The father of the appellant was conferred a gallantry award posthumously by the Government wherewith a piece of land situated in Lyallpur district was granted to him, and was allotted to the appellant who took possession on July 24, 1947.
Consequent to the partition of the country the family migrated to India where the Government allotted about 69 standard acres of land in Jullundur district as compensa tion for the land left behind in Pakistan.
Out of this land 19 standard acres came under the possession of the respond ent as a tenant.
On February, 1961 the respondent filed an application under section 18 of the Punjab Security of Land Tenures Act, 1953 to the Assistant Collector stating that he was a tenant in respect of the aforesaid land and should be granted permis sion to purchase the same.
The Assistant Collector granted the requisite permission subject to the payment of Rs.21,007.88P in ten equal half yearly instalments.
The appellant appealed to the Collector who upheld the permis sion to purchase, but enhanced the amount payable to the appellant as landlord.
During the pendency of these proceedings the appellant moved an application under section 9 read with section 14A of the Act for ejectment of the 818 respondent and obtained an order an 27th September, 1961.
The respondent moved a revision petition before the Commissioner in the proceedings initiated under section 18 of the Act, and the Commissioner made a recommendation to the Financial Commissioner for setting aside the orders of the Assistant Collector and the Collector allowing the purchase of land by the respondent on the ground that the application of the appellant for the ejectment of the respondent had since been allowed.
The Financial Commissioner, set aside the order of purchase.
The respondents ' writ petition chal lenging this order was allowed and the High Court quashed that order on 30th August, 1966.
On July 3, 1970 the appellant filed a suit against the respondent for possession of the land contending that the respondent had entered on a part of land as tenant and subsequently applied for the purchase of the land under section 18, but by virtue of section 19 DD of the Act inserted on August 3, 1968 with retrospective effect, the suit property of gallantry award was exempted from the provisions of the Act.
The Trial court dismissed the suit.
The order was affirmed in appeal by the Additional District Judge, and the second appeal to the High Court was also dismissed holding that section 19 DD of the Act was applicable to the suit land and the tenant could purchase it under section 18.
In the appeal to this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellant that the High Court was in error in holding that the land in question having been granted to the appel lant, the landlord in the year 1946 the same could not be said to be covered by the provisions of section 19 DD of the Punjab Security of Land Tenures Act, 1953.
It was also contended that equity is in favour of the appellant as the land was as compensation for the gallantry award land left by the awardee family at Layallpur as a result of partition of the country, and that the privilege of exemption should be acquired by the compensation land, and that the appellant has acquired the right to purchase as a tenant in occupation after a long time.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, HELD: 1.1.
From the language of section 19 DD of the Punjab Security of Land Tenures Act, 1953 which was inserted by the Punjab Act No. 12 of 1968 and from the fact that the date of the award of the grant of the land for gallantry having been before the 26th day of January, 1950 so long as such land or, any portion thereof, had not passed from the original grantee into more than three successive 819 hands by inheritance or bequest, and was held by the gran tee, or any of such hands, such land or portion, as the case may be, should not be taken into account in computing the surplus area under the Act, nor shall any tenant of such land or portion have the right to purchase it under section 18.
[822C D] 1.2.
There is no basis for holding that the exemption in respect of the gallantry award land will be available in respect of the land given under the as compensation for the loss thereof.
There is no infirmity in the High Court judgment on this Court.
[823A B] 1.3.
Equity is being claimed by both the parties.
Under the circumstances there is no other alternative but to let the loss lie where it fails.
As the maxim is, 'in aequali jure, melior est conditio possidentis ' Where the equities are equal, the law should prevail the respondent 's right to purchase must, therefore, prevail.
[823B C]
