In exercise of the powers conferred by sub section (2 a) of section 31 of the Bihar Finance Act, 1981 the Commission er of Commercial Taxes, Bihar issued a Notification dated 28th December, 1985 adopting Forms XXVIII A and XXVIII B as the declaration for the purposes of verification and assess ment of the sales tax payable.
Clause 1 of the Notification provided that a person transporting goods, exceeding the quantity notified under section 35, on a goods carrier or a vessel shall carry Form XXVIII A or XXVIII B duly filled up in respect of goods being brought into the State or being sent out of the State.
Clause 2 of the Notification provided that in case a form is found blank or not containing all the particulars, it shall be deemed to be a violation of the provisions of sub section (2 a) of section 31 of the Act.
The respondent, a registered dealer under the Bihar Sales Tax Act and the Central Sales Tax Act purchased 165 bags of mustard in the State of Rajasthan and was transport ing the same therefrom to 797 Jamshedpur in the State of Bihar.
The officers of the Inves tigation Bureau Jamshedpur Division seized the vehicle along with the goods on the ground that in the road permit the bill number had not been mentioned in column No. 9 in Form XXVIII B.
On a representation by the Singhbhum Chamber of Commerce and Industry the truck along with the goods was released.
The Inspecting Officer issued a demand notice to the respondent imposing a penalty of Rs.8,330 and rejected the contention of the respondent that no permit was neces sary because it was violative of the respondent 's Constitu tional right of freedom of inter State trade and commerce.
The appellant filed a writ petition in the Patna High Court challenging the validity of the Notification on the ground of its being violative of Articles 301 and 304 and also the demand notice imposing penalty.
The High Court held that the Notification imposed unwar ranted restrictions on the inter State trade and commerce and accordingly quashed the Notification as violative of Articles 301 and 304 and set aside the penalty order with demand notice.
In this appeal by special leave on the question whether the impugned Notification and the adoption of Forms XXVIII A and XXVIII B, for the purposes of preventing evasion of sales tax, was violative of Articles 301 and 304 of the Constitution.
Allowing the appeals and setting aside the judgment of the High Court, HELD: 1. Article 301 mandates free trade, commerce and intercourse throughout the territory of India.
The words "throughout the territory of India" extends the freedom not only to inter State but also to inter State transactions and movements.
The mobility of goods throughout the territory of India has to be free.
Free trade throughout the territory of India would be one with no tariffs and no restrictions or disadvantages of any kind of importing or exporting from the different States.
Free trade means complete freedom of inter State trade without any restrictions on the movement of goods between the States.
Anyone aggrieved by infringe ment of the provisions of Article 301 can seek his remedy from the Court against the offending legislative or execu tive action.
[808C E] 2.
The word 'trade ' has been used synonymously with the word 798 'business '.
Trade or business would mean some real substan tial and systematic or organised course of activity or conduct with a set purpose.
[808E] State of Bombay vs R.M.D. Chamarbaug wala, [1957] S.C.R. 874, applied.
Freedom under Article 301 does not mean absolute freedom but freedom from all restrictions and barriers except those which are provided in other Articles of Part XIII as well as regulatory and compensatory measures.
The object of Part XIII is not to make inter State trade, com merce or intercourse absolutely free.
Reasonable restric tions in public interest are permissible.
The reasonable restrictions contemplated in Part XIII have to be backed by law and not by executive action provided the same are within the limitations prescribed under the scheme of Part XIII.
The power of the Union or the State to exercise legitimate regulatory control is independent of the restrictions im posed by Articles 302 305.
[808F; 81 IG; 812B] State of Madras vs Nataraja, ; , applied.
While examining whether there is a violation of the freedom guaranteed by Article 301, one has to scrutinise whether the impugned legislative or executive act operates to restrict or barricade trade, commerce or intercourse directly and immediately, as distinct from creating some indirect or inconsequential impediment which may be regarded as remote.
In other words, regulatory or compensory measures cannot be regarded as violative of the freedom.
Such meas ures cannot be challenged as interfering with the freedom guaranteed by Article 301 unless they are shown to be co lourable measures to restrict the free flow of trade, com merce and intercourse.
[808H; 809A B] 5.
Measures impeding the freedom of trade, commerce and intercourse may be legislative or executive and may be fiscal or non fiscal.
Taxing laws could be restrictions on trade, commerce and intercourse, if they hamper the flow of trade and if they were not what could be termed to be com pensatory taxes or regulatory measures.
He who assails such a measure has to show that it is not regulatory but it directly and immediately interferes with the free flow of inter State trade or business.
Freedom may be impeded by impediments on the individuals carrying on trade or busi ness, on the business itself or on the vehicles, carriers, instruments and labour used in the trade or business.
[809B C] 799 Atiabari Tea Co. Ltd. vs State of Assam and others; , ; Automobile Transport (Rajasthan) Ltd. vs State of Rajasthan and others, [1963] 1 S.C.R. 491; Western Electronics vs State of Gujarat, A.I.R. 1988 S.C. 2038 and Indian Cement vs State of Andhra Pradesh, A.I.R. applied.
When the legislature had the power to make a law with respect to any subject it had all the ancillary and inciden tal power to make that law effective.
In the instant case the notification ex facie shows the purpose, namely, to prevent evasion and facilitate assessment of sales tax.
The permits will indirectly help assessment by ascertaining whether tax would be payable or not.
The permit would enable the carrier to cross the State territory by producing it if and when needed and thus would promote rather than impede inter State trade.
A declaration may also serve the public purpose by finding out unauthorised trade or business to which freedom of trade, commerce and intercourse would not apply.
Thus, the impugned notification is a measure in exercise of a power incidental to the levy of sales tax and it could not be said to have been a colourable exercise of power to impede, restrict or barricade inter State trade in respect of which Bihar State Legislature has no power to legislate.
[813B E] 6.1 Article 304(b) clearly permits the State Legislature to impose such a reasonable restriction on the freedom of trade, commerce and intercourse with or within that State as may be required in the public interest.
The word 'with ' involves an element having its situs in another State.
It cannot be, therefore, said 'that the insistence on the disclosure in respect of goods entering Bihar from another State if otherwise legitimate would not be protected by Article 304(b).
[815C] 6.2 To decide whether the notification impeded inter State trade, the concept of inter State trade and its conti nuity has also to be taken into consideration.
In the in stant case the notification clearly states that the declara tion in the permit is indeed for the purpose of verification and assessment of tax payable and there is no imposition of any tax.
The notification only prescribed the declaration forms to be carried on a goods carrier or vessel for trans porting goods through the State of Bihar.
It does not pro hibit transportation of the goods.
Therefore, there is no direct and immediate restriction of inter State trade, commerce or intercourse as a result of the requirement to fill up and carry the forms.
In other words, the continuity of the transport will not be obstructed or interrupted.
Therefore, the notification and the adoption of the forms are reasonable and in public interest and not ultra vires the Articles 301 and 304 of the Constitution of India.
[815F, 816F] 800 Hans Raj Bagrecha vs State of Bihar and others, ; , distinguished.
Sodhi Transport Co. vs State of U. P., [1986] 1 SCR939, held applicable.
