The Respondent entered into a contract with the appel lant Food Corporation of India on or about May 1979 whereun der the appellantCorporation was to give to the Respondent Paddy for being shelled/ converted into rice at the rate of 70% of the Paddy.
The Paddy was to be lifted from the go downs of the appellant.
The shelling charge was fixed at Rs.2/20 p. per quintal.
Some dispute having arisen between the parties, the Respondent moved an application before the Subordinate Judge for appointment of an arbitrator and the Sub Judge appointed the arbitrator who gave his award on 22nd January 1982.
In the award the arbitrator did not allow some of the claims made by the appellant, in particular, a claim of Rs.55,060/29 p which was claimed as a penalty Rs.2 per quintal for not lifting the balance of Paddy.
The arbitrator in disallowing the claim on that count, took the view that the appellant has to prove the actual losses suffered by it which the appellant failed to prove.
Another claim not allowed by the arbitrator related to Rs.3,23,856/08.
p. in respect of the cost of non delivery of 137 39548 tonnes of rice @ Rs. 165 per quintal.
The Respondent made an application section 14 of the Arbi tration Act, 1940 to make the award a rule of the Court.
The appellant filed the objections u/s 30 and 33 of the Act.
The Subordinate Judge, First Class, on 2nd December, 1982, found that the award was liable to be set aside and accordingly modified the award and passed a decree in favour of the appellant for the amount.
On 2nd March, 1984, the Addl.
Distt.
Judge, on appeal by the Respondent, reversed the order passed by the Subordinate Judge.
He held that the award was not liable to be corrected/interfered with in the manner done by the Sub Judge.
Aggrieved by the said order the appellant went in revision to the High Court.
The High Court on 11.12.84 dismissed the revision petition.
Hence this appeal by the appellant Corporation.
881 Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: That the arbitrator has chosen to make a speaking award in the instant case, that is he has given reasons for his conclusions.
Since the arbitrator has chosen to give reasons, unless it is demonstrated to this Court that such reasons are erroneous as such as propositions of law or a view which the arbitrator has taken is a view which it could not possibly be sustained in any view of the matter, then the challenge to the award of the arbitrator cannot be sustained.
[886H; 887A B] Even assuming that there was some mistake, such a mis take is not amenable to be corrected in respect of the award by the Court.
This was a fair order passed after considering all the records.
The conclusion arrived at by the arbitrator is a plausible conclusion.
The Court has no jurisdiction to interfere or modify the award in the manner sought for by the appellant.
[887G H] The Addl.
Distt.
Judge was justified in correcting the order of the Subordinate Judge and the High Court was also justified in not interfering with the order of the Addl.
Distt.
Judge.
[887H; 888A] Mukkudduns of Kimkunwady vs Inamdar Brahmins of Soorpai, ; M/s. Sudarsan Trading Co. vs The Government of Kerala & Anr., [1989] 1 Jt.
Today SC 339; Champsey Bhara & Co. vs Jivraj Balloo Spinning & Weaving Co. Ltd., L 1922 IA 324, followed.
Puri Construction Pvt. Ltd. vs Union of India, , referred to.
