The appellant company applied for a requisite central excise licence for manufacture of goods falling under Tariff Item 68 and for the purpose of such goods L 4 licence was also furnished and also the requisite ground plans of the factory in which the various goods were manufactured.
The excise authorities granted L 4 licence.
The appellant claimed benefit of exemption of Notification No. 89/79 CE dated March 1, 1979.
The classification list submitted by the appellant was approved by the Assistant Collector by his letter dated May 25, 1979.
For the period April 1, 1979 to June 30, 1979 the appellant filed his RT 12 for assessment which was also finally assessed without any protest or objection.
As the appellant claimed that his goods were wholly exempted by virtue of notification No. 89/79 CE dated March 1, 1979, the appellant wrote to the Superintendent asking for dispensation from filing RT 12 every month.
The Superintendent informed the appellant that it need not file RT 12, but should inform the excise authorities monthly by means of a simple letter the total clearance effected in the month in question.
Thereafter, the appellant submitted classification list in 1980, 1981 and 1982 and claimed benefit of exemption under notification No. 105/80 CE dated June 19, 1980.
The Assistant Collector approved the classification list.
The Central Excise Officer attached to the preventive branch visited the factory in July 1982 and examined the products manufactured by the appellant.
In January 1983, a show cause notice was issued to the appellant asking it to show cause as why excise duty should not be demanded under Tariff Item 52 in respect of the piece of nuts manu 871 factured and removed by the appellant during the period April 1, 1981 to July 19, 1982 without payment of appropri ate excise duty thereon, and also to show cause why penalty should not be imposed for failure to obtain the requisite L 4 licence under Tariff Item 52 and to show cause why the material seized on August 26, 1982 should not be confiscat ed.
The appellant showed cause and drew the attention of the authorities to the fact that the goods in question were not nuts but end products or connectors for lubricating purposes and as such were integral parts of Diesel Engine Pipes failing under Tariff item 68.
The Collector of Central Excise passed orders on July 16, 1984 holding that fittings were nuts classifiable under Tariff Item 52, and that appropriate duty on the clearance effected by the appellant during the period April 1, 1981 to July 19, 1982 should be paid and the seized goods were liable to confiscation but in lieu thereof a redemption fine of Rs.4,000 could be paid.
The Collector also imposed a penalty of Rs. 1 lakh.
The appellant went up in appeal before the Tribunal, which partly allowed the appeal and partly upheld the order of the Collector.
With regard to classification of the different fittings was concerned, it was held that the classification should have been as nuts under Tariff Item 52 of the Central Excise Tariff.
It further held that the appellant was guilty of suppression and therefore rejected the submission of the appellant that the show cause notice was barred by time.
It, however, reduced the amount of Penalty imposed by the Collector from Rs. 1 lakh to Rs.50,000.
The appellant appealed to this Court by special leave.
In the appeal to this Court, on the question whether the goods manufactured by the appellant were end products or connectors for lubricating purposes and as such were inte gral parts of the Diesel Engine Pipes failing under Tariff Item 68 as claimed by the appellant or nuts classifiable under Tariff Item 52.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: 1.
The Tribunal was right in classifying the goods under Tariff Item 52 of the Central Excise Tariff and in upholding the demand of the duty for a period beyond six months as contemplated by section 11 A of the Act.
The Tribunal duly gave benefit of the exemption notification in respect of the goods which had been exported.
[878F] 872 2(a) The Tribunal was right in upholding the demand of duty for a period beyond six months as contemplated by section 11 A of the Act.
[878F] 2(b) Whether there was any fraud, collusion, wilful mis statement, or suppression of fact, for the department to be justified to claim duty beyond a period of six months under the proviso to section 11 A of the Act is a question of fact.
[878B] 2(c) The appellant.
was both buying and selling these nuts and as such there was no conceivable reason why these nuts were described as end fittings in the declaration to the Department.
In the declaration it was so described.
[878C D] 2(d) The fact that the officers of the Department visit ed the factory of the appellant and they should have been aware of the production of the goods in question, was no reason for the appellant not to truly and properly describe these goods.
[878D E] 2(e) Not only did the appellant, as found by the Tribu nal, not described these goods properly, but also gave a misleading description.
[878E] 3.
The Tribunal on appraisement of all the materials, held that these were nuts manufactured by the appellant.
Such finding cannot be said to be wrong or perverse.
It was arrived at after giving opportunity to both the parties and considering all relevant materials.
There is no cogent ground to sustain any challenge to the findings of the Tribunal.
The Tribunal has considered all the relevant evidence, and not ignored any relevant piece of evidence.
It had applied the correct principle of law applicable to the determination of the question.
It has also applied the test of commercial identity of the goods and examined the matter from the angle of the conduct of the appellant.
These find ings of the Tribunal cannot be assailed in appeal under section 35L of the Act.
[875E; 877B C] 4.
The Tribunal having come to the conclusion that there was deliberate suppression or wrong statement, it follows automatically that the Tribunal was justified in upholding the imposition of penalty.
The quantum of penalty was a matter which the Tribunal was free to fix as it thought fit, as the justice of the case demanded.
Nothing has been shown that the conclusion was bad.
[878G H; 879A] 873
