The appellant Authority offered to register names of intending applications desirous of purchasing LIG, MIG, HIG and EWS type houses/flats.
The 'General Information Table ' given in the brochure indicated the type of houses, corre sponding income groups, cost, initial payment to be made, rate of interest and approximate monthly instalments.
Note (1) under the said table stated that the cost shown therein was only estimated cost and it would increase or decrease according to the rise or fail in the price at the time of completion of the houses, while Note (2) stated that the date given therein could be amended as felt necessary.
By clauses 12 and 13 contained in the brochure the Authority reserved its discretion to change, alter or modify any of the terms and/or conditions of the allotment as and when necessary.
All the respondents registered their names for allotment of the flats in accordance with the terms and conditions in the brochure and made the initial deposit.
Subsequently, they received notices from the Authority intimating the revised cost of houses and the amount of monthly instalment rates which were almost double of those initially stated in the 'General Information Table '.
The respondents were fur ther informed that those who intend to buy houses on the revised price/instalments must send their written acceptance by the date specified other wise their claims would not be included in the lots to be drawn.
Except a few, all other respondents gave their unequivocal and unconditional written consent.
Hence their names were included in the 743 744 draws and on becoming lucky in the draw, they were allotted their respective houses.
At this stage.
all the respondents approached the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution challenging the revised terms and conditions on the ground that the appel lants were estopped from changing the conditions subject to which the respondents had applied for registration and deposited the initial payment, that the enhancement of cost of the house amounting to almost double of the estimated cost as shown in the brochure and the increase of the month ly instalments were much beyond their means and that this arbitrary and unilateral stand of the appellants was to the prejudice of the respondents.
These petitions were resisted by the appellants by contending that the respondents were estopped from challenging the varied terms and conditions of the allotment after having consented.
The High Court found the action of the Authority in fixing the revised cost and instalments arbitrary and unrea sonable and directed the appellant Authority to re determine the cost of the flats and instalments payable by them after hearing the parties.
In these appeals by special leave it was contended for the appellant Authority that the income of the applicants was relevant only to determine the category of the scheme in which they had to be included for eligibility to get a house under the scheme but not for enhancement of the cost of the house and monthly instalments, that it had fixed the cost of the houses and the rate of instalments after taking into consideration the escalation in the price of building mate rial, labour charges, cost of transport and allied valuable factors which all enter into the price fixation, that in price fixation the executive has a wide discretion and it is only answerable provided there is any statutory control over its policy of price fixation, and that after the parties had entered into the field of ordinary contract, as in the instant case.
the relations were no longer covered by the constitutional provisions but by the legally valid contract which determines the rights and obligations of the parties inter se Allowing the appeals, HELD: 1.
Where the contract entered into between the State and the persons aggrieved is non statutory and purely contractual and the rights are governed only by the terms of the contract, no writ or order can be issued under Article 226 of the Constitution of India so as 745 to compel the authorities to remedy a breach of contract pure and simple.
[755C] Radhakrishna Agarwal & Ors.
vs State of Bihar & Ors.
, ; ; Premji Bhai Parmar & Ors. etc.
vs Delhi Development Authority & Ors. ; and D.F.O.v.
Biswanath Tea Company Ltd., referred to.
The respondents in the instant case had voluntarily registered themselves as applicants only after fully under standing the terms and conditions of the brochure, inclusive of cls.
12 and 13 and Notes 1 and 2 of the General Informa tion Table under which the Authority had reserved its right to change the terms and conditions as and when felt neces sary evidently depending upon the escalation of the prices.
The Authority did not compel anyone of the applicants to purchase the flat at the rates subsequently fixed by it and pay the increased monthly instalments.
On the contrary the option was left over only to the allottees.
All the same, the respondents gave their written consent unconditionally accepting the changed and varied terms and conditions.
[753H;754A C] The respondents after accepting the conditions imposed by the Authority had thus entered into the realm of a con cluded contract pure and simple with the Authority and hence they could only claim the right conferred upon them by the said contract and were bound by the terms of the contract unless some statute stepped in and conferred some special statutory obligations on the part of the Authority in the contractual field.
The contract between the respondents and the Authority did not contain any statutory terms and/or conditions.
[754C E] Even conceding that the Authority had the trappings of a State or would be comprehended in 'other authority ' for the purpose of Article 12 of the Constitution, while determining price of the houses flats constructed by it and the rate of monthly instalments to be paid, the 'authority ' or its agent after entering into the field of ordinary contract had acted purely in its executive capacity.
Thereafter the relations were no longer.
governed by the Constitutional provisions but by the legally valid contract which determined the rights and obligations of the parties inter se.
In this sphere, they could only claim rights conferred upon them by the contract in the absence of any statutory obligations on the part of the Authority in the said contractual field.
[754G H; 755A B] Ramana Dayaram Shetty vs The International Airport Authority 746 of India & Ors., ; The High Court while exercising its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution had, therefore, gone wrong in its finding that there was arbitrariness and unreasona bleness on the part of the appellants in increasing the cost of the houses/flats and the rate of monthly instalments, and giving directions in the writ petitions as prayed for.
[755D E]
