The respondent filed a suit in the Court of Civil Judge, praying that he be declared the sole and real owner of the suit house and that the appellant be permanently restrained from transferring the suit house.
The trial court decreed the suit accordingly.
The appellant filed an appeal before the Additional District Judge, who dismissed the same, agreeing with the findings of the trial court that the respondent had paid the price and purchased the house benami in the name of the appellant and therefore, the appellant had no right to create an equitable mortgage or to transfer the suit house.
The appellant 's second appeal was also dismissed by the High Court.
Hence, the appeal by special leave, by the appellant.
During the pendency of the appeal, the 622 Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988 came into force.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant that the respondent and the appellant had been living as man and wife and out of affection for the appellant, the respondent had purchased the suit house in the appellant 's name for Rs.8,000, for which the appellant had contributed Rs.2,000 and, therefore, the courts below had erred in holding that the suit house was not gifted by the respondent to the appellant but was held benami in her name, and that even if it was so held benami, the subsequent legislation, namely, the Benami Transactions (Prohibition Act, 1988 had put a complete bar to the respondent 's suit against the appellants in respect of the suit house.
On behalf of the respondent, it was submitted that the issues on gift and benami have been concluded by concurrent findings of fact of the courts below and that the respond ent 's right to the benami suit house having already become final it would not be affected by the subsequent Act.
On the questions: (a) whether the concurrent findings of fact of the courts below should be interfered with or not, (b) whether despite the decree in favour of the respondent, the suit or action would be affected by the subsequent legislation, namely, the Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988 and its predecessor Ordinance, (c) whether, on a proper construction, the legislature may be said to have expressed its intention of retrospective applicability of the legislation, and (d) whether there was a suit present between the respondent and the appellant on the date of the law coming into force, Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.1 A retrospective operation is not to be given to a statute, so as the impair existing right or obligation otherwise than as regards matter of procedure unless that effect cannot be avoided without doing violence to the language of the enactment.
The presumption against retro spective operation is strong in cases in which the statute, if operated retrospectively, would prejudicially affect vested rights or the illegality of the past transactions, or impair contracts or impose new duty or attach new disability in respect of past transactions or consideration already passed.
However, a statute is not properly called a retro spective statute because a part of the requisites for its action is drawn from a time antecedent to its passing.
[633H; 634A C] 623 1.2 Every law that takes away or impairs rights vested agreeably to existing laws is retrospective, and is general ly unjust and may be oppressive.
But laws made justly and for the benefit of individuals and the community as a whole may relate to time antecedent to their commencement.
The presumption against retrospectivity may in such cases be rebutted by necessary implication from the language employed in the statute.
It cannot be said to be an invariable rule that a statute could not be retrospective unless so ex pressed in the very terms of the section which has to be construed.
The question is whether on a proper construction, the legislature may be said to have so expressed its inten tion.
[634C E] 1.3 Before applying a statute retrospectively, the court has to be satisfied that the statute is in fact retrospec tive.
The Courts must also look at the general scope and purview of the statute and at the remedy sought to be ap plied and consider what was the former state of law and what the legislation contemplated.
[634A B] Craise on Statute Law, 7th ed.
referred to.
1.4 Where a particular enactment or amendment is the result of the recommendation of the Law Commission of India, it may be permissible to refer to the relevant report.
What importance can be given to it will depend on the facts and circumstances of the case.
However, the court has to inter pret the language used in the Act and when the language is clear and unambiguous, it must be given effect to.
Law Commission 's Report may be referred to as external aid to construction of the provisions.
[631C; 633D] Santa Singh vs State of Punjab, [1977] 1 S.C.R. 229referred to.
In the instant case, the Law Commission was of the view that the legislation replacing the Benanti Transactions (Prohibition of Right to Recover Property Ordinance, 1988) should be retroactive in operation and that no locus peni tentia need be given to the persons who had entered in the benami transactions in the past.
[633B] 2.1 When an Act is declaratory in nature, the presump tion against retrospectivity is not applicable.
Acts of this kind only declare.
A statute in effect declaring the benami transactions to be unenforceable belongs to this type.
[636A B] 2.2 The Parliament has jurisdiction to pass a declaratory legisla 624 tion.
As a result of the provisions of the Benami Transac tions (Prohibition) Act, 1988, all properties held benami at the moment of the Act coming into force may be affected irrespective of their beginning, duration and origin.
This will be so even if the legislation is not retrospective, but only retroactive.
[633E F] 2.3 The expression "any property held benami" in section 4 of the Act is not limited to any particular time, date or duration.
Once the property iS found to have been held benami, no suit, claim or action to enforce any right in respect thereof shall lie, and the real owner is bereft of any defence against the person in whose name the property is held or any other person.
In its sweep, section 4 envisages past benami transactions also within its retroactivity.
In this sense, the Act is both a penal and a disqualifying statute.
In Case of a qualifying or disqualifying statute, it may be necessarily retroactive.
[635E H] 2.4 The presumption against taking away vested right will not apply in this case inasmuch as under law it is the benamidar in whose name the property stands, and law only enabled the real owner to recover the property from him which right has now been ceased by the Act.
In one sense there was a right to recover or resist in the real owner against the benamidar.
Ubi jus ibi remedium.
When there is a right, there is a remedy.
Where the remedy is barred, the right is rendered unenforceable.
In this sense it is a disabling statute.
All the real owners are equally affected by the disability provision irrespective of the time of creation of the right.
A right is a legally protected inter est.
The real owner 's right was hitherto protected and the Act has resulted in removal of that protection.
[636B C] 2.5 When the law nullifies the defences available to the real owner in recovering the benami property from the benam idar, the law must apply irrespective of the time of the benami transactions.
The expression "shall lie" in section 4(1) and "shall be allowed" in section 4(2) are prospective and shall apply to present (future stages) and future suits, claims or actions only.
[636D] 3.
The hearing of appeal under the procedural law of India is in the nature of re hearing and, therefore, in moulding the relief to be granted in a case on appeal, the appellate court is entitled to take into account even facts and events which have come into existence after the decree appealed against.
Consequently, the appellate court is competent to take into account legislative changes since the decision under appeal was given and its powers are not confined only to see whether the 625 lower court 's decision was correct according to the law as it stood at the time when its decision was given.
[636F G] Once the decree of the High Court has been appealed against, the matter became sub judice again and, therefore, the Supreme Court had seisin of the whole case, though for certain purposes, e.g. execution, the decree was regarded as final and the courts below retained jurisdiction in that regard.
[636G H] Lachmeshwar vs Keshwar Lal A.I.R. 1941 F.C. 5; Shyabud dinsab vs The Gadag Betgeri Municipal Borough; , ; The King vs The General Commissioner of income Tax, ; Mukharjee Official Receiver vs Ramratan Kaur.
[1935] L.R. 63 I.A. 47; Dayawati vs Inderjit, ; ; Mohanlal Jain vs
His Highness Maharaja Shri Man Singh, [1962] 1 S.C.R. 702 and Amerjit Kaur vs Pritam Singh, relied upon.
Nand Kishore Marwah vs Samundri Devi, [1987] 4 S.C.C. 382 distinguished.
Ordinarily, this Court in an appeal will not inter fere with a finding of fact which is not shown to be per verse or based on no evidence.
But where there are material irregularities affecting the said finding or where the court feels that justice had failed and the finding is likely to result in unduly excessive hardship, this Court cannot decline to interfere merely on the ground that the finding in question is finding of fact.
[627E, H; 628A] Babu vs Dy.
Director, A.I.R. 1982 S.C. 756; Prasad vs Govindaswamy; , ; Dhanlibhai vs State of Gujarat, ; ; Ganga Bishan vs Jay Narayan, AIR 1986 SC.
441; Udaychand Disst vs Saihal Sen, A.I.R. 1988 S.C. 367 and Ram Singh vs Ajay Chawla AIR 1988 S.C. 514 relied upon.
In the instant case, the concurrent findings of the courts below are based on reasonable appreciation of evi dence on record and, therefore, can in no way be said to be perverse or unreasonable.
The High Court has analysed the facts and correctly applied the tests to determine whether the transaction was benami or not.
Therefore, there is no justification in tile appeal under article 136 of the Constitu tion for interference with the concurrent findings of fact.
[629A C] However, in view of the pendency of the appeal before the Supreme Court, and consequently, the suit filed by the respondent, on 626 the date of coming into force of section 4 of the Benami Transac tions (Prohibition) Act, 1988, which nullified the defences available to the real owner in recovering the benami proper ty from the benamidar, and since the law was applicable irrespective of the time of the benami transactions, the respondent 's suit or action for recovering the suit house held benami by the appellant cannot be decreed.
[636D E] No doubt, nobody should suffer for an act of the Court, but delay in disposal of an appeal cannot be termed an action of the court.
Hence the maxim actus curiae nemenim gravabit is not applicable in this case.
[637F G] The decree passed by the lower courts is, therefore, annihilated and the suit filed by the respondent is dis missed.
[637G]
