Central Reserve Police Force comprises of officers dra wn from two channels, direct recruits and Emergency Commi s sioned Officers (ECOs).
There was dispute regarding fixati on of inter se seniority of these officers which was ultimate ly resolved by the Delhi High Court by the judgment und er appeal.
The High Court by the impugned judgment held in favour of ECOs and directed implementation of its decisi on regarding seniority as also grant of benefits to ECOs.
As a result of the High Court 's judgment 37 direct recruits, w ho are at present holding the posts of Commandants, that is to say, 22 as Commandants (Selection Grade) and 15 as Comma n dants (Non Selection Grade) by virtue of upgradation of 88 posts of Commandants (Non Selection Grade) will have to be reverted.
Being aggrieved by the High Court 's judgment, th ey have appealed to this Court, after obtaining Special Leave .
The main contention advanced by the appellants is th at as they were not parties in the Contempt Proceedings where in the High Court has rendered the judgment in question, th at order is not binding upon them and as such the matter be remitted back to the High Court.
To avoid delay that will be caused in the matter if the case is sent back, the Court as also the parties desired that the dispute be amicably se t tled.
Accordingly both the direct recruits and ECOs he ld negotiations amongst themselves with a view to arrive at an acceptable settlement and after a great deal of endeavou r, they put up the terms of agreement before the Court.
T he Court thereupon gave time to the Union of India to consid er the acceptability of the agreement reached between t he contesting parties.
The Union of India conveyed to the Cou rt that the agreement was not acceptable to it though it was in favour of amicable settlement.
It suggested two other alte r natives, which were not found to be favourable to ECOs.
15 This Court considered the respective terms of the se t tlement and disposing of the appeals in terms thereof, HELD:.
Central Reserve Police Force is a sensitive for ce and there should not be any dispute and differences amo ng the members of such force.
It is the duty of the Governme nt to maintain peace and harmony in the force by trying to resolve any dispute among the members of the force in publ ic interest.
[17B] While it may be desirable that the present position of the direct recruits should be protected, the giving of su ch protection should not be to the prejudice of the ECOs.
[17 E] In order to establish peace and amity between the co n tending parties and for ends of justice, the Court direct ed that in modification of the judgment of the High Court, t he appeals be disposed of in accordance with the terms of settlement, as agreed to by the direct recruits and t he ECOs, set out in this Court 's judgment hereinbelow.
[17E F ]
