The common question that arose for decision by this Court in these groups of matters is whether payment of less salary to a senior than his junior in the same cadre having the same scale of pay is violative of the principle of "equal pay for equal work" enshrined in Article 39(d) read with Article 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The said ques tion in each group of matters arises thus: The first batch in this bunch of appeals (CAs 317 30/87 etc.) relate to the case of Assistant Section Officers of Andhra Pradesh High Court.
It may be pointed out that copy ists and Assistants are the two feeder channels to the post of assistant Section Officers.
Prior to 1974 the Copyists were in the pay scale of Rs.70 130 and were entitled to additional payment at Rs.7.5P every 100 words they copy in excess of 42,000 words.
Consequent upon pay revision, they were given the pay scale of Rs.250 430 w.e.f. 1.1.1974 with out entitlement of remuneration in addition to pay.
The Copyists represented that while revising their grade, tile additional emoluments, which they were getting prior to revision of pay, has not been taken into consideration.
On recommendation of the High Court, the State Government agreed to fix the pay of the Copyists in the revised grade by adding to their basic pay Rs.83.34P, that being the average remuneration that each Copyist was earning prior to 1.1.74 and the Dearness Allowance admissible thereon.
The pre revised scale of pay of Assistants was Rs.90 192 which was revised to Rs.250 430 from 1.1.1974.
Even though the Scale of Pay of Copyists and Assistants was the same, Copyists started drawing more salary on account of addition of Rs.83.34P aforesaid.
Consequently on promotion to the Post of Assistant Section Officer, the salaries of those 1001 promoted from the cadre of Copyists were fixed higher than those who were promoted from the cadre of Assistants.
One Janakirama Rao, a Copyist was promoted to the cadre of Assistant Section Officer in 1984.
On the basis of his last pay drawn as Copyist, his pay as Assistant Section Officer was fixed higher than those who were promoted to the said post from the cadre of Assistants during the period 1982 84, under F.R. 22(a)(i) of Andhra Pradesh Fundamental Rules.
The Seniors filed writ petitions in the High Court contending that the grant of higher pay to juniors in the same cadre is violative of the principle "Equal pay for equal work".
The High Court allowed the Writ Petitions and directed that the Assistant Section Officers seniors to Janakirama Rao be paid the same salary as he was drawing.
Division Bench held that grant of higher pay packet to junior person than his seniors under any circumstances is discriminatory.
Hence these appeals by the State of Andhra Pradesh.
Another batch of appeals is filed by Tirumala Tirupathi Devasthanam.
One B.V. Krishnamurthy and 62 others working as Upper Division Clerks in the Devasthanam had filed writ petition in the High Court praying that the Devasthanam be directed to pay salary to them at par with one D. Gopaliah, U.D.C. who was junior to them.
Particulars of D. Gopaliah and one of the petitioners may only be stated.
Gopaliah joined as Lower Division Clerk in 1967 and was given Selec tion Grade in 1974.
Family Planning incentive of Rs. 11 was added to his salary in 1977.
He was promoted as U.D.C. in 1979 but was reverted in 1981.
He was given further increase in pay as L.D.C. on completion of 15 years service, as provided in the Rules and in June 1987, he was drawing basic pay of Rs.811.
He was again promoted as U.D.C. on 1.7.1983 and in that cadre, on the basis of his pay in the lower grade, his salary as per Rules was fixed at Rs.861.
On the other hand Krishnamurthi who joined as Lower Division Clerk in 1970, and promoted as U.D.C. on 3.11.1981, his salary was fixed at Rs.615.
On 1st July 1983 Krishnamurthy was drawing Rs.635.
In these circumstances Gopaliah though junior to Krishnamurthy started drawing more salary.
Following his earlier decision, the learned Single Judge allowed the Writ Petitions filed by Krishnamurthy and others similarly placed.
Their Writ Appeals were dismissed.
Hence these appeals by Devasthanam.
The third group of appeals by the State of Andhra Pra desh (CAs 299/88 & 300 301/88) are directed against the order of the Andhra Pradesh Administrative Tribunal.
The Writ Petitioners therein were Assistants working in differ ent departments of the State.
They were all absorbed in the Pay & Accounts Office, Hyderabad w.e.f. 12th July 1002 1978.
One Swaminathan was also absorbed as Assistant in the said office w.e.f. 4th September 1978.
In view of his length of service and grant of Selection grade, he had been drawing higher salary in his parent Department.
Accordingly on his joining Pay & Accounts Office, his salary, as per Rules, was protected and he was fixed at higher basic pay than the Writ Petitioners.
The Seniors raised contention before the Tribunal on the basis of "Equal pay for equal Work".
The Tribunal allowed the Writ Petitions, holding that for whatever reason a junior is paid higher pay packet than his senior, the prin ciple of "Equal pay for equal work" is violated and the senior is entitled to the same pay.
In other cases, also, the same question junior drawing more salary than senior and the seniors claiming parity of pay is involved.
Before this Court it was contended by the appellants employers that so long as there is rational basis for giving higher pay to junior in the same cadre, the seniors can have no grievance.
The last pay drawn in the lower cadre has to be the basis for fixation of salaries under the Fundamental Rules and following that basis, the salaries have been rightly fixed.
According to some appellants if all the consideration, factors and incidents of service are identical then only the principle of "Equal pay for equal work" is attracted.
If there is justification under the Rules or otherwise for giving a higher pay to the junior then the principle in the abstract sense is not attracted.
Allowing the appeals, this Court, HELD: Doctrine of "Equal pay for equal work" cannot be put in a straight jacket.
Although the doctrine finds its place in the Directive Principles, this Court, in various judgments, has authoritatively pronounced that right to "equal pay for equal work" is an accompaniment of the equal ity Clause enshrined in Article 14 and 16 of the Constitu tion of lndia.
[1008H; 1009A] Reasonable classification, based on intelligible crite ria having nexus with the object sought to be achieved, is permissible.
[1009B] "Equal pay for equal work" does not mean that all the members of the cadre must receive the same pay packet irre spective of their 1003 seniority, source of recruitment, educational qualifications and various other incidents of service.
When a single run ning pay scale is provided for a post in a cadre, the Con stitutional mandate of equal pay for equal work is satis fied.
Ordinarily grant of higher pay to a junior would ex facie be arbitrary but if there are justifiable grounds in doing so, the seniors cannot invoke the equality doctrine.
[1009B C] The differentia on grounds such as, when persons re cruited from different services are given pay protection, when promoters from lower cadre or a transferee from another cadre is given any pay protection, when a senior is stepped at efficiency bar, when advance increments are given for experience/passing a test/acquiring higher qualifications or as incentive for efficiency, would be based on intelligible criteria which has rational nexus with the object sought to be achieved, and which does not violate the mandate of equal pay for equal work.
The orders appealed against were there fore reversed.
[1009D E]
