One Hazari Singh died in November 1918 leaving behind his widow Smt.
Mam Kaur and two daughters viz., Smt.
Pan Bai and Smt.
Sohan Bai.
The widow inherited the agriculture properties of her husband.
The present appeals have arisen out of the two suits filed by the two daughters aforesaid claiming their half share in the property.
The circumstances that led to the filing of the suits may be stated thus: Smt.
Mam Kaur, the widow, adopted Ranjit Singh grand son of Sanehi Singh and son of Lakhi Singh (one of the collater als) in 1944 and gifted all the lands to him inherited by her from her husband.
Both the adoption as also the gift were made orally.
Munshi Singh and his brothers (reversions) filed a suit challenging the validity both of the adoption of Ranjit Singh and the gift of the properties to him.
By a decree of the Court both the adoption as also the gift in favour of Ranjit Singh were declared invalid and a declaration was granted in respect of the gift so far as it affected the reversionary rights.
Thereupon on 4th June, 1963, Smt.
Mam Kaur sold away the entire property to Ranjit Singh & his brothers for Rs.50,000.
Pan Bai, daughter of deceased Hazari Singh and Munshi Singh and others (revisioners) filed suits claiming pre emption rights to purchase the properties in question.
By a decree of the Court it was held that Pan Bai has a superior right to purchase the property.
Accordingly first preference was granted in favour of Smt.
Pan Bai to deposit the sale amount and seek pre emption failing which her suit was to be dismissed and a later date was given to Munshi Singh and others.
Pan Bai did not deposit the amount with the result Munshi Singh & others deposited the amount and took possession of the properties and came to be substi tuted in the sale.
1013 On the death of Mam Kaur in January, 1965, Smt.
Sohan Bai (her 2nd daughter) filed a suit for a decree for posses sion of half of the share on the plea that in view of the declaratory decree of 24.7.47, on the death of Smt.
Mam Kaur, succession had to be traced to Hazari Singh i.e. her father.
Pan Bai, also filed a suit for the same relief.
The Trial Court decreed the suit filed by Smt.
Sohan Bai but dismissed the suit filed by Smt.
Pan Bai on the ground that as Smt.
Pan Bai had flied a suit claiming on the basis of pre emption earlier, she was estopped from disputing the validity of the sale made by Smt.
Mam Kaur.
On appeal the Additional District Judge maintained the decree passed in the suit of Smt.
Sohan Bai and reversed the trial Court 's Judgment in the suit filed by Smt.
Pan Bai and held that both the daughters were entitled to succeed to half share each in the property.
Against the order of the Additional District Judge, defendants in both the suits filed Regular Second Appeals in the High Court which were dismissed by the impugned judgment.
Hence these appeals.
Before this Court it was inter alia contended by the appellants that ; in an earlier suit the adoption and the gift having been declared invalid, the donee who was the adopted son of Ranjit Singh was not left with any rights in the properties; on the other hand it was contended by the Respondents that no doubt adoption was declared invalid but so far as gift was concerned, it was declared invalid in a suit for declaration by reversioners to the limited extent that this gift will not affect the rights of the reversion ers thereby meaning that so far as the life estate of Smt.
Mam Kaur was concerned, it was transferred by the gift deed but the right of the reversioners to succeed on the death of Smt.
Mam Kaur was protected as it was declared that this gift will not affect the rights of the reversioners.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court, HELD: The gift will not affect the rights of the rever sioners on the death of Smt.
Mam Kaur but it could not be disputed that so far as Smt.
Mam Kaur during her life time is concerned, as she had gifted away the property to Ranjit Singh and delivered possession, she had no rights left with her.
[1020E F] What residuary rights could be thought of were not the rights of the widow but the right of the reversioners to get as heirs of her husband on her death and on that basis it could not be said that she could be said to be possessed of any right in the property which she held 1014 as a limited owner on the date the Hindu Succession Act came into force.
[1020G H] On the date on which Smt.
Mam Kaur executed the sale deed, in fact, she had no title to the property nor she was in possession thereof.
[1022D E] Jagannathan Pillai vs Kunjithapadam Pillai & Ors., ; Gopal Singh & Ors.
vs Dile Ram (dead) by Lrs. & Ors., Kuldip Singh & Ors.
vs Surain Singh and others, referred to.
