The appellants are tenants.
The premises in dispute is a shop building bearing No. T.C. 887, M.G. Road, Pazhavangadi, Trivandrum, part of a Pucca three storeyed building owned by one M.P. Phillip.
As per the settlement the shop in dispute devolved on one of his sons, while the shop was in the possession of the tenant.
During the tenancy owner mortgaged the premises in dispute and the remaining portions to the first defendant with a direction to receive the rent from the tenant.
The tenant was asked to attorn to the mortgagee.
The first defendant in course of management of the property gave the building on lease to the appellants for a higher rent; the earlier tenant having vacated the same.
The owner thereafter executed the second mortgage with a direction to redeem the mortgage in favour of the first defendant and before the subsequent mortgagee took steps to redeem the mortgage, the owner assigned his equity of redemption to the respondent.
The Respondent and the subsequent mortgagee together as plaintiffs 1 & 2 filed a suit to redeem the mortgage of the first defendant impleading the appellants as parties and claimed recovery of the Khas possession of the building.
The appellants contended (i) that they are tenants of the build ing inducted into possession by the mortgagee as a mode of enjoyment; (ii) that the mortgage deed authorised the mort gagee to enjoy the building by letting it out and that they were not liable to be evicted through a decree of Court in redemption Suit without an order under the Kerala Building (Lease and Rent Control) Act 1965.
The trial Court decreed the suit and directed recovery of possession of the Shop building.
It took the view that the mortgagee could not induct a tenant and give him any right to continue in possession even after the redemption of the mortgage.
975 On appeal, the first appellate Court held that the disputed building was a shop building which was never in the enjoyment of the owner; mode of enjoyment of the owner being by letting it out and when the mortgagee enjoyed the proper ty in that manner by letting it out, the person put in possession as a tenant was entitled to continue in posses sion even after redemption, until evicted under the Rent Control Act.
It also found that the mortgage deed impliedly authorised the mortgagee to let out the building.
In that view of the matter, the trial Court 's order was set aside.
The Respondent thereupon filed a second appeal before the High Court The High Court took the view that it was not open to the mortgagee to induct a person into possession which conferred any right on the tenant to continue in possession even after redemption.
Accordingly it allowed the appeal and a decree for eviction was passed.
Hence this appeal by the appellants tenant.
Dismissing the appeal, but directing that the decree for eviction should not be executed till the 31st October, 1989 if the appellants give usual undertaking to deliver vacant possession on 31st October, 1989, this Court, HELD: That the mortgagor on redemption of mortgage gets back his own right; he is not the successor in interest of the mortgagee.
Interest, if any, created by the mortgagee on the mortgagor 's right, must disappear on ceasing of the interest of the mortgagee.
[983C D] The limited estate created in favour of the mortgagee having disappeared, all rights emanating from that limited estate disappear and the superior right of the mortgagor comes not in place of the mortgagee but as a result of an independent title, and as such the mortgagor cannot be bound by any act created or any relationship contracted between the mortgagee and the tenant, unless it is permitted by the mortgage deed [983G H] The mortgagor 's right of redemption and the mortga gee 's right of foreclosure or sale are co extensive.
[984D] Jadavji purshottam vs Dhani Navnitbhai Amaratlal & Ors., and Pornal Kanji Govindji & Ors.
vs Vrajlal Karsandas Purohit & Ors., [1988] 4 Judgment Today SC 307, followed.
976 Raj Brij Raj Krishna & Anr.
S.K. Shaw & Bros., ; M/s. Raval & Co. vs
K.G. Ram Chandran & Ors., ; ; V. Dhanpal Chettiar vs Yesodai Ammal, ; ; Gian Devi Anand vs Jeevan Kumar & Ors., ; and G. Ponnial Thevar vs Nalleyam Perumal Pillai & Ors., ; not applicable.
