The petitioner was initially appointed in the year 1967 to the post of 'Teacher Co ordinator ' in the pay scale of Rs.210 425 in a Research Project funded by the Indian Coun cil of Medical Research.
As the unit where the petitioner was employed was taken over by the All India Institute of Medical Sciences on 1.7.1970 his services stood transferred to the said Institute and he continued to hold the post of Teacher Coordinator in the Institute.
Though the post was redesignated as 'Hearing Therapist ' with effect from 3.8.72, the same scale of pay, viz Rs.210 425 continued.
Pursuant to the recommendations of the Third Pay Commis sion the pay scale of 'Hearing Therapist was revised to Rs.425 700 with effect from 1.1.1973, and since then the petitioner continued to draw salary in the said scale.
The petitioner made several representations to the respondentauthorities to revise his pay scale and to place him in the pay scale prescribed for 'Speech Pathologist ' and 'Audiologist ' viz. Rs.650 1200.
Since no relief was granted the petitioner invoked the jurisdiction of this Court by means of a writ petition under Article 32.
The petitioner contended in his writ petition, that as 'Hearing Therapist ' he performs the same duties and func tions as 'Senior Speech Pathologist ', 'Senior Physio Thera pist ', 'Senior Audiologist ' and 958 'Speech Pathologist ' that the qualifications prescribed for the aforesaid posts are almost similar and they are working in the same institution under the same employer, yet the respondent authorities practised discrimination in refusing to accept his claim for equal pay.
It was further contended that the Third Pay Commission ignored the claim of 'Hearing Therapist ' although it had granted higher scale of pay for similar posts of 'Speech Therapist ', 'Senior Speech Patholo gist ', and 'Audiologist ', and that 'Speech Therapists ' performing similar types of duty as are performed by the petitioner had been granted higher pay scale in other organ isations like Safdarjung Hospital, PGI Chandigarh, and Medical College, Rohtak.
The respondents having thus failed to implement the Directive Principle of 'Equal pay for equal work ' as contained in article 39(d) of the Constitution in violation of articles 14 and 16, the petitioner claimed relief for the issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the re spondents for fixing his pay in the scale of Rs.410 950 with effect from 1.1.1970, and thereafter in the scale of Rs.650 1200 with effect from 1.1.1973.
The respondents contested the writ petition by asserting that the petitioner cannot compare himself with 'Senior Speech Therapist '. 'Senior Physio Therapist ', 'Senior Occu pational Therapist ', 'Audiologist ' or 'Senior Therapist ' as qualifications, duties and functions of these posts are altogether different and distinct from those prescribed for 'Hearing Therapist ', that there is no equality between the petitioner and the persons holding the aforesaid posts, that the Institute had created different posts with different pay scales having regard to the qualifications, duties, and responsibilities of the posts.
The petitioner 's plea of discrimination was emphatically denied.
Dismissing the writ petition, the Court, HELD: The principle of 'Equal pay for equal work ' cannot be invoked invariably in every kind of service, particular ly, in the area of professional services.
[967H] Dr. C. Girijambal vs Government of Andhra Pradesh, ; relied on.
In the instant case, even assuming that the petitioner performs similar duties and functions as those performed by an 'Audiologist ', it is not sufficient to uphold his claim for equal pay.
In judging the equality of work for the purposes of equal pay, regard must be had not only to the duties and functions but also to the educational qualifica tions, 959 qualitative difference and the measures of responsibility prescribed for the respective posts.
Even if the duties and functions are of similar nature but if the educational qualifications prescribed for the two posts are different and there is difference in measure of responsibilities, the principle of 'Equal Pay for Equal Work ' would not apply.
[964H; 965A B] State of Mysore vs Narasing Rao, ; ; Union of India vs Dr. (Mrs.) S.B. Kohli, ; ; Jammu & Kashmir vs Triloki Nath Khose & Ors., ; ; Ganga Ram vs Union of India, ; ; Mohammad Shujat Ali of All India Customs & Central Excise Stenographers (Recog nised) & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; and State of U.P. & Ors.
vs Sh.
J.P. Chaurasia & Ors., ; referred to.
Merely because Speech Therapists performing similar duties and functions in other institutions are paid higher pay scale is no good ground to accept the petitioner 's claim for equal pay.
In the absence of any material placed before the Court it is not possible to record findings that the petitioner is denied equality before the law.
Moreover, if the employer is not the same the principle of 'Equal pay for equal work ' would not be applicable.
[969E F] The doctrine of 'Equal Pay for Equal Work ' is not an abstract one, it is open to the State to prescribe different scales of pay for different posts having regard to educa tional qualifications, duties and responsibilities of the post.
The principle of 'Equal Pay for Equal Work ' is ap plicable when employees holding the same rank perform simi lar functions and discharge similar duties and responsibili ties are treated differently.
The application of the doc trine would arise where employees are equal in every respect but they are denied equality in matters relating to the scale of pay.
The principle of 'Equal Pay for Equal Work ' has been enforced by this Court.
[962D F] Randhir Singh vs Union of India & Ors., ; ; Direndra Chemoli & Anr.
vs State of U.P., ; V.J. Thomas & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, [1985] (Supp.) SCC 7; P. Savita vs Union of India & Ors., [1985] (Supp.) SCR 101; Bhagwan Dass vs State of Haryana, [1987] 4 SCC 634 and Jai Pal & Ors.
vs State of Haryana & Ors.
, [1988] 3 SCC 354, referred to.
