This is a tenant 's appeal filed after obtaining Special Leave from the Court.
The Respondent landlord of tenanted premises (i.e. two sheds) filed a petition for ejectment of the appellant from the premises in question before the Rent Controller.
According to the Respondent landlord the monthly rent payable by the appellant was Rs.950 p.m. which was liable to be enhanced under the provisions of Haryana Urban (Control of Rent and Eviction) Act, 1973 from Rs.950 to Rs.1142 p.m.
Accordingly, the respondent caused a notice to be given to the appellant claiming rent @ Rs. 1142 w.e.f. 26.6.1974 till June 1977 and since the appellant defaulted in making payment of the rent, he was liable to be ejected from the demised premises.
The tenant denied that the rent was liable to be enhanced as claimed by the landlord.
He further asserted that he had already paid rent upto March 1975 by means of cheques and that he had tendered the ar rears of rent together with interest and costs as assessed by the Rent Controller on 5.12.1977.
On this reasoning he urged that he was not liable to be evicted on the ground taken in the Petition.
The landlord in the replication denied the receipt of rent for the period from May 1974 to November, 1977 @ Rs.1142 p.m. Alternatively he claimed that the rent to the extent of Rs.36,100 was due to him from the appellant @ Rs.950 p.m. from 1st May, 1974 to June 30, 1977.
The Rent Controller held that the landlord respondent was not entitled to recover the rent @ Rs.1142 p.m. but only Rs.950 p.m. as agreed between the parties and the appellant has failed to pay the rent from 1.4.1975.
Accordingly, the Rent Controller directed the ejectment of the appellant from the premises by granting him two months time.
987 The appellate authority having affirmed the order of the Rent Controller, the appellant filed a Civil Revision before the High Court under Sub section
(6) of Sec. 15 of the Act.
Before the High Court it was urged by the appellant that since in the application for ejectment no specific amount of arrears of rent due was mentioned as contemplated by CI.
(c) of Rule 4 and Clause (1) of Rule 5 of the Haryana Urban (Control of Rent and Eviction) Rules he could not be evict ed.
Finding no substance in the said contention, the High Court rejected the Civil Revision.
Hence this appeal.
The appellant raised two contention before this Court viz., that the High Court has ignored to note the statutory obligation cast on the Rent Controller as per the proviso attached to Sec.
13(2)(1) of the Act requiring him to calcu late and determine the quantum of arrears of rent; even at the first instance has not been complied with and (ii) that the application for ejectment was not in accordance with the mandatory provisions of Rule 4(c) 5(1) and 6 of the Rules framed under the Act.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: The proviso to Sec. 13(2)(i) requires the tenant to pay or tender the actual arrears of rent within 15 days of the first hearing of the application for ejectment after due service alongwith the interest to be calculated by the Controller at 8 per cent per annum on such arrears together with such costs of the application, if any, as may be al lowed by the Controller.
[994B] When there is a statutory obligation on the tenant either to pay or tender the arrears of rent within a period of 15 days of the first hearing of the application for ejectment after due notice it is for him to calculate the exact arrears of rent due and to pay or tender the same and if the tenant fails to do so he is deemed to have not paid or made the valid tender of the rent.
[994D] The non compliance of Rule 4(c) i.e. the non mentioning of the quantum of arrears of rent, does involve no invali dating consequence and also does not visit any penalty.
[999B C] Rules 4(c), 5(1) and 6 are not mandatory but only directory.
[999C] If the statute is mandatory, the things done not in the manner or form prescribed have no effect or validity.
But if it is directory, the non compliance may not lead to any serious and adverse consequence.
[995H; 996A] 988 The word "shall" in its ordinary import is obligatory.
Nevertheless the word "Shall" need not be given that conno tation in each and every case and the provisions can be interpreted as directory instead of mandatory depending upon the purpose which the legislature intended to achieve as disclosed by the object, design, purpose and scope of the statute.
[998H; 999A B] No prejudice is writ large in the present case because proof of prejudice is also one of the necessary criteria besides non compliance of the provision to invalidate the Act.
[999G] Sheo Narain vs Sher Singh, ; , Not applicable.
Sham Lal (dead) by Irs.
vs Atme Nand Jain Sabha (Regd.) Dal Bazar, ; , Not applicable.
Montreal St. Rly.
Co. vs Normandin, ; , re ferred to.
Seth BikhrajJaipuria vs Union of India, ; , referred to.
Raza Buland Sugar Co. Ltd. vs Municipal Board, Rampur, ; , referred to.
K. Kamraj Nadar vs Kunju Thevar and Others, , referred to.
Subbarao vs Member, Election Tribunal, Hyderabad, ; , referred to.
State of U.P. & Others vs Babu Ram Upadhya, ; , referred to.
Ajit Singh vs State of Punjab, ; , referred to.
