A letter petition in regard to the Mental Hospital at Ranchi was considered as a public interest application under Article 32 of the Constitution, and the Court called upon the State of Bihar to file its counter affidavit.
At the same time, the Court directed the Chief Judicial Magistrate to visit the hospital and submit a report about the conditions prevailing there.
The hospital was in the sole management of the Health Department of the State of Bihar.
The State of Bihar received financial contributions from the States of West Bengal and Orissa on the basis of the number of beds reserved for each State.
The report submitted by the Chief Judicial Magistrate made a painful reading.
In the affidavit submitted by the State of Bihar it was stated that the Government was aware of the conditions and had since taken some steps to improve the working of the hospital, and had also drawn up a scheme to develop the hospital on the lines of NIMHANS in Bangalore.
From time to time, the Court had issued directions and made specific orders regarding provision of better food.
clothing, medical treatment, housing and improvement of sanitation, etc.
While keeping the matter pending, the Court, HELD: (1) In a welfare State it is the obligation of the State to provide medical attention to every citizen.
The State has to realise its obligation and the Government of the day has got to perform its duties by running the hospital in a perfect standard and serving the patients in an appropriate way.
[318D E] (2) It is clear that inspite of several orders made by this Court and assurances held out by the State Government of Bihar.
the defects were not being remedied.
The awareness PG NO 307 of the governmental authorities of the sordid situation prevailing in the hospital, as admitted in the scheme furnished to the Court, the non compliance in an effective way with the directions made from time to time by the Court and the general lethargy shown in rising from slumber leaves a clear impression that the institution cannot be run as a mental hospital of that magnitude unless there be change in the administrative set up, the control is altered and a new service to patient oriented thrust given to the institution.
[3I8 C] (3) The scheme which was furnished to the Court was a halfhearted one and no attempt therein was made to bring about any improvement except attending to certain obvious deficiencies and short falls.
The Court had looked forward to a scheme of re orientation which the scheme did not even remotely touch.
[318F G] (4) The State Government authorities have not been able to assess the priorities.
There does not seem to be the slightest interest on the part of the persons handling the matter, to improve the environment.
In these circumstances, it is difficult to leave the management exclusively to the Health Department of the State of Bihar if the institution has to run as a good and useful hospital.
Association of the States of West Bengal and Orissa in the management is likely to bring about some positive result.
It would, therefore, be much better if a Committee of Management is appointed with full powers to look after all aspects of the institution.
[319A; B D] (5) The Court accordingly constituted a Committee of Management for the Mental Hospital and gave directions regarding the financial contribution from the participating States, and also laid down guidelines regarding the functioning and management of the hospital.
The Court further directed that the Committee shall take expeditious steps to explore the possibility of transforming the hospital into the pattern obtaining in the hospital run by NIMHANS at Bangalore.
[321C D]
