Pursuant to the directions made by the Supreme Cour t, with a view to providing relief to delinquent childr en detained in jails, in 1986 the District Judges of the enti re country supplied the particulars of under trial and convic t ed children found in regular jails within their jurisdi c tion.
With the passage of time and the coming into force of the Juvenile Justice Act, 1986 it became necessary to g et fresh detailed reports for updating the information.
The Supreme Court issued directions and, HELD: 1.
Children require the protective umbrella of society for better growth and development as they are not in a position to claim their entitlement to attention, growi ng up, food, education and the like.
It is the responsibili ty of the society and is one of the paramount obligations of those who are in charge of governance of the country tod ay to attend to the children to make them appropriate citize ns of tomorrow.
[64A B] 2.
Every District Judge is directed to report to th is Court the figures as to the exact number of delinque nt juveniles still detained in regular jails and whether juv e nile courts, juvenile homes, special homes and observatio ns homes as provied in the Juvenile Justice Act, 1986 have be en established.
[62H; 63A] 61 2.1 A Senior Advocate of this Court is appointed as Commissioner to visit the jails in the three Districts of the State of Bihar, viz. Deogarh, Patna and Bhagalpur a nd collect the necessary particulars of juvenile delinquen ts housed in those jails and report to this Court.
He shall be provided all facilities by the State Government and sha ll also be entitled to reimbursement of his expense section [64H;65A B] 3.
Section 62 of the Juvenile Justice Act, 1986 empowe rs the State Government to make rules to carry out the purpos es of the Act.
The scheme of the Act is such that it cannot be properly enforced unless appropriate rules are framed a nd brought into force.
The District Judges while making the ir reports shall also indicate whether rules have been fram ed and whether such rules are already in force.
Counsel for t he respective States are directed to inform this Court by written Memorandum about the framing of rules and bringi ng them into force in the respective States.
If such rul es have not been framed in any State, such State or States a re directed to frame the same and bring them into force witho ut any further delay.
[63C E] 4.
For facilitating the monitoring of the implementati on of the Juvenile Justice Act, 1986, a group of nominat ed advocates is entrusted with the work of making a dra ft Scheme and placing it before the Court for its consider a tion.
[64D E] 5.
The Registry of this Court should have appropria te funds to meet the expenses from time to time.
The Union of India is directed to deposit a sum of Rs.50,000 while ea ch of the States of Bihar and West Bengal and Uttar Pradesh is directed to deposit a sum of Rs.15,000.
[65B C]
