With a view to preventing the petitioner detenu fr om acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order, an order of detention was passed against h im by the Comissioner of Police, Surat City, under section 3( 2) of the Gujarat Prevention of Anti social Activities Ac t, 1985.
The grounds of detention referred to the detenu 's criminal activities connected with bootlegging on a lar ge scale and in an organised manner, and the several cas es registered and pending against him on that account.
T he detenu 's representations were dismissed by the 1st respon d ent and the State Government.
It was contended on behalf of the petitioner that t he Detaining Authority for drawing his requisite subjecti ve satisfaction had taken into consideration the previo us grounds of detention which were the subject matter of a Special Criminal Application before the Gujarat High Cour t, and the High Court had quashed the order of detention i m pugned in that case.
On the other hand, it was contended on behalf of the respondents that the earlier proceeding w as considered only to a limited purpose of taking note of t he detenu 's continued involvement in bootlegging activities.
Allowing the writ petition, and quashing the detention ord er it was HELD: (1) Even if the order of detention comes to an e nd either by revocation or by expiry of the period of detenti on there must be fresh facts for passing a subsequent orde r. [58D] Ghulam Nambi Zaki vs State of Jammu & Kashmir, ; Hadibandhu Das vs District Magistrate, Cuttack Anr.
; , ; HarJas Dev Singh vs State of Punja b; , and 53 Chotka Hembram vs State of West Bengal, 1, referred to.
(2) A fortiori when a detention order is quashed by t he Court issuing a high prerogative writ like habeas corpus or certiorari, the grounds of the said order should not be taken into consideration either as a whole or in part ev en alongwith the fresh grounds of detention for drawing t he requisite subjective satisfaction to pass a fresh ord er because once the Court strikes down an earlier order by issuing a rule it nullifies the entire order.
[58D E] Ibrahim Bachu Bafan vs State of Gujarat, , followed.
(3) It is imperative therefore to read down section 15 of the Act which provides for the making of successi ve orders of detention so as to bring it in conformity wi th Article 22(4) of the Constitution.
[59C] Abdul Latif Abdul Wahab Sheikh vs B.K. Jha & Anr .; , followed.
