The petitioner was detained under an order dated 17 th September, 1988 made by the detaining authority under sub section (2) of section 3 of the Gujarat Prevention of Anti Social Activ i ties Act, 1985 with a view to prevent him from acting in a ny manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order.
T he grounds of detention mentioned five offences register ed against him with police records, out of which the first o ne under section 324 IPC was stated to have been compromised, t he second under section 332 IPC and the third under sections 148 and 3 07 IPC respectively were stated to be pending trial, the four th under section 302 IPC was stated not proved, while the fif th under section 302 IPC was stated to be in the court.
The Government approved the said order on 21st Septe m ber, 1988.
The detenu submitted his representation dat ed 22nd September, 1988 to the first respondent who by h is order dated 30th September, 1988 rejected the same.
He thereupon, filed this petition under Article 32 of t he Constitution.
It was contended for the petitioner that he has be en acquitted even on 26th August, 1988 in the case shown at serial No. 2 in the Table appended to the grounds of dete n tion, and on 6th June, 1988 in the case shown at Serial N o. 3, that this material and vital fact of his acquittal in t he said cases had not been placed before the detaining author i ty and this non placing and the consequent non considerati on of the said material likely to influence the mind of t he detaining authority vitiates the subjective satisfaction a nd invalidates the detention order, that the names of his s o called associates were nowhere disclosed which fact wou ld show either the authority did not know as to who the se associates were or knowing their names has refrained fr om furnishing it to the detenu thereby disabling him to ma ke his effective representation, and 44 that the grounds of detention otherwise were vague or def i cient.
For the respondent it was contended that each activ i ty of the petitioner was a separate ground of detention a nd that the fact that the petitioner was acquitted in the sa id cases was of no consequence.
Allowing the writ petition, HELD: The requisite subjective satisfaction, the form a tion of which is a condition precedent to passing of a detention order, will get vitiated if material or vit al facts which would have bearing on the issue and weighed t he satisfaction of the detaining authority one way or the oth er and influenced his mind are either withheld or suppressed by the sponsoring authority or ignored and not considered by the detaining authority before issuing the detention orde r. [51D E] In the instant case, at the time when the detaini ng authority passed the detention order the vital fact of acquittal of the detenu in cases mentioned at serial Nos. 2 and 3 had not been brought to his notice and on the oth er hand it was withheld and the detaining authority was giv en to understand that the trial of those cases was pendin g.
This non placing of the material fact resulting in no n application of the mind of the detaining authority to t he said fact has vitiated the requisite subjective satisfa c tion, rendering the impugned detention order invalid.
T he same is, therefore, set aside.
The detenu be set at liber ty forthwith.
[51E, F, G, H] S.K. Nizamuddin vs State of West Bengal, ; ; Suresh Mahato vs The District Magistrate, Burdwan Ors., AIR 1975 SC 728; Asha Devi vs Additional Secretary to the Government of Gujarat & Anr., ; and Si ta Ram Somani vs State of Rajasthan & Ors., referred to.
Shiv Rattan Makim vs Union of India & Ors., [1985] Sup p. (3) SCR 843 and Subharta vs State of West Bengal , distinguished.
