This is defendants ' appeal arising out of a suit for part i tion.
One Mallappa Kulkarni had two sons: Veerappa and Gura p pa.
Verrappa is survived by his son Lingappa.
Gurappa, w ho was in the service of Railways married Channavva (fir st wife) on 16.2.28 but since she remained issueless, he rema r ried in 1955 Chinnavva (second wife).
From this marriage t wo daughters were born viz. Shakuntlabai arid Annapoornav a. Consequent upon the death of his second wife Gurappa is sa id to have married Nilavva accroding to customary Udiki ma r riage.
After retirement Gurappa settled permanently at Hub li where he had house, property etc.
After the death of Gura p pa, his first wife Channavva claimed l/3rd share in t he property.
Having failed to get the same, she sold her 1/3 rd share to Lingappa.
Lingappa also could not procure the 1/3 rd share from defendants by mutual negotiation.
Thereupon he filed a suit for partition claiming his 1/3rd share in t he immovable properties left by Gurappa.
In the suit he i m pleaded Channavva (first wife) as Defendant No. 1 and t he children from 2nd wife as Defendant Nos. 2 & 3 and Nilla va was impleaded as Defendant No. 4, who was described as having illegal connections with the deceased Gurappa.
The Additional Munsiff, Hubli who tried the suit pass ed a preliminary decree for partition of l/3rd share of Gura p pa 's properties in the hands of the defendants 2 to 4 by metes and bounds.
Defendants 2 to 4 contested that Defenda nt No. 4 was lawfully married wife of Gurappa.
Defendants 2 to 4 appealed to the Civil Judge at Hub li impleading the plaintiff and Defendant No. 1 as respodent section The Civil Judge 71 modified the decree and granted I/6th share holding the 4 th defendant to be legally married wife of Gurappa.
Bei ng dissatisfied by the said order, the plaintiff as also D e fendants 2 & 3 filed appeals in the High Court.
The Hi gh Court by the impugned judgment allowed the plaintiff 's appeal and restored the decree of the trial Court for l/3 rd share and dismissed the defendant 's appeal.
The High Cou rt held that the 4th defendant was not legally married wife of deceased Gurappa.
Hence this appeal by Defendants 2 & 3 by special leave.
The question that was agitated before this Court wa s: Whether proof of custom of Udiki marriage was adduced by t he fourth defendant; and whether Udiki marriage itself impli ed the dissolution of earlier marriage and if not, wheth er separate custom of dissolution of the earlier marriage w as pleaded and proved.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: Custom must be proved and the burden of proof is on the person who asserts it.
A custom cannot be extended by logical process.
Customs cannot be extended by analogy a nd it cannot be established by a priori method.
[8lB. E] Nothing need be proved of which the Courts can ta ke judicial notice.
When a custom has been judicially reco g nised by the Court then it passes into the law of the la nd as proof of it becomes unnecessary under section 57(1) of the Evidence Act.
[81 F] From the evidence on record, appreciated in the light of the case law on the subject and the authoritative tex ts relating to the custom of dissolution and Udiki form of marriage prevalent among the Lingayats who are a religio us sect following teachings of Basava, the Court entertains no doubt that there has been ancient and unbroken customs of dissolution of marriage and of Serai Udiki marriage amo ng the Panchamasal Lingayats which was judicially noticed by the Courts, and that the marriage in the instant case, of the fourth defendant with Gurulingappa was proved to ha ve been customarily dissolved and that she was subsequent ly legally married with Gurappa in the valid customary form of Udiki marriage, whereafter, she lived with Gurappa as hu s band and wife until Gurappa died, and that, thereafter, s he enjoyed the family pension by dint of her being nominated as wife of Gurappa to the knowledge of all concerned.
She w as accepted by the community as wife of Gurappa even after h is death.
There is, therefore, no scope for declaring t he marriage illegal posthumously.
[84F H; 85A] 72 Virasangappa vs Rudrappa & Anr., Madr as 440; Pakhali Jina Magan vs Bai Jethi, I.L.R. 5; Sankarlingam vs Subban, [1894] 17 Madras 479; Shivalingi ah vs Chowdamma, A.I.R. 1956 Mys. 17; Rahi vs Govinda Val ad Teja, Bom. 97; Edward vs Jenkins, [189 6] ; Mohammed Ibrahim vs Shaik Ibrahim, AIR 19 ; Ramalakshmi Ammal vs Sivanantha Perumal Sethuraya r, 14 M.I.A. 570; Raja Rajendra Narain vs Kumar Gangananda Ors., AIR 1925 PC 213; D.C. Bara Banki vs Receiver of t he Estate of Choudhry & Ors., AIR 1928 PC 202; Effuah Amiss ah vs Effuah Krabah, AIR 1936 P.C. 147; Saraswati vs Jagada m bal; , and Uzagar Singh vs Mst.
Jeo, AIR 19 59 SC 1041, referred to.
