In May 1985, some of the hutments in the Bombay Port Trust lands were cleared by the Port Trust and these hut ments were demolished.
The petitioners filed a writ petition in the Bombay High Court for restraining the Bombay Port Trust from carrying out any further demolition of the hut ments.
The writ petition was dismissed by a Single Judge of the High court.
An appeal preferred against the order of the Single Judge was dismissed by a Division Bench.
Hence the appeal by special leave to this Court.
By an interim order dated 27th January 1986 a Division Bench of this Court fixed a cut off date as January 1, 1981 for the purpose of granting relief in the form of providing alternative sites to the hutment dwellers and directed that those hutment dwellers who have been continuously in occupa tion for at least two years prior to January 1, 1981 shall not be thrown out unless and until, alternative sites are provided to them for occupation.
A Commission was also appointed to identify the persons who were eligible for alternative sites in terms of the aforesaid interim order.
In its report submitted on 4th November 1986, the Commission pointed out that only 50 hutment dwellers could satisfy the Commission that they were living on the site for a period of two years prior to the cut off date.
The other hutment dwellers were unable to do so.
174 It was contended on behalf of the petitioners that (i) in view of the time which has gone by, cut off date fixed by this Court should be extended, and (ii) the policy of the State of Maharashtra was not to evict unauthorised occupants on public lands except after providing them alternative accommodation.
Disposing of the special leave petition, it was, HELD: 1.
The problem of hutment dwellers is a human problem and the removal of hutments is bound to cause an untold hardship and misery to the occupants.
However, on that consideration, the Bombay Port Trust cannot be prevent ed from putting its land to its own use.
[178C] 2.
Once the cut off date has been fixed by this Court, there is no basis for extending the cut off date merely because time has gone by since that would render the entire task given to the Commission futile.
Moreover, doing so would run counter to the intention of this Court in making the aforesaid order which was to protect only those hutment dwellers who had been in occupation for at least two years prior to 1.1.1981.
In view of the fact that no policy state ment of the Government of the State of Maharashtra was pointed out it cannot be taken into account.
Moreover, the Port Trust land cannot be regarded as public land in occupa tion of the Government, either the Central Government or the State Government.
[177E H] 2.1.
Under the circumstances, directed that the said 50 hutment dwellers along with their families who had been identified by the Commission as having occupied the said hutments for two years or more prior to the cut off date, namely, 1.1.1981, shall not, be removed from their hutments and their hutments shall not be demolished except after provision of alternative sites for them.
The Port Trust will be at liberty to remove these hutments after giving alterna tive sites to these hutment dwellers.
[177H; 178A B] 3.
It is not possible for this Court to say whether there would be a greater injury to public interest by the removal of the unauthorised hutment dwellers or by prevent ing the Port Trust from putting its own land to a proper use.
[178C D] 4.
The State Government or the Central Government or even the Bombay Port Trust may make some provision for providing alternative sites at least to some of these hut ment dwellers.
However, 175 the provision of such alternative sites is not made a condi tion precedent to the removal of the hutment dwellers or the hutments in question other than those who are entitled to protection on the basis set out earlier.
