Sub section
(1) of section 25 of the Wealth Tax Act, 1957 inves t ing the Commissioner with the power to revise an ord er passed by any authority subordinate to him stipulates in c l. (b) of the proviso thereto that the power of revision sha ll not extend to an order which is the subject of an appe al before the Appellate Assistant Commissioner or the Appella te Tribunal.
The respondent, a share holder in a company, adopte d, for the purpose of assessment under the Act, valuation of shares at their breakup values with paid up capital a nd reserves which was rejected by the Wealth Tax Officer w ho estimated their value on the basis of capitalisation of profits for the assessment year 1960 61 and on the basis of the break up value with certain modifications for the a s sessment years 1958 59 and 1959 60.
The respondent 's appea ls were partly allowed by the Appellate Assistant Commission er against which the Commissioner of Wealth Tax preferr ed appeals to the Appellate Tribunal.
The Appellate Tribun al dismissed the appeals.
During the pendency of the appea ls before the Tribunal, the respondent preferred revisi on applications to the Commissioner of Wealth Tax and contend ed that the valuation of the shares adopted by the Appella te Assistant Commissioner was unreasonable and excessive a nd should be duly modified.
The Commissioner rejected t he applications on the ground that they were incompetent in view of cl.
(b) of the proviso to sub section
(1) of section 2 5.
Against that order the respondent filed a writ petiti on which was allowed by a Single Judge of the High court hol d ing that the revision applications were competent since t he aforesaid provision would not operate as a bar against an assessee in a case where the appeal before the Appella te Tribunal is filed by the Revenue.
An appeal filed again st his order was 132 dismissed by a Division Bench of the High Court.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: Where an appeal is filed before the Appella te Tribunal against an order of the Appellate Assistant Commi s sioner, the impugned order merges in the order of the Appe l late Tribunal when the appeal is disposed of on merits.
If meanwhile a revision application has been filed before t he Commissioner against the same order of the Appellate Assis t ant Commissioner, it will not be open to the Commissioner to pass any order in revision against the order of the Appe l late Assistant Commissioner as the latter will have merg ed with the order of the Appellate Tribunal.
It is immateri al that the appeal and the revision application have not be en filed by the same party.
This would be plainly so as in t he present case, the subject matter of the appeal before t he Appellate Tribunal is the same as that of the revisi on application before the Commissioner.
[135B D] In this case the High Court omitted to consider that t he appeals filed before the Tribunal had been disposed of, a nd the impugned order of the Appellate Assistant Commission er had merged in the order of the Appellate Tribunal renderi ng the revision applications infructuous.
What the responde nt should have done was to file her own appeals before t he Appellate Tribunal.
It must be noted that the Appella te Tribunal is a superior body to the Commissioner, as is cle ar from sub section
(1) of section 26 which provides that an appeal sha ll lie to the Appellate Tribunal from an order under sub section
( 2) of section 25 of the Commissioner.
There would have been no difficulty in the Appellate Tribunal considering the appea ls of both parties and passing suitable orders in regard to t he valuation of the shares.
[135F G; 136A B]
