Sub section
(1) of section 12B of the Indian Income Tax Act, 1922 provides that tax shall be payable by an assessee under the head "Capital gains" in respect of any profits or gains arising from the sale, exchange, relinquishment or transfer of a capital asset.
The respondent assessee who owned 90 shares in the Shorrock Co. which stood dissolved under a scheme of amalga mation with another company known as New Shorrock Co., which was sanctioned by the High Court, was aborted 45 shares of the New Shorrock Co. in terms of the provisions of the said scheme.
During the assessment proceedings for the assessment year 1961 62, the Income Tax Officer omitted to consider the applicability of section 12B 10 the case of the assessee.
Later on, the Commissioner issued a notice under section 33B to the assessee stating that the receipt of 45 shares of the New Shorrock Co. "in exchange" of his original holding of 90 shares in the Shorrock Co. had resulted in an assessable profit, and passed an order directing the Income Tax Officer to revise the assessment and to include an amount of Rs.49,350 representing the capital gain resulting from the transaction.
On appeal by the assessee the Appellate Tribu nal held that the transaction represented neither an ex change nor a relinquishment and, therefore, section 12B of the Act was not attracted.
However, at the instance of the Revenue the Tribunal referred the question to the High Court which answered it in favour of the assessee.
Dismissing the appeals, 180 HELD: The sole question is whether the receipt of the 45 shares of the New Shorrock Co. upon amalgamation by reason of the share holding of 90 shares of the Shorrock Co. can be described as an "exchange" or a "relinquishment" within the meaning of section 12B.
It seems plain to us that no exchange is involved in the transaction.
An exchange involves the trans fer of property by one person to another and reciprocally the transfer of property by that other to the first person.
There must be a mutual transfer of ownership of one thing for the ownership of another.
In the present case, the assessee cannot be said to have transferred any property to any one.
When he was allotted the shares of the New Shorrock Co. he was entitled to such allotment because of his holding the 90 shares of Shorrock Co. The holding of the 90 shares in the Shorrock Co. was merely a qualifying condition enti tling the assessee to the allotment of the 45 shares of the New Shorrock Co. The dissolution of the Shorrock Co. de prived the holding of the 90 shares of that company of all value.
[183B E] On the question whether there was any relinquishment, the decision must again be against the Revenue.
A relin quishment takes place when the owner withdraws himself from the property and abandons his rights thereto.
It presumes that the property continues to exist after the relinquish ment.
Upon amalgamation, the shares of the Shorrock Co. lost all value as that company stood dissolved.
[183E F]
