By an agreement dated 7 March, 1974, both the appellant and the respondent Ram Lal appointed an arbitrator to adju dicate through arbitration their disputes about a plot of land.
The arbitrator gave his award on 22 May 1974 stating, inter alia, that the land in dispute was in the joint name of the appellant and respondent Ram Lal, and that the half ownership of the appellant shall now be owned by Shri Ram Lal in addition to his 1/2 share owned by him in those lands.
The arbitrator filed an application before Sub Judge, II Class for making the award the rule of the Court.
The appel lant filed objections under section 33 of the , to set aside the award on various grounds but no point was raised that the award was unenforceable because it was not properly stamped and not registered.
The trial court dismissed all the objections taken under section 14 of the and made the award the rule of the Court.
The District Judge, in the appeal filed by the appel lant, came to the conclusion that the award declared a right in immovable property and since it was unregistered and unstamped it could not be made the rule of the Court.
The High Court, however, allowed the appeal filed by the res 251 pondent on the ground that the award did not create any right in immovable property, and that it only admitted the already existing rights between the parties and hence it did not require any registration.
The appellant appealed by special leave to this Court.
During the pendency of the said appeal the award was submitted for registration on 19 December, 1988 and was registered on 3 February, 1989.
On behalf of appellant it was argued that the High Court was wrong in looking into an unregistered award, and that its subsequent registration was obtained by misrepresenta tion and misleading the authorities did not validate it retrospectively and that the registration having been beyond the period of four months was wholly bad.
On behalf of the respondent the appeal was contested by contending that the award did not require registration as it did not create, declare or assign any new right in the immovable property, but that it merely declared the existing right of ownership of the respondent, that the appellant was barred from taking the plea of its being unregistered at a later stage as it had not been taken by him before the trial court.
It was further submitted that the appellant was estopped from agitating the question after the lapse of 30 days as is statutorily required under section 30 of the Arbitra tion Act.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: (1) The real purpose of registration is to secure that every person dealing with the property, where such document requires registration, may rely with confidence upon statements contained in the register as a full and complete account of all transactions by which title may be affected.
Section 17 of the said Act being a disabling section, must be construed strictly.
Therefore, unless a document is clearly brought within the provisions of the section, its non registration would be no bar to its being admitted in evidence.
[259C D] Ramaswamy Ayyar & Anr.
vs Thirupathi Naik, ILR XXVII Madras p. 43, affirmed.
(2) On a proper construction of the award, it does appear that the award did create, declare or assign a right, title and interest in the immovable property.
The award declares that 1/2 share of the ownership 252 of Shri Lachhman Dass shall "be now owned by Shri Ram Lal, the respondent in addition to his 1/2 share owned in these lands.
" Therefore,the said award declares the right of Ram Lal to the said share of the said property mentioned in that clause.
It is not in dispute that the said property is immovable property and it is not merely a declaration of the pre existing right but creation of new right of the parties.
The award in the instant case affects immovable property over Rs. I00 and as such was required to be registered.
[259D F; 262G] (3) The filing of an unregistered award under section 49 of the Act was not prohibited.
What was prohibited was that it could not be taken into evidence so as to affect immovable property failing under section 17 of the Act.
[260E] (4) An award affecting immovable property of the value of more than Rs. I00 cannot be looked into by the Court for pronouncement upon the award, on the application under section 14 of the unless the award is registered.
Section 14 enjoins that when an award of an arbitrator has been filed, the Court should give notice to the parties and thereupon the court shall pronounce judgment upon the award and make it a rule of the Court.
But in order to do so, the court must be competent to look into the award.
Section 49 of the act enjoins that the award cannot be received as evidence of any transaction affecting immovable property or conferring power to adopt, unless it is registered.
In that view of the matter, no judgment upon the award could have been pronounced upon the unregistered award.
[263E F] Satish Kumar & Ors.
vs Surinder Kumar & Ors., and Ratan Lal Sharma vs Purshottam Harit, ; , relied upon.
(5) In the instant case, though it may not be possible to take the point that the.
award is bad because it is unregistered as such, it could not be taken into considera tion in a proceeding under section 30 or 33 of the , but it can be taken in the proceedings under section 14 of the when the award is sought to be .filed in the Court and the Court is called upon to pass a decree in accordance with the award.
As the court could not look into the award, there is no question of the court passing a decree in accordance with the award and that point can also be taken when the award is sought to be enforced as the rule of the Court.
Further, at the relevant time the award was not registered.
If that is the position, then the subse 253 quent registration of the award whether in conformity with sections 23 and 25 of the Act or whether in breach or in violation of the same is not relevant.
[265A D] Gangaprashad vs Mt. Banaspati, AIR 1933 Nagpur 132, referred to.
