Appellant herein was a lessee of the Respondent in respect of a shop since 1961, at a monthly rent of Rs.25 later increased to Rs.30 and in addition to the said rent, he was to pay house tax to the municipality.
Respondent landlord filed a suit for eviction against the appellant on the ground of default in payment of rent for the period 1.2.1966 to 31.12.66.
The appellant filed an application in that suit under sec.
13(4) of the Act (as it stood prior to amendment) for determination of arrears of rent and the interest payable thereon.
The Trial Court determined the arrears of rent and the interest payable by the appellant.
Consequent upon the appellant 's depositing the same, the suit was dismissed in terms of sec.
13(7) of the Act.
The appellant continued depositing the rent in Court.
Thereafter the Respondent filed another suit on 21.5.75 alleging that the appellant has again committed default in payment of rent and should therefore be evicted.
The appellant received a notice calling upon him to appear in Court on 10.2.76.
Since he had not received a copy of the plaint, he was granted time till 30.3.76 to file his written statement.
In the written statement he refuted his liability to pay the rent and also moved an application u/s 13(3) & 13(4) of the amended Act praying that if in the course of his depositing the rent in court, there has been any omission, due to oversight the Court may determine the arrears of rent & interest payable thereon and permit him to deposit the same in court.
It may be pointed out here that before the appellant was served with the notice of the suit, the Act was amended on 29.9.75 by Amending Ordinance No. 26 of 75 whereby a new section 13 A was added to the Act.
The object of the newly added section was to provide benefit to all tenants against whom suits for eviction on the ground of default in paying the rent were pending by making a provision that the Courts shall not pass any decree in favour of landlords on that ground if the 193 tenant makes an application within a stipulated period and deposits in court the total rent due.
The Trial Court passed orders on the application u/s 13(3) & 13(4) and called upon the appellant to deposit a sum of Rs.335 towards arrears of rent and interest before 28.7.76.
The appellant complied with the order but despite that, the Trial Court passed a decree for eviction and the appellate Court confirmed the same.
In the second appeal preferred by the appellant, he contended that the Trial Court ought to have treated the application filed by him u/s 13(3) & 13(4), as one filed u/s 13 A of the Act and given the benefit thereof to him.
Even though the High Court found that the appellant having re ceived the notice of the suit late and hence was not in a position to make the application within 30 days, declined to interfere because in its view the Act has not provided for any relief to tenants placed in the situation in which the appellant was placed.
The High Court held that the Act contains a lacuna but the same can be remedied by the legis lature and not by Courts and as such the appellant cannot claim the benefit of sec.
13 A of the Act.
The suit having been filed prior to the coming into force of Amending Act, the same will be governed by the provisions of unamended Act.
On the dismissal of the second appeal by the High Court, the appellant has filed this appeal after obtaining special leave.
Before this Court two questions arose for consideration viz: (1) whether the appellant is not entitled to the bene fit of sec.
13 A because he had not filed an application within 30 days from the date of commencement of the Act, and (2) even otherwise whether by reason of the earlier default in payment of rent for the period 1.2.1966 to 31.12.1966, the appellant is disentitled under the Act to claim the benefit of sec.
13 A. Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: Section 13 A has been given overriding effect.
Subsection (1) of section 13 A mandates all courts not to pass any decree in favour of a landlord for eviction of a tenant on the ground of nonpayment of rent, if the tenant makes an application as per clause (b) and pays to the landlord or deposits in court within the prescribed time the total amount of rent in arrears together with interest and full costs of the suit.
[199B C] 194 The intention of the legislature to confer the benefit of section 13 A to all tenants, provided actual eviction had not taken place could further be seen by the terms of sec tion (c).
[199D E] It would be unreasonable and inequitable to hold that the legislature had intended to confer the benefit of sec.
13 A only to those tenants who had received notice of the suit filed against them before the Ordinance came into force and not to those tenants against whom proceedings were pending in the sense they had been instituted but who had no notice of the pendency of the suit.
[199F G] Even though it was found that some arrears had to be paid, the appellant cannot be denied the benefit of sec.
13 A because the section has been given overriding effect in so far as suits and other proceedings which were pending on the date of the promulgation of the ordinance and as such the proviso to sub sec.
(6) of sec.
13 of the amended Act would not disentitle the appellant to claim the benefit of sec.
13 A. [202H; 203A] B.P. Khemka Pvt.
Ltd. vs
V.B.K. Bhowmick; , , referred to.
