The appellant, section Rangarajan is a film producer.
He produced a Tamil film "Ore Oru Gramathile" and applied for certificate for exhibition of the film.
The examination committee upon seeing the film refused to grant the Certifi cate but on a reference being made to the 2nd Revising Committee for review and recommendation, the Committee by a majority of 5:4 recommended the grant of a 'U ' certificate subject to deletion of certain scenes.
On 7.12.87 'U ' certificate was granted which was chal lenged in the High Court by means of writ petitions.
It was contended before the High Court that the film is treated in an irresponsible manner, the reservation policy of the Govt. has been projected in a biased manner and the so called appeal in the film that "India is one" is a hollow appeal which touches caste sensitivity of the Brahmin forward caste.
It was also asserted that the film would create law and order problem in Tamil Nadu.
The Writ Petitions were dismissed by the Single Judge but upon appeal they were allowed and the 'U ' certificate issued to the appellant producer was revoked.
These two appeals, one by the producer of the film and the other by the Union of India have been filed by 205 special leave of challenging the decision of the High Court.
The principal contentions raised on behalf of the appel lants were: (i) that the fundamental right of freedom of free expression guaranteed under the Constitution covers even the medium of movies; that the opinion on the film ought not to be rested on the isolated passages disregarding the main theme and its message; (ii) That the Court should not concern itself with the correctness or legality of the views expressed in the film and the Court cannot limit the expression on any general issue even if it is controversial and that the writings of the film must be considered in a free and liberal manner in the light of the freedom of expression guaranteed under the Constitution.
It was assert ed that the theme of the film is that reservation could be on the basis of economic backwardness instead of caste.
Counsel for the Respondents was critical about the manner in which the reservation policy of the Govt.
has been condemned and the events and the characters portrayed in the film, as they are depicted in a biased manner and reaction to the film in Tamil Nadu is bound to be volatile and likely to create law and order problem.
Allowing the appeals, this Court, HELD: The motion pictures were originally considered as a form of amusement to be allowed to titillate but not to arouse.
They were treated as mere entertainment and not an art or a means of expression.
Movie motivates thought and action and assures a high degree of attention and retention.
It makes its impact simultaneously arousing the visual and aural senses.
The movie had unique capacity to disturb and arouse feelings.
It has as much potential for evil as it was for good.
It has an equal potential to instil or cultivate violent or good behaviour.
[211D E; 212G; 213D] Censorship by prior restraint is, therefore, not only desirable but also necessary.
[213E] The Censors Board should exercise considerable circum spection on movies affecting the morality or decency of our people and cultural heritage of the country.
The moral values in particular, should not be allowed to be sacrificed in the guise of social change or cultural assimilation.
[216G H] The Censors should be responsive to social change and they must go with the current climate.
The Censors may display more sensitivity 206 to movies which will have a markedly deleterious effect to lower the moral standards of those who see it.
[217C D] If the film is unobjectionable and cannot constitution ally be restricted under Article 19(2), freedom of expres sion cannot be suppressed on account of threat of demonstra tion and processions or threats of violence.
That would tantamount to negation of the rule of law and a surrender to black mail and intimidation.
It is the duty of the State to protect the freedom of expression since it is a liberty guaranteed against the State.
The State cannot plead its inability to handle the hostile audience problem.
It is its obligatory duty to prevent it and protect the freedom of expression.
[230C D] The Revising Committees have approved the film.
The members thereof come from different walks of life with variegated experiences.
They represent the cross section of the community.
They have judged the film in the light of the objectives of the Act and the guidelines provided for the purpose.
There is nothing wrong or contrary to the Constitu tion in approving the film for public exhibition.
[230E F] The framework of the Indian Constitution differs from the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.
Article 19(1)(a) guarantees to all citizens the right to freedom of speech and expression.
The freedom of the expression means the right to express one 's opinion by words of mouth, writ ing, printing, picture or in any other manner, it would thus include the freedom of communication and the right to propa gate or publish opinion.
The communication of ideas could be made through any medium, newspaper, magazine or movie.
But this right is subject to reasonable restrictions on grounds set out under Article 19(2).
Reasonable limitations can be put in the interest of sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order, decency or morality or in relation to contempt of court, defamation or incitement to an offence.
[212B D] In matters of certification of films, it is necessary to take prompt action by the respective authorities.
The pro ducer who has invested a large capital should not be made to wait needlessly.
He has a statutory right to have the valid ity of the film determined in accordance with law.
It would be, therefore, proper and indeed appreciative if the film is reviewed as soon as it is submitted.
It is not proper to form an opinion by dwelling upon stray sentences or isolated passages disregarding the main theme.
[219E; 220B C] 207 Freedom of expression is the rule and it is generally taken for granted.
Every one has a fundamental right to form his own opinion on any issue of general concern.
He can form and inform by any legitimate means.
[223C] Democracy is Government by the people via open discus sion.
The democratic form of government itself demands its citizens an active and intelligent participation is a basic features and a rational process of democracy which distin guishes it from all other forms of govt.
Public discussion on issues relating to administration had positive value.
[223D E] Our commitment to freedom of expression demands that it cannot be suppressed unless the situations created by allow ing the freedom are pressing and the community interest is endangered.
The anticipated danger should not be remote, conjectural or far fetched.
It should have proximate and direct nexus with the expression.
The expression of thought should be intrinsically dangerous to the public interests.
In other words, the expression should be inseparably locked up with the action contemplated like the equivalent of a "spark in a power keg".
[226G H] It is difficult to understand how the expression in the film with criticism of reservation policy or praising the colonial rule will affect the security of the State or sovereignty and integrity of India.
There is no utterance in the film threatening to overthrow the Govt.
by unlawful or unconstitutional means.
There is no talk of secession either nor is there any suggestion for impairing the integration of the country.
The film seems to suggest that the existing method of reservation on the basis of caste is bad and reservation on the basis of economic backwardness is better.
The film also deprecates exploitation of people on caste considerations.
[222G H; 223A] The fundamental freedom under article 19(1)(a) can be reasonably restricted only for the purposes mentioned in article 19(2) and the restriction must be justified on the anvil of necessity and not the quicks and of convenience and expediency.
Open criticism of Government policies and opera tions is not a ground for restricting expression.
We must practice tolerance to the views of others.
Intolerance is as much dangerous to democracy as to the person himself.
[230H; 231A B] The Court allowed the appeals, set aside the judgment of the High Court and dismissed the writ petitions.
[231B C] 208 Mutual Film Corporation vs Industrial Commission, (1915) referred to, Burstyn vs Wilson, ; referred to, Schenek vs United States, ; (1919) referred to, Santosh Singh vs Delhi Administration, ; followed, K.A. Abbas vs Union of India, ; referred to, Ramesh vs Union of India, ; ; Bhagwat Charan Shukla vs Provincial Government, AIR 1947 Nag 1 at 676, Rajkappoor vs Laxman, ; , Maneka Gandhi vs Union of India, [1978] 2 SCR 621; Naraindas vs State of Madhya Pradesh, ; ; Sakal vs Union of India, ; , Whitney vs California, [274] U.S. 357, 375 378, 1927; Manohar vs Govt.
of Bombay, AIR 1950 Bombay 210; Niharender Dutt Majumdar vs Emperor, AIR 1942 FC 22 and Handyside vs United Kingdom, [1975I EHRR/737 at p. 754 referred to.
