The second respondent, who is the predecessor in inter est of the first respondent, had on.
26th September, 1946 leased out the land in dispute to the appellant at the first instance for a period Of 10 years.
The lease however provid ed to the lessee/appellants option of extension at enhanced rent, twice for successive periods of 5 years, and a third option of extension for a further maximum period of one year.
The appellants are stated to have exercised their option of extension for two successive periods of five years, hot failed to exercise the option of extension for one year thereafter.
On that ground the first respondent instituted a suit for ejectment khas, possession and mesne profits.
The appellants, as defendants, contested the malt stating, inter alia, that they did not exercise the option for renewal after the expiry of the original tern of 10 years as they became thika tenants from 28th February, 1949 i.e. the date of commencement of the Calcutta Thika Tenancy Act, 1949 as admitted by the second respondent in two judi cial proceedings before the Controller under the Calcutta Thika Tenancy Act, 1949.
It was further stated that they never paid any enhanced rent; and that the first respond ent 's claim for the differential rent was rejected in the first respondent 's suit, and ultimately the special leave petition filed in the Supreme Court in that matter was also dismissed.
402 The suit for ejectment in the present suit was decreed by the Trial Court.
The Appellate Court, while dismissing the appellants appeal, held that (1) the lease was for a period of 20 years and not for a period of less than 12 years, and hence sub section 5(b) of Section 2 of the Act had no application; and (2) the respondent were not barred by waiver, estoppel, res judicata or principles analogous thereto because of the earlier judicial proceedings filed by the second respondent as there could be no question of giving a status under the Act when in the facts of the case such a status was not available.
The High Court dismissed the appellants ' second appeal.
Before this Court it was urged on behalf of the appel lants that (1) there could be no controversy about the appellants ' status of thika tenants in view of the fact that the lease was at the first instance for 10 years only and its first and subsequent extensions were contingent on the appellants regular payment of rents, rates and taxes and enhancement of rent, which contingency did not happen as they did not pay any enhanced rent, but simply were holding over; (2) the second respondent admitted the Thika Tenants status of the appellants in the earlier proceedings before the Controller and were therefore estopped from questioning that status.
On the other hand, it was urged on behalf of the re spondent that the lease having clearly been for a period of 20 years, the appellants have rightly been held not to be thika tenants under the Act; and that there could be no estoppel against a statute.
Dismissing the appeal, it was, HELD: (1) Every contract is to be construed with refer ence to its object and the whole of its terms.
The best interpretation is made from the context.
The whole context must be considered to ascertain the intention of the par ties.
It is an accepted principle of construction that the sense and meaning of the parties in any particular part of instrument may be collected 'ex antecedentibus et consequen tibus '; every part of it my be brought into action in order to collect from the whole one uniform and consistent sense, if that is possible.
[409E G] N.E. Railway vs Hastings, (267), referred to.
(2) In the construction of a written instrument, it is legitimate and in order to ascertain the true meaning of the words used and, if that be doubtful, it is legitimate to have regard to the circumstances sur 403 rounding their creation and the subject matter to which it was designed and intended they should apply, [410A B] (3) It is pertinent to note that the word used is 'exte nsion ' and not 'renewal '.
To extend means to enlarge, ex pand, lengthen, prolong, to carry out further than its original limit.
Extension ordinarily implies the continued existence of something to be extended.
The distinction between 'extension ' and 'renewal ' is chiefly that in the case of renewal, a new lease is required, while in the case of extension the same lease continues in force during addi tional period by the performance of the stipulated act.
In other words, the word 'extension ' when used in its proper and usual sense in connection with a lease means a prolonga tion of the lease.
[411C E] (4) Construction of this stipulation in the lease in the above manner will also be consistent when the lease is taken as a whole.
The purposes of the lease were not expected to last for only 10 years as the Schedule specifically men tioned the lease as "for a stipulated period of twenty years." [411E] Kanai Lal vs Paramnidhi, ; ; Mahadeolal Kanodia vs Administrator General of West Bengal, ; ; Annapuma vs Tincowrie Dutt, ; ; Shaf fiuddin & Ors.
vs G.C. Banarjee, and Sheikh Gufan vs S.K. Ganguli, ; distinguished.
(5) No particular order from the previous judicial proceedings conferring the status of thika tenants on the appellants has been shown.
The special leave petition was dismissed by the Supreme Court "without going into the question whether the Thika Tenancy Act was applicable or not.
" Hence, no status could be said to have been deter mined.
[413D F] (6) The essential element of waiver is that there must be a voluntary and intentional relinquishment of a known right or such conduct as warrants the inference of the relinquishment of such right.
It means forsaking the asser tion of a right at the proper opportunity.
[413F G] (7) Waiver is distinct from estoppel in that in waiver the essential element is actual intent to abandon or surren der the right, while in estoppel such intent is immaterial.
The necessary condition is the detriment of the other party by the conduct of the one estopped.
An estoppel may result though the party estopped did not intend to lose any exist 404 ing right.
Thus voluntary choice is the essence of waiver for which there must have existed an opportunity for a choice between the relinquishment and the conferment of a right in question.
Nothing of the kind could be proved in this case to estopp the first respondent, who had filed the suit at the proper opportunity after the land was trans ferred to him.
[413G H; 414A B] Shanti Devi vs
A.K. Banerjee, , referred to.
