The appellants are members of the Andhra Pradesh Engi neering Subordinate Service as Supervisors.
The cadre of supervisors includes degree holders in Engineering and diploma or licence holders.
The appellants are diploma holder supervisors.
Their two fold grievance was: (1) dis crimination in the matter of promotion in as much as the quota of promotion is four to one from amongst the graduate supervisors and non graduate supervisors, respectively; and (2) disparity in the matter of grant of different pay scales to graduate supervisors and non graduate supervisors.
For the redressal of their first grievance, the non graduate supervisors had earlier, in Mohd. Sujat Ali vs Union of India; , , challenged the validity of the Andhra Pradesh Engineering Service Rules, 1967 which gave preferential treatment to graduate supervisors for promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer.
They had con tended that this amounted to denial of equal opportunity to non graduate supervisors thus violating the equality clause enshrined under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
This Court rejected the challenge, holding that the graduate supervisors had always been treated as a distinct and sepa rate class from non graduate supervisors and that they were never fused into one class.
423 The constant appeal relates to their second grievance and arises out of the writ petition filed by the non gradu ate supervisors in the High Court of Andhra Pradesh chal lenging discrimination in the matter of grant of different pay scales to graduate and non graduate supervisors.
Their contention was that they were entitled to the same scale of pay as prescribed for the graduate supervisors on the prin ciple of equal pay for equal work, as they constituted the same service and performed the same duties and functions as those performed by graduate supervisors.
The State Govern ment contested the case on the pleading that graduate super visors and diploma supervisors always remained separate and they were never fused into one service.
It was further contended that even though the two class of employees dis charged the same functions and carried out similar duties, the State was justified in prescribing different pay scales for historical reasons, and also on the basis of difference in the educational qualifications.
The learned Single Judge allowed the writ petition.
On appeal by the State, the Division Bench set aside the judg ment of the learned Single Judge and dismissed the writ petition on the finding that the State practised no discrim ination and the appellants were not entitled to relief on the principle of equal pay for equal work.
Before this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellants that (1) the graduate and non graduate supervi sors constituted the same class as they belonged to the same service and both the class of officers were fused into one, as the two posts were inter changeable; (2)even if the two class of officers constituted two different categories, since they had been carrying out of the same work and per forming the same duties carrying the same responsibility, without any distinction, the doctrine of equal pay for equal work was fully applicable, and it was not necessary that the two class of officers must belong to one integrated service; and (iii) even if the appellant 's grievance regarding viola tion of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution was not sustainable, the appellants were entitled to the same scale of pay as granted to the graduate supervisors on the princi ple of 'equal pay for equal work ' enshrined under Article 39(d) of the Constitution.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: (1) There is a basic difference between the two class of supervisors as graduate supervisors hold degree in Engineering while non graduate supervisors are only Diploma and Licence holders, and they have all along been treated differently on the basis of difference in 424 educational qualifications.
Classification of Supervisor into two classes on the basis of historical reasons is valid and it does not offend Articles 14 or 16 of the Constitu tion.
[431B] Mohammad Sujat Ali vs Union of India, referred to.
(2) Since classification on the basis of educational qualification is a valid consideration for discriminating in matters pertaining to promotion to higher post, there is no reason as to why the same principle is not applicable for prescribing scales of pay.
[432C] (3) Classification in service rounded on the basis of educational and academic qualification is now well recog nised.
It is open to the administration to give preference to a class of employees on the basis of educational qualifi cations, having regard to the nature of duties attached to the post, for the purpose of achieving efficiency in public services.
[432B] Union of India vs Dr. (Mrs.) S.B. Kohli, ; and State of Jammu & Kashmir vs Triloki Nath Khosa, ; , referred to.
(4) The principle of 'equal pay for equal work ' is not an abstract one.
It is open to the State to prescribe dif ferent scales of pay for different cadres having regard to nature of duties, responsibilities and educational qualifi cations.
Different grades are laid down in service with varying qualification for entry into a particular grade.
Higher qualification and experience based on length of service are valid considerations for prescribing different pay scales for different cadres.
[433G H; 434A] State of Mysore vs P. Narasing Rao, ; , referred to.
(5) Where two class of employees perform identical or similar duties and carry out the same functions with the same measure of responsibility, having same academic quali fications, they would be entitled to equal pay.
If the State denies them equality in pay, its action would be violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution, and the Court will strike down the discrimination and grant relief to the aggrieved employees.
But before such relief is granted the court must consider and analyse the rationale behind the State action in prescribing different scales of pay.
If on an analysis of the relevant rules, 425 orders, nature of duties, functions, measure of responsibil ity, and educational qualifications required for the rele vant posts, the court finds that the classification made by the State in giving different treatment to the two class of employees is rounded on rational basis having nexus with the objects sought to be achieved, the classification must be upheld.
Principles of equal pay for equal work is applicable among equals; it cannot be applied to unequals.
[435E G] Federation of All India .Customs and Central Stenogra phers (Recognised) vs Union of India; , ; State of U.P. v .J.P. Chaurasia; , and Mewa Ram Kanojia vs All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Judg.
Today , referred to.
(6) This Court granted relief in a number of cases after recording findings that the aggrieved employees were dis criminated in violation of the equality clause under Arti cles 14 and 16 of the Constitution, without there being any rationale for the classification, even though in some cases the two class of employees did not constitute the same service.
[434C] Randhir Singh vs Union of India, ; ; P. Savita vs Union of India, ; Dhirendra Chamouli vs State of U.P., ; Surinder Singh vs Engineer in Chief CPWD, ; Bhagwan Dass vs State of Haryana, [1987] 4 SCC 634 and Jaipal vs State of Haryana, [1988] 3 SCC 354, referred to.
(7) Article 39(d) contained in Part IV of the Constitu tion, ordains the State to direct its policy towards secur ing equal pay for equal work for both men and women.
Provi sions contained in the Chapter on Directive Principles of State Policy cannot be enforced by courts although the principles contained therein are fundamental in nature for the governance of our country.
[432H; 433A] (8) Fundamental rights and the Directive Principles constitute "Conscience of the Constitution".
The Constitu tion aims at bringing about a synthesis between "Fundamental Rights ' and 'Directive Principles of State Policy ' by giving to the former a place of pride and to the latter a place of permanence; together they form core of the Constitution.
They constitute its true conscience and without faithfully implementing the Directive Principles it is not possible to achieve the welfare State contemplated by the Constitution.
[433D] Keshavanand Bharti vs State of Kerala, [1973] 4 SCC 225, referred to.
426 (9) The Court has no power to direct the Legislature to frame laws to give effect to the Directive Principles as contained in Part IV of the Constitution or to injunct the Legislature from making any such law.
But while considering the question of enforcement of fundamental rights of a citizen, it is open to the Court to be guided by the Direc tive Principles to ensure that in doing justice the Princi ples contained therein are maintained.
[433A B]
