The appellant assessee, a company engaged in the manu facture of penicillin, in order to increase its production, entered into an agreement with a Japanese firm (Meiji) for supply of sub cultures of penicillin producing strains, technical know how, training, written description of the process on a pilot plant, design and specifications of the main equipment in such pilot plant, and to advise the asses see in the largescale manufacture of penicillin for a limit ed period of two years.
As per the agreement, the assessee paid Rs.2,39,625 to Meiji and claimed the same as revenue expenditure in its Income tax assessment for the assessment year 1964 65.
Disallowing the claim the Income Tax Officer held that the expenditure was for the acquisition of an asset or advantage of an enduring benefit and thus a capital outlay.
The Appel late Assistant Commissioner confirmed the order of the Income Tax Officer.
The further appeal of the assessee was dismissed by the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal holding that the payment made to Meiji was 'once for all payment ' made for the acquisition of a capital asset.
At the instance of the assessee, the Tribunal referred to the High Court, the question as to whether the sum paid to Meiji was a revenue expenditure.
The High Court answered the question in the negative.
The present appeal is against that order of the High Court.
The assessee also moved an application before the High Court 303 seeking a direction to the Tribunal to refer another ques tion of law as to whether a new plant was obtained or in stalled by the assessee consequent upon the agreement.
Declining to interfere, the High Court observed that the Tribunal has not recorded a finding to the effect that a completely new plant was obtained by the assessee and the Tribunal 's decision that the assessee, had obtained a new process and a new technical know how from Meiji was not without evidence.
Against the above order of the High Court, the assessee preferred an appeal to this Court, which was formally dis posed of with a direction to the Tribunal to draw up a supplementary statement of the case and refer for the opin ion of this Court, the further question of law as sought for by the assessee; and such a question to be considered in the present appeal.
On behalf of the assessee, it was submitted that the Tribunal was influenced by an erroneous assumption that the agreement, envisaged the setting up of a new plant, whereas the objective of the agreement was only to increase the yield of penicillin in the existing plant itself.
The Revenue contended that there was a new venture based on a new technology and know how of unlimited duration which required a new plant for its commercial exploration.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: 1.
The financial outlay under the agreement was for the better conduct and improvement of the existing business 'and should, therefore, be held to be a revenue expenditure.
There is also no single definitive criterion which, by itself, is determinative whether a particular outlay is capital or revenue.
The 'once for all ' payment test is also inconclusive.
What is relevant is the purpose of the outlay and its intended object and effect, considered in a common sense way having regard to the business reali ties.
The rapid strides in science and technology in the field should make this Court a little slow and circumspect in too readily pigeon holing an outlay, such as this, as capital.
The circumstance that the agreement in so far as it placed limitations on the right of the assessee in dealing with the know how and the conditions as to non partibility, confidentiality and secrecy of the know how incline towards the inference that the right pertained more to the use of the know how than to its exclusive acquisition.
[319A, B C; 317D E] CIT vs CIBA of India Ltd., ; ; CIT, Bombay vs 304 Associated Cement Co. Ltd., JT 282 (2) 287, relied on.
The idea of 'once for all ' payment and 'enduring benefit ' are not to be treated as something akin to statuto ry conditions; nor are the notions of "capital" or "revenue" a judicial fetish.
What is capital expenditure and what is revenue are not eternal verities but must needs be flexible so as to respond to the changing economic realities of business.
The expression "asset or advantage of an enduring nature" was evolved to emphasise the element of a sufficient degree of durability .appropriate to the context.
[313C] Herring vs Federal Commissioner of Taxation, ; , referred to.
In computing the income chargeable under the head "Profits and Gains of Business or Profession", section 37 of the Income tax Act enables the deduction of any expenditure laid out or expended wholly and exclusively for the purpose of the business or profession, as the case may be.
The fact that an item of expenditure is wholly and exclusively laid out for purposes of the business, by itself, is not suffi cient to entitle its allowance in computing the income chargeable to tax.
In addition, the expenditure should not be in the nature of a capital expenditure.
In the infinite variety of situational diversities in which the concept of what is capital expenditure and what is revenue arises it is well nigh impossible to formulate any general rule, even in generality of cases sufficiently accurate and reasonably comprehensive, to draw any clear line of demarcation.
Howev er, some broad and general tests have been suggested from time to time to ascertain on which side of the line the out lay in any particular case might reasonably be held to fail.
These tests are generally efficacious and serve as useful servants; but as masters they tend to be over exact ing.
The question in each case would necessarily be whether the tests relevant and significant in one set of circum stances are relevant and significant in the case on hand also.
[310C F; 312G] City of London Contract Corporation vs Styles, ; Vallambrosa Rubber Co. vs Farmer, ; British Insulated Helsby Cables Ltd. vs Atherton, ; Assam Bengal Cement Co. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, ; Sitalpur Sugar Works Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, [1963] 49 ITR (SC) 160; Laksh miji Sugar Mills Co. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, ; Travancore Cochin Chemicals Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, ; Sun News Papers 305 Ltd. & Associated News Papers Ltd. vs Federal Commissioner of Taxation, ; ; Regent Oil Co. Ltd. vs Strick, and B.P. Australia vs Commr.
of Taxa tion of the Commonwealth of Australia, ; re ferred to. 4.
The improvisation in the process and technology in some areas of the enterprise was supplemental to the exist ing business and there was no material to hold that it amounted to a new or fresh venture.
The further circumstance that the agreement pertained to a product already in the line of assessee 's established business and not to a new product indicates that what was stipulated was an improve ment in the operation of the existing business and its efficiency and profitability not removed from the area of the day to day business of the assessee 's established enter prise.
[318G H] 5.
There was no material for the Tribunal to record the finding that the assessee had obtained under the agreement a 'completely new plant ' with a completely new process and a completely new technical know how from Meiji.
Indeed, the High Court recognised the fallacy in this assumption of the Tribunal that a completely new plant was obtained by the assessee, though, however, the High Court attributed the inaccuracy to what it considered to be some inadvertence or misapprehension on the part of the Tribunal in that regard.
But the High Court was inclined to the view that a complete ly new process and technical know how was obtained from Meiji under the agreement.
Certain assumptions fundamental to, and underlying, the approach of the High Court are that the agreement envisaged a new process and a new technology so alien to the extent infra structure, equipment, plant and machinery in the assessee 's enterprise as to amount to an entirely new venture unconnected with and different from the line of assessee 's extant business.
It is in that sense that the expense was held not incurred for the purposes of the day to day business of the assessee but for acquiring a new capital asset.
But mere improvement in or updating of the fermentation process would not necessarily be inconsistent with the relevance and continuing utility of the existing infra structure, machinery and plant of the assessee.
[315A D; 317B] The New Encyclopaedia Britannica, Micropaedia, Vol.
II; Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology, Kirk Othmen, 3rd Edn.
2, referred to.
