Respondent firm owned a Steel Rolling Mill situate at Madras.
The said mill was leased out to a partnership firm viz., M/s. Steel Industries and after the expiry of the lease period, the Respondent took back the possession of the Mill on 1.8.1962 and informed the Central Excise Authori ties, who advised the Respondent to take out a licence for which it applied on 30.11.1962 Respondent sold away the Rolling Mill on 8.4.1963.
The Superintendent of Central Excise by his letter dated 13.10.1965 raised a demand of Rs.31,018.20 p. on the respondent on account of excise duty.
The Respondent having informed the Department that the firm had manufactured only 775.455 metric tonnes of steel, the demand of excise duty was reduced to Rs.6,419.38 p. only.
The Respondent, though pleaded that it was not liable to pay excise duty demanded, yet the Assistant Collector of Customs by his order dated 14.6.1967 confirmed the demand.
The Respondent firm challenged the validity of the demand by filing a Writ Petition in the High Court.
Respond ent contended before the High Court that (i) it was entitled to exemption of duty; (ii) that the demand for payment of excise duty was time barred and (iii) that Rules 10A under which the demand has been made are ultra rites as there was provision in the Act to enable the Government to frame rules for the recovery of duty short levied.
The High Court allowed the Writ Petition and upheld the contention advanced by the Respondent holding that Rule 10A did not apply to cases where there has been no prior levy of excise duty in respect of the articles manufactured during the relevant period.
Hence this appeal by the Department.
445 The question that arose for determination by this Court was whether Rule 10A of the Rules, as it stood at the rele vant time, was valid? Counsel for the appellant wile plead ing that the Rule was valid submitted that it was necessary to decide this question in view of the conflicting decisions creating difficulty for the Department in collecting short levies or escaped excise duty.
Counsel referred to decisions reported in 1972(2) MLJ 476; ; ; ; and 1977(2) Tax L.R. 1680.
Counsel for the Respondent urged that the Standing Counsel for the Central Government had conceded the ration ale of the decision in Haji J.A. Kateera sait vs Dy.
Commer cial Tax Officer, Mettupalayam;, 18 STC 370 which held that Sub Rule (7) of Rule S of the Central Sales Tax (Madras) Rules 1957 was in excess of the rule making power and as such the Sub rule as a whole was invalid.
In view of the said decision, the appellant would not be able to sustain the demand under Rule 10A; and it is no longer open to the appellant to challenge the validity of Rule 10A in the appeal.
Allowing the appeal and remanding the matter to the High Court, Court, HELD: Chapter II of the Act deals with levy and collec tion of duty.
Under Section 3 of the Act, duties specified in First Schedule to the Act were to be levied.
Rule 10A provided the machinery for collection of tax from assessee after the goods had left the factory premises.
This rule contemplated that the duty or deficiency in duty was payable on a written demand made by the proper officer in cases where either the rules did not make any specific provision for the collection of any duty or of any deficiency in duty, if the duty had for any reason been short levied.
It was a residuary provision and it applied only when there was no other specific provision in the Rules.
Where there had been no assessment at all there was no reason why claim and demand of the Respondent could not be said to be recoverable under Rule 10A. [449E; 448H; 449B C] The validity of the delegated legislation is generally a question of vires, that is, whether or not the enabling power has been exceeded or not.
Rule 10A as it existed at the relevant time, was valid and not ultra vires the rule making power.
Demand notice lawfully issued under the rule by the competent authority could not, therefore, be chal lenged on the ground of the Rule 10A itself being ultra vires.
Whether these could be challenged on any other ground must necessarily depend on the facts 446 and circumstances of each case.
[453E F] Kerala Polythene vs Superintendent Central & Excise, M/s. Chhotabhai Jethabhai Patel vs Union of India, Stateof Kerala vs K.M. Charie Abdullah & Co., [1965] 1 S.C.R.601.
Any rule if it could be shown to have been made 'to carry into, effect the purposes of the Act ' would be within the rule making power.
[452H; 453A] Citadel Fine Pharmaceuticals vs District Revenue Offi cer, Chingleput, ; M/s. Agarwal Brothers vs Union of India, ; N.B. Sanjane vs Elphin stone Spinning and Weaving Mills Company Ltd., ; Assistant Collector vs National Tobacco Co. Ltd., ; and D.R. Kohli vs Atul Products Ltd., ; , referred to.
