The petitioner companies viz., Veilore Electric Corpora tion Ltd., Kumbakonam Electric Supply Corporation Ltd. and Nagapatam Electric Supply Corporation Ltd. were grantee of licences under the by the Government of the then Presidency of Madras for supply of electrical energy in their respective areas.
In exercise of its power under Section 4(1) of the Madras Electricity Supply Undertakings (Acquisition) Act, 1954, the State Government issued orders dated 12.1.1968 taking over the undertakings of the Petitioner Companies viz., Kumbakonam Electricity Supply Company and Nagapatam Electric Supply Company declaring that their undertakings shall vest in the Government with effect from the dates specified in their respective orders.
These two petitioner companies filed writ petitions in the High Court of Madras challenging the constitutional validity of the 1954 Act, which were dismissed.
The Writ Appeals filed by them were also dismissed by a Division Bench of the High Court.
Thereafter appeals were filed in this Court, which were however, later withdrawn.
Though proceedings for the acquisition of the undertak ings of these two companies had been initiated under the 1954 Act but full effectuation thereof had been interrupted by the interlocutory orders made by the courts staying delivery of possession of the undertaking.
Subsequently the Tamil Nadu Private Electricity Supply Undertakings (Acquisition) Act, 1973 came into force which, inter alia, nul 477 lifted the effect of the action taken under the the State Government issued fresh orders under Section 4(1) of 1973 Act declaring that the undertakings of these two petitioner companies shah vest in Government with effect from 1.12.1973.
A similar order was passed b.v the State Government under Section 4(1) of 1973 Act in respect of the third petitioner company viz. Vellore Electric Corporation Ltd., declaring that the undertaking of this company shall vest in the Government with effect from 7.1.1974.
By an order dated 2.2.1978 the State Government also rejected the application of the petitioner Vellore Electric Corporation seeking a change in the basis for determination of amount from basis A to basis B under the 1974 Act.
Writ Petitions were filed in this Court under Article 32 of the Constitution by the three affected companies chal lenging the constitutional validity of the Tamil Nadu Pri vate Electricity Supply Undertakings (Acquisition) Act, 1973, as well as the orders made under Section 4(1) on the ground that the 'Act ', which envisages the acquisition of the Electric Supply Undertakings of petitioners as violative of Articles 14, 19(1)(f), 19(1)(g) and 31 of the Constitu tion.
Dismissing the Writ Petitions, HELD: 1.
The electricity generated and distributed by the undertakings of the petitioner companies constitute "material resources of the community." for the purpose and within the meaning of Article 39(b).
1.1 The idea of distribution of the material resources of the community in Article 39(b) is not necessarily limited to the idea of what is taken over for distribution amongst the intended beneficiaries.
That is one of the modes of "distribution".
Nationalisation is other mode.
1.2 On an examination of the scheme of the impugned law the conclusion becomes inescapable that the legislative measure is one of nationalisation of the undertakings and the law is eligible for and entitled to the protection of Article 31 C. 1.3 The economic cost of social and economic reform is, perhaps, amongst the most vexed problems of social and economic change and constitute the core element in National isation.
The need for constitutional immunities for such legislative efforts at social and economic 478 change recognise the otherwise unaffordable economic burden of reforms.
It is, therefore, not possible to divorce the economic consideration or components from the scheme of the nationalisation with which the former are inextricably integrated.
The financial cost of a scheme of nationalisa tion lies at its very heart and cannot be isolated.
Both the provisions relating to the vestitute of the undertakings in the State and those pertaining to the quantification of the 'Amount ' are integral and inseparable parts of the integral scheme of nationalisation and do not admit of being consid ered as distinct provisions independent of each other.
Tinsukia Electric Supply Co. Ltd. vs
State of Assam, [1989](3) S.C.C. 709; applied. 1.4 In view Of the fact that what was acquired in the instant case were not merely "choses in action" but the undertakings themselves, it is not necessary to go into the question whether a "choses in action" can at all be ac quired.
State of Madhya Pradesh vs Ranojirao Shinde & Anr., ; and Madan Mohan Pathak vs Union of India & Ors., ; ; referred to.
The subject matter of the grant in relation to dis tribution in the community of such material resources be it electricity, water, gas or other essential amenities of life has a special nature.
New Orleans Gaslight Co. vs Louisiane Light & Heat Producing & Mfg. Co., ; ; The Okara Electricity Supply Co. Ltd. vs The State of Punjab, A.I.R. 1960 S.C. 284; referred to.
2.1 The impugned law is within the legislative compe tence of the State Legislature and such State law, with the Presidential assent, prevails and is not over borne by the Central law.
The impugned State law, by its 22nd section, expressly excludes the operation of any provisions of the Electricity Act, 1910, in so far as such provision is incon sistent with the provisions of the Stare Law.
The Constitu tional immunity afforded to the State law prevents any challenge to it on grounds based on Article 14 or 19. 3.
There is nothing unreasonable about the provision which merely recognises the obligation of a licensee to account for its acts in relation to a property which has already vested in Government.
There 479 fore Section 4 which pertains to the liability of the licen see to account to Government in respect of possession of and any benefit derived from the undertaking after the date of the vesting is not arbitrary and unconstitutional.
The deduction envisaged by Section 10(d) from the amount payable towards and on account of arrears of elec tricity charges payable by the licensee to the Government or the Electricity Board as the case may be for the supply of Electricity made by them to the licensee is a legitimate item of deduction.
It cannot be held to be arbitrary on the apprehension that even a disputed and untenable claim in that behalf becomes entitled to deduction.
Section 13(1)(e) makes such a dispute as one of the arbitrable disputes and no deduction of a disputed claim can be justified by the Government if the arbitrator who is or has been a District Judge or a retired High Court Judge holds that the deduction is unjustified.
If a debt is deducted from the "amount", the debt is satisfied and is extinguished and no further debt remains outstanding to get itself attached to and becomes an encum brance upon the substituted security viz., the 'amount '.
Section 6(2) and Section 10(e) must be construed harmonious ly and in a reasonable manner.
There is no scope for any apprehension of a possible double recovery of the same debt.
Therefore the Act cannot be challenged on the ground of possible double recovery of the same debt under Section 6(2) and Section 10(e).
The measure of the reimbursement for an asset with held by the licensee is the corresponding expenditure to be incurred by Government for replacement which, in eminently conceivable cases, could be the market value of the asset which is so withheld by the licensee and which has to be replaced to keep the undertaking functioning.
Therefore Section 10(f) cannot be held to be arbitrary on the ground that it is an instance of application of double standards because while recovery of "market value" is sought to be made for non delivery of the item whereas in computing the "amount" only the "book value" of such "property" or "right" is taken.
It cannot be said that the accredited representative is, under Section 8(1), given only a month 's time from the date of his appointment to signify the choice under Section 5 as to the basis of determination of the amount.
Section 8(1) also provides 'or such further time as may be granted by the Government '.
If the exercise of this power is arbi trary or capricious the licensee has remedies in Administra tive 480 Law.
But the provision itself cannot be held to be bad or invalid on the ground that time granted under the Section to signify choice under Section 5 is unreasonably short.
The order of the Government dated 2.2.1978 rejecting the application of the Petitioner, Vellore Electric Corpora tion and refusing a change in the basis for determination of amount from basis A to basis B is set aside and the Govern ment is directed to consider the matter afresh.
