Appellant No. 1 is a public trust and the other appel lants are its trustees.
The Trust was running a science college at Ahmedabad.
The college initially had temporary affiliation to the Gujarat University.
From June 15, 1973 onwards the college had permanent affiliation.
A dispute between the University Area Teachers Associa tion and the University was referred to the Chancellor of the University who gave his award on June 12, 1970.
The award was accepted by the State Government as well as by the University.
The latter issued direction to all affiliated colleges to pay their teachers in terms of the award.
The appellants instead of implementing the award served notice of termination upon 11 teachers on the ground that they were surplus, and approached the University for permis sion to remove them.
The Vice Chancellor did not accept their request.
Thereupon the Trust decided to close down the college.
The retrenched persons demanded arrears of salary and allowances, provident fund and gratuity dues, and closure compensation.
But the management did not pay these dues.
The employees then moved the High Court to issue a writ of mandamus directing the Trust to pay the retrenched employees their legitimate dues.
The High Court accepted the writ petitions.
Before this Court, the appellants while conceding the just right of the employees to get salary for 2 1/2 months and the provident fund dues, contended that the Trust was entitled to get reimbursement from the Government in lieu of these payments.
As regards the arrears of salary.
698 payable under the Chancellor 's aWard, the appellants con tended that it was the liability of the Government and not of the management of the college.
As regards the closure compensation it was contended that Ordinance 120E prescrib ing compensation was ultra vires, and, at any rate, it was not binding on the Trust since it was enacted prior to the affiliation of the college.
It was further contended that the Trust was a private body and was not subject to the writ jurisdiction under Article 226.
Dismissing the appeals, it was, Held: (1)The Court is only concerned with the liability of the management of the college towards the employees.
Under the relationship of master and servant, the management is primarily responsible to pay salary and other benefits to the employees.
The management cannot say that unless and until the State compensates, it will not make full payment to the staff.
[703E F] (2) The college had temporary affiliation even earlier to the Ordinance 120E.
That apart, the benefits under the Ordinance are to be given when the college is closed which in this case was admittedly after the Ordinance was enacted.
[704A B] (3) If the rights are purely of a private character no mandamus can issue.
If the management of the college is purely a private body with no public duty mandamus will not lie.
These are two exceptions to mandamus.
But once these are absent and when the party has no other equally conven ient remedy, mandamus cannot be denied.
[705B C] (4) Public money paid as Government aid plays a major role in the control, maintenance and working of educational institutions.
The aided institutions, like Government insti tutions, discharge public function by way of imparting education to students.
They are subject to the rules and regulations of the affiliating University.
Their activities are closely supervised by the University authorities Em ployment in such institutions, therefore, is not devoid of any public character.
[705C D] (5) When the University takes a decision regarding the pay scales of the employees of the aided institution, it will be binding on the management.
The service conditions of the academic staff are, therefore, not purely of a private character.
It has super added protection by University decisions creating a legal right duty relationship.
When there 699 is existence of this relationship, mandamus cannot be re fused to the aggrieved party.
[705E] (6) Article 226 confers wide powers on the High Court to issue writs in he nature of prerogative writs.
Under Article 226, writs can be issued to "any person or authority".
It can be issued "for the enforcement of any of the fundamental rights and for any other purpose." [706F G] Executive Committee of Vaish Degree College vs Lakshmi Narain.
, ; ; Deepak Kumar Biswas vs Director of Public Instructions., ; distinguished Dwarkanath vs Income Tax Officer, ; , referred to.
(7) This is a striking departure from the English Law.
Under the English Law, the prerogative writ of mandamus is confined only to public authorities to compel performance of public duty, and 'public authority ' there means every body which is created by statute and whose powers and duties are defined by statute.
[706E F] (8) The words "any person or authority" used in Article 226 are not to be confined only to statutory authorities and instrumentalities of the State.
They may cover any other person or body performing public duty.
The form of the body concerned is not very much relevant.
What is relevant is the nature of the duty imposed on the body.
The duty must be judged in the light of positive obligation owed by the person or authority to the affected party, no matter by what means the duty is imposed.
If a positive obligation exists mandamus cannot be denied.
[707G H; 708A B] (9) Mandamns cannot be denied on the ground that the duty to be enforced is not imposed by the statute.
[708B] Praga Tools Corporation vs Shri C.A. Imanual, ; , referred to.
(10) The judicial control over the fast expanding maze of bodies affecting the rights of the people should not be put into water tight compartment.
It should remain flexible to meet the requirements of variable circumstances.
Mandamus is a very wide remedy which must be easily available 'to reach injustice wherever it is found '.
Technicalities should not come in the way of granting that relief under Article 226.
[708F G] 700
