The petitioners Public Limited Companies were grant ed licences under the provisions of the for supply of electricity within the respective licensed areas of Tinsukhia and Dibrugarh Municipal Boards.
The Dihrugarh Company was granted licence in 1928 on certain terms and conditions with an option to the State to purchase the under.
taking on the expiry of 50 years and thereafter on the expiry of every subsequent period of twenty years.
So also, the Tinsukhia company was granted licence in 1954 on certain terms and conditions with an option to the State Government to purchase the undertaking on the expiry of 20 years and thereafter on the expiry of every 20 years.
The State Government negotiated with the companies for pur 545 chasing them.
The negotiations were going on for several years.
On 27.9.1972 the Governor promulgated two ordinances for the compulsory acquisition of the undertakings of the two companies.
Subsequentiy, the ordinances were replaced by the Indian Electricity (Assam Amendment) Act, 1973 and the Tinsukhia & Dibrugarh Electric Supply Undertakings (Acquisi tion) Act, 1973.
The two legislations, one amending the provisions of Section 5(2), 6(7) and 7 A of the and the other providing for the acquisition of the two undertakings viz. the Tlnsukhia and Dibrugarh Electric Supply Undertaking (Acquisition) Act, '1973 were Challenged in this Court by the writ petitioners on several grounds.
It was contended that in view of the private negotiations and the exercise of the option to purchase, the legislations were not bona fide, but constituted a mere colourable exer cise of legislative power and that the real objects of the two legislations have no direct and reasonable nexus to the objects envisaged in Article 39(b) of the Constitution.
It was also contended that what was sought to be acquired was not the undertakings of the two companies, but the differ ence between the market value of the undertakings agreed to by the State Government and the Book value of the undertak ings which the law has substituted by virtue of the amend ments made in the .
The Article 31 C protection given to the legislations, and some of the specific provisions of the acquisition law which excluded certain items from the computation of compensation and authorised certain deductions in the amount of compensation have also been challenged.
On behalf of the Respondents, it was contended that electrical energy has been a material source of the communi ty and any legislative measure to nationalise the undertak ing fell squarely within the ambit of Article 39(b) and was entitled to Article 31 C protection.
It was also asserted that book value has been a well accepted concept of valua tion in accountancy and it cannot be characterised as illu sory even if the legislations did not enjoy the protection of Article 31 C. Dismissing the writ petitions, HELD: [R.S. Pathak.
CJ, M.N. Venkatachaliah, section Natara jan and section Ranganathan, J J per Venkatachaliah, J.] 1.1.
The proposition that the legislative declaration of the nexus between the law and the principles in Article 39 is inconclusive and justiciable is well settled.
The sequen tor is that whenever any immunity 546 is claimed for a law under Article 31 C, the Court has the power to examine whether the provisions of the law are basically and essentially necessary for the effectuation of the principles envisaged in Article 39(b) and (c).
It can, hardly be gain said that the electrical energy generated and distributed by the undertakings of the petitioners constitutes "material resources of the communi ty".
The idea of distribution of the material resources of the community in Article 39(b) is not necessarily limited to the idea of what is taken over for distribution amongst the intended beneficiaries.
That is one of the modes of "distri bution".
Nationalisation is another mode.
The economic cost of social and economic reform is, perhaps, amongst the most vexed problems of social and economic change and constitute the core element in Nationalisation.
The need for constitu tional immunities for such legislative efforts at social and economic change recognise the otherwise unaffordable econom ic burden of reforms.
It is not possible to divorce the economic considerations or components from the scheme of nationalisation with which the former are inextricably integrated.
The financial cost of a scheme of nationalisa tion lies at its very heart and cannot be isolated.
Both the provisions relating to the vestiture of the undertakings in the State and those pertaining to the quantification of the "Amount" are integral and inseparable parts of the integral scheme of nationalisation and do not ambit of being consid ered as distinct provisions independent of each other.
The debate whether nationalisation is by itself to be considered as fulfilling a public purpose or whether the nationalisa tion should be shown to be justified effectuation of the avowed objectives of such nationalisation the choice be tween the pragmatic and the doctrinaire approaches is concluded and no longer available.
[578C. D, E, 579C, D, H, 580A, B, E] 1.3.
The right, title and interest of the licensee in the undertaking does not get transferred to the Board or the State, as the case may be, immediately upon the mere exer cise of the option to purchase.
The exercise of the option would have no such effect on the licensee 's right to carry on his business until the undertaking was actually taken over and paid for.
The contentions that immediately upon the exercise of the option, ipso facto, the relationship between the parties get transformed into one as between a Debtor and a Creditor and that the interest of the licensee in the undertaking becomes an "actionable right", or a 'chosein action" and that no public purpose could be said to be served by the acquisition of a "chose in action" are all out of place in the instant case.
[582E, 583C] 547 1.4.
The acquisition legislation was brought forth for securing the principles contained in Article 39(b) of the Constitution and is protected under Article 31 C.
The Assam amendment made to the provisions of the , amending the basis for quantification of the amount payable in the case of a statutory purchase pursuant to the exercise of the option in terms of the licence would apply to and govern cases of statutory sales and would not assume any immateriality in the instant case.
[585E, F] Kesavananda Bharati vs State of Kerala; [1973] Suppl.
SCR 1; Minerva Mills Ltd. vs Union of India, ; ; Sanjeev Coke Mfg. Co. vs Bharat Coking COal Ltd., ; ; State of Tamil Nadu vs
L. Abu Kavar Bai; , ; Akadasi Padhart vs State of Orissa and Ors., ; ; Godra Electricity Co. Ltd. and Anr.
vs The State of Gujarat and Anr., ; and Madan Mohan Pathak vs Union of India and Ors., , relied on.
Fergusan vs Skrupa, ; ; Fazilka Electric Supply Co. Ltd. vs The Commissioner of Income Tax, Delhi, [1962] Suppl.
3 SCR 496 and Gujarat Electricity Board vs Shantilal; , , referred to.
Bihar State Electricity Board vs Patna Electricity Supply Co. Ltd., ; distinguished. "History of the treatment of choses in action by the common law" by W.S. Holdsworth Vol. 33 Harvard law Review referred to. 2.
It may not be just to deprive a recompence that is just and fair, in all cases.
But that.
is not to say that even ,under a law which has the protection of article 31 A or 31 C, the adequacy, or justness or fairness of the compensa tion would, yet, be justiciable.
Article 31 C is in effect and substance is to 'urban property ' of what Article 31 A is to 'agricultural property '.
All the same, the concept of "Book Value" is an accepted accountancy concept of value.
It cannot be held to be illusory.
Even if the impugned law had no protection of Article 31 C and tests appropriate to and available are applied, in the circumstances of the present case, it cannot be said that the principles envisaged in the acquisition law lead to an "amount" which can be called unreal or illusory.
[590C, 592B] 548 Eswari Khetan Sugar Mills vs State of U.P., ; ; relied on.
Gwalior Rayon vs Union of India, ; 671; referred to.
Under the law when a requisition is made by an in tending consumer for electrical energy, the licensee has an obligation to lay down service lines.
But, according to the provisions the entire cost of service line is not required to be borne by the licensee.
The licensee is entitled to call upon the consumer to pay part of the cost of service line which may in a given case amount to a substantial part in accordance with the provisions in the Schedule to the Electricity Supply Act.
While it is true that the ex pression 'works ' in Section 2(h) of the Indian Railways Act, 1910 includes 'Service lines ', the reason why 'Service lines ' could justifiably be excluded from valuation for purposes of determination of the 'amount ', is that the new licensee is to repair and maintain them.
[593B, C; 592F, G] Dakor Umreth Electricity Co. Ltd. vs State of Gujarat, ; ; approved.
On a reasonable construction, the expressions 'amounts remaining ' and 'in so far as such amounts have not been paid over ' necessarily exclude any such duplication of the accountability of the licensee for these 'Reserves '.
If any part of the reserves is invested in "fixed assets" and the reserves in the form of such "fixed assets" are taken over by the Government pursuant to the acquisition, what remains to he accounted for by the licensee is only the 'amounts remaining ' in the pertinent accounts.
The liability of the licensee for deduction of the 'Reserves ' from the 'amount ' would arise only if the balance remaining in those accounts are not paid.
[594F, G] 5.
As regards the liability of the licensee under Sec tion 11(3) of the Acquisition Act in respect of the amounts payable to employees retrenched by the Government or the 'Board ' as the case may be, within one year from the vesting date after the take over even if this question is justicia ble it is not unreasonable or arbitrary as it envisages the continuance of a liability which was, otherwise, sub stantially that of the licensee.
[595F, G, H, 596A, B] 6.
Though some of the liabilities arising out of the conduct of the licensees ' business prior to vesting are not taken over by Government, some of those liabilities are, yet, authorised to be deducted from the 549 amount.
The purpose of this provision is too obvious to require any statutory declaration or the obligations that arise in law and are attandant upon these sums coming to the hands of and retained by the Government.
Quite obviously, the provision is not intended for an unjust enrichment in the hands of Government.
The purpose is obviously to facili tate recovery of certain types of debts owed to public institutions etc., and the deduction is for the benefit of those creditor institutions.
The Government would, plainly, be under a legal obligation to pay the sums so deducted, to the concerned creditors.
The provisions of the Statute must be read along, and in consonance, with the general princi ples of law which import such obligations on the part of the Government and an implied corresponding discharge to the petitioners to the extent of such deductions in their li abilities.
There is a resulting statutory trust in the hands of the Government to pay the sums so deducted to the respec tive creditors, even in the absence of express provisions in this behalf in the Statute, the general principles of law operate.
As a matter of construction it requires to be held that these obligations and consequences follow.
[596E, F, G, H, 597A] 7.
The Courts strongly lean against any construction which tends to reduce a Statute to a futility.
The provision of a Statute must be so construed as to make it effective and operative, on the principle "but res majis valeat quam periat".
It is, no doubt, true that if a Statute is abso lutely vague and its language wholly intractable and abso lutely meaningless, the Statute could be declared void for vagueness.
This is not in judicial review by testing the law for arbitrariness or unreasonableness under Article 14; but what a Court of construction, dealing with the language of a Statute, does in order to ascertain from, and accord to, the Statute the meaning and purpose which the legislature in tended for it.
It is, therefore, the Court 's duty to make what it can of the Statute, knowing that the statutes are meant to be operative and not inept and that nothing short of impossibility should allow a Court to declare a Statute unworkable.
[597F, G, 598C] Manchester Ship Canal Co. vs Manchester Race Course Co., and Fawcet Properties vs Buckingham County Council, [1960] 3 AII.E.R. 503, referred to.
Section 10 of the Acquisition Act enjoins upon the Government to appoint a person having adequate knowledge anti experience in matters relating to accounts "to assess the net amount payable under the Act by the Government to the licensee after making the deductions mentioned in sec tion 9".
Proviso to Sections 8 and 9 envisages prior 550 notice to be issued to the licensee by the Government to show cause against any deduction proposed to be made under Section 8 or 9, as the case may be, within the period speci fied in the provisos.
Even after the Government so makes such determination of the amounts which, according to it, are deductible from the gross amount, such determination would not be final.
The assessment of the net amount payable to the licensee will have to be made by the "Special Offi cer".
It is reasonable to construe that the decision of the Government both under Sections 8 and 9 arrived at, even after giving an opportunity to the lincensee of being heard, would not be final, but the final determination will have to be made by the "Special Officer" appointed under section 10 of the Act.
Section 10(1) and (2) of the Act must be so construed as to enable the "Special Officer" to take into account the determination respecting the deduction under Sections 9 and 10 of the ACt made by the Government and take the decision of his own in the matter.
The power to "assess" the net amount by necessary implication takes within its sweep the power to examine the validity of the determination made by the Government .in the matter of deduction from the gross amount.
This power to determine and assess the 'net amount ' payable by necessary implication cover matters envisaged in Sections 8 and 9.
Though only Section 9 is specifically referred to in sub sections (1) and (2) of section 10, the language of sub sections (1) and (2) which enable the Special Officer to "assess" the net amount pay able would by necessary implication, attract the power to decide as to the validity and correctness of the deduction to be made under Section 8 as well.
So construed.
the provi sions of Section 10 would furnish a reasonably adequate machinery for the assessment of the "net amount" payable to the licensee.
[598E H; 599A E] 9.
So far as Arbitration is concerned, even after the decision of the "Special Officer", there is the further arbitral forum to decide disputes in respect of the specific areas in which disputes are rendered arbitrable under Sec tion 20.
There is a provision for appointment of a sitting or retired District or High Court Judge as arbitrator under the said section.
Hence it cannot be said that there is no proper machinery for resolving the disputes between the Government and the licensee rendering the Acquisition Act unworkable.
[599F, G] Per Mukharji, J. (Concurring) 1.
Article 39(b) of the Constitution enjoins that the State in particular should direct its policy towards secur ing that the ownership and control of the material resources of the community are so distri 551 buted as to best subserve the common good and that the operation of the economic system does not result in concen tration of wealth and means of production to the common detriment.
In order to decide whether a Statute is within Article 31 C, the Court, if necessary, may examine the nature and the character of the legislation and the matter dealt with as to whether there is any nexus between the law and the principles mentioned in Article 39(b) and (c).
On such an examination if it appears that there is no such nexus between the legislation and the objectives and the principles mentioned in Article 39(b) and (c), the legisla tion will not enjoy the protection of Article 31 C.
In order to see the real nature of the Statute, if need be, the Court may also tear the veil.
[553E H] Kesavananda Bharati vs State of Kerala, [1973] Suppl.
SCR 1; relied on.
Charles Russel vs The Queen, [1882] VII AC 829; referred to.
Whenever a question is raised that the Parliament or the State Legislature have abused their powers and inserted a declaration in a law for not giving effect to securing the Directive Principles specified in Article 39(b) and (c), the Court can and must necessarily go into that question and decide.
If the Court comes to the conclusion that the decla ration was merely a pretence and that real purpose of the law is the accomplishment of some object other than to give effect to the policy of the State towards securing the Directive Principles as enjoined by Article 39(b) and (c), the declaration would not debar the Court from striking down any provision therein which violates Articles 14, 19 or 31.
In other words, if a law passed ostensibly to give effect to the policy of the State is, in truth and substance, one for accomplishing an unauthorised object, the Court would be entitled to tear the veil created by the declaration and decide according to the nature of the law.
The only question open to judicial review under_Article 31 C is whether there is a direct and reasonable nexus between the impugned law and the provisions of Article 39(b) and (c).
Reasonableness is evidently regarding the nexus and not regarding the law.
[554D, E, F, 555B, C] Kesavananda Bharati vs State of Kerala, [1973] Suppl.
SCR 1; Minerva Mills Ltd. vs Union of India, ; and Sanjeer Coke Mfg. Co. vs Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. & Anr.
, ; , relied on.
It is indisputed that the electric energy generated by the petitioner companies constitutes material resources of the community 552 within the scope and meaning of Article 39(b), and having regard to the true nature and the purpose of the legisla tions, reading the legislations entirely, the legislations have a direct and reasonable nexus with time objective of distributing the material resources so as to subserve the common good.
The determination of value thereof and the substitution of the book value in place of market value, are only methods for such acquisition and do not disclose the true nature and character of the legislation, but are inci dental provisions thereof.
if that is the position then it is incorrect to say that what was acquired, was not the material resources but chose in action.
The true nature and character of the legislations in question was to acquire the material resources, namely, the electric energy for better supply and distribution.
[556D, E, F] State of Tamil Nadu & Ors.
vs L. Abu Kavur Bai & Ors., , relied on.
Bihar State Electricity Board & Ors.
vs Patna Electrici ty Supply Co. Ltd., distinguished.
Having regard to the true nature and character of the legislations in question the legislations are not colourable legislations in the sense that there was no direct and reasonable nexus with Article 31(b) and (c) of the Constitu tion.
[556H]
