The appellant Company, a manufacturer of superfine cement, preferred a claim for refund of duty on price of packing material of the product, paid by it during July 4, 1974 to March 1, 1974, on the ground that duty on packing charges on superfine cement was not leviable.
But the claim was rejected by the Assistant Collector of Central Excise, the Appellate Collector and also the Appellate Tribunal on the ground of limitation under Rule 11 of the Central Excise Rules, 1944, since the duty was not paid under protest.
The Tribunal also held that the letter dated July 11, 1974, in which the appellant had stated that the duty was not levi able on packing charges and if the department felt it was leviable they had no option but to suggest the rates fixed by Government from quarter to quarter as packing charges, was not a protest to save the period of limitation pre scribed in Rule 11.
In the appeal before this Court, on behalf of the Compa ny, it was submitted that a similar claim was allowed by the Central Government in the case of Birla Cement Works and that the Trade Notice dated 29.10.1979 by the Collectorate clearly stated that the cost of packing was not liable to be included in the assessable value.
While conceding that there was no particular form of protest, it was contended on behalf of the department that if the payments were held as made under protest, by treating the letter as a protest, then the period of limitation under Rule 11 of the Central Excise Rules, 1944 would not be applicable but the Trade Notice of 20.1.1979 could not be 716 given retrospective effect and, therefore, the matter had to be remitted to the Tribunal for disposal on other questions.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: The letter of the appellant clearly shows that all possible contentions which could be raised against the levy of duty on the value of packing material were raised, and that the appellant was not accepting the liability, without protest.
Therefore, the letter was in the nature of protest.
That being the position, the question of limitation does not arise for the refund of the duty.
i718 H] Giving the benefit without any Trade Notice in a similar case, the Central Government held, in their revisional order, that as superfine cement was capable of being sold without packing like grey portland cement, the cost of packing for superfine cement should not be added to the assessable value.
The authorities ought to have, therefore, extended this view to all similar cases.
[719A, D] In these circumstances, the appellant is entitled to refund of the duty paid by it.
[719F]
