The appellant State by virtue of the judgment in Nida marti Maheshkumar vs State of Maharashtra & Ors.
, ; , after providing 15 per cent of seats under the All India Quota and under Article 15 of the Constitution for admission to MBBS course, laid down the policy of reserva tion of the remaining seats for local students in the city of Bombay and for students from outside Bombay but within the State of Maharashtra, in the ratio of 70:30.
In the writ petitions preferred by the respondents a Single Judge of the High Court took the view that 30 per cent of seats meant for students from outside Bombay should have been filled in before 70 per cent of seats were filled in by local students.
The Division Bench dismissed the Letters Patent Appeal by the State.
In the Letters Patent Appeals by the respondents it directed creation of five additional seats in each of the three Municipal Medical Colleges and four additional seats in the Government Medical College.
Allowing the appeals, HELD: 1.
There was no unreasonableness or impropriety in the State Government 's decision to fill up 70 per cent of seats first.
The question whether the seats reserved for local students or for those residing outside Bombay should be filled up first was not within the purview or the juris diction of the Court.
The High Court was, therefore, not justified in directing admission on the basis of filling up 30 per cent of seats first.
[713C D] 2.
The Additional seats can be created only if the Indian Medical 711 Council approves of it.
There is also the question of bear ing the cost of creation of such seats.
In the instant case, neither the Government nor the Indian Medical Council had consented to such creation.
In exceptional circumstances and for ends of justice, the court may direct the creation of one or two seats after giving the Indian Medical Council an opportunity of being heard.
The High Court, therefore, should not have directed the creation of so many additional seats.
[713E G] [Appropriate directions issued for admission to four seats in the Grant Medical College in Bombay and thirty four seats in the other Bombay available under the All India Quota.]
