The respondent tenant fell into arrears of rent for two months consecutively.
The rent was payable in advance.
He was served with a notice of demand, within seven days of which he sent a bank draft purporting to be the rent for the first month, and within a month another bank draft for the like amount.
The landlady neither encashed nor returned them.
After the notice period she filed an application for his ejectment.
The Rent Controller held that the tenant was not in default.
The Tribunal, however, found that when the notice of demand was served the arrears of rent for the two months had arisen, that the bank draft sent thereafter related to the rent for the first month only, that as the rent for the second month had also become due but had not been tendered, the landlady was justified in not accepting the tender, and that when the respondent again sent a draft for the second month the rent for the third month had also fallen due but was not tendered.
It thus took the view that the respondent had not tendered the arrears of rent due up to date within two months of the notice of demand, and held that the ground of non payment of rent stood established.
Allowing the appeal, the High Court took the view that section 14(1)(a) of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 made out a ground for eviction only where the tenant had neither paid nor tendered the whole of the arrears of rent legally recov erable from him within two months of the date on which a notice of demand was served on him by the landlord, the arrears being the rent due on the date of the notice.
As in the instant case, the notice called for payment of the arrears due for the two months and the bank drafts were tendered within the period indicated in the notice, the notice was satisfied.
Dismissing the appeal by special leave, the Court, 745 HELD: The arrears of rent envisaged by section 14(1)(a) of the Delhi Rent Control Act are the arrears demanded by the notice for payment.
The arrears of rent due cannot be ex tended to rent which has fallen due after service of the notice.
[747DE] In the instant case, the two bank drafts representing the arrears of rent covered by the notice of demand had been tendered within two months of the date of service of the notice.
The High Court was, therefore, right in the view taken by it.
[747DE] Jag Ram Nathu Ram vs Shri Surinder Kumar, S.A.O. No. 52 of 1975 and S.L. Kapur vs Dr. Mrs. P.D. Lal, All India Rent Control Journal, [1975] 322, overruled.
