The respondent landlord filed a petition for eviction of the appellant tenant from the suit premises under section 14(1)(h) of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 on the ground that the appellant had acquired vacant possession of her house on November 20, 1973, after the suit premises had been let out to her on April 1, 1971.
The appellant contended that she was not liable to be ejected.
The Assistant Rent Controller and the Rent Control Tribunal concurrently held that even though the house owned by the appellant was not in her occupation on the date the petition was filed, it was sufficient for the purpose ors.
14(1)(h) that sometime before the filing of the petition she had obtained vacant possession of the house, and thus had alternative accommodation during November 20 24, 1973, i.e., from the date she obtained vacant possession from her tenant till she sold it.
The High Court also held that the ground for ejectment had been made out when the eviction petition was filed.
In the appeal before this Court, on behalf of the appel lant tenant it was contended that before the earlier tenant had vacated the house, the appellant had already entered into an oral agreement to sell the house to another person, which was formalized on a written document on November 24, 1973 and as the appellant was under legal obligation to sell the house she was not entitled to enter into and to continue in possession of the house when it was vacated, and there fore, the house could not be said to constitute alternative accommodation, for the purpose ors.
14(1)(h) of the Act.
Dismissing the appeal, 749 HELD: The Rent Control Tribunal has found against the existence of any oral agreement for the sale of the suit house.
It was only after four days of obtaining possession on November 20, 1973 from the original tenant that the appellant executed an agreement for sale.
Thus, it is clear that the appellant came into the house belonging to her on November 20, 1973 and it was available to her for her occu pation.
The circumstance that she lost possession on the date when the eviction petition was filed does not protect the appellant against section 14(1)(h) of the Act.
[750F G]
