This appeal by the Sales Tax authorities was directed against the judgment and order of the Orissa High Court, passed under article 226 of the Constitution, quashing five orders of assessment covering five quarters made against the respondents who carried on the business of collection and sale of Kendu leaves in the erstwhile Feudatory State of Pallaliara to which, on its merger into the province of Orissa on January 1, 1948, the provisions of the Orissa Sales Tax Act, 1947, were extended on March 1, 1949.
On the same date the Government of Orissa issued a notification under section 4(1) of the Act which was in the following terms: " In exercise of the powers conferred by sub section (1) of Section 4 Of the Orissa Sales Tax Act, 1947 (Orissa Act XIV of 1947), as applied to Orissa State, the Government of Orissa are pleased to appoint the 31st March, 1949, as the date with effect from which every dealer whose gross turnover during the year ending the 31st March, 1949, exceeded Rs. 5,000 shall be liable to pay 521 under the said Act on sales effected after the said date Section 4 Of the Act, inter alia, provided : " (1) . with effect from such date as the Provincial Government may by notification in the Gazette, appoint, being not earlier than 'thirty days after the date of the said notification, every dealer whose gross turnover during the year immediately preceding the commencement of this Act exceeded Rs. 5,000 shall be liable to pay tax under the Act on sales effected after the date so notified. (2) Every dealer to whom sub section (1) does not apply shall be liable to pay under this Act with effect from the commencement of the year immedi ately following that during which his gross turnover first exceeded Rs. 5,000 ".
The goods were admittedly delivered for consumption at various places outside the State and the Sales Tax Officer as well as the Assistant Collector in appeal, proceeding on the basis that the sales took place in the State, held that the respondents were liable to Sales Tax for all the five quarters, two of which fell before the commencement of the Constitution and three thereafter.
The contention of the respondents before the High Court was that the notification under section 4(1) Of the Act was invalid as it ran counter to the provisions of that sub section and no part of that charging section could, therefore, come into force.
It was further contended that the assessment for the three quarters following the commencement of the Constitution was invalid by reason or article 286 of the Constitution.
The High Court found entirely in favour of the assessee : Held (per Das C. J., Venkatarama Aiyar, section K. Das and Vivian Bose, jj.), that the decision of the High Court in so far as it related to the three post Constitution quarters was correct and must be upheld.
The orders of assessment for those quarters contravened both article 286 of the Constitution and section 30(r)(a)(1) of the Orissa Sales Tax Act and were without jurisdiction and must be set aside.
So far as the two pre Constitution quarters were concerned, the assessees were clearly liable under section 4(2) of the Act.
Per Das C. J. and Venkatarama Aiyar J.
The first part of the impugned notification, appointing the date from which the liability was to commence, was in consonance with section 4(1) Of the Act and, therefore, clearly intra vires, whereas the second part, indicating the class of dealers on whom the liability was to fall, went beyond that section and must, therefore, be held to be ultra vires and invalid.
But since the two parts were severable, the invalidity of the second part could in no way affect the validity of the first part which brought the charging section into operation and the assessees were liable for the two pre Constitution quarters under section 4(1) as well.
Per section K. Das and Vivian Bose JJ.
It would not be correct to say that the second part of the notification was a mere surplusage severable from the rest of the notification.
Liability to pay the 522 tax under section 4(1) of the Act could arise only on the issue of a valid notification in conformity with the provisions of that sub section and as there was no such notification the assessees were not liable under section 4(1) Of the Act which did not come into operation.
Subsections (1) and (2) Of section 4 are mutually exclusive, and their periods of application being different both could not apply at the same time and no notification was necessary to bring into operation sub section
(2) Of the Act.
The goods having been admittedly sold and delivered for consumption outside the State of Orissa, under article 286 (1)(a) read with the Explanation as also under section 30(1)(a)(1) of the Act, the sales were outside the State of Orissa and, consequently, the assessment for the three post Constitution quarters were without jurisdiction.
The State of Bombay vs The United Motors (India) Ltd., ; and The Bengal Immunity Company Limited vs The State of Bihar, , relied on.
Per Sarkar J.
There could be no liability under section 4(1) Of the Act till a date was appointed thereunder, and where the notification, as in the instant case, fixing such a date, was not in terms of that sub clause, there was no fixing of a date at all and the sub clause could not come into play and no liability could arise under it.
It was impossible to ignore the second part of the notification in question as a mere surplusage since the notification read as a whole had one meaning and another without it.
The Government could not be heard to say that what it had said in the notification was not what it actually meant.
Both the sub clauses Of section 4 having been brought into force at the same time by the same notification, they applied to all dealers together and contemplated a situation in which the liability of a dealer under sub cl.
(1) might arise.
It was apparent from the scheme of the Act that sub cl.
(2) was not intended to have any operation till a date was appointed under sub cl.
(1) and a liability under it might have arisen.
