The respondent Board of Trustees of the Port of Bombay is a statutory authority, and as such has been exempted from the operation of the Bombay Rents, Hotel & Lodging House Rates (Control) Act, 1947.
The appellant has been the lessee of the respondent since about 1932 in respect of part of the original plot No. 4 (now plot 5B) which adjoins plot No. 6 tenanted by M/s Bombay Bharat & Swadeshi Rice Mills.
In or about 1933 34, M/s Bombay Bharat & Swadeshi Rice Mills took over the appellant, and a rice mill was started on appel lant 's part of plot No. 4 and plot No. 6.
In December 1957, the Town Planning Scheme No. 1 in Bombay City came into force, and the original plot No. 4 was reconstituted into final plot No. 5.
In or about 1963 the respondent sub divided plot No. 5 into final plot 5A and final plot 5B, and as a result of the sub division M/s Dhanji Mavji became the tenant/occupant of a major portion of plot 5B, In 1970 71 the respondent agreed to let the entire plot 5B, including the portion which had been let to and was in possession of the appellant since 1933, to Dhanji Mavji.
The appellant objected to the offer made to Dhanji Mavji but the respondent asserted that as Dhanji Mavji had been in possession of the major portion of plot No. 5B, it agreed to let the entire plot to them.
In the premise, the respondent purported to terminate the tenancy of the appel lant in respect of its .
portion of plot 5B, and later filed suit for eviction.
The Trial Court dismissed the suit hold ing that it would be legitimate to infer that the letting was for a manufacturing purpose and hence the notice of termination was bad.
The appellate court reversed that decision.
Aggrieved thereby, the appellant filed a writ petition under Article 227 of the Constitution.
The High Court accepted the finding of the appellate court that the notice of ejectment was valid notice and there was no waiver of notice.
752 Before this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellant that (1) the exemption from the operation of the Rent Act was given to the Port Trust Authority on the as sumption that it would act in public interest and would not behave like ordinary landlords; (2) the action of the re spondent in terminating the appellant 's contractual tenancy had a public law character attached to it and was according ly subject to judicial review; (3) every action of the respondent which was 'State ' within Article 12 of the Con stitution, whether it be in the field of contract or any other field, was subject to Article 14 of the Constitution and must be reasonable and taken only upon lawful and rele vant grounds of public interest; (4) the respondent 's estab lished rational/policy was to offer/allot a final/reconsti tuted plot for development to the existing occupants thereof as joint tenants; and (5) the eviction of the appellant was not necessary in the public interest for the proper develop ment of the plot as required by the Town Planning Scheme.
On behalf of the respondent it was contended that (1) the onus was entirely on the appellant to establish that the Bombay Port Trust had terminated the tenancy or taken the proceedings in eviction not in public interest but for a collateral purpose or mala fide or that it had acted in a manner contrary to the provisions of Article 14; (2) since there was no obligation or duty cast upon the Bombay Port Trust to provide accommodation, there could be no question of acting in governmental character, and such a body stood on the same footing as any other citizen and would, in respect of such activity, not be subjected to public law duty; (3) the respondent 's dealing with tenants was a con tractual dealing and it was not a matter for public law domain and was not subject to judicial review; and (4) it was the policy of the respondent to allot the entire re constituted plot to one person who was occupying the major portion of such plot, for its proper development.
Dismissing the appeal, it was, HELD: Per Sabyasachi Mukharji, J., (Kania, J. agreeing) (1) Bombay Port Trust being a public body, even in respect of its dealing with its tenants, it must act in public interest, and an infraction of that duty is amenable to examination either in civil suit or in writ jurisdiction.
[761G] Rampratap Jaidayal vs Dominion of India, [1952] 54 Bom.
L.R. 927; and Baburao Shantaram More vs The Bombay Housing Board, [1954] V SCR 572, referred to.
753 (2) Where any special right or privilege is granted to any public or statutory body on the presumption that it must act in a certain manner.
such bodies must make good such presumption while acting by virtue of such privilege.
Judi cial review to oversee if such bodies are so acting is permissible. ]762D E] Radhakrishna Agarwal & Ors.
vs State of Bihar & Ors.
, ; and Life Insurance Corporation of India vs Escorts Ltd. & Ors., [1985] 3 Supp SCR 909, referred to.
(3) The field of letting and eviction of tenants is normally governed by the Rent Act.
The Port Trust is statu torily exempted from the operation of the Rent Act on the basis of its public/Governmental character.
Every action/activity of the Bombay Port Trust which constituted "State" within Article 12 of the Constitution in respect of any right conferred or privilege granted by any statute is subject to Article 14 and must be reasonable and taken only upon lawful and relevant grounds of public interest.
[762E F; 763A B] S.P. Rekhi vs Union of India, ; and M.C. Mehta & Anr.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, [1987] 1 SCC 395, referred to.
(4) Where there is arbitrariness in State action, Arti cle 14 springs and judicial review strikes such an action down.
Every action of the Executive authority must be sub ject to rule of law and must be informed by reason.
So, whatever be the activity of the public authority, it should meet the test of Article 14.
[763C] All exercise of discretion or power by public authori ties as the respondent, in respect of dealing with tenants in respect of which they have been treated separately and distinctly from other landlords on the assumption that they would not act as private landlords must be judged by that standard.
[763H; 764A] If a governmental policy or action even in contractu al matters fails to satisfy the test of reasonableness, it would be unconstitutional.
[764A B] E.P. Royappa vs State of Tamil Nadu, ; ; Maneka Gandhi vs Union of India, [1978] 2 SCR 621; R.D. Shetty vs The International Airport Authority of India & Ors., ; ; Kasturi Lal Lakshmi Reddy vs State of J & K, ; and 754 Ajay Hasia vs Khalid Mujib Sehravardi, ; , referred to.
(7) Governmental Policy would be invalid as lacking in public interest, unreasonable or contrary to the professed standards and this is different from the fact that it was not done bona fide.
[764B C] (8) There is always a presumption that a governmental action is reasonable and in public interest.
It is for the party challenging its validity to show that the action is unreasonable, arbitrary or contrary to the professed norms or not informed by public interest, and the burden is a heavy one.
[764C D] (9) Judicial review is not concerned with the decision, but with the decision making process.
Unless this restric tion on 'the power of the court is observed, the court under the guise of preventing the abuse of power, would be itself guilty of usurping power which does not belong to it.
[765E F] (10) The Court cannot really substitute a decision reached by a fair procedure keeping the policy of the re spondent in mind by a different decision only on the ground that the decision which appeals to the court is a better one.
[765G] Council of Civil Service Unions vs Minister for the Civil Service, ; Chief Constable of the North Wales Police vs Evans, ; In re Pres ton vs I.R.C., and Regina vs Chief Consta ble of the Merseyside Police, , referred to.
(11) The Bombay Port Trust, perhaps, was justified in coming to the conclusion that the only possible way to develop the properties of the Bombay Port Trust in compli ance with the Town Planning Scheme was by allotting plots to holders of major portions thereon.
Such a decision cannot be faulted.
[766E F] (12) Upon the facts of the instant case, there was an implied obligation in respect of dealings with the tenants/occupants of the Port Trust Authority to act in public interest/purpose.
That requirement is fulfilled if it is demonstrated that the Port Trust authorities have acted in pursuance of a policy which is referable to public pur pose.
Once that norm is established whether that policy is the best policy or whether another policy was possible, is not relevant for consideration.
[767E F] 755 (13) Under the constitutional scheme of this country, the Port Trust Authorities were required by relevant law to act in pursuance of public purpose.
This Court is satisfied that they have proceeded to so act.
[767G] Per section Ranganathan, J. (Concurring) On the facts of the instant case, the action of the Port Trust was not improper and there are no grounds for inter ference.
[768F]
