Section 87 of the empow ered the Central Government to extend, with such restric tions and modifications as it thought fit, to the Union Territory of Chandigarh any enactment which was in force in a State at the date of the notification.
Section 89 provided for adaptation and modification by the appropriate Govern ment of any law made before the appointed day, whether by way of repeal or amendment, for application in relation to the State of Punjab or Haryana or to the Union Territory of Himachal Pradesh or Chandigarh before the expiration of two years.
The State of Punjab, of which the Union Territory of Chandigarh originally formed part, was then governed by the East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act, 1949.
Section 2(j) of that Act defined 'urban area ' as any area administered by a municipal committee, a cantonment board, a town committee, or a notified area committee or any area declared by the State Government by notification to be an urban area for the purposes of the Act.
630 The Central Government had issued under section 89 of the Reorganisation Act, the Punjab Reorganisation (Chandigarh) (Adaptation of Laws on State and Concurrent Subjects) Order, 1968 with effect from 1st November, 1966 Paragraph 4 of which directed that in all the existing laws, in its appli cation to the Union Territory of Chandigarh, any reference to the State of Punjab should be read as a reference to the Union Territory of Chandigarh.
In exercise of the power conferred by section 2(j) of the Rent Act, the Central Government had also issued on 13th October, 1972 a notification declar ing the area comprising Chandigarh to be an "urban area" for the purpose of that Act.
This notification was, however, quashed by the High Court in Harkishan Singh vs Union, AIR 1975 P & H 160, on the ground that no notification had been issued prior to 1st November, 1966 under section 2(j) declaring Chandigarh to be an urban area, and there was no notification under section 87 making the 1949 Act operative in Chandigarh with the necessary adaptation.
Thereupon, Parliament enacted the East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction (Extension to Chandigarh) Act, 1974.
Section 3 of that Act extended to Chandigarh the 1949 Act subject to modifications specified in the schedule with retrospective effect from 4th November, 1972 with a view to regularies all proceedings for eviction which might have been initiated during the interregnum.
These included a modification of the definition of 'urban areas ' as including the area comprising Chandigarh, as defined in section 2 of the Capital of Punjab (Development Regulation) Act, 1952, and such other areas comprised in the Union Territory of Chandi garh as the Central Government may by notification declare to be urban for the purposes of the Act.
In 1982 Parliament passed the East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction (Chandigarh Amendment) Act, 1982 effecting certain amendments in the 1949 Act in its application to Chandigarh.
In 1985 the Legislature of the State of Punjab enacted East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction (Amendment) Act, 1985 to make the 1949 Act more effective.
This amendment came into force with effect from 16th November, 1985.
By a notification dated 15th December, 1986 purportedly in exercise of its power under section 87 of the Reorganisation Act the Central Government extended to the Union Territory of Chandigarh the provisions of the 1985 Act as in force in the State of Punjab at the date of the notification and subject to the modifications mentioned therein, with 631 the result that while the provisions of the 1949 Act had been brought into force with effect from 4th November, 1972 by the Act of Parliament, the provisions of the 1985 Act had been extended to the said territory by means of a Notifica tion of the Central Government issued under section 87.
The High Court upheld the validity of the said notification.
In these appeals by special leave and the writ petitions it was contended for the appellants/petitioners that in the purported exercise of its power under Article 246(4) of the Constitution, the Parliament could not delegate its legisla tive function in favour of an executive authority to such an extent as to amount to an abdication of its legislative function; that by enacting section 87, Parliament instead of legislating for the Union Territory had left it to the Central Government to decide for all time to come what should be the law in force in that Territory; whereas section 89 gives a limited transitory power to the Central Government to adapt existing laws within a period of two years; that such adaptation could hold the field only until they were altered, repealed or amended by a competent legislature or authority; that section 87 confers on the executive government a wide power of choice, for application to Chandigarh, of not only one legislative enactment on any subject in operation in various parts of the country but also groups of provi sions from one or more of them and thus enforce a law which would be an amalgam of various statutory provisions; that there was no legislative guidance as to the manner in which these choices should be exercised by the executive; that section 87 enables extension by Government notification even of any legislation which might have come into force in any part of India at any time between 1966 and the date of the notifica tion; that the effect, therefore, of section 87 could be that the entire legislation for the Union Territory in respect of any particular subject would entirely depend upon the fancy of the Central Government without any sort of legislative or parliamentary application of mind; that a power to exercise such wide power could not be described as a ministerial power, it is essential legislative power; that these facets of section 87 clearly render it an instance of excessive delega tion by Parliament to executive amounting in effect, to the total abdication of its legislative powers in regard to Chandigarh.
It was further contended that section 87, on its proper construction, permits the extension of the laws of another State to Chandigarh only so long as there is a vacuum of.
laws on any particular subject; that once Parliament itself steps in and assumes legislative responsibilities in respect of that subject, a transplantation of laws from elsewhere by extension is neither necessary nor valid; that as early as 1974 Parliament having applied its mind and legislated in respect of landlord 632 tenant matters for the Union Territory, it was for Parlia ment and Parliament alone to legislate on the subject there after; that by purporting to extend by an executive notifi cation under section 87 the provisions of the 1985 Act to Chandi garh what the Central Government had really done was to modify or amend an existing parliamentary law operating already in the State, which was impermissible, and that the notification dated 15th December, 1986 having thus exceeded the purview of section 87 it was, therefore, ultra vires.
Dismissing the appeals and the writ petitions, HELD: 1.1 Section 87 of the should be interpreted constructively so as to permit its object being achieved rather than in a manner that will detract from its efficacy or purpose.
So construed, its validity has to be upheld.
[683C] 1.2 It is impossible to carry on the government of a modern State with its infinite complexities and ramifica tions without a large devolution of power and delegation of authority.
While Parliament should, therefore, have ample and extensive powers of legislation, these should include a power to entrust some of those functions and powers to another body or authority.
Such entrustment, however, could not be so extensive as to amount to abdication or efface ment.
The legislatures cannot wash their hands off their essential legislative function of laying down the legisla tive policy with sufficient clearness and enunciating the standards which are to be enacted into a rule of law.
This function cannot be delegated.
What can be delegated is only the task of subordinate legislation which is by its very nature ancillary to the statute which delegates the power to make it and which must be within the policy and framework of the guidance provided by the legislature.
[668G H; 669C D] 1.3 Section 87 of the Reorganisation Act did not cross the line beyond which delegation amounts to abdication and self effacement.
It was not the power to make laws that was delegated.
The provision only conferred a power on the executive to determine, having regard to the local condi tions prevalent in the Union Territory, which one of several laws, all approved by one or the other of the legislatures in the country, would be the most suited to Chandigarh.
The power given as such was more in the nature of ministerial than in the nature of legislative power because all that the Government had to do was to study the laws and make selec tion out of them.
Thus viewed, it was not really an unguided and arbitrary power.
[675F G] 633 In re Delhi Laws Act; , applied.
Registrar of Cooperative Societies vs Kunhambu ; ; R. vs Burah, [1878] 51.A. 178; Jatindra Nath Gupta vs The Province of Bihar & Ors., ; Harishankar Bagla & Anr.
vs The State of Madhya Pradesh, ; Rajnarain Singh vs The Chairman, Patna Administration Committee, Patna & Anr., ; ; Sardar Inder Singh vs The State of Rajasthan, ; ; Pandit Banarsi Das vs The State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors., ; ; The Edward Mills Co. Ltd. Beawar vs The State of Ajmer; , ; The Western India Theatres Ltd. vs Municipal Corporation of the City of Poona, [1959] 2 Supp.
SCR 71; Hamdard Dawakhana (Wakf) Lal Kuan vs Union of India; , ; Vasantlal Maganbhai San janwala vs The State of Bombay & Ors., ; ; Jyoti Pershad vs Administrator for the Union Territory of Delhi, ; ; Shama Rao vs The Union Territory of Pondichery, ; ; Mohammad Hussain Gulam Moham mad & Anr.
vs The State Of Bombay & Anr.
; ; Corporation of Calcutta & Anr.
vs Liberty Cinema, ; , Devi Das Gopal Krishan & Ors.
vs State of Punjab & Ors.
, ; ; Municipal Corporation of Delhi vs Birla Cotton, Spinning & Weaving Mills, Delhi & Anr., ; ; Sita Ram Bishambhar Dayal vs State of U.P. & Ors., ; ; Hira Lal Rattan Lal etc.
vs State of U.P. & Anr.
; , ; Gwalior Rayon Silk Mfg. (Wvg.) Co. Ltd. vs The Ass,.
Commissioner of Sales Far & Ors., ; ; M.K. Papiah & Sons.
vs The Excise Commissioner & Anr., ; ; Brii Sundar Kapoor vs First Additional District Judges, [1980] I SCC 651 and Sprigg.
vs Sigcau, , referred to.
2.1 Section 87 was quite valid even on the policy and guidelines theory.
It is not necessary that the legislature should "dot all the t 's" and cross all the t 's" of its poli cy.
It is sufficient if it gives the broadest indication of a general policy of the legislature.
[673E F] 2.2 The policy behind section 87 seems to be that it was necessitated by changes resulting In territories coming under the legislative jurisdiction of the Centre.
These were territories situated In the midst of contiguous territories which had a proper legislature.
They were small territories falling under the legislative jurisdiction of Parliament, which had hardly sufficient time to look after the details of all their legislative needs and requirements.
To require or expect Parliament to legislate 634 for them would have entailed a disproportionate pressure on its legislative schedule.
It would also have meant the unnecessary utilisation of the time of a large number of members of Parliament for, except the few members returned to Parliament from the Union Territory none else was likely to be interested in such legislation.
In such a situation the most convenient course of legislating for them was the adaptation by extension of laws in force in other areas of the country.
[673F; 674A B] 2.3 There could have been no objection to the legisla tion if it had provided that the laws of one of the contigu ous States should be extended to Chandigarh.
But such a provision would have been totally inadequate to meet the situation for two reasons.
There might have been more than one law in force on a subject in the contiguous States say one in Punjab, one in PEPSU and one in Himachal Pradesh etc. and Parliament was anxious that Chandigarh should have the benefit of that one of them which would most adequately have met the needs of the situation in that territory.
Or, again, there might have been no existing law on a particular subject in any of the continuous 3teas which was why the power had to include the power of extending the laws of any State of India.
While in a very strict sense this might have involved a choice, it was in fact, and in general run of cases.
only a decision on suitability for adaptation rather than choice of a policy.
It was a delegation not of policy, but of matters of detail for a meticulous appraisal of which Parliament had no time.
Even if it be assumed that this involved a choice of policy, the restriction of such policy to one that was approved by Parliament or a State Legisla ture constituted a sufficient declaration of guideline within the meaning of the "policy guideline theory." [675G H; 676A C] In re Delhi Laws Act; , referred to.
Once it is held that the delegation of a power to extend a present existing law is justified, a power to extend future laws is a necessary corollary.
If Parliament had no time to apply its mind to the existing law initially to be adapted, it could have hardly found time to consider the amendments from time to time engrafted on it in the State of its origin.
It would then seem only natural as a necessary corollary that the executive should be permitted to extend future amendments to those laws as well.
[676D E] In re Delhi Laws Act; , referred to.
4.1 The concept of vacuum is as much relevant to a case where there is absence of a particular provision in an existing law as to a case 635 where there is no existing law at all in the Union Territory on a subject.
For instance, if Parliament had not enacted the 1974 Act but had only enacted an extension of the Trans fer of Property Act to Chandigarh, it could not have been said that a subsequent notification cannot extend the provi sions of the 1949 Act to Chandigarh simply because the subject of leases was governed by the Transfer of Property Act, which had been already extended and there, was, there fore, no "vacuum" left which could be filled in by such extension.
Again, suppose, initially, a Rent Act was extend ed by Parliament which did not contain a provision regarding one of the grounds on which a landlord could seek eviction say, one enabling the owner to get back his house for reoc cupation and then the Government thought that another enact ment containing such a provision also be extended, it could not perhaps be said that the latter was a matter on which there was no legislation enacted in the Territory and that the extension of the latter enactment only filled up a void or vacancy.
Again, suppose the provisions of a general code like.
say, the Code of Civil Procedure were extended to the Union Territory.
In that case s.87 could not be construed so as to preclude the extension of a later amendment to one of the rules to one of the orders of the C.P.C. merely on the ground that it will have the effect of varying or amending an existing law.
There is no warrant to thus unduly restrict the scope of a provision like section 87.
[682D H] 4.2 The extension of an enactment which makes additions to the existing law would thus also be permissible under section 87 of the Reorganisation Act, so long as it does not, ex pressly or impliedly repeal or conflict with, or is not repugnant to, an already existing law.
[683A B] In the instant case, the extension of the East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction (Amendment) Act, 1985 to the Union Territory of Chandigarh only added provisions in respect of aspects not covered by the East Punjab Urban Rent Restric tion (Extension to Chandigarh) Act, 1974 and in a manner not inconsistant therewith.
[683F] Lachmi Narain vs Union of India, and Hari Shankar Bagla vs State of Madhya Pradesh, referred to.
A notification while extending a law can make only such modifications and restrictions in the law extended as are of an incidental, ancillary or subservient nature and as do not involve substantial deviations therefrom.
In the instant case, the 1985 Act has been extended as 636 it is, with only very minor modifications.
The notification dated 15th December.
1986 was, therefore, quite valid and not liable to be struck down.
[684E F] Lachmi Narain vs Union of India, ; ; referred to and Kewal Singh vs Lajwanti, ; ; distinguished. 6.
Any addition, however, small does amend or vary the existing law but so long as it does not really detract from or conflict with it, there is no reason why it should not stand alongside the existing law.
In the instant case the modifications introduced by the 1985 Act in the 1949 Act, as were reenacted by the 1974 Act were minor modifications and restrictions.
They do not incorporate substantial changes in the scheme of the pre existing law.
Both sets of provisions can stand together and effectively supplement each other.
[684F, H] Hari Shankar Bagla vs State of Madhya Pradesh, and Lachmi Narain vs Union of India, referred to. 7.
There is a very crucial difference between section 87 and 89 in as much as within the period of two years mentioned in section 89, the Central Government could while adapting pre existing laws make any changes by way of repeal or amend ment.
But section 87, though capable of enforcement indefinitely, confers a more limited power.
It can be invoked only to extend laws, already in existence, to the Union Territory and cannot make any substantial changes therein.
The power under section 89 is limited in time but extensive in scope, while under section 87 the power is indefinite in point of duration but very much more restricted in its scope.
Therefore, resort to section 87 did not render section 89 redundant.
[686E F]
