The petitioner was born and studied upto class IX in Delhi.
In 1982 she left for Nigeria, along with her parents, where her father went on deputation.
There she passed the General Certificate of Education Ordinary Level, conducted by University of London, which was recognised by the Central Board of Secondary Education, New Delhi as equivalent to Class XI in India.
She returned to India along with her family in 1984.
After passing the All India Senior School Certificate Examination in 1985, she appeared for entrance examination for admission to one of the three Medical Colleges in Delhi and passed the test.
But she was denied admission because she had not satisfied the further condition that the last two years of education should be had in a school in Delhi.
Aggrieved by the denial of admission, the petitioner filed a writ petition in this Court.
By an order dated 31st July, 1987 this Court allowed the Writ Petition and directed the respondents to admit her in one of the three Delhi Medical Colleges in the first year course prescribed for the M.B.B.S. Degree.
Giving reasons for the said order, this Court, HELD: 1.
Rules are intended to be reasonable, and should take into account the variety of circumstances in which those whom the rules seek to govern find themselves.
[861C] 2.
The qualifying condition that a candidate appearing for the 859 entrance examination for admission to a Medical College in Delhi should have received the last two years of education in a school in Delhi is unreasonable when applied in the case of those candidates who were compelled to leave India for a foreign country by reason of the posting of the parent by the Government to such foreign country.
There is no real choice in the matter for such a student, and in many cases the circumstances of the student do not permit her to con tinue schooling in India.
Theoretically it is possible for a student to be put into a hostel to continue her schooling in Delhi but in many cases this may not be feasible and the student must accompany the parent to the foreign country.
[860H, 861A] 3.
The rigour of the condition prescribing that the last two years of education should be, received in a school in Delhi should be relaxed, and there should be no insistence on the fulfilment of that condition, in the case of students of parents who are transferred to a foreign country by the Government and who are therefore required to leave India along with them.
Therefore, the denial of admission to the petitioner to a seat in one of the Medical Colleges in Delhi was unreasonable.
[861B, 861E]
