The petitioners, the Assam Rifles Multi purpose Co operative Society, and its Vice Chairman a retired Military Officer, filed a writ petition in this Court praying for directions to the respondents for implementing the scheme, approved by the Government of India, for settling retired Defence Personnel, specially of the Assam Rifles, in the North Eastern Region.
The petitioner asserted that in pursu ance of this scheme, which assured the allotment of land, grant of title deeds in respect of the allotted land, facil ities for movement by air, freedom to develop the allotted area, grant of advance by way of loans etc.
and also provi sion of basic requirements of life for encouraging all round economic development of the area, about 200 retired person nel with their families journeyed to the region and settled there.
The respondents, in their counter affidavits contended that funds had been set apart and basic facilities provided.
This Court, by its Order dated February 20, 1987, di rected the Central Government to nominate a competent au thority for examining the problem, and looking into the scheme and submitting a report to the Central Government to enable it to consider the same and take necessary steps for redressal of the petitioners ' grievances.
Accordingly, the Director General of Assam Rifles submitted to the Government his report, making a number of recommendations in support of the scheme to settle Assam Rifles Ex servicemen and to ensure that the various facilities and concessions original ly promised to them were provided.
The Central Government considered the recommendations at an inter Ministerial meet ing and took certain decisions and placed them before the Court.
After considering the report and decisions of the Government 854 thereon and submissions made by the parties, this Court, HELD: The region constitutes part of Indian territory and is located on the Indian border with China and Burma.
It is in the public interest and for the benefit of the public that settlement of Indian citizens should be encouraged in this area and the area should be suitably developed.
[856A B] More than sufficient time has passed and it is desira ble to ascertain what action has been taken by the State Government pursuant to the requests made to it by the Cen tral Government to provide some of the facilities required by the settlers, and it is considered necessary to make the following supplementary directions: [857C D] The Central Government and State Government should decide between them as to which of them will give loans to the settlers and to what extent.
[857D] The Central Government should direct that the existing post office establishment should be enlarged to handle disbursement of pensions.
[857E] The State Government should upgrade the existing middle school to the status of High School and make adequate provi sion for additional seats in the students ' hostel to absorb the increasing number of seats resulting from such upgrada tion and the grant of domicile certificates in relation to settlers, atleast in respect of members of petitioner socie ty should be considered.
[857E F] Respondents No. 1 and 2 will file before the next date of hearing, affidavits indicating the action taken by them pursuant to the decisions taken at the inter Ministeri al meeting and pursuant to the directions made by this Court.
[857G]
