The appellants in the appeal were appointed in or about January, 1959 as Trade Apprentices in Locomotive Component Works.
In August, 1961 there was a merger of Locomotive Component Works with Diesel Locomotive Works, as a result of which all the members of the staff of LCW were taken over by DLW.
The appellants were appointed skilled artisans on July 19, 1962 after successfully completing the training period of 3 1/2 years.
The channel for promotion to higher posts was: (1) Skilled Artisan, (2) Highly Skilled Grade II, (3) Highly Skilled Grade I, (4) Chargeman C, (5) Chargeman B, (6) Chargeman A, (7) Assistant Foreman and (8) Foreman.
In September, 1963, the appellants were promoted to the post of Instructor C which was equivalent to the post of Charegman C.
The posts were inter changeable.
The appellants were further promoted on September 22, 1964 to the post of Chargeman B. Some of the respondents in the appeal who were direct Recruits also competed with the appellants for the post of Chargeman B, but could not qualify in the written test.
On August 11, 1966, the Genera1 Manager, DLW pre pared and issued a seniority list of Chargeman B.
This list was challenged by I certain direct recruits in a writ petition to the High Court.
A Single 79 Judge quashed the seniority list and also the guidelines/rules framed by the General Manager, DLW on the basis of which the seniority list was prepared, on the ground that the General Manager, DLW was not the General manager of the Railway, and as such he had no authority to frame the rules or the guidelines for the purpose of prepa ration of the seniority list.
It was further held that the guidelines/rules were violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Several appeals were preferred, one of them being by the Railway Administration.
The Division Bench while upholding the finding of the Single Judge that the General Manager DLW was not competent to frame the rules/guidelines, disagreed with the finding that the rules/ guidelines were violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Pursuant to the aforesaid judgment, the Railway Board issued an Advance Correction Slip No. 70 inserting Rules 324 to 328 in the Railway Establishment Manual after rule 323 in Chapter III.
Rule 328(2) provided that: 'selections and promotions made in the Diesel Locomotive Works from August 1, 1961 upto the date of the notification of the rules shall not be invalid '.
The amended rules came into effect from March 11, 1973.
The resultant situation was that Rule 328(2) vitally affected the appellants by making invalid all the promotions given to them during the period August 1, 1961 to March 11, 1973 and the appellants were reverted back as Skilled Arti sans.
The General Manager, DLW a Circular dated 7/8th Decem ber, 1973 directed appellants to appear at the Trade test and further informed that failure to do so would result in being passed over for fixation of seniority in the Highly Skilled Grade II.
The representation against this Circular was turned down.
Aggrieved by the introduction of Rule 328(2) and also the issuance of Circular by the General Manager DLW the appellants filed a writ petition in the High Court The High Court overruled the contention that the new rules inserted in the Railway Establishment Manual by the Advance Correc tion Slip No. 70, were invalid, and held that the rules were quite valied and were not arbitriary or discriminatory.
As regards promotion of the appellants,the High court took the view that they were only interim and professional and not regular and as such no right was confirmed on appellants to hold the posts to which they were promoted.
The high court accordingly dismissed the writ petition.
80 On behalf of the appellants in the appeal by special leave it was contended that Rule 328(2) as inserted in the Railway Establishment Manual by the Advance Correction Slip No. 70 was invalid, that the promotions of appellants up to the position of Chargeman A could not be set aside and appellants reverted back to their original position of Skilled Artisans, and that the length of service of the appellants for a period of about 9 years has been completely wiped out by the said Rule 328(2).
Allowing the appeal and setting aside the judgment of the High Court, HELD:1.
By virtue of Rule 157 of the Railway Establish ment Code, the Railway Board has the power to frame rules, but such rules must be framed with certain objects in view and must not be arbitrary.
[90E] 2.
The Court is always entitled to examine whether a particular rule which takes away the vested right of a railway employee or seriously affects him with retrospective effect, has been made to meet the exigencies of circum stances or has been made arbitrarily without any real objec tive behind it.
[90E F] 3.
The Railway Administration was to comply with the order of the High Court and in compliance with the order, it should have prepared the seniority lists in accordance with the existing rules.
[90C D] 4.
It is curious, that instead of preparing the seniori ty list in accordance with the existing statutory rules, as directed by the High Court, the Railway Board amended the rules and inserted by the Advance Correction Slip No. 70, among others, Rule 328(2).
That rule wipes out not only the promotions granted to the appellants up to the post of Chargeman Grade B, but also the length of service of the appellants for about nine years.
[89F G] 5.
This Court does not find any objective or purpose behind the framing of Rule 328(2) to the serious prejudice of the appellants.
The said Rule is arbitrary and therefore, cannot be allowed to be operative to the detriment of the appellants.
[90F] 6.
The appellants were regularly promoted to the post of Chargeman C and thereafter to Chargeman B.
In these circum stances, no justification is found for the Railway Board to incor 81 porate a new rule viz., Rule 328(2) to the serious prejudice of the appellants.
[90C] 7.
A person can have lien on a post and not a lien on a place.
There can be no doubt that a person appointed to a post on ad hoc basis cannot have any lien on the post.
It is only when a person is appointed on a permanent basis, he can claim lien on the post to which he is so appointed.
[87F G] 8.
It is not correct to say that the appellants were appointed or promoted to the post of Instructor C or Charge man C on an ad hoc basis or by way of an interim measure, as held by the High Court.
If they were appointed on ad hoc or purely temporary basis they could not have been promoted to the post of Chargeman B and Office Order No. 25 dated Janu ary 22, 1966 would have been quite inconsistent with such ad hoc or temporary appointments.
[87G H] 9.
Directed that Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 shall not give effect to Rule 328(2) as inserted in the Railway Establish ment Manual by the Advance Correction Slip No. 70 in the case of appellants and Respondent Nos.
3 to 6.
Orders dated December 7/8th, 1973 and January 7, 1974 are quashed.
Fur ther directed that Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 fix the seniority of appellants and respondents 3 to 6 on the basis of their promotions to posts of Instructor/Chargeman C and Chargeman B. [91B C]
