The assessee appellants, a partnership firm carrying on manufacturing business in Madras entered into an agreement with a company based in Calcutta for sale of their product through the latter 's sales organisation in all the States of India.
In the said agreement the assessee was referred to as the 'manufacturer ' and the company as the 'sole selling agents ' of the product.
The agreement itself was described as an 'agreement of sale '.
It provided inter alia that the stocks left over unsold beyond two years from their receipt with the selling agents could be returned to the appellants who were bound to replace them, that the appellants should take all suitable action for recovery of damages from the carriers, that they would supply the selling agents with all the necessary publicity material and also advertise at their cost through the media, that the selling prices and transfer prices of the product would be mutually agreed from time to time between them and the selling agents, that any reduction in price during the currency of the agreement was to be duly reflected in the price of stock lying unsold with the sell ing agents, and that on termination of the contract either by the assessee or by the selling agents, the unused stock lying with the latter was to be returned to the former.
The appellants were assessed to excise duty under the for the period July, 1977 to March, 1979 on the basis of the price at which the sell ing agents had sold the goods to their customers in the course of the wholesale trade.
They however, claimed that the assessable value should be the price at which the ex cisable goods were sold by them to the selling agents and sought refund of 783 the excess excise duty thus paid.
The Assistant Collector of Excise and the Collector rejected the said claim.
The TribUnal took the view that a sine qua non of a sale was that the title to the goods should pass from the seller to the purchaser.
When once that were not so, then it could not be said that it was an agreement for sale.
On an analy sis of the conditions of the agreement in the instant case it found that the title to and the ownership in the goods consigned to the selling agents continued with the appel lants.
It, therefore, concluded that the true character of the agreement was that it was an agreement for sole selling agency and not an agreement for sale.
It further held that the selling agents were 'a related person ' as understood under section 4(4)(c) of the Act and, therefore, the assessable value of the goods for levy of excise duty must be on the basis of price at which the selling agents ordinarily sold these in the course of wholesale trade less the transporta tion cost and other permissible deductions such as duty of excise and sales tax, if any, subject to proof.
In this appeal under section 35 L(b) of the Act it was con tended for the appellants, that there were two prices 'transfer price ' and 'selling price ' and there was good deal of difference between these prices which was suggestive of an outright sale, that the terms referred to by the Tribunal were merely indicative of the fact that it was an agreement whereby the purchaser upon terms was de scribed as 'sole selling agents ', that the appellants were manufacturing a product which was liable to lose its effica cy and quality after lapse of time and as such a replacement clause was inserted to ensure that the bad quality goods did not go to the market and damage their reputation, that the selling agents were not 'related persons ' in terms of section 4(4)(c) of the Act, as there was nothing in common between them and the appellants, and that claims like cost of trans portation and other permissible deductions such as duty of excise and sales tax to which they were otherwise entitled to should have been deducted from the 'value ' subject to proof by the appellants.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: 1.1 Whether there was an agreement for sale or an agreement of agency to sell must depend upon the facts and the circumstances and the terms of each case.
Such facts and terms must be judged in the background of the totality of the circumstances.
All the terms and conditions should be properly appreciated.
The terminology used by the parties is not decisive of the legal relationship.
[789F, 793D] 784 1.2 The essence of a contract of sale is the transfer of the title to the goods for a price paid or promised to be paid.
The transferee in such a case is liable to the trans feror as a debtor for the price to be paid.
The essence of the agency to sell is the delivery of the goods to a person who is to sell these not as his own property but as the property of the principal, who continues to be the owner of the goods, and make over the sale proceeds to the principal.
An agent.
however, could become a purchaser when he paid the price to the principal on his own responsibility.
[793C, 792A] 1.3 In the instant case, the most important fact sug gesting agency was the clause which enjoined that the stocks left over unsold beyond two years from their receipt could be returned to the appellants who were bound to replace these.
Added to it was the fact that the appellants were to prefer all claims for recovery of damages from the carriers and any reduction in price during the currency of the agree ment was to be duly reflected in the price of stock lying unsold with the selling agents, and the obligation that on the termination of the contract by either the appellants or the selling agents, unsold stocks lying with the latter were to be returned to the former.
[793F, GH] 1.4 The Tribunal was, therefore, right in holding that the transaction with the selling agents was not a transac tion of sale but an agreement for agency.
If that be so, then the first sale was by the selling agents to the custom ers of the market.
The price of that sale would thus be the assessable value under section 4 of the Act.
In that view of the matter it was not necessary to determine the question wheth er the selling agents were 'related persons ' in terms of section 4(4)(c) of the Act.
[795DE] W.T. Lamb & Sons vs Goring Brick Company Ltd., ; Gordon Woodroffe & Co. vs Sheikh M.A. Majid & Co., and Tirumala Venkateswara Timber & Bamboo Firm vs Commercial Tax Officer, Rajahmundry., ; referred to.
Though apart from cost of transportation, excise duty and sales tax.
other charges were not sought to be deducted by the appellants in the appeal and were not canvassed before the Tribunal too, nor in the grounds of appeal there was any such claim, in the interest of justice they are permitted to have the benefit of other deductions envisaged in Assistant Collector of Central Excise & Ors.
vs Madras Rubber Factory Ltd.; , subject to the order passed in the review matter.
[795G, 796AB] 785
