The respondent assessee is a co operative society run ning a sugar mill.
With a view to inducing its members to make further contribution to its capital it incorporated a bye law which provided for the establishment of a 'Loss Equalisation & Capital Redemption Reserve Fund '.
Every producer shareholder was required to deposit every year an amount to this fund which was to be utilised for the purpose of making the partly paid shares fully paid, and after defraying the loan taken from the Industrial Finance Corpo ration the balance was to be refunded to the members.
The money available in the Fund was utilised by the society for the purpose of its business.
A part of the amount was even tually utilised for converting the partly paid shares into fully paid shares.
It was then decided by the society to pay interest on the balance available in the Fund.
The interest thus paid to its members was sought to be claimed as deduc tion in computing the income of the assessee.
The Income Tax Officer rejected the claim holding that the amount did not represent loans taken by the assessee .or capital borrowed for the purpose of its business.
The Appel late Assistant Commissioner confirmed the disallowance.
The Income Tax Appellate Tribunal accepted the second appeal of the assessee and held that it was not necessary that borrow ing must contain an element of payment of interest and that even if a deposit was made by the members of the society which waS utilised for the purpose of the business of the assessee, the funds represented by such deposit would be 'capital borrowed ' for the purpose of section 36(1)(iii) of the Income Tax Act, 1961.
The High Court agreed with the view taken by the Appellate Tribunal and answered the questions referred to it in favour of the assessee and against the Revenue.
While allowing the appeals and answering the questions in the negative in favour of the Revenue, this Court.
841 HELD: (1) Section 36(1)(iii) of the Income Tax Act, 1961 provides that in computing the income chargeable under the head 'profits and gains of business or profession ' a deduc tion shall be allowed of the amount of interest paid in respect of capital borrowed for the purposes of the business or profession.
[845G,H] (2) The words 'borrowed money ' should not be given a strained meaning and it should be considered whether in ordinary commercial usage the relationship was that of a borrower and lender and the transactions 'were loan transac tions.
To constitute borrowed money there must be a real borrowing and a real lending.
[846B,D] (3) It is apparent that the deposits made by the members cannot be regarded as loans advanced by the members to the assessee.
There was never any intention between the assessee and its members to treat the deposits made by the members as loans and that the relationship between the assessee and the members should be that of borrower and lender.
, [847F,G] Port of London Authority vs Commissioner of Inland Revenue, ; Commissioner of Inland Reve nue vs Port of London Authority, ; Inland Revenue Commissioner vs Rowntree & Co. Ltd., ; Commissioner of Income tax, Gujarat vs Rajkot Seeds, Oil & Bullion Merchants Association Ltd., ; Commissioner of Excess Profits Tax, Central Calcut ta vs Bhartia Electric Steel Co. Ltd., ; Bombay Steam Navigation Co. [1953]; Private Ltd. vs Commis sioner of Income tax Bombay, and Madhav Prasad Jatia vs Commissioner of Income tax Uttar Pradesh, ; , referred to.
(4) A loan necessarily supposes a return of the money loaned.
The circumstance that there was no certainty that any balance would remain for refund to the members would in itself indicate that the deposits could not be regarded as loans.
[847G,H]
