The appellant filed a civil suit in the High Court for specific performance of a contract to sell the suit property by the respondents to her.
The High Court held the appellant liable to discharge the mortgage and directed her to deposit in Court a sum of Rs.3.5 lakhs with interest for the pur pose.
The appellant paid the amount direct to the mortgagee, which the High Court refused to accept as due compliance with its decree.
The appellant preferred appeals to this Court, which were disposed of on 29th November, 1979 with the direction that the appellant was to deposit within six months from the date of the order, the entire sum of Rs.3.15 lakhs together with interest.
Purporting to comply with the aforesaid order of this Court, appellant deposited a sum of Rs.2,42,822.19 on 11 April, 7980 and filed two Civil Misc.
Petitions in the High Court for a declaration that the payment was in compliance with the order of this Court and claimed as set off of the amount of Rs.5,96,687.19 paid by her earlier to the South Indian Bank, which she was entitled to recover from the respondent.
The time limit fixed for fulfilling the two conditions set out in this Court 's order dated 29th November, 1979 having fallen on 29th May, 1980 and the High Court not having passed orders on the appellant 's two CMP 's the appel lant paid into the High Court a sum of Rs.6.02 lakhs on 29th May, 1980 by cheque purporting to comply with the first condition of this Court 's order.
820 The High Court dismissed the appellant 's CMP and refused to grant the declaration that the appellant had complied with the order of this Court dated 29th November.
1979, on the ground that the appellant was bound to comply with the Original Side Rules of the High Court which prescribed the procedure to be followed in depositing money into Court particularly Order XXXI Rules 1 to 6 which aimed at securing the deposit of the money in the Reserve Bank of India to the credit of a particular proceeding, on or before the speci fied date.
In the appeal to this Court, on the question; whether payment made by the appellant on 29th May, 1980 by cheque of the amount of Rs.6.02 lakhs together with the amount depos ited earlier on 11th May, 1980 was in due compliance with this Court 's order dated 29th November, 1979.
Allowing the Appeal and setting aside the order of the High Court, this Court HELD: 1.
Payment by cheque is an ordinary incident of present day life, whether commercial or private, and unless it is specifically mentioned that payment must be in cash there is no reason why payment by cheque should not be taken to be due payment if the cheque is subsequently encashed in the ordinary course.
[823D E] In the instant case, there is nothing in the order of this Court providing that the deposit by the appellant was to be in cash.
The terms of the order dated November 29, 1979 are conclusive in this respect and it is the intent of that order which will determine whether payment by cheque within the period stipulated in that order was excluded as a mode in satisfaction of the terms of that order.
The time for payment of governed by the order of this Court.
[823E F] 2.
Payment on the cheque being honoured and encashed relates back to the date of the receipt of the cheque, and in law the date of payment is the date of delivery of the cheque.
[823F] Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay South, Bombay vs Messrs Ogale Glass Works Ltd. Ogale Wadi, A.I.R. 1954 S.C. 429 referred to.
In the instant case, there is nothing to suggest that the cheque was not honoured in due course and that the Bank had at any time declined to honour it for want of funds in the ordinary cause.
[823G] 821 3.
The conditions set forth in the order of this Court dated 29th November, 1979 have been complied with by the appellant substantially and she is entitled to the benefit of that order.
[824C D]
