The assessee appellant did not file its income tax returns under the Income Tax Act, 1961 for the assessment years 1965 66, 1966 67 within the statutory period.
It was only after notices under section 139(2) of the Act were served on the assessee the returns were filed.
In the said circum stances the Income Tax Officer initiated penalty proceedings against the assessee under section 271(1)(a) of the Act for the two assessment years and imposed penalties.
The explanation of the assessee that he was under the bona fide belief that he had no assessable income and had, therefore, not filed the returns earlier was not accepted by the Income tax Officer.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner dismissed the appeal, but in second appeal the Appellate Tribunal allowed the appeal holding that the Income Tax Officer had failed to bring on record any material to show that the explanation of the assessee tendered before him in regard t9 the delay should not be accepted, and that as the element of mens rea was required to be proved and had not been proved, the penalties were liable to be cancelled.
The Appellate Tribunal at the instance of the Revenue referred the question to the High Court, and a Full Bench of the High Court took the view that mens rea need not be established before penalty is imposed under section 271(1)(a) of the Act, and the Appellate Tribunal was therefore not justi fied in cancelling the penalties levied for the two assess ment years.
On the question whether the element of mens tea is a mandatory requirement before a penalty can be imposed under section 271(1 )(a) of 1001 the Income Tax Act, 1961.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court.
HELD: 1.
A penalty may be imposed under section 271(1)(a) if the Income Tax Officer is satisfied that any person has without reasonable cause failed to furnish the return of total income.
while section 276C provides that if a person wilfully fails to furnish in due time the return of income required under section 139(1) he shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment which may extend to one year or with fine.
It is, therefore, clear that in the former case what was intended was a civil obligation, while in the latter what is imposed is a criminal sentence.
[1003E F] 2.
There can be no dispute that having regard to the provisions of section 276C, which speaks of wilful failure on the part of defaulter and taking into consideration the nature of the penalty, which is punitive, no sentence can be im posed under that provision unless the element of mens rea is established.
[1003G H] 3.
The creation of an offence by Statute proceeds on the assumption that society suffers injury by the act or omis sion of the defaulter and that a deterrent must be imposed to discourage the repetition of the offence.
[1004A B] 4.
Unless there is something in the language of the statute indicating the need to establish the element of mens rea it is generally sufficient to prove that a default in complying with the statute has occurred.
[1004B C] 5.
In a proceeding under section 271(1)(a), it seems that the intention of the legislature is to emphasise the fact of loss of.
Revenue and to provide a remedy for such loss, although no doubt an element of coercion is present.
in the penalty.
In this connection the terms in which the penalty falls to be measured is significant.
[1004B] Corpus Juris Secundum, volume 85, page 580, para. 1023, referred to.
There is nothing in section 271(1)(a) which requires that mens rea must be proved before penalty can be levied under that provision.
[1004C]
