The words " specific moveable property " occurring in article 49 Of the Indian Limitation Act can mean only such specific items of moveable property in respect of which the plaintiff is entitled to claim immediate possession in specie from the defendant who has either wrongfully taken or is wrongfully withholding them from him.
A suit by one heir against the others for recovery of his share of the moveable property of a deceased person is not one for a specific moveable property wrongfully taken such as is contemplated by article 49 and must, in the absence of any other specific provision in the Act, be governed by article 12o and not article 49 of the Indian Limitation Act.
Mohomed Raisat Ali vs Musummat Hasin Banu, (1893) L,R. 2o I,A. 155, relied on.
Consequently, in a case where the decree passed upon an award, without specifying any particular G. P. Notes or dividing them, directed the elder brother to transfer G. P. Notes of the value of Rs. 13,200 to the younger brother from out of the G. P. Notes of the total value of Rs. 26,500 left by the father in the custody of the former, and the younger brother, failing to obtain relief by way of execution of the decree, brought the suit, out of which the present appeal arises, against the elder brother for a division of the G. P. Notes and a direction on him that G. P. Notes of the value of Rs. 13,200 might be transferred to him and claimed that the entire period covered by the execution proceeding from its inception till the final disposal by the High Court should be excluded in computing the period of limitation : Held, that the suit in substance was one for the division of moveable property held in joint ownership and not for possession of any specific.
item of moveable property and as such was governed, not by article 49, but by article 120 of the Indian Limitation Act.
Gopal Chandra Bose vs Surendra Nath Dutt, (1908) 12 C.W.N. 1010, distinguished and held inapplicable.
812 As the facts and circumstances of the case satisfied the requirements of section 14(1) Of the Indian Limitation Act in computing the prescribed period of limitation the time covered by the execution proceeding from its inception till its final disposal by the High Court must be excluded.
