The appellant company entered into an agreement with a Norwegian Company under which the latter was to provide technical knowhow and technical services including facili ties for the training of personnel of the appellant company in connection with the manufacture of computers for a con sideration of NOK 32 Millions, Norwegian Currency, equiva lent to Rs.575 lakhs.
The appellant company applied to the Income Tax Officer for 'No Objection Certificate ' under Section 195(2) of the Income Tax, 1961 in order to remit the instalments due under the agreement without deducting the tax at source but the same was refused.
The application of the appellant company to the Commis sioner of Income Tax seeking a direction to the Income Tax Officer was also rejected on the ground that having regard to Sections 9(1)(vii) and 195 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 the payment to the foreign company constituted deemed accru al of Income in India and therefore the appellant was obliged to deduct at source the tax payable by the foreign company.
A writ petition filed by the appellant against the order of the Commissioner and assailing the constitutional validity of Section 9(1)(vii) of the 995 Income tax Act, 1961 was dismissed by the High Court of Andhra Pradesh.
A similar writ petition filed against the order of refusal of 'No Objection Certificate ' by the Com missioner of Income Tax in relation to disbursement made under an agreement with a U.S. Company was also dismissed by the High Court.
Against the decision of the High Court appeals were filed in this Court challenging the vires of Section 9(1)(vii) of the Income Tax Act, 1961 contending that (i) it was extra territorial in operation, and (ii) there was no nexus between anything done in India and the persons sought to be taxed.
Referring the matter to a Constitution Bench, HELD: 1.
It is envisaged under our constitutional scheme that Parliament in India may make laws which operate extra territorially.
Article 245(2) declares that no law made by Parliament shall be deemed to be invalid on the ground that it would have extra territorial operation.
Therefore, a Parliamentary statute having extra territorial operation cannot be ruled out from contemplation.
The operation of the law can extend to persons, things and acts outside the territory of India.
The general principle, flowing from the sovereignty of States, is that laws made by one State can have no operation in another State.
But while the enforce ment of the law cannot be contemplated in a foreign State, it can, nonetheless, be enforced by the courts of the enact ing State to the degree that is permissible with the machin ery available to them.
They will not be regarded by such courts as invalid on the ground of such extra territoriali ty.
[998H, 999A B, D] British Columbia Electric Railway Company Limited vs The King, , applied.
But unless nexus exists Parliament will have no competence to make the law.
Article 245(1) empowers Parlia ment to enact law for the whole or any part of the territory of India.
The provocation for the law must be found within India itself.
Such a law may have extra territorial opera tion in order to subserve the object, and that object must be related to something in India.
It is inconceivable that a law should be made by Parliament in India which has no relationship with anything in India.
[999E F] 2.1 In view of the great public importance of the ques tion, whether the ingredients of the impugned provision indicate a nexus 996 these cases are referred to a Constitution Bench.
[999H] Corborandum Co. vs C.I.T., ; referred to.
