The appellants are the heirs of one A who was the tenant of the land in question for about three decades before the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Land Act, 1948 was enacted.
Though he was entitled to purchase the land on satisfaction of certain conditions, it was admitted before the authori ties that he did not satisfy the conditions.
The landlords claimed possession of the land.
A was already possessed of land beyond the ceiling area prescribed by Sec.
32A of the Act and he, therefore, did not claim to have purchased the land in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
Since in such cases.
32P provides that the former tenant would be summarily evicted and the land would be surrendered to the landlord, the land in question went to the landlords.
The appellants claimed that on a partition in the family of the landlords the land in question was allotted to some of the respondents and A purchased the same for Rs. 3000 on 3.6.1960.
It was contended that the land holding of A was within the ceiling area following the partition in 1959 between him and his sons.
Suppressing the sale of the land and without impleading the appellants, the respondents moved the authorities in 1963 for recognising their claim.
The Agricultural Land Tribunal and the Additional Mamlatdar upheld the claim of the respondents, relying on an enquiry under Section 32G, wherein the right of A as a tenant was negatived.
the appel lants filed an appeal before the collector, who remanded the matter to the Mamlatdar.
The Additional Mamlatdar observed that since the tenant had purchased the land from the land lords, the proceeding was fit to be dropped and it would be appropriate to deal with the case under Section 84C which provided holding of an enquiry to decide the validity of the transfer.
After such enquiry the Agricultural Lands Tribunal held that the purchase made on 3.6.1960 by A was lawful and upheld the claim of the appellants.
This was confirmed on appeal and one of the respondents filed a revision applica tion before the 239 Revenue Tribunal.
The Tribunal held that the land owned by A did not belong to the joint family and his sons had no share therein and so the alleged partition could not be accepted or recognised.
And in 1960, A was possessed of land beyond the ceiling area and was not entitled to purchase further land from respondents.
The appellant moved the High Court under Article 227 of the Constitution.
The High Court re jected the petition.
This appeal, by Special Leave, is against the High Court 's Judgment.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: The ban on transfers which may affect the ceiling law is more severe under the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, directs that no sale of land shall be valid in favour of a person who will, after such sale, hold land exceeding two thirds of the ceiling area deter mined under the Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling on Holdings) Act, 1961.
The fact that on the death of A in 1962 his earlier holdings were inherited by his heirs and the respective holdings, therefore, came below the ceiling area, is immaterial because the disputed land was purchased by A himself in 1960.
It has to be remembered that, as has been held by the Revenue Tribunal, the other lands exclusively belonged to A and exceeded the ceiling area.
The sale on 3.6.1960 must, therefore, be held to be illegal and inopera tive.
[241G H; 242A]
