The contesting respondents have been in occupation of the demised property under a registered lease for 20 years, which was to expire on 31.7.1971.
They served a notice on the appellants on 16.7.1971 claiming the right to continue in possession after 31.7.1971 as tenants from month to month.
The appellants did not accept the respondents ' claim and filed before the Munsif a case purporting to be an application under section 12 of the Bihar Buildings (Lease, Rent and Eviction) Control Act, 1947.
The respondents con tested the application on the ground that as heirs of the original lessee, they had formed a partnership as a result of which a new month to month tenancy had been created.
They further contended that the appellants ' application before the Munsif under section 12 was not maintainable.
The Munsif accepted the appellants ' case that the legal representatives of the original lessee continued as tenants under the lease after the attornment and were liable to eviction after the expiry of the lease period.
The Judicial Commissioner dis missed the respondents ' appeal holding that the deed of lease was subsisting, the parties were having the relation ship of lessors and lessees, and no month to month tenancy had been created.
The Judicial Commissioner further held that the appellants would have to make another application under section 12(3) of the Act for evicting the respondents if they did not vacate within the time allowed by court.
The High Court, in its revisional jurisdiction, set aside the decisions of the courts below and held that in the absence of a month 's notice under section 12(1) from the tenants, the application of the appellants under section 12 was not maintain able before the Munsif and the entire proceedings was mis conceived.
The High Court pointed out that in the circum stances the appropriate remedy of the appellants was to file a suit under section 11 of the Act.
971 Before this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellants that an application under section 12 of the Act before the Civil Court was maintainable, and that both the reme dies.
i.e., by an application under section 12 of the Act as also by way of a suit were open to a landlord after the expiry of the period of a fixed term tenancy, and it was for him to choose which course to follow.
On behalf of the respondents it was contended that on the expiry of such a tenancy the only remedy was to file a suit, and in any event section 12 was wholly inapplicable as, according to their case in the notice, a fresh tenancy had come into existence, and as such their notice was not one under section 12 of the Act at all.
Allowing the appeal, this Court HELD: (1) The Act refers to several authorities for decision of different issues.
As regards the question of dealing.
with the eviction of tenants under section 11 and exten sion of period of lease under section 12, the civil court is the proper forum.
It is the same court before which both a suit under section 11 and an application under section 12 are to be filed.
[976C, D] (2) The instant case was tried by the learned Munsif in the same manner as the trial of an eviction suit.
The re spondents filed a regular appeal before the District Judge, designated as Judicial Commissioner, and he also went through the entire controversy thoroughly.
The judgment of the High Court indicates that the scope in which the argu ments by the parties were addressed was the same as in a second appeal, and the decision also was accordingly given.
In these circumstances, it is wholly immaterial as to wheth er the application originally filed by the appellants before the Munsif was not in the form of a plaint, specially when the necessary verification was also there at the foot of the petition.
The only difference may be as to the amount of court fee payable by the parties, but that should not come in the way of construing the correct nature of the proceed ings.
[976G H; 977C D] Madho Bibi vs Hazari Mal Marwari, AIR 1929 Patna 141 and Hazari Lal vs Ramjiwan Ramchandra, AIR 1929 Patna 472, referred tO. (3) The court must examine the substance of the applica tion to find out its true nature and should not be guided solely by the heading given to it by a party.
[977G H] 972 Lachhoo vs Munnilal Babu Lal, AIR 1935 All.
183, referred to.
(4) The principle is well established that the exercise of a power will be referable to a jurisdiction which confers validity upon it and not to a jurisdiction under which it will be nugatory, and there is no reason to exclude the application of this rule to judical proceedings.
[977H; 978A] R.P. Singh vs The Chief Commissioner (Admn.) Manipur, ; referred to.
(5) If it is assumed that an application under section 12 of the Act is not maintainable in the facts and circumstances of the present case, the proceeding has to be treated as a suit and the judgment of the learned Munsifas a decree therein.
[978C] (6) The occasion for filing an application under section 12(3) can arise only where the matter is covered by section 12, and as an assumption has to be made in favour of the re spondents that section 12 has no application, there is no point in asking the appellants to file such an application.
[978E] (7) This Court can and should restore the decree of the trial court even in the absence of an appeal by the appel lants before the High Court against the order of the Judi cial Commissoner declining to pass a formal decree of evic tion and directing the appellants to make an application under section 12(3) of the Act for that purpose.
As mentioned in Article 142 of the Constitution, this Court may pass such decree or make such order as is necessary for doing complete justice in any case or matter pending before it, and the instant case is a most appropriate one for exercise of such power.
[978D F]
