The respondent company, a manufacturer of electric lamps, fluorescent lamps and miniature lamps sold its entire products to five customer companies namely (a) Bajaj Elec tricals Ltd. (b) Philips India Ltd. (c) Crompton Greaves Ltd. (d) General Electric Co. of India Ltd. and (e) Mazda Lamps Co. Ltd. after putting the brand names of the said Customer companies as per their directions.
The customer companies in turn sold these lamps under their respective names to wholesale dealers and others at prices higher than the prices charged to them by the Respondent Company.
Excise duty on electric lamps at first was a specific duty but later it was changed to ad valorem duty.
After such change there was a controversy between the Respondent Compa ny and the Central Excise authorities as to whether the prices charged by the Respondent Company to its customer companies or the prices charged by the customer companies when they in turn sold to wholesale dealers and others, should be the basis for determination of the value for levy of excise duty.
As the Department insisted that latter shall be the value for levy of excise duty, the Respondent Company moved a Writ Petition in the High Court of Allahabad.
The High Court by its order dated 14.5.74 allowed the Writ Petition holding that the prices at which the Respondent Company sold its products to the Customer companies should be the value for levy of excise duty and not the prices at which the customer companies sold these to wholesale dealers and others.
Hence this appeal by the Excise authorities.
874 Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: The first part of Section 4(4)(c) refers to a person who is so associated with the assessee that each had interest, directly or indirectly in the business of the other and the second part of that definition refers to a holding company, a subsidiary company, a relative and a distributor of the assessee and any sub distributor of such distributor.
The sale by the assessee company was on princi pal to principal basis and the share holding company (Bajaj Electrical Ltd.) and so called to associate companies .of the foreign share holding companies.
Goods were supplied to the Customer companies in their brand names as in the case of Atic Industries case.
In Atic Industries case there was no allegation of extra commercial consideration and in the instant case also there was no such allegation.
In Atic Industries case, same prices were charged from all the customers, similar is the position in the instant case.
[876G H; 877H; 878A B] In view of the ratio of the decision of this Court in Atic Industries case the Judgment and order of the High Court is upheld and the appeal preferred by the Revenue dismissed.
[879E] Union of India vs Bombay Tyre International Ltd., ; ; A.K. Roy vs Voltas Ltd., ; and Union of India vs Atic Industries Ltd., ; , referred to.
