The Hotel Receipts Tax Act, 1980 came into force on 9.12.1980.
The Act imposed a special tax of 15% on the gross receipts of certain hotels, where the room charges for residential accommodation provided to any person during the previous year were Rs.75 or more per day per individual.
The levy commenced from the assessment year 1981 82 but was discontinued from 27.2.1982.
Charges received from persons within the purview of certain Vienna Conventions were exempt from the tax.
The constitutional validity of the said Act was chal lenged in these writ petitions, on grounds of lack of legis lative competence and of violation of Articles 14 and 19(1)(g).
It was contended on behalf of the petitioners that the reliance on Entry 82, List I in support of the tax was wholly misconceived and the tax in pith and substance was an impost under Entry 62, List II reserved to the States.
It was also contended that the Act is patently violative of Article 14 since the basis of classification has no nexus with the object of the tax, in that other hotels which have much higher gross receipts are left out.
It was contended by the petitioners that the law imposed unreasonable burden on their freedom of business and constituted a violation of Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution.
881 On behalf of the Respondent it was contended that the said tax fails under Entry 82, List I and the word 'income ' should not be read in a narrow and pedantic sense, but must be given its widest amplitude.
The challenge to the Act on the ground that it was violative of Articles 14 and 19(1)(g), was also resisted by the Respondent.
Dismissing the writ petitions, HELD: 1.1.
The word 'income ' is of elastic import.
In interpreting expressions in the legislative lists a very 'wide meaning should be given to the entries.
In understand ing the scope and amplitude of the expression 'income ' in Entry 82, List 1, any meaning which fails to accord with the plenitude of the concept of 'income ' in all its width and comprehensiveness should be avoided.
The cardinal rule of interpretation is that the entries in the legislative lists are not to be read in a narrow or restricted sense and that each general word should be held to extend to all ancillary or subsidiary matters which can fairly and reasonably be said to be comprehended in it.
The widest possible construc tion, according to the ordinary meaning of the words in the entry, must be put upon them.
Reference to legislative practice maybe admissible in reconciling two conflicting provisions in rival legislative lists.
In construing the words in a constitutional document confering legislative power the most liberal construction should be put upon the words so that the same may have effect in their widest amplitude.
The expression 'income ' in Entry 82, List I, cannot be subjected, by implication, to any restriction by the way in which that term might have been deployed in a fiscal statute.
A particular statute enacted under the Entry might, as a matter of fiscal policy, seek to tax some species of income alone.
The definitions would, therefore, be limited by the consideration of fiscal policy of a particular stat ute.
But the expression 'income ' in the legislative entry has always been understood in a wide and comprehensive connotation to embrace within it every kind of receipt or gain either of a capital nature or of a revenue nature.
The 'taxable receipts ' as defined in the statute cannot be held to fail outside such a 'wider connotation ' of 'income ' in the wider constitutional meaning and sense of the term as understood in Entry 82, List I. Navinchandra Mafatlal vs CIT, Bombay City, [1955] 1 SCR 829 and Bhagwandas Jain vs Union of India, AIR 1981 S.C. 907, relied on.
Navnitlal vs K.K. Sen, ; ; Governor Gener al in Council vs Province of Madras, and Kamakshya 882 Narain Singh vs CIT, , referred to.
It is now well settled that a very wide latitude is available to the legislature in the matter of classification of objects, for purposes of taxation.
It must needs to be so, having regard to the complexities involved in the formu lation of a taxation policy.
Taxation is not now a mere source of raising money to defray expenses of Government.
It is a recognised fiscal tool to achieve fiscal and social objectives.
The differentia of classification presupposes and proceeds on the premise that it distinguishes and keeps apart as a distinct class hotels, with higher economic status reflected in one of the indicia of such economic superiority.
The presumption of constitutionality has not been dislodged by the petitioners by demonstrating how even hotels, not brought into the class, have also equal or higher chargeable receipts and how the assumption of econom ic superiority of hotels to which the Act is applied is erroneous or irrelevant.
As regards reasonableness of classification and restriction on the petitioners ' freedom of trade and busi ness, similar contentions were raised in a connected case.
As has been held in that case and for the reasons given therein, the challenge to constitutionality of the provi sions of the Act, based on Articles 14 and 19(1)(g) is rejected.
Federation of Hotel & Restaurant Association of India etc.
vs Union of India, , followed.
