The respondents, who were non graduate Excise Preventive Officers in the Excise Department, had challenged in the High Court the amendment made to the original Special Rule 2 of the Special Rules for the Kerala Excise and Prohibition Subordinate Service whereby the ratio of 1:3 between gradu ates and non graduates was introduced in the matter of promotion from the category of Excise Preventive Officers to that of Second Grade Excise Inspectors.
They had contended that as graduates and non graduates were both regarded as eligible for promotion to the post of Second Grade Excise Inspectors.
no differentiation should have been made between them when prescribing a rule of quota for promotion.
The learned Single Judge allowed the writ and held that the amendment to Special Rule 2 was violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The State of Kerala and the private appellants, who were graduate Excise Preventive Officers and were holding the post of Second Grade Excise Inspectors.
filed appeals.
It was contended by them before the Division Bench that (i) the preference shown to gradu ates in the matter of promotion represented the recognition of graduation as a standard of merit which would promote administrative efficiency, and (ii) the amendment to Special Rule 2 was the result of a historical background which justified preferential treatment.
It was pointed out that as graduates and non graduates had all along been 202 treated differently in the matter of promotion to the post of Excise Inspector, the classification brought about by amending Special Rule 2 could not be regarded as unreasona ble.
The Division Bench held that the amendment to Special Rule 2 of the Kerala Excise & Prohibition Subordinate Serv ice Rules was ultra vires.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court HELD: (1) The history of the evolution of the Kerala Excise and Prohibition Subordinate Service has shown no uniformity either in approach or in object.
The history has varied with the circumstances prevailing before and after the reorganisation of the State.
The conditions pertaining to the service.
and respecting which the constitution of the service varied from time to time, showed fluctuations.
A consistent or coherent policy in favour of graduates was absent.
This is not a case where the cadre of officers was kept in two separate divisions.
It was a single cadre, and they were all equal members of it.
There is no evidence that graduate Preventive Officers enjoyed higher pay than non graduate Preventive Officers.[208E G] Mohammad Shujat All &.
vs Union of India ; and Col. A.S. Iyer vs V. Balasubramanyam, ; , distinguished.
(2) The Conditions of employment and the incidents of serv ice the instant case, recognise no distinction between graduate and non graduate Officers and for all material purposes they are effectively treated as equivalent.
The nature of the duties of Preventive Officers whether graduate or non graduate was identical, and both were put to field work.
Non graduate Preventive Officers were regarded as competent as graduate Preventive Officers.
There is no evidence of any special responsibility being vested in graduate Preventive Officers.
[208H; 209A, E] State of Jammu & Kashmir vs Triloki Nath Khosa, ; ; S.L. Sachdev vs Union of India, [1980] 1 S.C.R. 971, distinguished.
H.H. Shri Swamiji of Shri Admar Mutt vs Commissioner, Hindu Religious & Charitable Endowment Department, ; and Motor General Traders vs State of Andhra Pra desh; , , referred to.
(3) Ordinarily, it is for the Government to decide upon the considerations which, in its judgment, should underlie a policy to be 203 formulated by it.
But if the considerations are such as prove to be of no relevance to the object of the measure framed by the Government.
it is always open to the Court to strike down the differentiation as being violative of Arti cles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
[209D E] (4) The learned Single Judge as well as the Division Bench were right in holding that the prescription of a ratio dividing the quota of promotion between graduate Preventive Officers and non graduate Preventive Officers is invalid on the ground that it violates Articles 14 and 16 of the Con stitution.
[209B C]
