This appeal is directed against the order of the Gujarat High Court upholding the order dated the 15th November, 1977 passed by the State of Gujarat whereby the amounts of gratu ity and pension payable to the appellant on superannuation were reduced by 50 per cent.
The appellant was born on January 15, 1909 and after obtaining a Degree in Bachelor of Engineering (Civil) joined the service in the former State of Junagarh and as such was governed by the Junagadh State Pension and Parwashi Allow ances Rules of 1932 which were duly codified and published in the Junagadh State Account Code, State of Junagadh was integrated into the State of Saurashtra on 20.1.1949 and the services of the appellant were absorbed in the State of Saurashtra.
The conditions of service of the absorbed serv ants were duly protected and a proclamation providing a guarantee that the service conditions of absorbed servants could not be varied to their disadvantage was issued on 20.1.49 that being the date of merger of the State.
The State of Saurashtra made the Saurashtra Covenanting State Servants (Superannuation Age) Rules, 1955.
Rule 3(i) thereof provided that a Government servant shall, unless for special reasons otherwise directed by Government retire from service on his completing 55 years of age.
After the merger of the State of Saurashtra with State of Bombay the old Bombay Civil Service Rules, 1959 were made applicable to Saurashtra area and on 1.7.59 the Bombay Civil Service Rules, 1959 were promulgated.
As per clause (c)(2)(ii)(1) of Rule 161, Government servants in the Bombay Service of Engineers Class I were to retire on reaching the age of 55 years.
215 The appellant was compulsorily retired by the State on 12.10.1961 with effect from 12.1.1962 when he had completed the age of 53 years.
The appellant challenged that order by means of writ before the High Court and having remained unsuccessful he took up the matter before this Court and this Court by its judgment dated 9.4.69 allowed the appeal and declared that the appellant was entitled to remain in service until he attained the age of 55 years and that the impugned order compulsorily retiring him at the age of 53 years was invalid and ineffective.
In order to give effect to this Court 's order mentioned above, the Government of Gujarat on 4.8.69 intimated the appellant that he will be deemed to have remained in service uptil 14.1.64, when he attained the age of 55 years.
as he had attained that age prior to the decision of this Court.
In the meantime the age of superannuation of the employ ees of the State of Gujarat had been raised from 55 years to 58 years.
The appellant in order to take benefit of the change moved a writ petition before the High Court of Guja rat but remained unsuccessful.
Thereupon he filed a special leave petition before this Court.
This Court by its order dated 21.7.1975 declined to interfere.
Thus the appellant was not entitled to continue in service beyond 55 years of age.
It may be mentioned that prior to his compulsory retire ment there were three departmental inquiries pending against the appellant, on grounds of slackness in supervision.
overpayment to contractors and loss to the Government and payment in advance of the receipt of goods.
The first in quiry was initiated on 6.2.61.
second on 11.4.1963 and the third on 17.8.63.
These inquiries remained pending against the appellant till 1971.
The appellant filed yet another Special Civil Applica tion No. 504 of 1971 before the High Court praying for issue of a writ of mandamus directing the State to pay to the appellant all his outstanding salary.
allowances.
including due increments after the efficiency bar from 12.1.
1902 to 14.1.
1964 together with 6% interest.
An application for interim relief was also filed but was withdrawn later on the representation perhaps made by the State that the enquiries had become infructuous consequent to appellant 's retirement.
In the meanwhile the State of Gujarat issued a show cause notice dated 17.7.1971 to the appellant intimating him that the Government 216 considered his service record and did not find the same thoroughly satisfactory for the reasons mentioned in the said notice and accordingly the Government proposed to make 50% reduction both in the payment of Gratuity and Pension admissible to him.
The appellant submitted his reply and these proceedings due to laches on the part of the appellant went on for a considerable time and the Government passed the final order on 15.11.1977 reducing the Pension and Gratuity by 50 per cent.
To challenge this Order the appellant again filed Spe cial Civil Application before the High Court for quashing the order reducing his Pension and gratuity.
The High Court dismissed the application in limine on 8.3.1978 observing that in the present case the Government recorded reasons why it came to the conclusion that the petitioner 's Service was unsatisfactory and therefore, put a proportionate cut in the Pension.
as no case of discrimination was made out.
The appellant, preferred Letters Patent Appeal.
against the order passed by the Single Judge.
His contention before the Division Bench was that he continued to be governed by the Junagadh Rules in spite of the fact that the Bombay Rules were sought to be made applicable to him.
His alternative contention was that even if the Bombay Rules were to be made applicable, so far as the question of payment was concerned, inasmuch as they were not less advantageous on compulsory retirement.
proportionate pension was payable to the appel lant under the Bombay Rules of 1959.
The Division Bench held that under either set of Rules, it was open to the State Government to reduce the amount of pension payable to the petitioner as his service had not been found satisfactory by the State under Junagadh Rules as also under Bombay Civil Service Rules.
The High Court accordingly dismissed the Letter Patent Appeal.
Hence this appeal.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant that the High Court went wrong in upholding the impugned order reduc ing the amounts of pension & gratuity in exercise of its power under Rules 188 and 189 of the Bombay Rules, as it had already been ruled by this Court in its judgment in Civil Appeal No. 409 of 1966, that Bombay Rules could not be made applicable to the appellant.
It was urged that the appellant was not governed by Saurashtra Rules either, and it was asserted that either in the show cause notice or in the impugned order.
it Is nowhere specifically stated as to under what set of Rules, the impugned order Imposing a cut in the Pension or Gratuity has been passed.
A contention was also raised based on clauses 3, 13 & 15 of Rule 241 A of Junagadh Rules stating that they operate in different fields.
It was added that no inquiry as contemplated under Rule 189 had been made and admittedly the State had stated before the High Court that 217 the departmental inquiries had become infructuous consequent upon the retirement of the appellant.
According to the counsel for the State the appellant having been retired in pursuance of a judicial order passed by this Court, he cannot now be heard that his retirement at the age of 55 years should be construed as compulsory re tirement the superannuation age having been increased to 60 years under Junagadh Rules, that the retirement of the appellant is normal one; he was entitled to pension under Rule 241 of the Junagadh Rules and the State has passed the impugned order after complying with the provisions of Rules or gratuity be not reduced.
Dismissing the appeal.
this Court, HELD: Rules 188 and 189 have expressly preserved the State Government 's power to reduce or withhold pension by taking proceedings against a Government Servant even after his retirement.
[229H; 230A] In the instant case, in accordance with the procedure specified in Note I to Rule 33 of the Bombay Civil Services Conduct, Discipline and Appeal Rules a show cause notice had been issued to the appellant on 17.7.71 calling upon him to show cause within 30 days from the date of the receipt of the notice as to why the proposed reduction should not be made in the Pension and death cum retirement gratuity.
The appellant failed to avail that opportunity to disprove the allegations and satisfy his appointing authority that he rendered satisfactory service throughout.
It was in those circumstances the appointing authority thought fit to impose reduction on the Pension and gratuity in accordance with Rules 188 and 189 of the Bombay Rules on the ground that the appellant had not rendered satisfactory service.
The appel lant is not entitled to take advantage of clause (b)(ii) of the proviso to Rule 189 A since the proceedings had been instituted long before his retirement.
Further as per clause (a) of the said proviso the proceedings were already insti tuted long before his retirement.
Further as per clause (a) of the said proviso, the proceedings already instituted while the Government servant was in service could be contin ued and concluded even after his retirement.
Therefore the order dated 15.11.1977 reducing the pension and gratuity cannot be said to contravene the Bombay Rules.
[231A E] A combined reading of clauses 3, 13 and 15 of Rule 241 A of 218 Junagadh Rules shows that clause 3 is an exception to the general scheme laid down in clauses 13 and 15.
[228C] Bholanath J. Thakar vs State of Saurashtra, AIR 1954 SC 680; Dalip Singh vs State of Punjab, ; Moti Ram Deka etc.
vs General Manager NEF Railways, Maligaon, Pandu etc.
; , ; State of Maharashtra vs M.H. Mazumdar; , and M. Narasimhachar vs State of Mysore, [1960] 1 SCR 981, referred to.
State of U.P.v.
Brahm Datt Sharma, [1987] 2 SCC 179, fol lowed.
