Section 4(1) of the West Bengal Rural Employment.
and Production Act, 1976 provided for levy of rural employment cess on immovable properties.
Clause (aa) of section 4(2) as amended by section 7(b) of the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amend ment) Act, 1981 provided for levy of rural employment cess in respect of tea estates on the despatches of tea grown therein.
The first proviso thereto provided for exclusion of despatches of tea for sale made at recognised centres.
The second proviso thereto empowered the State Government 10 fix different rates of cess on despatches of different classes of tea.
Sub section (4) of the amended section 4 provided for exemption of certain categories of despatches from the liability to pay the whole or part of the cess or to reduce the rate of the cess payable thereon.
The first proviso to section 4(2)(aa) was.
however, omitted by the West Bengal Taxa tion Laws (Amendment) Act, 1982.
Article 304(b) of the Constitution permits the legislature of a State to impose reasonable restrictions on the freedom of trade, commerce or intercourse with or within that State provided the Bill or amendment for that purpose is introduced with the previous sanction of the President.
It was contended for the petitioners that the levy of the cess under section 4(1) read with section 4(2)(aa) of the Act, as amended in 1981 and 1982.
was violative of the freedom guaranteed by Article 301 of the Constitu 294 tion and also lay outside the legislative competence of the State Government.
Allowing the writ petitions.
HELD: 1.1 If the levy of a tax on goods has direct and immediate effect of impeding the movement of goods through out the territory of India, there is a violation of Article 301 of the Constitution.
If, however, the impact of the levy is indirect or remote, no valid complaint can be made in relation to Article 301.
There is also no violation of Article 301 if the case fails under Article 304(b) and its proviso.
[299F, 300D E] 1.2 Therefore, if the legislature of a State enacts a law which imposes such reasonable restrictions on the free dom of trade, commerce or intercourse with or within that State as may be required in the public interest and further that the Bill or amendment for the purposes of clause (b) has been introduced or moved in the Legislature of a State with the previous sanction of the President, such enactment will not offend Article 301.
The rural employment cess in the instant case was a tax.
[300F, 299F] Ariabari Tea Co., Ltd. vs The State of Assam & Ors. ; ; The Automobile Transport (Rajasthan) Ltd. vs The State of Rajasthan & Ors., [1963] 1 S.C.R. 491; Firm A.T.B. Mehtab Majid and Company vs State of Madras & Anr., [1963] Suppl.
2 S.C.R. 435; Kalyani Stores vs TIre State of Orissa & Ors., ; ; State of Mysore vs Ii.
Sanjeeviah, ; and Andhra Sugars Ltd. & Anr.
vs State of Andhra Pradesh & Ors.
, ; , referred to.
2.1 To determine whether the levy was in respect of tea estates, and, therefore, of land thus making an indirect impact or was a levy on despatches of tea thereby directly impeding movement of goods, the substance of the legislation must be ascertained from the relevant provisions of the statute.
[301B] 2.2 The subject of the levy, the nature of which de fines the quality of the levy, however, must not be confused with the measure of liability, that is to say, the quantum of the tax.
Furthermore, the standards laid down for measur ing the liability under the levy must bear a relationship to the nature of levy.
[301B C, 302D E] 295 Union of India & Ors.
vs Bombay Tyre International Ltd. 2.3 If the levy is regarded as one in respect of tea estates and the measure of the liability is defined in terms of the weight of tea despatched from the tea estate there must be a nexus between the two indicating a relationship between the levy on the tea estate and the criteria for determining the measure of liability.
If there is no nexus at all it can conceivably be inferred that the levy is not what it purports to be.
[301H, 302A] 2.4 In the instant case, the nexus with the tea estate is lost altogether in the provisions for exemption or reduc tion of the levy and throughout the nexus is confined to despatches of tea rather than related to the tea estate.
There is nothing to suggest that a particular tea estate produces only one class of tea, and when reference is made to a certain class of tea the reference identifies a certain class of tea estates.
[302E F] 2.5 While there must always be a nexus between the subject of the levy and the measure of the levy that nexus extends into different dimensions.
Variations considered appropriate for the purpose of determining the measure must correspond to variations in the subject of the levy.
If the measure of levy is to vary with the despatches of different classes of tea, there must be something in the class of tea concerned which points to a reason located in the particular tea estate or classes of tea estates which are made the subject of the levy.
So also, if the measure varies with the centre of sale of tea, the variation must relate to a reason to be found in the nature of the tea estate concerned.
Ultimately, the benefit of exemption or reduced levy must be related to the need for exempting the tea estate from that levy or relieving it from part of the normal levy.
[302F, 303A] 2.6 In the instant case the relevant statutory provi sions, including section 4(2)(aa) and section 4(4), indicate no such relationship or nexus between the tea estate and the varied treatment accorded in respect of the despatch of different kinds of tea.
The levy of rural employment cess was, there fore, a levy in respect of despatches of tea and not in respect of tea estates.
It must, thus, be regarded as con stituting a direct and immediate restriction on the flow of trade and commerce in tea throughout the territory of India.
[303B C] 2.7 Such a levy could avoid the injunction declared in Article 301 296 only if it satisfied the provisions of Article 304(b) and the proviso thereto.
The amendments made to the West Bengal Act in 1981 and 1982 had not been moved in the Legislature of the State with the previous sanction of the President.
The provisions brought into the Act by the said amendments were, therefore, unconstitutional and void and could not be given effect to.
[303C D, F, G] 3.
Under the Parliament had assumed con trol of the tea industry including the tea trade and control of tea prices.
Under section 25 of that Act a cess on tea pro duced in India had also been imposed.
The State legislation imposing a cess on despatches of tea was, therefore, also void for want of legislative competence as it pertained to a covered field.
[304B]
