Shri Anantharamakrishnan, a reputed industrialist died in Madras on April 18, 1964 intestate leaving behind his widow, Valli, two sons, Sivasailam and Krishnamoorthy and two daughters, Kalyani and Seetha.
Some time thereafter, his son Sivasailam, being an accountable person rendered the Estate Duty account.
All other heirs i.e. his mother, broth er and sisters, who were also accountable persons, being the heirs of the deceased wrote to the Assistant Controller of Estate Duty that as accountable persons they agreed to abide by the accounts rendered by Sivasailam and whatever explana tion is furnished by him would be binding on them.
M/s. Amalgamations Private Ltd. is a company which held shares in most of the companies including Simpson and Compa ny Ltd. in which company the deceased Anantharamakrishnan too held shares.
By a letter of April 27, 1965, Amalgama tions informed the assessing authority that the deceased had transferred property to it in the form of shares and that at the time of his death, he had controlling interest in the Company.
On September 13, 1965, the Assessing Authority wrote to Amalgamations that the deceased having transferred 80,377 shares of Simpson, as such Amalgamations was a con trolled company within the meaning of section 17 of the Estate Duty Act and thus the said company had to be regarded as one of the accountable persons in respect of the estate of the deceased.
Amalgamations was therefore required to submit an account of the estate.
Accordingly Amalgamations flied a return and no objection thereto was taken by any of the heirs.
Treating Amalgamations as a controlled company and in view of the fact that the deceased had control over its affairs, the assessing authority valued the shares as per the provisions of Rule 15 of the Rule framed by 234 the Board under Section 30(1)(e) of the Act.
The principal value of the shares was determined of Rs.2,12,29,998 and the duty was computed at Rs.1,67,74,697.58, out of which provi sional duty in the sum of Rs.65,50,542.73 had been paid.
The assessment order was addressed both to Amalgamations as also to Shri Sivasailam as accountable persons.
No appeal was preferred against the said assessment by the accountable persons.
K.S. Sundaram husband of the appellant as her agent and constituted power of attorney, on June 11, 1974 wrote to the Assistant Controller seeking certain clarifications.
The Assistant Controller referring to the agreement between the heirs of the deceased Anantharamakrishnan that they were bound by the accounts rendered or explanation given by Sivasailam, replied that, since all subsequent proceedings had been completed after discussion with Sivasailam and Amalgamations, the assessment had become final and that it was not possible to enter into any further discussion.
On 2nd January, 1975, appellant 's husband as agent filed an application under Sec.
61 of the Estate Duty Act, and it was contended by him that the assessment order was vitiated by several errors inasmuch as Rule 15 only prescribed the method of valuation of shares and debentures of the con trolled company and the rule was appendage to Sections 36 & 37 of the Act.
It was urged that the assessment order did not show any details and therefore a rectification order should be made indicating the exact amount included under Section 17(1) of the Act as the property passing on the death of the deceased.
He stated that he required this information to know the precise amount which his principal had to pay to Amalgamations, as the assessment order did not, in terms, indicate apportionment of the duty, for which reason rectification was required.
On January 25, 1975, the Assistant Controller declared by an order that he was unable to find any mistake in the assessment order which called for any rectification and therefore he declined to act under Sec.
61 of the Act.
Order passed by the Assistant Controller was challenged in the High Court by means of Writ Petitions.
The High Court dismissed the Writ Petitions holding that there was no error apparent on the record and therefore there was no reason for invoking Sec.
61 of the Act.
The High Court took the view that proceedings reflected a private dispute between the appellant and other members of the family.
Hence this appeal by the appellant.
235 Dismissing the appeal the Court, HELD: All the heirs other than Sivasailam had agreed that as accountable persons they would abide by the accounts rendered by Sivasailam and any information furnished by him with regard to the estate duty matter would be binding on them.
The appellant cannot be heard now to dispute the quantum of liability and the basis on which the liability was computed.
Nor is it open to her to contend that it is not Amalgamations which is liable to pay the duty, but the duty is payable by the heirs of the deceased.
The assessment had become final and no appeal against it had been attempt ed.
[239C D] The appellant acquiesced wholly and completely in the assessment to estate duty being made on Amalgamations.
[239E] The assessment was completed in 1970 and the entire estate duty has now been paid up.
It was only after the entire estate duty was paid that the appellant filed the application for rectification on January 2, 1975.
[239E F] The question whether the assessment was justified on Amalgamations or should it have been taken against the heirs of the deceased stands concluded now and upon all the facts and circumstances of the case it was not permissible for the appellant to have recourse to Sec.
61 of the Act in order to re open the case, as there was no mistake apparent on the record.
[240D E] That this litigation was woven around a private dispute among the family members.
[239G] Hari Vishnu Kamath vs Syed Ahmed Ishaque and Others, ; , 1123; Hind Trading Company vs Union of India & Anr., ; ; M.K. Venkatachalam, Income tax Officer and Another vs Bombay Dyeing and Manufacturing Co. Ltd., ; , 149 50; Commissioner of Income tax, Madras vs Mr. P. Firm Muar, ; ,822 and Thungabhadra Industries Ltd. vs The Government of Andhra Pradesh, ; , 180, referred to.
