Upon the sale of certain village land the appellants filed a suit for pre emption, and a compromise decree was passed allowing pre emption provided the appellants deposited the purchase amountbvacertaindate.
The appellants Posited the amount and got Possession of the land.
Before the appellants deposited 879 the amount, the respondents who were pre emptors of an equal degree, filed a suit to enforce their right of pre emption.
The appellants contended that the land could be divided between two equal pre emptors only when both the suits were pending before the court at the time of the passing of the decree, and that the appellants having obtained the decree and paid the amount got substituted in place of the vendees and the respondents could succeed only by establishing a superior right of pre emption.
The respondents countered that they had a statutory right under section 17 Of the Punjab Pre emption Act to share the land with the appellants and that the appellants, having been substituted in place of the vendees Pendente lite, were hit by the doctrine of lis pendens and could not claim a higher right than the vendees: Held, that the respondents ' suit could not succeed as they (lid not have a superior right of pre emption over the appellants who had become substituted in place of the vendees upon payment of the purchase money under their decree.
A pre emptor has two rights: (i) inherent or primary right to the offer of a thing about to be sold and (2) a secondary or remedial right to follow the thing sold.
The secondary right is simply a right of substitution in place of the original vendee.
Dhani Nath vs Budhu, 136 P. R. 1894 at P. 511 and Gobind Dayal vs Inayatullah, All. 775, followed.
In a suit for pre emption the plaintiff must show that his right is superior to that of the vendee and that it subsists at the time he exercises his right.
This right is lost if before he exercises it another person with an equal or superior right has been substituted in place of the original vendee.
The Punjab Preemption Act defines the right of pre emption and provides a procedure for enforcing it.
It does not enlarge the content of this right nor does it introduce any change in the incidents of the right.
Section 28 Of the Act does not preclude the Court from giving a decree for pre emption in a case where the suits are not joined together and one of the suits has been decreed separately.
The doctrine of lis pendens applies only to a transfer Pendente lite, but it cannot affect a pre existing right.
If the sale is a transfer in recognition of a preexisting and subsisting right, it would not be affected by the doctrine, as the transfer does not create a new right Pendente lite but if the preexisting right became unenforceable by reason of limitation or otherwise, the transfer, though ostensibly made in recognition of such a right, in fact creates only a new right pendente lite.
The appellants ' right of pre emption was subsisting and was not barred by limitation at the time of the transfer in their favour as they had filed a suit and had obtained a decree and the coercive 112 880 process was still in operation.
Consequently the appellants were not hit by the doctrine of lis pentlens and they acquired an indefeasible right to the land when they took possession of it after depositing the purchase money in court.
Mool Chand vs Ganga jal, Lah.
258, Mt. Sant Kaor vs Teja Singh, I.L.R. , Mohammad Sadhiq vs Ghasi Ram, A.I.R. 1946 Lah.
322 and Wazir Ali Khan vs Zahir Ahmad Khan, A.I.R. 1949 East Punj.
193, approved.
Kundan Lal vs Amar Singh, A.I.R. 1927 All.
664, disapproved.
The right of pre emption is effectively exercised or enforced only when the pre emptor has been substituted for the vendee.
A conditional decree whereunder the pre emptor gets possession only if he pays a specified amount within a prescribed time and which also provides for the dismissal of the suit in case the condition is not fulfilled, cannot bring about the substitution of the decree holder for the vendee before the condition is fulfilled.
Such substitution takes effect only when the decree holder fulfils the condition and takes possession of the land.
Deonandan prashad Singh vs Ramdhari Choudhyi, (1916) L. R. 44 I. A. 80, followed.
