These three Writ Petitions have been filed by three different Private Limited Companies and their share holders challenging the vires of the Jammu & Kashmir Extraction of Resin Act (7 of 1986).
The circumstances that led to the filing of these Writ Petitions may be stated thus: The State of Jammu & Kashmir with a view to industria lise the under developed State formulated schemes and invit ed outsiders to set up industries in the State and as a stimulus the Government offered land and other facilities.
The Petitioner Companies, in response to the said invitation went to the State of Jammu & Kashmir and negotiated the arrangements, as a result of which each Company had obtained a right to collect resin gum to process the same for indus trial purposes.
The Petitioner Company in Writ Petition No. 751 of 1986 had obtained under Government order dated 27.4.79 allotment of 10 to 12 lacs of blazes annually for extraction of resin from the forests in Poonch and Rambam Divisions for a period of 10 years.
Government order granting rights had been made in favour of the Petitioner Company in W.P. No. 794 of 1986.
The Petitioner Company in W.P. No. 798 of 1986 was a proces sor only and had undertaken to work as a tapper.
The orders passed in favour of these Companies referred to above were challenged before this Court as being violative of articles 14 and 19 of the Constitution on the ground that grant of forest rights to the Petitioners were arbitrary, mala fide and not in public interest.
It was contended that State largesse had been created in favour of the Petitioners at the cost of State Exchequer and the grant created monopoly.
This Court dismissed the Writ Petitions holding that there was no substance 258 in any of the contentions advanced by the Petitioners.
Kasturi Lal Lakshmi Reddy vs State of Jammu & Kashmir & Anr.
, The order made in favour of the Petitioner in W.P. No. 794 of 1986 and incorporated in the agreement dated 6.11.1978 was also challenged but this Court rejected the Petition.
Brij Bhushan & Ors.
vs State of Jammu & Kashmir & Ors.
, While the Petitioners were carrying on with the business contracted for, Governor 's Act of 1986 came into force.
The provisions of the said Act particularly sections 3, 4 and 5 have been impugned in these Petitions.
It is contended on behalf of the Petitioners that Gov ernment orders and contracts under which they have got the right to exploit or utilize the particular forest product amounts to "property" and they are entitled to protection thereof against expropriation and in case no compensation was provided, the provisions of the Act are hit for contra vening the fundamental right guaranteed by article 19(1)(g) which confers upon them the right to carry on any occupa tion, trade or business.
On the other hand the case put forward by the State is that the benefits and privileges conferred on the three Petitioners either under contract or under Government orders did not constitute property and by the provisions of the Act no transfer of such property has taken place.
Allowing the Writ Petition, this Court, HELD: The statutory scheme of Jammu & Kashmir Extraction of Resin Act, 1986 is to extinguish private rights both in respect of Government owned trees as also trees in private ownership and to vest those1 rights in the State Government or the Government Company.
[271A B] The Executive grant or the contract created interest in the Petitioners and there is no room to doubt that by such process in favour of the Petitioners property right had been created.
The interests which are in dispute before this Court do constitute property entitled to protection under article 19(1)(1) and are covered by article 31(2).
[267G; 268A B] 259 Ramana Dayaram Shetty vs The International Airport Authority of India & Ors., ; and Kasturi Lal Lakshmi Reddy vs State of Jammu & Kashmir & Anr., ; The ownership vested in the private persons, by opera tion of section 3 of the Act, the right to appropriate the usu fruct of the trees is taken away from the private owner and is vested in the State.
Sub article
(2A) of article 31, therefore, does not apply.
Consequently, sub article
(2) applies and compensation, therefore, was payable before the property could be taken over by the State.
Provisions of sections 3 and 4 of the Act are ultra vires of the Constitution and since these provisions contain the soul of the Act, without them the Act cannot operate, the entire Act has to suffer.
[271C D; 272B C] Subodh Gopal Bose 's case ; ; Dwarkadas Shrinivas of Bombay vs The Sholapur Spinning & Weaving Co. Ltd. & Ors., ; ; R.C. Cooper vs Union of India, ; ; Madan Mohan Pathak vs Union of India & Ors., ; and Tara Prasad Singh vs Union of India & Ors., ; , referred to.
