Lions Club.
Pottery Town, Khurja (U.P.) actuated by the desire to provide relief and facilities of opthalmic surgi cal services particularly to the persons residing in rural areas, suffering from eye troubles, arranged and opened an "Eye Camp" at Khurja after obtaining necessary permission from the Chief Medical Officer, Buland Sahar.
In this con nection, the Club invited Dr. R.M. Sahay of the Sahay Hospi tal at Jaipur and team of Doctors to do the surgical job.
The Club published propaganda literature with attractive slogans, e.g., 'Get operated and go home ', 'No restriction on food '. 'No bed rest ' and 'No stitches to be removed '.
In response thereto substantial number of patients visited the Camp.
Dr. Sahay arrived in Khurja on 21.4.1986 and examined about 122 patients.
One hundred and eight patients were operated upon, 88 of them for cataracts.
Dr. Sahay left Khurja that evening for Moradabad where he was schedule to conduct another similar Eye Camp.
It is unfortunate that the project which was opened for the good of the suffering people, proved a disastrous medi cal mis adventure, as the operated eyes of the patients were irreversibly damaged, owing to a post operative infection of the intra Ocular Cavities of the operated eyes.
and the eyes were completely damaged.
Similar mishap happened at Morada bad also though on a lesser scale, the number of affected persons being 15 only.
To remove the infection that caused this damage.
Doctors gave the necessary treatment but to no avail.
242 In order to find out the causes of this mishap, i.e. the source of infection.
the Government appointed Inquiry Committee.
reports whereof were placed before the Court for favour of perusal.
Two social activists, Shri A.S. Mittal and Shri Om Prakash Tapas have filed these Writ Petition in the form of a Public Interest Litigation.
The Petitioners have made serious allegations about the very bona fides behind the sponsoring of iII fated 'eye camp ' and have alleged monetary gains on the part of the sponsors but the Court did not find any material to substan tiate the said allegation.
The petitioners prayed that (i) the victims of this medical mishap be given expert rehabili tatory treatment and appropriate compensation, (ii) that the Government do conduct a thorough investigation as to the conditions which rendered a medical misadventure of such a scale possible and evolve proper guidelines which will prevent recurrence of such tragedies and.
(iii) that appro priate legal action be instituted against Dr. Sahay and his team and other Government officials concerned.
Pursuant to the reports of the Inquiries conducted into the causes of mishap.
penal action had been initiated against Dr. Sahay & others.
The Court considered the following aspects of these proceed ings; (a) Whether the Guidelines prescribing norms and condi tions for the conduct of "Eye Camps" are sufflciently com prehensive to ensure the protection of the patients who are generally drawn from the poor and less affluent section of the society or whether any further guidelines are required to be evolved.
(b) What relief, monetary or otherwise should be afford ed to those who have suffered? Disposing of the Writ Petition, this Court, HELD: Modern techniques in opthalmic surgery render cataract a minor operation.
A cataract affected eye when properly operated Is expected to become normal.
The opera tion Is meant to remove an obstruction to vision and resto ration of normal eyesight, This Implies that the eyes of patients selected for operation has the potential for resto ration of sight.
In the Instant case, they have become totally blind In the operated eyes, [247H; 248A B] 243 A mistake by a medical practitioner which no reasonably competent and careful practitioner would have committed is a negligent one.
[250D] One of the questions that might arise in the appropriate forum is whether the Doctors judged by the circumstances in which they were working made a mistake and if so whether such a mistake was negligent.
[250D E] Law recognises the dangers which are inherent in surgi cal operation.
Mistakes will occur on occasions despite the exercise of reasonable skill and care.
[250G] Jackson and Powell on Professional Negligence, 1982 Edn.
The necessity of the highest standards of aseptic ster ile conditions at places where opthalmic surgery or any surgery is conducted cannot be over emphasised.
It is not merely on the formulation.
of the theoretical standards but really on the professional commitments with which the pre scriptions are implemented that the ultimate result rests.
[254B C] The factual foundations requisite for establishing the proximate causal connection for the injury has yet to be established conclusively.
On humanitarian consideration, the victims should be afforded some monetary relief by the State Government.
In addition to the sum of Rs.5,000 already paid by way of interim relief, the State Government shall pay a further sum of Rs. 12,500 to each of the victims.
The vic tims entitled to receive the additional payment shall be the same as those who had the benefit of the interim relief of Rs.5,000.
[255D F] That the Revised Guidelines dated 9.2.1988 with the suggested modifications can be held to be satisfactory.
[254F] The Court abstained from pronouncing on the question of culpable rashness or negligence on the part of the Doctors or others against whom separate action is either pending or contemplated.
[246G] Dr. Laxman Balakrishna Joshi vs Trimbak Bapu Godbols, ; , Para 11 and Street on Torts, [1983] (7th Edn.), referred to
