The appellant who migrated from Pakistan in 1947 was allotted certain lands.
On 29.12.1962 allotment was made quasi permanent in character, but on 29.4.1963, the lands were transferred to her permanently, by a Sanad issued under Rule 68 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation & Rehabilita tion) Rules, 1954.
The respondent like the appellant had also migrated from Pakistan and on 29.12.1959 lands were also allotted to him but no entry could be made in the revenue record.
On 29.6.1960 during consolidation proceedings no tuk was however made for the respondent.
He filed objections which were rejected.
He unsuccessfully appealed to the Appellate Authority The Settlement Officer (Appeals).
In the second appeal, the Assistant Director Consolidation of Holdings remanded the matter to the Special Settlement Officer with the observation that because of the mistake of the Consoli dation authorities there had been over allotment, and the authorities 384 will see that the first allottee is given the land first.
As nothing happened for about three years, the respond ent filed a writ petition in 1966 and the High Court direct ed implementation of the order of the Assistant Director Consolidation.
The appellant was not a party to either of these proceedings.
Pursuant to the order of the High Court the Consolida tion Officer started enforcing the observations of the Assistant Director, found that the land allotted to various persons was more than the land available for allotment, and in order to resolve this difficulty evolved a via media procedure.
lie deprived some of the allottees of the land allotted to them, and the appellant was one such person.
He allotted all such lands to the respondent.
This was the commencement of the instant litigation.
Against the aforesaid order of the Consolidation Officer the appellant preferred an appeal before the Assistant Director which was dismissed and the writ petition against the said order was rejected by the High Court in limine with only one word, namely, 'dismissed '.
The appellant having no other alternative instituted a suit contending that it was impermissible for the Consolida tion Officer to adjust the lands, or take away any part of it which became her absolute property by virtue of the Sanad granted on 29.4.1963.
The trial Court dismissed the suit.
The Additional District Judge confirmed that judgment, and the second appeal to the High Court was also dismissed.
In the appeal to this Court on the question; whether the lands given to the appellants by permanent Sanad could be deprived of in consolidation proceedings without giving them adequate alternate lauds.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: 1.
The authorities under the Consolidation Act have no jurisdiction or power to modify or cancel the grante of proprietary rights granted in the Sanad under section 10.
[392G] 2.
From section 10 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation & Rehabilitation) Act 1954, it is clear that the parties who were put in possession under initial allotment would contin ue to remain in possession even after its acquisition by the Central Government.
But it is open to the Central Government for the purposes of payment of compensation to 385 such displaced person, transfer to him such property on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed.
Apparently this refers to a permanent transfer in lieu of compensation.
[390D E] 3.
Transfer of property referred to in section 30 of the East Punjab Holdings (Consolidation and Prevention of Fragmenta tion) Act, 1948 is either by a landowner or by a tenant, and it has no reference, and indeed cannot have a reference to transfer of Sanad under section 10 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation & Rehabilitation) Act of 1954.
The conferment of rights in lieu of compensation under section 10 stands on a different footing which could not be contemplated within the language of section 30 of the Consolidation Act.
[391F] 4.
When a writ petition after contest is disposed of on merits by a speaking order, the question decided in that petition would operate as res judicata, but not a dismissal in limine or dismissal on the ground of laches, or avail ability of alternative remedy.
[392E F] Workmen of Cochin Port Trust vs Board of Trustees of the Cochin Port Trust & Another, ; , referred to.
