The Bhopal Gas Leak Tragedy that occurred at midnight of 2nd December, 1984, by the escape of deadly chemical fumes from the appellant 's factory was a great industrial disaster and it took an immediate toil of 2600 human lives and left tens of thousands of innocent citizens of Bhopal physically affected in various ways.
As per the figures furnished by the Union of India in its amended plaint a total number of 2,660 persons suffered agonising and excruciating deaths between 30,000 to 40,000 persons sustained serious injuries as a result of the said disaster.
Legal proceedings for the recovery of compensation for the victims were initiated against the multi national compa ny first in the U.S. Courts and later in Distt.
Court at Bhopal in Suit No. 113 of 1986.
The present appeals concern with the order dated 4th April, 1988 passed by the Madhya Pradesh High Court whereby it modified the interlocutory order dated 17.12.1987 made by the Distt.
Judge and granted interim compensation of Rs.250 crores.
Both the Union of India and the Union Carbide Corporation have appealed to this Court against that order.
The Court by its order dated the 14th February, 1989 made in these appeals directed that there shall be an over all settlement of the claims in the suit for 470 million U.S. Dollars and termination of all civil and criminal proceedings.
On May 4, 1989 the Court pronounced its reasons for its aforesaid order dated 14.2.89thus: The Statement of the reasons is not made with any sense of finality as to the infallibility of the decision; but with an open mind to be able to appreciate any tenable and compelling legal or factual infirmities that may be brought out, calling for remedy in review under Article 137 of the Constitution.
[132C D] 129 The basic consideration motivating the conclusion of the settlement was the compelling need for urgent relief.
Con siderations of excellence and niceties of legal principles were greatly over shadowed by the pressing problems of very survival for a large number of victims.
[133A, C] The instant case is one where damages are sought on behalf of the victims of a mass disaster, and having regard to the complexities and the legal question involved, any person with an unbiased vision would not miss the time consuming prospect for the course of the litigation in its sojourn through the various courts, both in India and later in United States.
This Court considered it a compelling duty.
both judicial and humane, to secure immediate relief to the victims.
In doing so, the Court did not enter upon any forbidden ground.
What this Court did was in continua tion of what had already been initiated.
[133E F, H; 134A] The range of choice for the Court in regard to the figures was, therefore, between the maximum of 426 million U.S. Dollars offered by Shri Nariman and the minimum of 500 million U.S. Dollars suggested by the Attorney General.
[134F G] Having regard to all the circumstances including the prospect of delays inherent in the judicial process in India and thereafter in the matter of domestication of the decree in the United States for the purpose of execution, the Court directed that 470 million U.S. Dollars which upon immediate payment and with interest over a reasonable period, pending actual distribution amongst the claimants, would aggregate very nearly to 500 million U.S. Dollars or its rupee equiva lent of approximately Rs.750 crores which the Attorney General had suggested.
be made the basis of the Settlement.
[134G H; 135A B] The Settlement proposals were considered on the premises that the Government had the exclusive statutory authority to represent and act on behalf of the victims and neither counsel had any reservation as to this.
The order was also made on the premises that the Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster (Registration and Processing of Claims) Act 1985 was a valid law.
[135B C] There might be different opinions on the interpretation of laws or on questions of policy or even on what may be considered wise or unwise; but when one speaks of justice and truth, these words mean the same thing to all men whose judgment is uncommitted.
[140B C] The compulsions of the need for immediate relief to tens of 130 thousands of suffering victims could not wait till these questions, vital though they be, are resolved in due course of judicial proceedings.
[142D E] A settlement has been recorded upon material and in circumstances which persuaded the Court that it was a just settlement.
This is not to say that this Court will shut out any important material and any compelling circumstances which might impose a duty on it to exercise the powers of review.
Like all other human institutions, this Court is human and fallible.
What appears to the Court to be just and reasonable in that particular context and setting, need not necessarily appear to others in the same day.
Which view is right, in the ultimate analysis, is to be judged by what it does to relieve the undeserved suffering of thousands of innocent citizens of this country.
[142F G] Decisions of courts cannot be reacted or altered or determined by agitational pressures.
If a decision is wrong, the process of correction must be in a manner recognised by law.
All of those who invoke the corrective processes in accordance with law shall be heard and the court will do what the law and the course of justice requires.
The matter concerns the interests of a large number of victims of a mass disaster.
The Court directed the settlement with the earnest hope that it would do hem good and bring them imme diate relief, for, tomorrow might be too ate for many of them.
But the case equally concerns the credibility of, and the public confidence in, the judicial process.
[143B, D E] Those who trust this Court will not have cause for despair.
[143F] M.C. Mehta vs Union of India, AIR 1987 SC 1(186; Theo ries of Compensation, R.E. Goodin: Oxford journal of Legal Studies, 1989 p.57 and Wallace Mendelson.
Supreme Court Statecraft The Rule of Law and men, referred to.
