The appellant had taken the premises on rent from the respondent landlord for running a cycle and rickshaw repair ing shop.
In the rent note there was no stipulation that the appellant would not do any business in the shop except the cycle or rickshaw repairs.
Along with the repair business the appellant temporarily carried on sale of televisions also in the premises.
The landlord filed an application for eviction under section 13(2)(ii)(b) of the East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act, 1949 alleging that the tenant had put the premises to different use.
The Rent Controller rejected the application by holding that the temporary sale of televisions did not constitute user for a purpose other than that for which the premises was leased.
On an appeal filed by the landlord the appellate authority granted eviction by holding that the statutory condition was satisfied.
The appeal filed by the tenant against the decision of the appellate authority was dis missed by the High Court.
Hence this appeal by the tenant.
Allowing the appeal and setting aside the order of eviction, HELD: Letting of a premises can broadly be for residen tial or commercial purpose.
The restriction which is statu torily provided in section 13(2)(ii)(b) of the Act is obvi ously one to protect the interests of the landlord and is intended to restrict the use of landlord 's premises taken by the tenant under lease.
It is akin to the provision con tained in section 108(o) of the dealing with the obliga 424 tions of a lessee.
A house let for residential purpose would not be available for being used as a shop even without structural alteration.
The concept of injury to the premises which forms the foundation of clause (o) is the main basis for providing clause (b) in section 13(2)(ii) of the Act as a ground for the tenant 's eviction.
[426H, 427A B] The landlord parts with possession of the premises by giving a lease of the property to the tenant for a consider ation.
Ordinarily, as long as the interest of the landlord is not prejudiced, a small change in the user would not be actionable.
In the instant case, the premises was let out for running of a repair shop.
Along with the repair busi ness, sale of televisions was temporarily carried on.
This did not constitute a change of user within the meaning of section 13(2)(ii)(b) of the Act so as to give a cause of action to the landlord to seek eviction of the tenant.
[427E, F] Mohan Lal vs Jai Bhagwan, ; , applied.
Des Raj vs Sham Lal, A.I.R. 1980 P & H 229, held inapplica ble.
Moti Ram vs State of Mahdya Pradesh, A.I.R. 1978 S.C. 1594; Maharaj Krishan Kesar vs Milkha Singh, Civil Appeal No. 1086 of 1964 decided on November 10, 1965 (S.C.); Dup port Steel Ltd. vs Sirs, ; U.P. Naing vs Burma Oil Co., A.I.R. 1929 P.C. 108; Raghavan Pillai vs Sainaba Beevi, [1977] Kerala L.T. 417 and Dattatraya vs Gulab Rao, , referred to.
