On June 19, 1962, the Government of Maharashtra issued a draft notification under Section 3(3) of the Bombay Provin cial Municipal Corporation Act, 1949 and thereby proposed the formation of "Kalyan Corporation", by merging of munici pal areas of Kalyan, Ambarnath, Domoivali and Ulhasnagar.
The proposal was resented to by the residents of the said areas and many objections and representations by persons, companies and authorities including the municipal bodies of Ambarnath, and Ulhasnagar were made.
So far as Ulhasnagar was concerned it was stated that Sindhi Community after partition has settled at Ulhasnagar and to keep the identity of Sindhies distinct, they had formed All India Sindhi Panchayat Federation.
The said Federation challenged the draft notification by a Writ Petition before the High Court.
On an assurance being given by the Government before the High Court that the representation made by the Federation would be duly considered, the Writ Petition was allowed to be withdrawn.
As per the assurance, the Federation was given personal hearing on their representation.
Only the Federa tion was heard, none of the other representationists was afforded any hearing though their objections were duly considered.
After considering the matter in the manner aforesaid, the Government decided to exclude Ulhasnagar from the proposed Corporation and accordingly a notification under section 3(2) of the Act was issued.
The Corporation was thus Constituted excluding Ulhasnagar.
Save as aforesaid no other alteration was made in the notification.
406 The Residents of Ambarnath municipal area were not satisfied.
They moved the High Court challenging the validi ty of the notification issued under section 3(2) of the Act.
Their main contention was that there has been hostile dis crimination in the matter as only the Federation was heard and none else.
They also asserted that the establishment of a Corporation without Ulhasnagar, keeping in view the geo graphical contiguity was unintelligibe and incomprehensible.
According to them it was arbitrary and opposed to the object of the Act.
Federation and others interested in the proceedings were allowed to intervene and they supported the stand taken by the Government which was the main respondent.
The State pleaded that the formation of Corporation was an extension of the legislative process and as such section 3 was a piece of conditional legislation, and the notifica tion issued in exercise of that power cannot be said to have been vitiated by non compliance with the principles of natural justice.
According to the State it was not obligato ry for the State to issue a preliminary notification over again before the final notification excluding Ulhasnagar was issued.
The High Court took the view that the decision to ex clude Ulhasnagar was taken by the State abruptly and in an irrational manner and that the decision was against the object of the Act.
On the legality of the procedure followed by the Government, the High Court held that once a decision was taken, it was obligatory on the part of the Government to reconsider the proposal as a whole so for as the rest of the areas were concerned.
The High Court without quashing the impugned notifica tion directed the State Government to reconsider the propos al under subsection (3) of the Act either to exclude or include any area and accordingly make amends in the notifi cation.
It was also directed that the Petitioners and the Federation be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard before any final decision in the matter is taken.
Against the aforesaid decision of the High Court only interveners have preferred these appeals.
The State and Kelyan City Corporation have not appealed.
Counsel for the appellants reiterated the stand taken by the Government before the High Court and urged that the State had a wide discretion in the selection of areas for constituting the Corporation and the Court cannot interfere with such discretion.
State 's power to consti 407 tute a corporation is legislative in character and rules of natural justice have no application.
It was urged that the state had complied with all the statutory requirements and it was not necessary for the state to go through that exer cise again.
It was further urged that the decision of this Court has been disregarded and a binding decision of a co ordinate bench of the same Court in Village Panchayat Chi kalthane & Anr.
vs State of Maharashtra has been ignored.
Allowing the appeals, this Court, HELD: In our system of judicial review which is a part of our constitutional scheme, this Court holds it to be the duty of Judges of superior Courts and tribunals to make the law more predictable.
The question of law directly arising in the case should not be dealt with apologetic approaches.
The law must be made more effective as a guide to behaviour.
It must be determined with reasons which carry convictions within the Courts, professions and public otherwise the lawyers would be in a predicament and would not know how to advise their clients.
Subordinate Courts would find them selves in an embarrassing position to choose between the conflicting opinions.
The general public will be in a dilem ma to obey or not to obey such law and it ultimately fails into disrepute.
[417D F] It is needless to state that the judgment of superior Courts and Tribunals must be written only after deep travail and positive vein.
One should never let a decision go unless he is absolutely sure it is right.
The law must be made clear, certain and consistent.
But ceritude is not the test of certainty and consistency does not mean that there should be no word of new content.
The principle of law may develop side by side with new content but not in consistencies.
There could be waxing and waning the principle depending upon the pragmatic needs and moral yearings.
Such develop ment of law particularly is inevitable in our developing country.
[417G H; 418A B] The rules of natural justice are not applicable to legislative activity plenary or subordinate.
The procedural requirement of hearing is not implied in the exercise of legislative powers unless hearing was expressly prescribed.
[419F] The High Court, therefore, was in error in directing the Government to hear the parties who are not entitled to be heard in law; section 3 of the Bombay Provincial Municipal Corporation Act 1949.
[419F G] The Government in the exercise of its powers under section 3 is 408 not subject to the Rules of natural justice any more than is legislature itself.
[419F] Mahadeolal Kanodia vs The Administrator General of West Bengal, A.I.R. (1960) S.C.p. 926; Sri Bhagwan and Anr.
vs Ram Chand and Anr.
, ; at 1773; Union of India vs Raghbir Singh, ; ; The Nature of Judicial Process by Benjamin N. Cardozo; Bates vs Lord Heilsham of St. Marylebone and Others, 1, W.L.R. 1373; Tulsipur Sugar Co. Ltd. vs The Notified Area Committee, Tulsipur, ; and Baldev Singh vs State of Himachal Pradesh, , referred to.
