Under a Hire Purchase agreement entered into with the appellant, a firm registered under the Partnership Act, 1932, carrying on the business of hire purchase of automo bile vehicles, Respondent No. 1 hired the truck owned by the appellant, under the agreement Respondent No. 1 agreed to pay initial hire charge of Rs. I0,000 and certain monthly hire charges on due dates.
On the failure of Respondent No. 1 to pay the monthly hire charges, after paying the initial hire charges and charges for one month, the appellant filed a suit against Respondent No. 1 and his guarantor on July 22, 1968, for the recovery of a sum of Rs. 13,422.23 for breach of terms and conditions of the agreement.
There was a change in the constitution of the firm on July 1, 1967 with the retirement of two of the then part ners, and addition of one new partner as also admission of two minors to the benefits of the Partnership.
This change was notified to the Registrar of Firms on August 28, 1968 and was duly taken note of in the Register of Firms subse quently.
Thus, no notice of the change had been given to the Registrar of firms.
The Trial Judge dismissed the suit as not maintainable in view of Section 69(2) of the Partnership Act, 1932.
Upholding this decision, the High Court dismissed the appeal of the firm.
Hence, the appeal, by special leave, by the appellant firm.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court.
HELD: Sub section (2) of Section 69 of the Partnership Act lays down that no suit to enforce a right arising from a contract shall be instituted in any Court by or on behalf of a firm against any third party unless the firm is registered and the persons suing were or had been shown in the Register of Firms as partners in the firm.
[487C] In the present case, the suit tided by the appellant firm is clearly 485 hit by the provisions of sub section (2) of Section 69 of the said Partnership Act, as on the date when the suit was filed, two of the partners shown as partners as per the relevant entries in the Register of Firms were not, in fact, partners, one new partner had come in and two minors had been admitted to the benefit of the partnership firm regard ing which change no notice was given to the Registrar of Firms.
Thus, the persons suing, namely, the current partners as on the date of the suit were not shown as partners in the Register of Firms.
Therefore, the suit was not maintainable in view of the provisions of sub section (2) of section 69 of the Partnership Act, 1932.
[487D E] Although the plaint was amended on a later date, that cannot save the suit.
