According to the Regulation 16.14 of the Jammu & Kashmir Industries Employees Service Rules & Regulations the serv ices of the permanent employee could be terminated if the post is abolished or he is declared medically unfit after giving three month 's notice or pay in lieu thereof and in case of temporary employee one month 's notice or pay in 429 lieu thereof.
This regulation was amended on April 20, 1983 by adding two more grounds namely, if the employee remains on an unauthorised absence or if he takes part in active politics, in such cases the services shall be terminated if he fails to explain his conduct satisfactorily within 15 days from the date of issue of notice and the management shall be empowered to take a decision without resorting to further enquiries.
Pyare Lal Sharma was employed as a Chemical Engineer by the Jammu & Kashmir Industries Ltd. hereinafter called 'Company '.
The Company issued a show cause notice on 21.4.83 in terms of the added clauses for his unauthorised absence from duty.
As no reply was submitted, the M.D. terminated his services by an order dated 14.6.1983.
Sharma challenged the order of termination by way of a writ petition before the J & K High Court.
Learned Single Judge allowed the Writ Petition on three grounds namely, violation of Rules of Natural Justice, that the Board of Directors having appoint ed Sharma, the M.D. who is subordinate authority could not terminate his services and that the regulation 16.14 was arbitrary and violative of article 14 of the Constitution of India.
The Letters Patent Bench of the High Court dismissed the appeal of the Company but denied backwages to Sharma.
Aggrieved by that order both the Company as well as Sharma came up in appeals before this court.
While allowing the appeal of Sharma partially and dismissing the appeal of the Company, this Court, HELD: That Regulation 16.14 was not arbitrary.
The provision of show cause notice is a sufficient safeguard against arbitrary action.
Under grounds (a) & (b) of the Regulations three months notice or pay in lieu thereof is required.
Regarding grounds (c) & (d) the regulations pro vide for 15 days notice to explain the conduct satisfactori ly and there is no requirement of any other notice or pay in lieu thereof.
[437C D] There is no provision in the Articles of Association or the regulations of the company giving same protection to the employees of the company as is given to the civil servants under article 311(1) of the Constitution of India.
An employee of the Company cannot, therefore, claim that he cannot be dismissed or removed by an authority subordinate to that by which he was appointed.
Since on the date of termination of Sharma 's services the M.D. had the powers of the appointing authority he was legally competent to terminate Sharma 's services.
[437F G] 430 Grounds (c) & (d) in regulation 16.14 exclusively and individually are sufficient to terminate the services of an employee.
Once it is established that an employee remains on an unauthorised absence from duty the only action which can be taken is termination of his services.
Similar is the case when an employee takes part in active politics.
The finding in the termination order cannot be sustained because no notice in this respect was given to Sharma but the order of termination can be supported on the ground of his remaining on unauthorised absence from duty.
[437H; 438A B] State of Orissa vs Vidyabhushan Mohapatra, [1963] 1 Supp.
SCR 648 and Railway Board vs Niranjan Singh, , relied upon.
It is a basic principle of natural justice that no one can be penalised on the ground of a conduct which was not penal on the day it was committed.
The date of show cause notice being April 21, 1983 the unauthorised absence from duty which has been taken into consideration is from Decem ber 20, 1982 to April 20, 1983.
Whole of this period being prior to the date of amendment of regulation 16.14, the same could not be made as a ground for proceeding under ground (c) of Regulation 16.14.
The Notice served on the appellant was thus illegal and as a consequence the order of termina tion can not be sustained and has to be set aside.
[438F G] When the termination order is set aside by the courts normally the employee becomes entitled to backwages and all other consequential benefits.
In view of the facts and circumstances of this case the court ordered that only sixty percent of the backwages be paid to Sharma.
Moneys already received by Sharma under orders of either this Court or High Court shall be adjusted and the balance paid to him.
If the money already paid to Sharma is more than what has been ordered to be paid now then there shall be no recovery from him.
[439A C]
