The respondents who were lorry drivers, cleaners and coolie were carrying fertiliser bags in trucks from Indore (Madhya Pradesh) to Maharashtra.
They were intercepted at a Sales Tax Barrier near the border of Maharashtra State.
The documents seized from the lorry drivers contained the in voices and other records, but did not include permits issued under the Fertilisers (Movement Control) Order, 1973.
Conse quently, they were prosecuted under the Fertiliser (Movement Control) Order, 1973 read with sections 3 and 7 of the for exporting fertilisers from Madhya Pradesh to Maharashtra without a valid permit.
The Trial Court acquitted the respondents holding that: (i) the prosecution had failed to prove mens rea on the part of the respondents, and (ii) the act of transportation of the fertiliser bags in trucks by the respondents constituted merely preparation and not attempted commission of the offence.
Appeals were tided by the State against the acquittal under section 378(3) of the Cr.
P.C. 1973 but the High Court declined to grant leave.
Hence these appeals by the State.
Allowing the appeals, 550 HELD: 1.
The words used in section 7(1) are "if any person contravenes whether knowingly, intentionally or otherwise any Order made under section 3".
The section is comprehensively worded so that it takes within its fold not only contraventions done knowingly or intentionally but even otherwise, i.e., done unintentionally.
The element of mens rea in export of fertiliser bags without a valid permit is therefore not a necessary ingredient for convicting a person for contravention of an order made under section 3 if the factum of export or attempt to export is established by the evidence on record.
[554C D] 1.1.
The crucial words "whether knowingly, intentionally or otherwise" were inserted in section 7 in order to prevent persons committing offences under the Act escaping punish ment on the plea that the offences were not committed delib erately.
The amendment was brought about in 1967 in order to achieve the avowed purpose and object of the legislation.
[557C] 1.2.
Therefore, the Trial Court and the High Court committed an error in taking the view that the respondents in each of the appeals were not liable for conviction for contravention of the Fertiliser (Movement Control) Order, 1973 read with sections 3 and 7 of the because the prosecution had failed to prove mens rea on their part in transporting fertiliser bags from Madhya Pradesh to Maharashtra.
[557E] Swastik Oil Industries vs State, [1978] 19 Guj.
Law Reporter 1117; approved.
Nathu Lal vs State of Madhya Pradesh, A.I.R. 1966 S.C. 43, referred to. 2.
In the commission of an offence there are four stages viz. intention, preparation, attempt and execution.
The first two stages would not attract culpability but the third and fourth stages would certainly attract culpability.
[557G] 2.1.
The respondents in each case were actually caught in the act of exporting fertiliser bags without a permit therefore from Madhya Pradesh to Maharashtra.
If the inter ception had not taken place at the Sales Tax Barrier the export would have become a completed act and the fertiliser bags would have been successfully taken to Maharashtra State in contravention of the Fertiliser (Movement Control) Order, 1973.
It was not therefore a case of mere preparation viz. the resport 551 dents trying to procure fertiliser bags from someone or trying to engage a lorry for taking those bags to Maharash tra.
They were cases where the bags had been procured and were being taken in the lorries under cover of sales in voices for being delivered to the consignees and the lorries would have entered the Maharashtra border but for their interception at the Sales Tax barrier.
Surely, no one can say that the respondents were taking the lorries with ferti liser bags in them for innocuous purposes or for more thrill or amusement and that they would have stopped well ahead of the border and taken back the lorries and the fertiliser bags to the initial place of despatch or to some other place in Madhya Pradesh State itself.
The acts of transportation of the fertiliser hags in the trucks in question by the respondents were therefore clearly cases of attempted unlaw ful export of the fertiliser bags and not cases of mere preparation alone.
[557H, 558A B C D] [Section 7 of the was again amended in 1974 and the words "whether knowingly, intentionally or otherwise" were deleted and a new provision in section 10 of the Act was added.
The effect of this amendment is that a presumption of guilty mind on the part of the accused in respect of offences under the Act, includ ing Sec. 7, would arise and it would be open to the accused to rebut the same.]
