The appellant plaintiff sued for declaration that inclu sion of the disputed property in the land records of the respondent Gaon Sabha on the basis that it had vested under the provisions of the Delhi Land and Reforms Act, 1954 was wrong, void and without jurisdiction, and for a further declaration that she was entitled to bhumidhari rights in the property under section 11 of the Act.
In paragraph 4(d) of the plaint, it was pleaded that the suit land was not 'land ' and was not banjar (waste) and did not come within section 154(1)(i) to (vii) of the Act and, therefore, there was no vesting in law.
The proprietor, according to the plaintiff, grew fuel wood and partly used the property as ghatwars and used the stones for building purposes.
The suit was decreed in the trial court, and the said decree was affirmed in appeal, but at the instance of the respondent defendant No. Gaon Sabha, the High Court in second appeal reversed the decrees of the courts below and dismissed the suit.
The High Court found that the property came within the definition of 'land ' and, therefore, was subjected to the legal incidence of the statutory provisions.
In regard to the relief of bhumidhari rights, it held that the plain tiffs ' suit was not maintainable.
Dismissing the appeal this Court, HELD: The definition of 'land ' in section 3(13) of the Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954 is wide.
A land on which fuel wood is grown would 592 constitute groveland.
In view of the inclusive definition of 'land ', the finding of the High Court that the dispute property constituted land cannot be said to be wrong.
[594C D] Nemi Chand vs Financial Commissioner, Punjab & Anr., ; Rajinder Prashad & Anr.
vs The Punjab State & Ors., AIR 1966 (53) Punjab 185; Munshi Ram & Ors.
vs Financial Commissioner, Haryana & Ors.
, ; ; Haiti vs Sunder Singh, ; referred to.
It is impermissible to rely on definitions containing meanings different from the definition under the Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954 for a proper resolution of the dispute.
[595A] The High Court therefore came to the correct conclu sion when it held that the disputed property Constituted 'land ' under the Act, and became liable to vest in the Gaon Sabha under the Act.
[595B]
