In 1959 the landlord filed an application under section 3(1) of the U.P. (Temporary) Control of Rent & Eviction Act, 1947 for the eviction of the tenant from the shop on the ground that the landlord wanted to demolish the shops in the building including the shop of the appellant/ tenant and in their place wanted to construct new shops and residential portion on the first floor.
In the application the landlord gave an assurance (undertaking) that he would give new shop to the tenant/appellant after the new shops were construct ed, at a reasonable rent.
This application was contested by the appellant/tenant alongwith other tenants.
The applica tion was made to the District Magistrate u/s 2(d) of the U .P.
Rent Act, 1947.
The Rent Controller and Eviction Officer who acted as District Magistrate under the said Act granted the permission and rejected the contentions of the tenants.
Against this decision all the tenants filed revi sion petitions which were dismissed by the commissioner Rohilkhand Division, Bareilly.
The tenants preferred further revision to the State Govt.
u/s 7 F of the said Act.
In disposing of the revision petitions the Special Secretary noted that the landlord had given an undertaking to the tenants that they would he given newly constructed shops on standard rent and that during the period taken for construc tion alternative accommodation would he given to them.
Thereafter the landlord filed a suit on the basis of the, permission for eviction of the tenants.
During the pendency of the suit the U.P. Urban Buildings (Regulation of Letting, Rent and Eviction) Act, 1972 came into force.
The U.P. Rent Act of 1947 was repealed and some amendments were made to section 43(2)(rr) in the U.P. Rent Act of 1972 whereby the landlords who had on the basis of permission granted to them u/s 3(1) of the U.P. Rent Act of 1947 instituted suits for the eviction of the tenants were given the right to apply for eviction of their tenants straightaway if the permission granted to them under section 3(1) of the U.P. Rent Act of 1947 had been obtained on any ground 561 specified in sub section (1) or subsection (2) of section 21 of the U.P. Rent Act of 1972.
Taking advantage of these provisions, the landlord filed an application for an order of eviction u/s 43(2)(rr) of the U.P. Rent Act 1972.
The Prescribed Authority dismissed the application of the land lord on the ground that the permission obtained by him was conditional permission and it would come into operation when the landlord had complied with the offer made by him and until then he could not claim eviction of the tenant u/s 43(2)(rr) of the U.P. Rent Act, 1972.
Against that order the landlord preferred a writ petition in the High Court of Allahabad.
The High Court took the view that the Prescribed Authority was bound to allow the application of the landlord u/s 43(2) (rr) and order eviction.
Against this judgment the tenant appellant came up by way of special leave.
In setting aside the order of the High Court, this Court in allowing the appeal, HELD: One of the circumstances which constituted the basis for the grant of the permission to tile the suit for eviction was that the landlord gave an assurance cum under taking to give the newly constructed shops to the tenants sought to he evicted including the tenant in the appeal and that the landlord also gave a similar assurance to give alternative accommodation to the tenant during the period which would he taken in completing the new construction.
Nothing is found in the provisions of Section 43(2)(rr) of the U.P. Rent Act of 1972 which would enable the landlord to evade his duty to comply with the undertaking cum assurances given by him.
The undertaking cum assurances given by the landlord in the instant case certainly formed part of the basis on which the permission to file suit for eviction was unconditionally given to him.
It is but fair that the Court should see to it that the tenant is not deprived of the benefit of the undertakings cum assurances.
[566G, 567F] Asa Singh vs
B.D. Sanwal & Ors., AIR 1969 All.
474 and Bansilal Sahu vs The Prescribed Authority & Anr., AIR 1980 All. 194, referred to.
