The appellant, a transporter, brought some goods to Delhi without paying terminal tax.
Under Section 464 of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957, a penalty of ten times the amount of terminal tax was demanded from the appellant.
The demand was challenged before the High Court by way of a Writ Petition.
The High Court considered the question as to whether the penalty imposed under section 464 of the Act could be imposed by the taxing authority without a prosecution having been filed before a competent magis trate, and answered it in the affirmative.
This appeal by special leave is against the High Court 's judgment.
On behalf of the appellant, it was contended that Sec tion 464 of the Act gives a wide discretion to impose penal ty upto ten times of the tax payable and as such is a judi cial function which cannot be left to the executive authori ty and hence the authority who imposed the penalty was not competent to do so.
The respondents contended that Section 464 does not pertain to any offence and penalty levied under this section is not punishment; that section 463 provides for punishment after conviction and so, for imposition of penalty under Section 464, the prosecution of the appellant before a competent magistrate is not at all necessary.
It was also contended that Section 59 confers very wide powers on the Commissioner and he is also authorised to delegate the functions, and under such delegated authority the penalty has been imposed under Section 464.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: 1. Penalty under Section 464 of the Delhi Munici pal Corporation Act, 1957 could be imposed without a convic tion by a 651 criminal court.
The different phraseology used in sections 463 and 464 clearly go to show that where the ingredients of Section 463 are not in doubt it is open to the corporation authorities to launch a prosecution against the person who introduces the goods without payment of terminal tax and in this event the person, on conviction only, can be punished and the punishment is also imprisonment, but the highest limit of fine is limited to Rs.1,000 whereas under Section 464 neither there is any reference to a conviction nor any reference to the Court of a Magistrate and the only penalty provided is monetary which may extend to ten times.
It is therefore clear that Section 463 refers to a criminal of fence if committed, could only be tried by a competent criminal court and on conviction alone the punishment could be imposed but Section 464 is in the nature of a revenue provision where non payment of tax could be remedied by imposition of penalty and the limit of penalty has been prescribed at ten times of the tax which is payable.
In view of different language used in the two sections and also the language used in the marginal note it is clear that the two cannot be said to be same or similar.
It is no doubt true that as regards the offences, a specific provision has been made in Section 469 for appoint ment of a Municipal Magistrate but in respect of penalties there is no specific provision authorising any officer or authority to exercise jurisdiction under the section where for evasion of tax, penalty could be levied, like Section 464, but it could not be doubted that Section 59 gives a very wide power to the Municipal Commissioner either to exercise these powers himself or to delegate.
It is not in dispute that in exercise of powers under Section 59 the Municipal Commissioner had the authority, and exercising the powers under Section 491 of the Act, by notification dated September 17, 1973 he delegated the functions under Section 464 to the taxing authorities.
Hence the taxing authorities were competent under the scheme of this Act to impose the penalty to the tune of ten times of the tax which is pay able.
[655G H; 656A, B]
