Bansi Lal Sharma, respondent in one appeal, was appoint ed as Male Nurse in 1941 and was officiating as Sister Tutor in March 1966 when the Rajasthan Medical and Health subordi nate Service Rules, 1965 came into force.
Shanti Lal Jain, respondent in the second appeal, was appointed as Compounder Grade I in the year 1959 and was holding the post of Sister Tutor in March 1966.
In their separate petitions fried in the Rajasthan High Court, the respondents challenged the creation of two separate cadres Nursing Cadre and Compound ers Cadre under the Rules as arbitrary and as such viola tive of Articles 14, 15 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
It was pleaded that hitherto there was combined channel of promotion for compounders and nurses but the Rules had arbitrarily deprived Compounders Grade I of their right to promotion to higher posts of Assistant Nursing Superintend ent and Nursing Superintendent Grade II/Grade I.
It was further urged that recruitment to the Nursing Cadre was confined to females alone which resulted in discrimination on the ground of sex.
The writ petitions were dismissed by the learned Single Judges who held that creation of two separate cadres was not arbitrary, did not infringe the equality clause, and was not discriminatory on the ground of sex. 'The Division Bench, on appeal, upheld the findings of the learned Single Judges on Article 5 but set aside their judgments and found that there was no justification for creating separate cadres and deny ing channel of promotion to Compounders Grade I to the higher posts in the Nursing Cadre.
The Division Bench ac cordingly held the Rules to be arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Allowing the appeals filed by the State, this Court, 671 HELD: 1.
Prior to 1966 there was no statutory Rules pertaining to the service.
No executive order creating cadres in the department or a joint seniority list indicat ing common cadre for nurses and compounders have been pro duced.
[673F] 2.
Even assuming that prior to coming into force of the Rules there was a combined cadre of nurses and compounders, Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution do not forbid the State Government from creating new cadres, bifurcating one cadre into two or more, or uniting two or more cadres into one.
The creation of cadres in the service of the State is a matter which has to be left entirely to the State Govern ment.
[673G H] Reserve Bank of India vs N.C. Paliwal & Ors., ; ; referred to.
A bare reading of the Rules show that the composition of the two cadres including designations, qualifications and methods of appointment to various posts, is entirely differ ent.
This Court does not agree with the High Court that Nurses and Compounders belong to one class and as such must be encadred together.
[678B] 4.
It is not for the High Court to assume the extent of maternity cases which are treated in the hospitals or to lay down that compounders though not qualified to treat maternity cases must be equated with nurses because they can treat other type of cases.
[678G] 5.
By amending the Rules in 1978 an opening has been provided for compounders Grade II to enter the Nursing cadre by competing with the staff nurses for promotion to the post of Sister/Nursing Tutor.
The Compounders Grade II have thus been provided with two channels of promotion, one in their own cadre and the other to the Nursing Cadre.
Thus the grievance of the Compounders that they were denied channel of promotion to the higher posts in Nursing Cadre has also been removed.
[679B C]
