Section 13(1)(a) of the West Bengal Premises Tenancy Act, 1956 provides for recovery of possession where the tenant or any person residing in the premises let to the tenant without the previous consent in writing of the land lord transfers, assigns or subsets in whole or in part the premises held by him.
Section 14 forbids the tenant from sub letting the premises without the previous consent in writing of the landlord.
Sub section (1) of section 16 requires the tenant and every sub tenant to whom the premises are sub.let to give notice to the landlord of the creation of the sub tenancy within one month from the date of such sub letting and also to notify the termination of such sub tenancy within one month of such termination.
Sub section (2) prescribes such a notice in respect of sub tenancies created with or without the consent of the landlord before the commencement of the Act, within the time specified therein.
Where there is no such consent in writing from the landlord, sub section (3) provides for cessation of tenant 's interest in the portion sub let and the sub tenant becoming a tenant directly under the landlord in certain circum stances.
Clause 6 of the lease deed creating tenancy for a period of 'three years from 1st May 1948 permitted the respondent tenant to sub.let any portion of the demised premises which was left unused or surplus.
After expiry of the lease period in 1951, the said tenant continued in possession, and by holding over became a month to month tenant.
It had, howev er, created certain sub tenancies within the period covered by the lease and before the Act came into force.
A suit for its eviction brought by the landlord in 1960 was dismissed by the trial court.
The landlord filed a fresh suit in 1972 on the Found that the tenant had created sub.tenancies in the premises after the dismissal of the earlier suit.
The tenant advanced the plea of res judicata and con 632 633 tended that it was and is entitled to grant sub tenancies under cl. 6 of the lease deed which continues to bind the parties.
Rejecting the case of res judicata, the trial court held that a number of sub tenants who were in possession of the premises at the time of the earlier suit had been sub stituted later by another set of sub tenants after the coming into force of the Act, and that the entire premises was let out to sub tenants which was not consistent with the terms of the permission as mentioned in cl. 6.
Allowing the appeal, the High Court, however, held that the suit was barred by the rule of res judicata.
In this appeal by special leave, it was contended for the appellants that since a large portion of the disputed property was sublet to fresh sub tenants after the institu tion of the earlier suit of 1960 there was no scope for applying the doctrine of res judicata, and that the consent contemplated by the 1956 Act has to be specific in regard to each sublease, which requirement was not satisfied by the general permission granted by cl. 6 of the lease deed.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: 1.
In the earlier suit all the sub lessees were inducted during the period the lease was operative, i.e., much before the Tenancy Act was passed.
The question of violation of the provisions of the said Act, therefore, did not arise there.
The earlier judgment cannot thus operate by way of res judicata.
[637A] 2.1 The provisions of section 16 of the Act clearly indicate that permission to the tenant to sub let in general terms cannot be deemed to be consent for the purposes of sections 13 and 14.
[637F] 2.2.
The Act contemplates that while one sub tenant may be evicted another may continue in the premises as a tenant directly under the landlord, depending on the circumstances.
Therefore, previous consent in writing of the landlord with respect to each sub letting separately is essential.
Since in the instant case consent of the appellant landlord was not obtained specifically for each of the sub tenancies, the respondent tenant must be held to have violated section 14.
The appellants are thus entitled to succeed under section 13(1)(a).
[638F, H] M/s Shalimar Tar Products Ltd. vs H.C. Sharma & Ors., ; , referred to.
It was not the case of the respondent that any of the sub 634 tenants had sent any notice to the landlord as prescribed by the Act.
Therefore, the eviction suit cannot fail on the ground of non impleading of the sub tenants.
However, the sub tenants cannot be bound by that finding in the suit.
They will be entitled to be heard if and when the landlord seeks their eviction.
[639B]
