The State Government sanctioned development plan in respect of and situated in Sholapur under the Maharashtra Regional and Town planning Act, 1966.
Though the sanction covered the land of petitioners also, some of their land was reserved for public purpose under the said Act.
Thereafter, the Urban Land (Ceiling & Regulation) Act, 1976 came into force and proceedings for acquisition of land in excess of the ceiling limit were initiated.
Against such proceedings, the petitioners have approached this Court by way of writ petitions.
The petitioners contended that the Urban Ceiling Act would not apply to the lands reserved for a public purpose under the Town Planning Act and that the proceedings should be quashed.
They also challenged the constitutional validity of sections 10, 11 and 23 of the Ceiling Act, as being ultra vires of Articles 14 and 31, and prayed for a Writ of Manda mus restraining the State Government from acquiring the petitioners ' land under the Ceiling Act.
Dismissing the writ petitions, HELD: 1.1.
The Act has been placed in the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution at SI.
No. 132 and consequently comes under the protective umbrella of Article 31 B of the Consti tution.
[620A B] 1.2.
It is not the case of the petitioners that the provisions of the 617 Ceiling Act in any way damage of destroy a basic or essen tial feature of the Constitution or its bask structure.
Also there is no statutory provision either in the Ceiling Act or in the Town Planning Act, which would exclude the operation of the Ceiling Act with regard to lands reserved for public purpose under the Town Planning Act.
[620C E] Maharao Sahib Shri Bheem Singh vs Union of India and others, [1985] Suppl.
1 S.C.R. 862; applied.
The primary object and the purpose of the Ceiling Act is to provide for the imposition of a ceiling an vacant land in urban agglomerations, for the acquisition of such land in excess of the ceiling limit to regulate the con struction of building on such land and for matters connected therewith, with a view to preventing the concentration of urban land in the hands of a few persons and speculation and profiteering therein, to bring about an equitable distribu tion of land is urban agglomerations to subserve the common good, in furtherance of the Directive Principles of Articles 39(b) and (c).
The land to the extent which falls within the ceiling area stands in a class different from the land which is in excess of the ceiling area and is liable to be de clared surplus to give effect to the purpose and object of the Ceiling Act.
[620G H; In the instant case, the purpose and object of the Ceiling Act is entirely different from just acquiring a bit of land here or a bit of land there for some public purpose.
The Ceiling Act is a self contained Code having an overrid ing provision in Section 42.
Once the land fails beyond the ceiling limit prescribed by the Ceiling Act and is capable of being acquired as surplus land under Section 10 thereof it would he wholly inappropriate to acquire the same very Land or a portion thereof under the Town planning Act inas much as it would inter alia apparently result in misuse of public funds by granting higher compensation when the pur pose of acquisition can he achieved on payment of the lesser amount of compensation prescribed in Section 11 of the Ceiling Act.
[624A, B, F & G] Union of India etc.
vs Valluri Basavaiah Chowdhary etc.
; , ; State of Gujarat & Others vs Parshottamdas Ramdas Patel & Others, ; ; relied on.
Nagar Improvement Dust & Another vs Vithal Rao & Oth ers; , , distinguished.
Prakash Chand Amichand Shah vs State of Gujarat and others; , ; referred to.
618 3.
The alleged discrimination that if the purpose of reservation is construction of buildings, the land will be given compensation under the Ceiling Act whereas when the purpose of reservation is parks, gardens etc.
compensation would be given under the Town Planning, Act, does not exist.
The provisions of the Ceiling Act are applicable with regard to vacant land and if for same fortuitous circumstances a particular category of land does not fall within the defini tion of vacant land the provisions with regard to the vacant land can obviously not be applied to such land.
The lands falling under the two categories constitute separate classes and cannot consequently be treated alike.
[624B, C & D]
