One Chain Sukh died issueless.
His interest as the occupancy tenant of the land in dispute therefore devolved upon his widow, Smt.
Sukhia, in accordance with section 35 of the United Provinces Tenancy Act, 1939.
A couple of years after the death of Chain Sukh, Sukhia remarried Gopal Singh in "Karwa" form according to the caste custom, prior to the date of vesting, i.e., 1.7.1952, under the U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950.
A son Chartder Pal, respondent No. 4, was born to Sukhia.
Sukhia continued to remain in possession of this holding till her death in 1965.
The appellant is the sister of deceased Chain Sukh.
A dispute arose between the appellant and Chander Pal during the consolidation proceedings under the U.P. Consolidation of Land Holdings Act, each of them claiming interest to the exclusion of the other.
The Consolidation Officer held that Smt.
Sukhia on her remarriage lost her interest in the holding and by virtue of section 171 of the Zamindari Aboli tion Act, Smt.
Mainia being the sister of Chain Sukh inher ited the interest in the holding.
The Settlement Officer, Consolidation, dismissed Chander Pal 's appeal.
The Settle ment Officer, however, held that a legal marriage of Smt.
Sukhia with Gopal Singh was not proved; that Smt.
Sukhia cultivated the land throughout as the widow of Chain Sukh, and that, after her death the appellant inherrited it.
In revision, the Deputy Director Consolidation held that Smt.
Sukhia 's "Karva" with Gopal Singh not being proved to he a legal marriage, the succession would he governed on the basis that she was Chain Sukh 's widow at the time of her death.
Chander Pal filed a writ under Article 226, and the High Court 686 while allowing the petition held that the consolidation authorities erred in deciding the matter on the basis that Smt.
Sukhia 's marriage with Gopal Singh was not proved to he legal.
The High Court observed that in view of appellant Smt.
Mainia 's clear admission that Smt.
Sukhia was remarried to Gopal Singh in "Karwa" form, and that they had been living together as husband and wife for several years, no further proof of legality of the remarriage was necessary.
The High Court further held that the effect of the provi sions of the Tenancy Act was that her interest in the hold ing after her remarriage was in her own right and not as widow of Chain Sukh, and therefore, by virtue of section 180(2) of the Tenancy Act she acquired an independent right which did not devolve upon her death to Chain Sukh 's sister, but to her son Chander Pal born to her after her remarriage with Gopal Singh.
Before this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that Smt.
Sukhia 's interest in the holding contin ued till her death only as widow of Chain Sukh since her initial interest in the holding was by devolution as widow of Chain Sukh under section 35 of the Tenancy Act; that Smt.
Sukhia 's remarriage with Gopal Singh was not proved; that since the possession of Smt.
Sukhia was recorded throughout as widow of Chain Sukh, there was no occasion for attracting the provisions contained in section 180(2) of the Tenancy Act; and that on her death in 1965 the succession was gov erned by section 172 read with section 171 of the Zamindari Abolition Act.
In reply, it was contended that remarriage of Smt.
Sukhia prior to the date of vesting, i.e., 1.7. 1952, under the U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950 being the admitted case of the appellant, Smt.
Mainia, herself, the appellant could not now he permitted to take contrary stand; that the possession of Smt.
Sukhia in the holding at the time .of her death not being as a widow of Chain Sikh but in her own right, the succession was governed not by section 172 but by section 174 of the Zamindari Abolition Act under which Chartder Pal inherited Smt.
Suk hia 's interest in the holding as her son.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: (1) The case of the appellant before the Consoli dation Officer was put up on the basis of Smt.
Sukhia being remarried to Gopal Singh and Chander Pal being the son born to Smt.
Sukhia after her remarriage could not claim to be a legal heir of Smt.
Sukhia 's first husband Chain Sukh.
The High Court was, therefore.
right in taking the view that the matter must he decided on that basis.
[691F G] (2) The mere fact of Smt.
Sukhia 's name being shown in the 687 family register as widow of Chain Sukh till the time of her death in 1965 did not have the effect of continuing Smt.
Sukhia 's status as widow of Chain Sukh even after she had become the wife of Gopal Singh as a result of her remar riage.
[691H 692A] BadriPrasad vs Deputy Director Consolidation, A.I.R. 1978S.C. 1557, referred to.
(3) Section 36 of the Tenancy Act, which clearly pro vides for succession to a female tenant holding an interest inherited as a widow in the case of her marriage thereafter, or, in other words, remarriage, was attracted in the present case.
[692F] (4) According to section 36, on the remarriage of Smt.
Sukhia with Gopal Singh the interest devolved in accordance with the order of succession laid down in section 35 on the heirs of the last male descendant, that is, Chain Sukh but appellant Smt.
Mainia, married sister of Chain Sukh, not being one of the heirs of Chain Sukh according to section 35 of the Tenancy Act, the interest did not devolve on Smt.
Mainia.
(5) The continued possession of Smt.
Sukhia after her remarriage attracted section 180 of the Tenancy Act.
[693D] (6) Admittedly, no suit as contemplated by sub section (2) of section 180 of the Tenancy Act was brought at any time against Smt.
Sukhia and the prescribed period of limi tation for such a suit expired prior to her death in 1965.
Sub section (2) of section 180 of the Tenancy Act was, therefore, clearly attracted and Smt.
Sukhia had become a hereditary tenant by virtue of that section with the further consequences flowing therefrom.
[694A B] (7) The legal consequence flowing from sections 36 and 180 of the U.P. Tenancy Act is enough to indicate that the character of widow 's possession after her remarriage altered by operation of law and any further animus is not required to bring about the effect of the statutory provisions which ensue on expiry of the limitation prescribed for a suit to evict her.
[694G] Ram Jivan vs Smt.
Phoola (dead) by Lrs., ; Jagarnath and others vs Deputy Director of Consolida tion Gorakhpur and others, [1976] AWC 654 and Chhiddoo Singh vs Deputy Director of Consolidation & others.
, [1976] AWC 809, distinguished.
