Respondent Town Improvement Trust Bhopal acquired 152 acres of land in village Jamalpura under section 68 of the Madhya Pradesh Town Improvement Trust Act within the munici pal limits of Bhopal.
That land included 12.62 acres of land belonging to the appellant on which stood a house, a well and some trees.
The appellant being not satisfied with the amount of compensation offered to him by the Trust, made a Reference to the Compensation Tribunal.
The Tribunal awarded compensation at the rate of Rs.6,000 per acre for the land, Rs.5,000 for the building, Rs.3,000 for the well and Rs.815 for the trees.
Thus the Tribunal awarded a total sum of Rs.1,20,000 as compensation as against a claim of Rs.13,39,560 made by the appellant.
On appeal, the High Court, maintained the award in respect of the building, well and the trees but enhanced the same so far as the land is concerned by determining the market value of Rs.12,000 per acre.
Working or this basis, including 15% solatium, the total amount of compensation awarded worked out to he Rs. 1,84,923.
Being dissatisfied with the Order of the High Court, he has come up to this Court after obtaining special leave.
The main contentions urged by the appellant are (i) that the house and well are undervalued; (ii) that the land ought to have been treated as urbanised developed land; (iii) that potential value of the land has not 909 been taken into consideration while determining compensa tion; (iv) that the value of the sales of similar plots has wrongly been rejected.
Partly allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: In determining market value, where there was no sufficient direct evidence of market price, the Court is required to ascertain as best as possible from the materials before it, what a willing vendor would reasonably have expected to obtain from a willing purchaser from the land in its particular position and with its particular potentiali ty.
[914C D] A land which is certainly or likely to be used in the immediate or reasonably near future for building purposes but which at the valuation date is waste land or has been used for agricultural purposes, the owner, however, willing a vendor he is, is not likely to be content to sell the land for its value as waste or agricultural land as the case may be.
The possibility of its being used for building purposes would have to be taken into account.
However, it must not be valued as though it had already been built upon.
It is the possibilities of the land and not its realised possibilities that must be taken into consideration.
[914E F] In estimating the market value of the land, all the capabilities of the land and all its legitimate purposes to which it may be applied, or for which it may be adapted are to be considered and not merely the condition it is in and the use to which it is put at the time applied by the owner.
The proper principle is to ascertain the market value of the land taking into consideration the special value which ought to be attached to the special advantage possessed by the land; namely, its proximity to developed urbanised areas.
[915A B] The value of the potentiality has to be determined on such materials as are available and without indulgence in fits of imagination.
[915B C] A court of appeal interferes not when the judgment under attack is not right, but only when it is shown to be wrong.
[912E] In an appeal under article 136 of the Constitution of India involving the question of valuation of acquired land, the Supreme Court will not interfere with the award unless some erroneous principle has been invoked or some important piece of evidence has been overlooked or misapplied [912B C] 910 When the willing vendor had agreed to sell land at 14 annas per sq.
feet after development and the development charge was to be paid by the willing purchaser it could be reasonable to deduct only 50% on account of the land to be set apart for roads, drains etc.
and not beyond that.
Con sidering this aspect of the matter and the potential value of the land as urban developed area the Court took the view that the compensation may justly be enhanced by 1/6th i.e. to Rs.14,000 per acre.
Solatium 15% was maintained but the rate of interest was raised to 9% on the enhanced compensa tion till payment.
[918F G ] Atmaram Bhagwant vs Collector ofNagpur, A.I.R. 1929 P.C. 92, followed; Dollar Company Madras vs Collector of Madras, ; Gajapatiraju vs Rev. Divisional Officer, ; Mahabir Prasad Santuka vs Collector, Cuttack, [1987] 1 S.C.C. 587 and U.P. Government vs
H.S. Gupta, A.I.R. 1957 S.C. 202.
