The respondent let out his premises to the appellant by way of an unregistered lease deed which inter alia stated that without the permission of the landlord the premises should not he sub let except to associate concerns, and the lessee was liable for payment of rent.
Alleging that the appellant, a manufacturing company of automobiles, had sub let the premises to M/s United Automobiles without his consent, the respondent initiated eviction proceedings.
The appellant contended that M/s United Automobiles, being the authorised dealer and distributor of the products manufactured by it, has been in occupation of the premises in that capacity and cannot therefore he described as a sub tenant.
Alternatively, in view of the specific term in the lease deed, the arrangement with the associate concern was not a sub lease without the consent of the respondent, it was contended.
The respondent took the stand that the term cannot be looked into, as the document was not regis tered and that M/s United Automobiles cannot be assumed to he an 'associate concern ' within the meaning of the term.
Both the Rent Controller and the appellate authority held that the term of the lease was not inadmissible, but ordered eviction on the ground that M/s United Automobiles was inducted in the premises as a sub lessee.
The appellant filed a second appeal before the High Court which dismissed it in limine.
Hence this appeal by special leave.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: 1.
The appellant has created a sub lease in favour of its dealer, and has thus parted with the possession within the meaning of section 14(1) Proviso (b) of the Delhi Rent Control Act.
The appellant Com 730 731 pany has a separate legal entity and has nothing to do with M/s United Automobiles except that the latter is the dealer distributor of some of its manufactured articles.
M/s United Automobiles is not a licensee and is not in posses sion of the premises on behalf of the appellant.
The mone tary benefit available to the dealer is confined to the commission it receives on the sale of every vehicle; and does not include the right of enjoyment of the premises.
The dealer pays a fixed sum as rent to the appellant and the rent is not related or dependant on the sale of any vehicle.
The fact that this amount is same as what is paid by the appellant to the respondent does not appear to be material.
[733E G] 2.
The question whether a lessee is entitled to create a sub lease or not is undoubtedly a term of the transaction of lease, and if it is incorporated in the document it cannot be disassociated from the lease and considered separately in isolation.
If a document is inadmissible for non registra tion, all its terms are inadmissible including the one dealing with landlord 's permission to his tenant to sub let.
The appellant cannot, in the present circumstances, be allowed to rely upon the clause in the unregistered lease deed.
[734C D] Sachindra Mohan Ghose vs Ramesh Agarwalla, A.I.R. 1932 Patna 97; referred to.
In the instant case, a perusal of the clause relied on by the appellant would show that it contains the respond ent 's consent in general terms without reference to M/s United Automobiles.
As a matter of fact M/s United Automo biles came to be inducted as a sub tenant much later.
Such a general permission cannot be treated to be the consent as required by section 14(1) Proviso (b) of the Act.
Since consent of the respondent was not obtained specifically with refer ence to the sub letting in favour of M/s United Automobiles, the clause in the lease deed cannot save the appellant, even if it be assumed in its favour that the clause is admissible and the sub lessee is appellant 's associate concern.
[734E G] M/s Shalimar Tar Products vs S.C. Sharma, ; ; relied on.
