Certain lands situated on the outskirts of a large city were acquired by the respondent State after issuing prelimi nary notification under section 4(1) of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 on August 6, 1956 for construction of an industrial estate.
The appellants claimed compensation at the rate of Rs.3 per sq. yard and cited in support thereof an agreement of sale dated January 21,1957 and a conveyance dated April 2, 1957 pertaining to a piece of land adjoining the acquired land showing the sale price at the rate of Rs.3 per sq. yard.
The respondent State relied on an auction sale dated February 23, 1953 at about 41p.
per sq. yard, evidenced by exhibit 112, and the instance evidenced by exhibit 118 pertaining to sale to a minor, transacted by his father.
The Land Acquisition Officer classified the land as superior agricultural land and awarded the compensation at the rate of Rs.2200 per acre, i.e., about 45p.
per sq. yard.
In the reference, the Civil Judge did not rely upon any of the instances proved before him, but considering the general situation of the land and its considerable building potentiality fixed the rate of compensation at Rs.4400 per acre, i.e., about 90p.
per sq. yard.
Dismissing the appeal, the High Court took the view that the valuation fixed by the Civil Judge was justified.
It held that a postacquisition sale could not be regarded as a comparable instance at all, since the acquisition for con struction of the industrial estate was bound to have pushed up the prices in the surrounding area.
It placed reliance on the evidence furnished by the instance at exhibit 112, over a year prior to 744 the date of section 4 notification, but discarded the instance evidence by exhibit 118 relied on by the State.
Allowing the claimants ' appeal by special leave, the Court, HELD: The market value of a piece of property for pur poses of section 23 of the Land Acquisition Act, is stated to be the price at which the property changes hands from a willing seller to a willing, but not too anxious a buyer, dealing at arm 's length.
Prices fetched for similar lands with similar advantages and potentialities under bona fide transactions of sale at or about the time of the preliminary notification are the usual and, indeed, the best, evidence of market value.
[747C] Administrator General of West Bengal vs Collector, Varanasi, ; , referred to.
In the instant case, the instance evidenced by exhibit 112 pertaining_ to sale of land in government auction relied on by the High Court was a distress sale.
There were execution proceedings pending against the vendor.
It could, thus, hardly furnish any reliable evidence for estimating the market value of the land in question.
The instance evidenced by exhibit 118 was rightly discarded by the High Court.
Only a certified copy of the sale deed pertaining thereto was produced in.
the trial court.
The evidence of the purchaser, who was minor at the time when the sale deed was executed, had no evidentiary value as he had no personal information regarding the sale.
No other person conversant with the sale was examined by the State.
[748AB, CF] The only comparable instance on the basis of which the market value at the time of the section 4 notification in respect of the acquired land could be determined was, therefore, the sale proved by the sale deed dated April 2, 1957 and the preceding agreement of sale dated January 21, 1957.
Though entered into about five months alter the notification it could be fairly regarded as reasonably proximate to the acquisition.
The price fixed under the said agreement was Rs.3 per sq. yard.
However, there seem to have been some rise in the price of land on account of the acquisition of the land in question for purposes of constructing the indus trial estate.
Further, the land proposed to be purchased under the agreement was adjoining the land of the purchaser and the purchaser might have paid some extra amount for the convenience of getting the neighbouring land.
These factors have to be taken into account and appropriate deductions made from the rate disclosed in the agreement in estimating the market value.
Considering these together with 745 the situation and potentialities of the acquired land, it would be proper to fix its market value at Rs.8800 per acre, which comes to about Rs. 1.80p.
per sq. yard.
The decree passed by the Civil Judge to be amended accordingly.
[748G, 747E]
