In the Sessions trial of the appellants accused under section 302/ 34, I.P.C., the prosecution examined 34 wit nesses including the Investigation Officer (PW 34).
The Trial Court examined the accused under section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and recorded their state ments.
Thereafter the Public Prosecutor filed an application for re examination of the first appellant under section 313 which was rejected by the Trial Court.
An unsigned correction slip, without any application and service on the defence counsel, was also filed seeking correction in the statement of PW 34.
The Trial Court recti fied the typographical errors, but refused to make other corrections which would have changed the substantive part of the evidence.
The State preferred a Criminal Revision in the High Court which stated that the Trial Court has not followed proper procedure regarding correction or recorded evidence.
The High Court expunged the examination under section 3 13 of all the accused reserving liberty to the prosecution to file application for re examination of PW 34 and accepted the demand for transfer of the case.
Hence these appeals.
Allowing the appeals, and reversing the order of the High Court, HELD: 1.
The object of section 278 is two fold: firstly to ensure that the evidence of the witness as recorded is accurate and secondly to give the witness concerned an opportunity to point out mistakes.
If the 736 correction suggested by the suggested by the witness is one which the judge consideration necessary he will make it at once as required by sub section (1), but if the correction is such that the judge does net consider necessary, subsec tion (2) requires that a memorandum of the objection be made, and the Judge add his remarks, if any, thereto.
[741E] 1. 1 In the instant case, the trial judge corrected all the typographical errors which he considered necessary but refused to carry out the substantive part of his deposition.
The section is not intended to permit a witness to resile from his statement in the name of correction.
The trial judge was justified m refusing to effect the change which he thought was intended to change the earlier version.
He did not make a memorandum as the correction slip was unsigned and was not properly filed.
Since the correction slip as well as the remarks of the trial judge have become a part of the record, nothing more need he done as the provisions of section 278 are substantially complied with.
[741F G] 2.
The object of section 313 is that the accused may he given an opportunity of explaining each and every circum stance appearing against him.
The trial judge need not consult or hear the public prosecutor or the counsel for the accused as to the nature of the circumstances or the type of questions to he put to the accused.
It is his duty to exam ine the accused as per law.
It is, however, open to the prosecution to invite the attention of the Court to any incriminating circumstance left out and not put to the accused.
[742C D] 2.
I In the instant case, after the prosecution has closed the evidence the accused were examined under section 313 of the Code.
The prosecution did not at any stage move the trial judge for recalling PW 34 for further examination.
Therefore there was no justification for the High Court for giving liberty to the prosecution for re examination of PW 34 and expunging the examination of all the accused under section 313.
[742A 741H] 3.
In the instant case, as the trial judge has since retired the question of transfer of the case to another Bench of the City Sessions Court does not arise.
[742E]
