Maganlal executed a mortgage in favour of M.P. State Financial Corporation as security for a loan.
The amount of loan not having been paid, the Corporation initiated pro ceedings before the District Judge under section 31 of the for attachment and sale of the mortgaged property, which was ultimately auc tioned and purchased by M/s Jaiswal Industries, the first purchaser Maganlal made an application under Order 21 Rule 90 of the Code of Civil Procedure with the result that the sale was set aside by the Additional District Judge.
The first purchaser preferred an appeal against the order set ting aside the sale and also sought stay of further proceed ings for re sale.
The High Court did not grant stay but only ordered that the fresh sale shall not be confirmed till the disposal of the appeal.
Fresh auction was held and sale was knocked down in favour of Ramnarayan, the second purchaser.
The appeal of the first purchaser was subsequently allowed by the High Court and the first sale in his favour was confirmed.
Both Maganlal and Ramnarayan have filed two separate appeals in this Court challenging the order of the High Court.
Maganlal made an application before this Court under Order 34 Rule 5 of the Code, being C.M.P. No. 9940 of 1982, for redemption of the mortgage, and has urged that in case C.M.P No. 9940 of 1982 is allowed, it would not be neces sary for him to press the merits of the appeal.
This conten tion has not been seriously disputed by the first and the second purchasers.
They have however opposed this applica tion on the ground that: (i) an order of sale of the mort gaged property passed 697 by the District Judge under section 32 of the Act after affecting an attachment under section 31 thereof will not come within the purview of a final decree for sale of mort gaged property contemplated by Order 34 Rule 5 of the ' Code and as such the benefit of that provision could not be extended to Maganlal; (ii) the High Court having confirmed the sale in first purchaser 's favour, an application under Order 34 Rule 5 of the Code is not maintainable inasmuch as the said provision contemplates payment 'on or before the day fixed or at any time before the confirmation of a sale '; and (iii) section 32(8) of the State Finance Corporation Act makes the manner provided in the Code applicable only "as far as practicable" and there was neither a decree nor was the Financial Corporation a decree holder in a suit for sale it was only deemed to be a decree holder by legal fiction because of the expression "in execution of a decree as if the Financial Corporation were the decree holder".
On the other hand, it is contended on behalf of Maganlal that (i) Order 34 Rule 5 of the Code is attracted even to an order of sale of mortgaged property passed under section 32 of the Act and since the right of redemption which vests in Maganlal has not yet extinguished in view of the pendency of these appeals, there is no impediment in the relief contem plated by Order 34 Rule 5 of the Code being granted.
and (ii) in view of sub section (8) of section 32 of the Act the applicability of the provisions of Order 34 Rule 5 of the Code cannot be denied to the facts of the instant case.
Allowing the CMP and the appeal filed by Maganlal and granting consequential reliefs to the first and the second purchasers, this Court.
HELD: (1) In case the provisions of Order 34 Rule 5 of the Code are held to be applicable to the facts of the instant case, appropriate relief can be granted thereunder as the order of confirmation of the sale passed by the High Court in favour of the first purchaser has not become abso lute due to the pendency of these appeals against that order nor has the right of redemption of Maganlal yet extin guished.
[707F G] Chandra Mani vs Anarjan Bibi, A.I.R. 1934 P.C. 134; Nilayam Ramkrishan Rao vs Kandokari Chellayamma & Anr., ; ; S.V. Ramalingam & Ors.
vs K.E. Rajagopa lan & Ors., ; M. Sevugan Chettiar vs V.A. Narayana Raja, A.I.R. 1984 Mad 334; Raghunath Singh & Ors.
vs Pt.
Hansraj Kunwar & 698 Ors., A.I.R. 1934 P.C. 205 and Mhadagonda Ramgonda Patil & Ors.
vs Shripal Balwant Rainade & Ors., , referred to.
(2) An application under section 31(1) of the Act cannot be put on par to a suit for enforcement of a mortgage nor the order passed thereon under section 32 of the Act be put on par as if it was an order in a suit between a mortgagee and the mortgagor for sale of mortgaged property.
On the other hand, the substantive relief in an application under section.31(1) is something akin to an application for at tachment of property in execution of a decree at a stage posterior to the passing of the decree.
[710E F] Gujarat State Financial Corporation vs M/s Natson Manu facturing Co. (P) Ltd.; , and M/s Everest Industrial Corporation & Ors.
vs Gujarat State Financial Corporation, ; , referred to.
(3) The purpose of enacting sections 31 and 32 of the Act was apparently to provide for a speedy remedy for recov ery of the dues of the Financial Corporation.
This purpose however was, in cases covered by clause (a) of sub section (1) of section 31, confined to the stage of obtaining an order asking to a decree in a suit, in execution whereof "the property pledged, mortgaged, hypothecated or assigned to the Financial Corporation as security for the loan or advance" could be sold.
Sections 31 and 32 of the Act cut across and dispense with the provisions of the Code from the stage of filing a suit to the stage of obtaining a decree in execution whereof such properties as are referred to in clause (a) of sub section (1) of section 31 could he sold.
After this stage was reached, sale in execution of an order under section 32 of the Act was for purposes of execution put at par with sale in execution of a decree obtained in a suit, by enacting sub section (8) of section 32 of the Act.
[711H 7 12B] (4) If in its anxiety to ensure speedy recovery of the dues of the Financial Corporation Parliament had intended also to cut across and dispense with the procedure contained in the Code for execution of a decree for sale of such properties as are referred to in clause (a) of sub section (1) of section 31 of the Act, it would have made some provi sion analogous to provisions contained in the enactments for revenue recovery.
But that was not done.
Instead, sub sec tion (8) was incorporated in section 32 of the Act.
[712F] (5) As is apparent from the plain language of section 32(8) of the 699 Act, the legal fiction was created for the purpose of exe cuting an order under section 32 of the Act Tim ' sale of attached property as if such order was a decree in a suit for sale and the financial Corporation was the decree holder whereas the debtor was the judgment debtor.
[714B] It is settled law that a legal fiction is to he limited to the purpose for which it was created and should not he extended beyond the legitimate field.
[713H] The Bengal Immunity Company Ltd. vs The State of Bihar & Ors., ; East End Dwellings Company Ltd. vs Finsbury Borough Council, [1952] Appeal Cames 109; The Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay vs Amarchand N. Shroff, [1963] Supp.
1 S.C.R. 699; Commissioner of Income Tax, Gujarat vs Vedilal Lallubhai, ; and Nation al Sewing Thread Co. Ltd. vs Jamesh Chadwick & Bros. Ltd., ; , referred to.
(6) The provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure with regard to execution of a decree for sale of mortgaged property contained in Order 21 of the Code including the right to file an appeal against Such orders passed during the course of execution which are appealable shall apply mutasis mutandis to provisions of an order under section 32 of the Act unless such provision is not practicable to he applied.
[714C] (7) Since, in the instant case, the equity of redemption has not extinguished, there is no good ground to take the view that even though all the remaining provisions with regard to execution of a decree for sale of mortgaged property will apply to execution of an order under section 32 of the Act, the provision contained in Order 34 Rule 5 of the Code shall not apply.
Nothing has been brought to the notice of the Court as to how and why it is not practicable to apply the said provision.
[7 14F]
