The respondent was awarded a contract for construction of Earth Dam by the appellant State of Orissa.
His dispute relating to the remaining Claim for payment was referred to an arbitrator for adjudication.
Before the arbitrator the respondent claimed (i) the balance amount due to him; (ii) his security deposit with the appellant; and (iii) interest, on the balance amount due and security deposit, upto the date of award.
On 2.12.1980 the arbitrator gave a lump sum award in favour of the respondent inclusive of interest upto the date of award.
The Trial Court made the award a rule of the Court and accordingly passed a decree in favour of the respondent for the amount awarded together with interest at the rate of six per cent from the date of decree.
The appeal filed by the State was dismissed by the High Court.
In this appeal it was contended on behalf of the State that the award was invalid because; (i) the arbitrator gave no reasons; (ii) no interest could be awarded by the arbi trator upto the date of award, and the award being inclusive of interest was not severable.
it was also contended that the High Court was wrong in assuming that the Trial Court was correct in refusing to call the arbitrator for being examined.
Allowing the appeal partly, HELD: 1.
The absence of reasons in the award does not by itself result in its invalidity except where the giving of reasons by the 822 arbitrator for the award is the requirement of the arbitra tion agreement or the deed of submission or an order made by the Court or statute governing the arbitration.
[823G H] Raipur Development Authority & Ors.
vs M/s Chokhamal Contractors and Ors., [1989] 2 S.C.C. 721, applied.
Even though an arbitrator is a competent witness, the Court must exercise the power of calling him as a witness cautiously and sparingly and not in a routine manner.
When the Court is requested to call the arbitrator for examina tion as a witness it must be shown that there is some cogent ground for his examination within the permissible limits.
[826D] In the instant case, nothing has been shown to indicate that it was at all necessary to call the arbitrator as a witness to depose on any matter which could legitimately be examined by the Court in the proceedings.
The High Court was, therefore, justified in refusing to call the arbitrator for examination.
[826E] State of Orissa vs D.C. Routray, A.I.R. 1983 Orissa 163, approved.
In cases wherein the reference to arbitrator was made prior to the commencement of the , on August 19, 1981 the arbitrator is not empowered to grant interest for the period either before the commencement of the proceedings or during the pendency of the arbitration.
In the instant case, the reference to arbitrator was made and even the award was given prior to the commencement of the .
Therefore, the arbitrator had no jurisdiction to grant any amount as interest for any period either upto the date of submission of the claim before him or pendente lite upto the date of the award.
[827F G] Executive Engineer (Irrigation), Balimela & Ors.
vs Abhaduta Jena & Ors., [1988] 1 SCC 418, applied.
Gujarat Water Supply and Sewerage Board vs Unique Erec tors (Gujarat) (P) Ltd. & Anr.
, ; , held inapplicable.
In the instant case, the inclusion of the amount of interest in the lumpsam award by the arbitrator does not render the whole award 823 invalid since it is possible to sever the invalid part relating to interest.
The balance amount of award remaining after deduction of interest would not be tainted with any invalidity, and it would be just and proper to sustain the award to this extent only.
The decree is, therefore, modi fied to this extent.
[828E F; 829C]
