Appellant joined the Military Engineering Service as Assistant Executive Engineer, upon his selection by the Union Public Service Commission through the combined Engi neering Service Examination held in 1960.
He represented that his previous service in Central Government should be considered in fixing his seniority.
in the seniority list published, the appellant 's name was shown at 483rd position.
The appellant made a representation against the lower place ment.
Departmental Promotion Committee did not consider him for promotion because of the lower placement.
Challenging the lower placement, the appellant filed a suit before the Civil Court which was dismissed.
His first appeal before the District Judge as also the second appeal before the High Court met the same fate.
This appeal, by special leave, is against the judgment of the High Court.
The respondents resisted the appeal on grounds of limitation and res judicata.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: 1.1.
There has been no dispute in the Courts below, and here too, that the appellant has been legally recruited to the service.
The Union of India accepted the position that recruitment through the Union Public Service Commission had been regularly made and the post was not a temporary one but as the performance of the appellant had not been of a high order, he had been placed below treating him to be temporary a position for which there is not much of legal support.
[770B C, E, F] 1.2.
Strictly speaking, Janardhana 's decision may not have the effect of res judicata for the present litigation, but in a dispute of the present dimension where hundreds of employees are concerned, it would not be proper for the employees to litigate over the same issue 768 from time to time.
If it would be open to members of the service from time to time to raise disputes of the same nature and introduce uncertainty into the service, that would affect the efficiency of the service and would be against public interest.
That also would call into jeopardy the guarantees of public service and expose the officers into an atmosphere of insecurity.
A seniority list of a cadre should not be made the subject matter of debate too often.
[771B D] A. Janardhana vs Union of India & Ors., ; ; affirmed.
The plea of limitation raised by the respondents should not have been upheld in the facts of the case.
The seniority list was being changed from time to time.
The appellant had represented against the 1967 seniority list.
The dispute was already pending before this Court in Bachan Singh 's case.
In fact, without waiting for the judgment of this Court in that case, the plaintiff came to Court on 22.3.1971.
The appellant was entitled to make a representa tion against the seniority list and rejection of the repre sentation actually would have given him the cause of action.
In these circumstances, non suiting him on the plea of limitation would not at all be justified.
[772E G] Bachan Singh vs Union of India, ; , referred to.
Individual claims, could not have been barred from consideration if by the time Janardhana 's case came to be disposed of, claims were pending adjudication before the Court.
Appellant 's case was already before the High Court by the time Janardhana 's appeal was disposed of by this Court.
The stand taken by Respondent No. 1 that it was open to the appellant to appear in the competitive examination in the succeeding year to better his position, is no justification for depriving him of his legitimate claim to a higher place ment in the seniority in the cadre.
Appellant 's position shall be shown below the recuirts of 1960 and above those of 1961 and he may be bracketed with one who has been assigned that position and an appropriate rectification shall be made in the seniority list of 1967 on the basis of the placement in terms of this judgment.
His entitlement to promotion on the basis of such position shall be considered by the re spondents within four months hence.
[772H; 773A D]
