A Constable while returning home after performing his duties was knocked down by a tractor owned by appellant No. 1, and driven by appellant No. 2 who had no driving licence.
As a result of the accident, the Constable died and his widow and children claimed compensation, before the Tribu nal.
Awarding a compensation of Rs.96,000 the Tribunal held that at the time of the accident the vehicle belonged to appellant No. 1 and was driven by appellant No. 2, who had no driving licence, that the accident took place due to his rash and negligent driving, and appellant No. 1 alone was liable to pay the compensation.
The appellant has come in appeal, by special leave, contending that the insurer alone would be liable to pay the compensation amount, even though the tractor was not driven by a licensed driver.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: 1.
Section 96 of the imposes a duty on the insurer to satisfy judgments against persons insured in respect of third party risks.
Sub section 2 thereof provides exception to the liability of the insur er.
Sub sec.
2(b) of sec.
96 provides that the insurer is not liable to satisfy the judgments against the persons insured if there has been a breach of a specified condition of the policy.
One of the conditions of the policy specified under clause (ii) is that the vehicle should not be driven by any person who is not duly licensed or by any person, who has been disqualified from holding or obtaining driving licence, during the period of disqualification.
It is not in dispute that the certificate of insurance concerned in this case contains this condition.
If, therefore, there is a breach of this condition, the insurer will not be liable to indemnify the owner.
[813C E] 812 2.
In the present case, the onus of the insurer has been discharged from the evidence of the insured himself.
The insured took a positive defence stating that he was not the owner of the vehicle since he had already sold the same to a third party.
This had not been proved.
Secondly, he took a defence stating that the vehicle at the relevant time was driven ' by a licensed driver.
This was proved to be false.
There is no other material even to indicate that the vehicle was entrusted to the licensed driver on the date of the fatal accident.
[814D F] Skandia Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Kokilaben Chandravadan and Ors., [1987] 2 SCC 654, distinguished.
