The appellant had joined service in the Orissa Govern ment as an Assistant Engineer in 1955, and in 1983 he was working on the post of Superintending Engineer.
Since he had completed 50 years of age, a Review Committee considered his service record for determining his suitability for retention in service in accordance with the first proviso to Rule 71(a) of the Orissa Service Code.
On the recommendation of the Review Committee the State Government by its order dated 10.11.1983 pre maturely retired the appellant from service.
The appellant filed a civil suit challenging the validity of his pre mature retirement.
The suit was transferred to the Administrative Tribunal.
The Tribunal held that the recom mendation of the Review Committee was bona fide and did not suffer from any legal infirmity.
Before this Court, it was contended that the recommenda tion of the Review Committee was vitiated as it was founded on irrelevant and inadmissible material.
It was urged that the Review Committee had considered a number of adverse remarks contained in the appellant 's service record for the remote past years, and had also considered adverse entries relating to recent years although those adverse entries had not become final.
Allowing the appeal and setting aside the order of premature retirement of the appellant, this Court, HELD: (1) The purpose of the Rule conferring power on the Government to retire Government servants prematurely is to energise 804 its machinery by 'chopping of the dead wood '.
[807C] Union of India vs J.N. Sinha, [1971] 1 SCR 791.
(2) When a Government servant is promoted to a higher post on the basis of merit and selection prior adverse entries if any contained in his service record lose their significance and those remain on record as part of past history.
It would, therefore, be unjust to curtail the service career of Government servant on the basis of those entries in the absence of any significant fail in his per formance after his promotion.
[807F] (3) If the adverse remarks awarded to a Government servant are communicated to him after several years, the object of communicating entries is defeated.
It is, there fore, imperative that the adverse entries awarded to a Government servant must he communicated to him within a reasonable period to afford him opportunity to improve his work and conduct and also to make representation in the event of the entry being unjustified.
In the instant case, belated communication of the entries resulted into denial of reasonable opportunity to the appellant to improve his performance.
[808A B] (4) The appellant 's representation against the adverse entries relating to a number of years was rejected on the ground that the representation was barred by time.
Since the communication of the adverse entries was itself highly belated, the representation against those adverse remarks should have been considered on merits and the same could not be rejected on the alleged ground of delay as the Government itself was guilty of inordinate delay in communicating the adverse remarks to the appellant.
[808D] (5) The appellant had a right to make representation against the adverse entries within six months period.
There fore, the adverse entries awarded to the appellant in the years 1981 82 and 1982 83 could not be taken into account either by the Review Committee or by the State Government in forming the requisite opinion contemplated by Rule 71(1)(a) of the Orissa Service Code, before the expiry of the period of six months.
It is settled view that it is not permissible to prematurely retire a Government servant on the basis of adverse entries, representations against which are not considered and disposed of.
[809C D, 808H 809A] Brij Mohan Chopra vs State of Punjab, ; (6) The Members of the Tribunal must follow rules of natural 805 justice in administering justice like judges.
They should not sit in judgment on their own decisions.
In the instant case Shri Gian Chand, who had administratively taken a decision as Chief Secretary against the Appellant, consid ered the matter judiciary as the Chairman of the Administra tive Tribunal, thereby he acted as a Judge of his own cause.
While it is true that there is no allegation of personal bias against Shri Gian Chand, he may have acted bona fide, nevertheless, the principles of natural justice, fair play, and judicial discipline required that he should have ab stained from hearing the appellant 's case.
[810B, 809F H]
