The respondent, and employee in the Posts and Telegraph Department, was retired from service under Rule 2(2) of the Liberalised Pension Rules, 1950 which empowered the Govern ment to retire a servant at any time after he had completed 30 years of qualifying service.
The respondent 's writ peti tion in the Allahabad High Court was dismissed by the learned Single Judge holding that there was no infirmity in the Rule.
The Division Bench, however, accepted the Special Appeal filed by the respondent and declared Rule 2(2) in valid.
Before this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellant that the Government of India had issued instruc tions dated July 11, 1955 and February 8, 1956 which laid down that the retirement under Rule 2(2) of the Pension Rules should be effected when such retirement was necessary in public interest.
It was further contended that the Minis try of Home Affairs Memorandum dated November 30, 1962 which was issued in the name of the President of India, was statu tory and had the effect of amending Rule 2(2) of the Pension Rules, and reading the rule and the memorandum together the power under Rule 2(2) could only be exercised to weel out unsuitable employees.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: (1) Central Government servants superannuate at the age of 58 years.
The Government has the absolute right under Rule 56(j) of 797 Fundamental Rules to prematurely retire a servant in 'Public Interest ' after he has attained the age of 55 years.
The Government has also the power under Rule 2(2) of the Libera lised Pension Rules to retire a servant at any time after he has completed 30 years of qualifying service.
[798H 799A] (2) Fundamental Rule 56(j) while granting absolute right to the Government provides that such power can only be exercised in 'Public Interest '.
This guide line is suffi cient safeguard against the arbitrary exercise of power by the Government.
The object of this Rule is to chop off dead wood.
Rule 2(2) of the Pension Rules on the other hand provides no guide line and gives absolute discretion to the Government.
There is no requirement under the rule to act in 'Public Interest '.
[799E F] (3) Although the rules are mutually exclusive and have been made to operate in different fields but the operational effect of the two rules is that a Government servant who has attained the age of 55 can be retired prematurely under F.R. 56(j) only on the ground of 'Public Interest ' whereas anoth er Government servant who is only 51 and has completed 30 years of qualifying service, can be retired at any time at the discretion of the Government under Rule 2(2) of the Pension Rules.
Any Government servant who has completed 30 years of qualifying service and has not attained the age of 55 years can be picked up for premature retirement under Rule 2(2).
Since no safe guards are provided in the Rule, the discretion is absolute and is capable of being used arbitrarily and with an un even hand.
Rule 2(2) of the Pension Rules is therefore ultra vires Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
[799G, 800B C] (4) A statutory rule cannot be modified or amended by executive instructions.
A valid Rule having some lacuna or gap can be supplemented by the executive instructions, but a statutory rule which is constitutionally invalid cannot be validated with the support of executive instructions.
The instructions can only supplement and not supplant the rule.
[800E] (5) The Ministry of Home Affairs, Memorandum dated November 30, 1962 has not been issued under Article 309 of the Constitution of India and as such cannot be statutory.
The memorandum is in the nature of executive instructions issued in the name of the President of India as required under Article 77(1) of the Constitution of India.
[801D] 798 Union of India & Ors.
vs R. Narasimhan, A.I.R. 1988 S.C. 1733,
distinguished
