The respondent who was an employee of the appellant bank was dismissed from service on the basis of disciplinary proceedings instituted against him.
He filed a suit chal lenging the validity of the disciplinary proceedings on the ground that the inquiry was vitiated by serious violation of principles of natural justice.
The trial court decreed the suit.
The decree was confirmed by the Additional District Judge in appeal, and by the High Court in second appeal.
Before this Court, the appellant contended that (i) having regard to the nature of relationship of master and servant between the parties, the decree of re instatement of the respondent was illegal, and the suit as framed was not maintainable because the respondent 's remedy was a suit for damages; (ii) alternatively, if the respondent was held to be a public servant so as to enable him to ask for re in statement in the service, the suit must be dismissed as not maintainable in view of the provisions of the U.P. Public Services (Tribunal) Act, 1976; and (iii) there was no viola tion of the principles of natural justice.
While confirming the decree with modifications, this Court, HELD: (1) The High Court was right in holding that as the respondent was not given adequate opportunity to examine the documents, he was handicapped in filing his show cause and defending himself effectively.
[938C] 936 (2) The appellant bank is not covered by the definition of 'public servant ' in section 2(b) of U.P. Public Services (Tribunal) Act, 1976.
It has been constituted in exercise of the power conferred by section 3 of the , and has been sponsored by the Syndicate Bank, a natio nalised Bank.
Although fifteen per cent of the total capital of the Bank has been contributed by the State of Uttar Pradesh, it has no controlling power, and none of the condi tions mentioned in section 2(b) of the U.P. Act is satisfied.
[939G] (3) The plaintiff respondent is not a "public servant" within the limited meaning of the expression used in the U.P. Act and the courts below are right in overruling the defence plea of the bar by the U.P. Act on the jurisdiction of the civil court to entertain the suit.
[939H 940A] The test for determining if an authority fails within the definition of State in Article 12 of the Constitution is whether it is an instrumentality or agency of the Govern ment.
The enquiry has to be not as to how the juristic person is born but why it has been brought into existence.
It is therefore, immaterial whether the authority is created by a statute or under a statute.
[940C] Ajay Hasia & Ors.
vs Khalid Mujib Sheravardi & Ors., ; , referred to.
(5) An examination of the relevant circumstances in regard to the appellant Bank leads to the irresistible conclusion that it is an instrumentality of the Central Government.
By establishing the Rural Banks the Central Government acts in discharge of its obligations under Arti cles 38 and 48 of Part IV of the Constitution through them.
[940G, 942C] (6) The provisions of the do not leave any room for doubt that the Regional Rural Banks are under deep and pervasive control of the Central Government and have been established as its instrumentality and, are, therefore, 'State ' within Article 12 of the Con stitution.
[943A] (7) There is no merit in the argument that the Courts cannot force the services of the respondent on the appellant bank by passing a decree for his re instatement in service and all that can be done is to grant a relief by way of compensation in a properly consti tuted suit.
[943B] Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Ltd. vs Brojo Nath Ganguly, , referred to. 937 (8) In the instant case, the departmental proceeding against the respondent from 5.7.1983 onwards is quashed and the decree for the plaintiff 's re instatement in service with consequential benefits is confirmed, subject to the modification that if the Bank authorities be of the view that in spite of the delay of several years the inquiry ought to be completed, it will be open to them to proceed with it and to take further steps in the proceeding from the stage where it stood on 5.7.1983, in accordance with the directions of the Court in this judgment.
[943F G]
