In the election to the Bihar Legislative Assembly held in 1985, the appellant was declared elected from the 286 Chandan Kyari (S.C.) Constituency.
The respondent, a sitting M.L.A., who secured 430 votes less than the appellant, filed an election petition in the Patna High Court (Ranchi Bench) calling in question the election of the appellant.
The respondent 's main grievance was that the Returning Officer re allocated his 'bow and arrow ' symbol to another candidate Murura Dasi, and instead allotted the symbol of 'ladder ' to him, and this sudden change of symbol left him with less than 20 days time for campaign which resulted in confusion amongst his supporters as a result of which his election was materially affected.
On this premise the respondent contend ed that the election was liable to be declared void on the ground of (i) violation of section 30(d) of the Representa tion of People Act, 1951, which according to him prescribed atleast 20 days time for election campaign, which he did not have after change of the symbol; and (ii) violation of Rule 10(5) of the Conduct of Election Rules, 1961 under which, according to him, the election symbol could not be changed without permission of the Election Commission.
The respond ent election petitioner examined himself.
Evidence of no other witness appears on record.
The High Court allowed the petition and declared the appellant 's election to be void holding that the result of the election in so Tar as it concerned the returned candi date was materially affected by violation of Rule 10(5) of the Conduct of Election Rules, 1961.
Before this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appel lant that 922 (i) the appellant did not receive any notice of the election petition against her and the trial had proceeded ex parte; (ii) there was no breach of section 30(d) of the Representa tion of the People Act Inasmuch as the minimum 20 days time was available after the date of withdrawal of nomination paper to the date of poll; (iii) there was no violation of Rule 10(5) of the Conduct of Election Rules; and (iv) even assuming that there was violation of this rule, the election petitioner dismally failed to prove by evidence that the result of the election was materially affected thereby, inasmuch as no sufficient evidence was adduced in proof of his claim, and he himself could not have proved his aver ments.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: (1) Under s.30 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, as soon as the notification calling upon a con stituency to elect the member or members is issued, the Election Commission shall, by notification in the Official Gazette appoint, amongst others, under clause (d), the date or dates on which a poll shall, if necessary, be taken, which or the first of which shall be a date not earlier than the twentieth day after the last date for the withdrawal of candidature.
[928F] (2) In the instant case, the last date for the withdraw al of nomination was 9.2.1985 and the date of poll was 5.3.1985.
There was, therefore, clear compliance with the requirement of section 30(d).
The respondent himself stated that on 14.2.1985 he received notice of intention of the Return ing Officer to change his election symbol and the symbol was actually changed on 15.2.1985.
This Court agrees with the High Court that only the spirit of section 30(d) was not complied with.
In terms, this provision was clearly complied with.
[928G 929A] (3) The violation of sub rule (5) of Rule 10 per se will not invalidate the election.
The election petitioner has also to prove that the result of the election, in so far as it concerns the returned candidate, was materially affected.
[934A B] (4) The party who wishes to get an election declared void has to establish by satisfactory evidence that the result of the poll had in fact been materially affected by the violation of Rule 10(5) of the Rules.
For doing this, it has to be demonstrated that the votes would have been di verted in such a way that the returned candidate would have been unsuccessfull.
[931B] 923 Vashist Narain Sharma vs Dev Chandra & Ors., ; ; lnayatullah Khan vs Diwanchand Mahajan & Ors., ; S.N. Balakrishna vs Fernandes, ; , ; Shiv Charan Singh vs Chandra Bhan Singh, ; and Chhedi Ram vs Jhilmit Ram & Ors., , referred to.
(5) A decision in an election petition can be given only on positive and affirmative evidence and not on mere specu lation and suspicion, however, strong they are.
In the instant case, there is no such positive and affirmative evidence.
Mere assertions by the election petitioner were not enough.
[932D] (6) There could be no proposition or contention that a candidate with a particular symbol would always be success ful at the hustings or that a particular voter or a number of voters would always vote for a symbol irrespective of the candidate to whom it is allotted.
[932E] (7) There is no dispute about the importance of the symbol in a backward constituency.
This will however, not absolve the election petitioner of his burden of proving that the result of the election has been materially affect ed.
[933B] All Party Hill Leaders ' Conference, Shillong vs Captain W.A. Sangama, ; and Roop Lal Sathi vs Nach hattar Singh Gill; , , referred to.
(8) The election petitioner has not stated and proved that more than 430 voters would have voted for him, had the symbol of 'bow and arrow ' not been changed, and that they voted for Murura Dasi only for her having the symbol of 'bow and arrow '.
How could that be proved would.
of course, depends on the facts and circumstances of the case.
[929F] (9) In the instant case, the election petitioner dismal ly failed to discharge the burden of proving that the result of the election, in so far as it concerned the appellant, who has been the returned candidate, was materially affect ed.
The High Court was in error in holding, without suffi cient evidence, that it was materially affected.
[934C]
