The appellant company carried on the business of manu facture and sale of paper.
It claimed exemption from payment of excise on paper core which, accordingly to the appellant, was used in the manufacture of paper.
The case of the appel lant was that the paper cores used in the manufacture of paper constituted "component parts" within the meaning of Notification No. 201/79 dated June 4, 1979 as amended.
The case of the respondent on the other hand was that the paper cores were really used by the appellant as packing material after the paper had already been manufactured for taking it to the market and did not constitute "component parts" of paper.
The Assistant Collector, Central Excise, rejected the claim of the appellant but its claim on appeal as regards exemption from duty on paper cores was allowed by the Appel late Collector.
The Customs, Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal however allowed the appeal of the Reve nue.
Partly allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
Even though the term "component parts" has not been defined either by the Act or by the Notification, the term "manufacture" has been defined in section 2(f) of the .
This definition contem plates that "manufacture" includes any process, incidental or ancillary to the completion of a manufactured product.
[895D] 2.
In the absence of any definition of the term "compo nent partS" it is permissible to refer to the dictionary meaning of the word "component".
Accordingly to the diction ary meaning, the word "component" inter alia means a con stituent part.
[895F] 3.
If the use of paper core is necessary in "any process incidental 893 or ancillary to the completion of" paper as marketable goods and it would consequently be commercially inexpedient to sell paper without the use of paper core, it would certainly be a constituent part of paper and would thus fall within the purview of the term "component parts" used in the Noti fication.
[896F] M/s J.K. Cotton Spinning & Weaving Mills vs Sales Tax Officer, Nagpur and another, [1965] 1 S.C.R. Page 900 and Bhor Industries Ltd. Bombay vs Collector of Central Excise, Bombay, ; , referred to.
Paper is made (1) in the form of rolls and (2) in the form of sheets and the paper which is sold in the form of sheets is cut in desired sizes.
Even though rewinding has to be done both for manufacturing roll paper as well as sheet paper, use of paper core in rewinding is necessary only with regard to manufacture of roll paper, inasmuch as it is the paper as rolled on paper core which is delivered to the customer in the form of rolls and unless in the process of rewinding paper core is used, paper cannot come out of the machine in rolls so as to be sold as a marketable commodity known as roll paper.
The use of paper core, however, is not necessary for the manufacture of paper sheets.
[897E, 899G 900A] 5.
Use of paper core would come within the purview of the expression "any process incidental or ancillary to the completion of manufactured products" used in the definition of the term "manufacture" in section 2(f) of the Act and for the same reason paper core would also be constituent part of paper and would thus fail within the term "component parts" used in the Notification in so far as manufacture of paper in rolls is concerned.
Paper core, however, cannot be said to be used in the manufacture of paper in sheets as compo nent parts.
[900E F]
