The High Court, in an appeal against a decision of the Forest Tribunal, under the provisions of the Kerala Forests (Vesting & Assignment) Act, 1971, held that 92 acres of forest land were to be given back to the appellants.
Accord ingly, the Forest Department returned certain lands.
Later on they realised that the lands constituted thick forests and had valuable trees thereon and refused the timber trans it permits applied for by the appellants.
Aggrieved against the decision, the appellants ap proached the High Court by way of a Writ Petition.
The High Court held that the appellants were not entitled to any relief with regard to rosewood and other trees cut from the lands that did not form part of the land ordered to be restored to them.
The High Court directed the Forest Depart ment to consider the application of the appellants and pass appropriate orders after giving an opportunity to the appel lants to put forward their contentions.
This appeal, by special leave, is against the said order of the High Court.
Allowing the appeal in part, HELD: 1.1 The appellants are entitled to return of 92 acres of land and not 80 acres.
This is on the ground that the direction of the High Court in the first appeal became final and in terms of such direction 92 acres were to go back to the appellants.
Government had no authority to alter the decision by an administrative order as has been done in this case.
[41D] 1.2 There is no dispute that 56.31 acres have been restored to the appellants.
By the affidavit of 24th June, 1989, 23.69 acres have been 38 offered to be restored from three survey numbers indicated therein.
With the restoration of 23.69 acres the appellants would have got back 80 acres of land.
There would still be 12 acres to be returned to the appellants.
The respondents shall have a direction to trace these 12 acres in the local ity and make over vacant possession to the appellants there of within four months.
[41E] 1.3 In case 23.69 acres or any part thereof as indicated in the affidavit Cannot be delivered possession and the balance 12 acres are not identified and possession thereof cannot be delivered, the appellants shall be entitled to compensation in respect of the shortfall out of 35.69 acres in all which remain to be delivered and compensation for such shortfall shall be determined as if it were acquisition under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, the date of the preliminary notification being deemed to be the date of judgment of the Division Bench in MFA 401/78.
The direc tions indicated above shall be worked out by the respondents within a total period of six months.
[41F G] 2.
The High Court called upon the respondents to consid er the appellants ' plea for timber transit permits in re spect of trees cut from certain other lands.
There is no material on record as to whether that has been complied with.
In case the respondents have not done the same yet, they are directed to comply with the order of the High Court within three months.
[41H; 42A]
