The appellants are the tenants of premises situated in the District of Bijnor.
The suit for their eviction was filed in 1967 on the ground that they (tenants) had made material alteration in the property and as such were liable for ejectment under section 3(1)(c) of the U.P. (Temporary) Control of Rent 'and Eviction Act 1947.
The appellants did not dispute the constructions in the demised premises, but asserted that the constructions in question had been made with a view to save the building from rain water and fire and the constructions were not such which would render them liable for eviction as contemplated under section 3 of the Act of 1947.
The appellants also pleaded that the construc tions were effected with the permission of the landlord.
The learned Munsif, who tried the suit held that the construc tions had been made by the tenants appellants without the consent/knowledge of the landlord and that the constructions amounted to "material alterations".
He accordingly decreed the landlord 's suit.
The First Appellate Court, which is the Civil Judge affirmed the decree of eviction by his order dated 16th Feb. 1984.
Thereupon the appellants went in second appeal before the High Court.
The High Court too dismissed the appeal.
It found that the constructions have been made by demolishing the old structures, by conversion of six Kuchha Kothas into pucca ones and an entirely new constructions had come up in their place.
It further found that the accommodation had been increased by enclosing the open space which must have been possible only by raising walls etc.
In any case, ac cording to the finding of the High Court, the property looked different from what originally it was.
Thus the alterations made by the appellants were material alterations and as such came within the mischief of section 3(1)(c) of the Act 1947.
9 Hence this appeal by the appellants tenants.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: Under Section 3(1)(c) of the Act it is apparent that the grounds for eviction could be either such construc tion which materially altered the accommodation or alterna tively is likely to substantially diminish its value.
These are the disjunctive requirements.
In the facts and circum stances of the instant appeal, all the Courts have found that constructions carried out by the tenants have the effect of altering the form and structure of the accommoda tion.
[12B C; F] The suit which was filed on the ground that there were material alterations simpliciter under section 3(1)(c) of the Act of 1947 would continue to be valid after the coming into operation of Act of 1972 in view of clause (s) of Sub section (2) of section 43 thereof.
This is the consequence of the language used.
Neither the Act of 1947, nor the Act of 1972 gives any right to the landlord.
The landlord 's right to evict tenant is guided by the Transfer of Property Act.
The Act of 1947 gives protection to the tenants under certain conditions and at the time when the suit was filed, the rights of the parties had been crystallised.
On the facts as alleged and proved and found by the Court, the tenants were liable to be evicted.
The question of temporary rights in favour of the landlord does not arise.
[14H; 15A C] The rights of the parties must be determined in accord ance with the provisions of law.
What justice of the case entails and what is just, due and the law says, is to be given to each one whether being a landlord or a tenant.
"The Judge is not to innovate at pleasure.
He is not a knight errant roaming at will in pursuit of his own ideal of beauty or of goodness" (Cardozo The Nature of the Judicial process page 141).
If that is the position on the date when the rights crystallised and in view of clause (s) of section 43 (2) of the Act of 1972, those rights will continue as if they were under the old Act.
The right had accrued to the landlord to get the eviction even if the alteration had not in any way affected or diminished the value of the premises.
That right cannot be deprived.
[15D F] Considering the fact that the tenants are poor and in possession since long, the Court directed that the tenants will not be evicted until 30th September 1990 provided the tenants give 'the usual undertaking containing the usual terms stating, inter alia, that they are in possession, within four week of this date.
The undertaking must be given by 10 each of the appellants.
default of filing of undertak ing, the decree will be executable forthwith.
[15H; 16A] The Court further observed that in view of the condition of the tenants, if an application is made for allotment of any other area by these parties to the appropriate authori ty, and if the appellants are not in possession or occupa tion of other property, such authority should consider the feasibility to give them fresh allotment of some other property.
[16B] Babu Manmohan Das Shah & Ors.
vs Bishun Das, ; and Qudrat Ullah vs Municipal Board, Bareilly, ; , referred to.
