The department took the view that in respect of the yarn manufactured between 17.3.72 and 23.7.72 the assessee is liable to pay the normal duty payable on yarn under Item 18E so long as the fabric manufactured out of such yarn remained uncleared from the factory as on 24.7.1972.
On the other hand the assessee 's contention was that excise duty on yarn is attracted as soon as it is produced and cleared for captive consumption.
The Customs, Excise & Gold Control Appellate Tribunal (CEGAT) accepted the contention of the assessee and held that the yarn cleared for captive consumption during the period from 17.3.72 to 23.7.72 in terms of the special procedure was entitled to the benefit of the rate fixed under Notification No. 62/72 CE dated 17.3.72 and that no further duty was payable on that quantity of the yarn and a consequential refund to the appellants was directed.
Ag grieved by the order of the Tribunal the department pre ferred these appeals to this Court.
While dismissing the appeals and upholding the view taken by the Tribunal, this Court, HELD: Rules 96 V & W of the Central Excise Rules, deal with two items: cotton yarn or yarn falling under item 18E of the First Schedule and woollen yarn.
Normally, under the schedule to the Act, woollen yarn was being charged to excise duty on an ad valorem basis while cotton and other yarn was being assessed on weight basis.
[92C] Yarn is an excisable commodity and but for the special procedure 87 and notification, duty thereon is leviable at the point of production and clearance for captive consumption.
The duty attached itself at the point of production and clearance of the yarn.
The notification does not alter this position.
It does not shift the incidence of duty from yarn to the woven fabric.
[94E F] The proviso to Rule 96 W does not help the Revenue.
It only contemplates cases where there is a change in the rates prescribed under the notification between the date of pro duction of the yarn and the date of clearance of the fabric.
[94H; 95A] The words of the proviso can be extended to cover a case where the notification itself has ceased to apply by the date of clearance of the fabric.
To apply the proviso to such a case would result in its applicability to a totally different situation.
It would involve a comparison of un likes.
[95E] Crown Spinning & Manufacturing Co. Ltd. vs Collector, , referred to.
