The plaintiff appellant was dismissed from service by the Collector on 13.1.1966.
His departmental appeal was dismissed by the Divisional Commissioner on 31.8.1966.
Thereupon the appellant instituted a suit on 30.1.1969 asking for a declaration that the order of dismissal was inoperative and that he continued to be in service.
The suit was dismissed by the trial court and that order was upheld by the appellate courts.
In dismissing the suit the courts below accepted the defence plea that it had been filed beyond the period of limitation prescribed therefore under Article 58 of the first Schedule of the Limitation Act.
Hence this appeal.
This appeal initially came up for hearing before a Division Bench of this Court.
At the hearing reli ance was placed before a decision of this Court in Sita Ram Goel vs The Municipal Board, Kanpur & Ors., ; in support of the contention that the suit was barred by limitation.
The Division Bench took the view that the deci sion of this Court rendered by five Judge Bench in Sita Ram Goel 's aforesaid required reconsideration.
This is how the appeal has come up before a Seven Judge Bench.
The question that fell for determination by the Court was 'When was the right to sue first accrued ' to the appellant i.e. whether from the date when the original adverse order of dismissal was passed against him or when the departmental/statutory appeal was finally disposed of.
The appellant 's contention is that the original order having merged in the final order whereby his departmental appeal was disposed of, the right to sue accrued from that date and on this reckoning, the suit filed by him was within time.
44 Allowing the appeal and remanding the matter to trial Court, this Court, HELD: Powers of adjudication ordinarily vested in courts are being exercised under the law by tribunals and other constituted authorities.
[51H] In respect of many disputes the jurisdiction of the court is now barred and there is a vesting of jurisdiction in tribunals and authorities.
That being the position, there is no justification for the distinction between courts and tribunals in regard to the principle of merger.
[51H; 52A] It must be held in the instant case, that the order of dismissal made by the Collector did merge into the order of the Divisional Commissioner when the appellant 's appeal was dismissed on 31.8.1966.
[52B] The cause of action first arises when the remedies available to the public servant under the relevant service Rules as to redressal are disposed of.
[53B] The cause of action shall be taken to arise not from the date of the original adverse order but on the date when the order of the higher authority where a statutory remedy is provided entertaining the appeal or representation is made.
Where no such order is made, though the remedy has been availed of, a six months ' period from the date of preferring of the appeal or making of the representation shall be taken to be the date when cause of action shall be taken to have first arisen.
[53H; 54A] In every such case until the appeal or representation provided by a law is disposed of, accrual of the cause of action shall first arise only when the higher authority makes its order on appeal or representation and where such order is not made on the expiry of six months from the date when the appeal was filed or representation was made.
[54D] Redressal of grievances in the hands of the departmental authorities taken an unduly long time.
That is so on account of the fact that no attention is ordinarily bestowed over these matters and they are not considered to be governmental business of substance.
This approach has to be deprecated and authorities on whom power is vested to dispose of ap peals and revisions under the service Rules must dispose of such matters as expeditiously as possible.
[52G H] 45 Ordinarily, a period of three to six months should be the outer limit.
That would discipline the system and keep the public servant away from a protracted period of litiga tion.
[53A] Sita Ram Goel vs The Municipal Board, Kanpur & Ors., ; , overruled.
Madan Gopal Rungta vs Secretary to the Government of Orissa, [1962] Supp.
3 SCR 906, followed.
Pierce Leslie Co. Ltd. vs Violet Ouchterlony Wapshare & Ors., and vice verse; , ; State of Uttar Pradesh vs Muhammad Nooh, ; ; Collector of Customs, Calcutta vs East India Commercial Co. Ltd., ; Somnath Sahu vs State of Orissa & Ors., ; C.I.T.v.
Amrit Lal Bhagilal & Co., [1959] SCR 713 and Raghuvir Jha vs State of Bihar & Ors., , referred to.
