In pursuance of an order of detention dated 15.4.1988, passed by the District Magistrate, Meerut, the Petitioner, a bachelor and having no property, was arrested on 2nd October 1988 and detained under Section 3(2) of the National Securi ty Act.
The petitioner was supplied with the grounds of detention enumerating therein the ' acts committed by him on 2nd, 3rd and 4th April 1988 and on 9.4.88 and the provoca tive speeches made by him on the occasion of Shabberat a Muslim festival to the effect that Hindus had deliberately "sent their cow on the road" and the "people are silent" and about teaching "them" a lesson and administration 's failure to fix a long speaker in the mosque These acts and the speeches made by the petitioner.
were, in the opinion of the detaining authority, prejudicial to the maintenance of public order.
The representation made by the petitioner against the order of detention was rejected and the order of his detention was confirmed.
Thereupon, the petitioner has filed this Writ Petition under Article 32 of the Constitution challenging his deten tion.
The contentions of the petitioner are that (i) that there was inordinate delay in arresting the petitioner which indicated that the order of detention was not based on a bona fide and genuine belief that the action and conduct of the petitioner were such that the same were prejudicial to the maintenance of Public Order and the so called "grounds" were merely make belief and not genuine grounds; (ii) that the grounds were not germane to the maintenance of "public order" and (iii) that the grounds were vague and unintelli gible.
Allowing the Writ Petition, this Court, HELD: Sub section (2) of section 3 of the Act autho rises the Central Government or the State Government, if satisfied with respect to any person that with a view to preventing him from acting in any 57 manner prejudicial to the security of the state, it is found necessary, then the person can be detained.
Hence there must be conduct relevant to the formation of the satisfaction having reasonable nexus with the actions of the petitioner which are prejudicial to the maintenance of public order.
Existence of material relevant to the formation of satisfac tion and having rational nexus to the formation of the. satisfaction that because of certain conduct "it is neces sary" to make an order "detaining" such person, are subject to judicial review.
[60H; 61A B] Delay, unexplained and not justified, by the circum stances and the exigencies of the situation, is indicative of the fact that the authorities concerned were not and could not have been satisfied that "preventive custody" of the concerned person was necessary to prevent him from acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order.
Whether there has been unreasonable delay, depends upon the facts and circumstances of a particular situation.
[61C D] Satisfaction of the authorities based on conduct must precede action for prevention.
Satisfaction entails belief.
Satisfaction and belief are subjective.
Actions based on subjective satisfaction are objective indication of the existence of the subjective satisfaction.
Action based on satisfaction should be with speed commensurate with the situation.
[61E F] If in a situation the person concerned is not available or cannot be served then the mere fact that the action under section 7 of the Act has not been taken, would not be a ground to say that the detention order was bad.
Failure to take action, even if there was no scope for action under section 7 of the Act would not be decisive or determinative of the question whether there was undue delay in serving the Order of detention.
[62A B] The Petitioner has no property, so no property could be attached and as the Government 's case is that he was not available for arrest, no order under sec.
7 could have been possibly made.
This, however, does not salvage the situa tion.
The fact is that from 15th April 1988 to 12th May 1988, no attempt had been made to contact the Petitioner.
No explanation has been given for this.
There is also no explanation why from 29th September 1988 to 2nd October 1988, no attempt had been made.
It is however stated that from May to September 1988 the "entire police force" was extremely busy in controlling the situation.
Hence, if the law and order was threatened and prejudiced, it was not the conduct of the petitioner but because of "the inadequacy" or "inability" of the police force of Meerut City to control 58 the situation.
Therefore the fact is that there was delay.
The further fact is that the delay is unexplained.or not warranted by the facts/ situation.
To shift the blame for public order situation and raise the bogey of the conduct of the petitioner would not be proof of genuine or real belief about the conduct of the petitioner but only raising a red herring.
[62B E] The Court quashed the order of detention and directed the petitioner to be set at liberty forthwith.
[65B] Nizamuddin vs The State of West Bengal, ; ; Bhawarlal Ganeshmalji vs State of Tamil Nadu & Ant., ; at p. 638; Indradeo Mahato vs State of West Bengal, ; State of Gujarat vs Adam Kasam Bhaya, ; ; Subhash Bhandari vs Distt.
Magis trate, Lucknow & Ors., ; and Kanu Biswas vs State of West Bengal; , , referred to.
