For the spread of Hindi in North Eastern part of India an institution named Asom Hindi Prachar Samiti was formed on 3.11.38 at Gauhati.
In 1948 this Samiti was renamed as Assam Rashtrabhasha Prachar Samiti.
The Petitioner No. 1 herein is a registered body which claims to have a membership of about 22000 persons scattered all over the North Eastern part of India.
This Samity has a sole constitution known as Bidhan which is also a duly registered body.
The Samiti holds different examinations in Hindi twice a year, publishes text books in Hindi for Primary Schools, High Schools, Higher Secondary Schools and Colleges upto the degree standard.
Certificates issued by the Samity are recognised by the Government of India, the Government of Assam and various other organisations.
The Samiti also imparts training and teaching in Hindi through a number of Vidyalayas and Prama nita Pracharaks.
The assets and properties of the Samiti at the time of filing this Petition are stated to be worth Rs. 1,24,42,000.00.
According to the Bidhart, the management and administra tion of the Samiti is run by elected bodies namely Byabas thapika Sabha and Karyapalika, each having 5 years term from the date of holding of its first meeting.
The Karyapalika consisted of 17 members.
The Chief Minister of Assam was the Ex officio Adhyaksa of the Samiti but at the time of holding of the first meeting, the State of Assam was under Presi dent 's rule and consequently the office of Adhyaksha re mained vacant.
Petitioner No. 2 was unanimously elected Mantri.
Petitioner No. 2 and other office bearers of the Karyapalika held the first meeting on 19.8.1982 and the Karyapalika was running and managing the day 161 to day affairs of the Samiti efficiently and diligently.
The Samiti in its meeting held on 17.7.83 passed a resolution amending the Bidhan deleting the provision that the Chief Minister of Assam shall be the ex officio Adhyak sha of the Samiti.
This resolution was adopted in full compliance of Section 30 of the Bidhan and all members present in the meeting except one supported the resolution.
After the passing of this amendment, the Respondent No. 4 as alleged by the petitioners, passed an order dated 7.7.84 on political considerations purportedly to act as the Ex offi cio Adhyaksha of the Samiti declared a state of emergency in the Samiti in exercise of the powers conferred under section 16(Gha) of the Bidhan, dissolved the existing Karyapalika and constituted an ad hoc body with himself as Chairman and five others as members to manage the affairs of the Samiti and asked the Petitioners to hand over the charge of the Samiti to this Ad hoc committee.
Thereupon, the petitioners filed a suit for a declaration that the order dated 7.7.84 passed by Respondent No. 4 was void, illegal, without juris diction and unenforceable against the petitioner society.
The Petitioners also prayed for a permanent injunction restraining the respondents from giving effect to the order and also moved an application for issuance of a temporary injunction upon which a show cause notice was issued to the defendants who filed their objections.
While the matter was pending consideration of the question of issuing of a tempo rary injunction the Governor of Assam purporting to act under clause I of Article 230 of the Constitution of India promulgated an ordinance called the Asom Rashtrabhasha Prachar Samiti (taking over of management and control) Ordinance, 1984.
In due course the Ordinance was replaced by an Act passed by the Assam Legislative Assembly.
Under the Ordinance and the Act virtually the Samity which was a public body was substituted by a Board appointed by the Government and all the functions, properties and affairs of the Samiti were taken over by the Board.
It is this action taken under the Ordinance and ultimately the Act which is the subject matter of challenge in this Writ Petition.
It is contended that although the Act as its title discloses, was a temporary measure, was continued at perpetuity and the Samiti is being run by nominated members and the rights of the members of the Samiti under Article 19 of the Constitu tion of India have not only been restricted but taken away.
Even during the hearing it was indicated that the Government of Assam has no intention to end the temporary arrangement of the Samiti and by this process the State Government intends to deprive the members of the society their rights under Article 19(1)(C) for all times to 162 come.
In the Act there is no provision providing for resto ration of the elected bodies which shows that the use of phrase 'temporary ' was just an eye wash.
Accepting the contentions of the Petitioners, this Court while allowing the Writ Petition.
HELD: As the Act of 1984 and the Board nominated or appointed under Section 3 of the Act is controlling the affairs of the Society it is not necessary to go into the orders passed by the Chief Minister invoking the emergency powers although the facts alleged clearly go to show that except that the Constitution (Bidhan) was amended and the Chief Minister was dropped from the place which he used to enjoy before the amendment of the Bidhan, there was nothing serious justifying all these actions starting from invoking the emergency provisions till enacting the present Act.
[171G H; 172A] It is also apparent that since 1984 when this Act was passed and a notification appointing a Board was issued, the Government has not chosen to take any steps to restore the Society back to its elected authorities and office bearers and nor does it intend to do so even now.
Thus this Court is left with no option but to decide and decide upholding the Constitution and the right of association conferred under Article 19(1)(C) of the Constitution.
[175D E] The Complete Control has been taken away from the Peti tioner Society and is given to Board nominated by the Gov ernment.
The Board is not as an interim measure.
But will continue to control and manage the affairs of the society.
This amounts to taking away the fundamental right of the Petitioner Society to form an Association guaranteed under Article 19(1)(C) of the Constitution of India.
[170E] The Notification under the Act enacted by the Assam Legislature is set aside holding that the Act itself is ultra vires of the Constitution.
The Notification issued under Section 3 of the Act by which a Board was nominated to replace the Karyapalika and Byabasthapika Sabha is also quashed.
[175E] Damyanti Narang vs The Union of India and others, , referred to.
