The appellant is a company having its registered office at Ahmednagar in Maharashtra.
It carries on business as manufacturers of Ayurvedic preparations including "Asvas" and "Aristhas".
At the material time the appellant was manufacturing and selling an Ayurvedic product, "Ashvagand harist" which is a medicinal preparation containing self generated alcohol but not capable of being consumed as ordinary alcoholic beverages.
came into force on 1.4.1957.
The schedule to the said Act contained two items specifying "medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol" which are prepared by distillation or to which alcohol has been added and which are capable of being consumed as ordinary "alcoholic bever age" and "medicinal and toilet preparations not otherwise specified containing alcohol" as the commodities excisable under the provisions of the Act.
The said "Ashvagandharist" was treated and accepted by the Excise Authorities as being exempt from the payment of excise duty upon the basis and footing that the same was an Ayurvedic preparation contain ing self generated alcohol which was not capable of being consumed as ordinary alcoholic beverage and which fell under item 2(i) of the schedule in respect of which, the rate of excise duty prescribed in the schedule was "Nil".
130 The Act was amended by Amendment Act 19 of 1961 whereby concept of "patent and proprietary" medicine was introduced in the schedule.
The Amendment Act, by an Explanation intro duced in the schedule the definition of "patent and proprie tary" medicine contained in the Drugs Act 1940.
Despite the said amendment in the schedule the appellants ' product continued to be treated as exempt from the liability to pay excise duty on the ground that it was covered under item 2(i) of the schedule which item was re numbered as item 3(i) of the schedule.
Thereafter by section 18 of the Finance Act 1962, the Act was further amended by substitution of Expla nation I to the schedule of the Act.
By the said explana tion, a "patent and proprietary" medicine was defined as a medicinal preparation of the description and the type speci fied in the Explanation.
The said Explanation was given retrospective effect from April 23, 1962.
In pursuance of the said Explanation I brought by the Finance Act, Director of Prohibition and Central Excise, Govt.
of Maharashtra, Bombay issued a circular dated May 31, 1962, which inter alia directed that the medicinal preparations containing self generated alcohol but not capable of being consumed as alcoholic beverage were to be treated as products falling under Item No. I and not Item 3 of the schedule.
As a result of that circular, the Respondents levied excise duty on the appellants ' product amounting to Rs.2, 18,282.16p.
and realized the same from the appellant.
The appellant paid the amount "under protest".
With a view to recover the aforesaid amount, which according to the appellant, was illegally recovered by the Respondents, the appellant filed a suit, being special suit No. 23 of 1965 in the Court of Civil Judge Sr. Division, Ahmednagar.
The Civil Judge by his order dated 27.3.69 decreed the appellantplaintiff 's suit with interest at 6% per annum from the date of the suit till realisation.
The Respondents appealed to the High Court against the Order of the Civil Judge and the High Court allowed the appeal, reversed the Judgment and decree passed by the Civil Judge and dismissed the appellant 's suit.
Hence this appeal by the plaintiff appellant by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: From Explanation I of the Schedule of the Act as substituted by Act 5 of 1964 it is clear that patent or proprietary medicine 131 means any medicinal preparation which is not specified in a monograph in a Pharmacopoeia, Formulary or other publica tions notified in this behalf by the Central Government in the Official Gazette.
[144C] To be a patent medicine one would be required to have a patent.
A patented article means an article in respect of which a patent is in force, [144D] A patent medicine will, therefore, mean medicine in respect of which a patent is in force.
[144E] Patent means a grant of some privilege property, or authority, made by the Government or sovereign of a country to one or more individuals.
A proprietor is one who has the legal right or exclusive title to anything.
It is synonymous with owner.
A person entitled to a trade mark or a design under the Acts for the registration or patenting of trade mark or design is called a proprietor of the trade mark or design.
[144E F] A Schedule in an Act of Parliament is a mere question of drafting.
It is the legislative intent that is material.
An Explanation to the Schedule amounts to an Explanation in the Act itself.
[147F] The Schedule may be used in construing provisions in the body of the Act.
It is as much an Act of the Legislature as the Act itself and it must be read together with the Act for all purposes of construction.
Expressions in the Schedule cannot control or prevail against express enactment and in case of any inconsistency between the schedule and the enactment, the enactment is to prevail and if any part of the schedule cannot be made to correspond it must yield to the Act.
[147H; 148A B] An explanation is different in nature form a proviso, for a proviso excepts, excludes or restricts while an expla nation explains or clarifies.
Such explanation or clarifica tion may be in respect of matters whose meaning is implicit and not explicit in the main section itself.
[149F] Bihta Marketing Union vs Bank of Bihar, ; ; ; State of Bombay vs United Motors, ; ; Collector of Customs vs G. Dass & Co., AIR 1966 SC 1577; Burmah Shell Oil Ltd. vs Commercial Tax Officer, AIR 1961 SC 315: ; Dattatraya Govind Mahajan vs State of Maharashtra, ; (928): ; and Hiralal 132 Ratanlal vs State of U. P., ; Ex praecedentibus et consequentibus optima fit interpre tatio.
The best interpretation is made from the context.
Injustum est nisi tota lege inspecta, de una aliqua ejus particula proposita judicare Vel respondere.
It is unjust to decide or respond as to any particular part of a law without examining the whole of the law.
Interpretare et concordare leges ligibus, est optimus interpretendi modus.
To interpret and in such a way as to harmonize laws with laws, is the best mode of interpretation.
[151G H] Jura eodem modo distituentur quo constitutuntur.
Laws are abrogated by the same means (authority) by which they are made.
[152A] Every word in a Statute is to be given a meaning.
A construction which would leave without effect any part of the language of a statute will normally be rejected.
Every clause of a statute is to be construed with reference to the context and other clauses of the Act so as to make, as far as possible, a consistent enactment of the whole statute.
[152B] A specific provision to include Ayurvedic preparations containing self generated alcohol which are not capable of being consumed as ordinary alcoholic beverages was neces sary.
That having not been done by the Explanation itself, it was not permissible to include it by the Circular.
The Explanation I could not have been in conflict with the provisions of the Act and the Circular could not have been in conflict with the Explanation, the Schedule, the Rules and the Act.
[152E F] The Court set aside the order of the High Court and restored that of the Civil Judge decreeing the suit.
[152G] Inland Revenue Commissioners vs Gittus, [1920] I KB 563; Baidyanath Ayurved Bhawan Pvt. Ltd. vs The Excise Commis sioner, U.P.; , ; Mohanlal Maganlal Bhavsar vs Union of India, ; Commissioner of Sales Tax vs The Modi Sugar Mills Ltd., ; and Cape Brandy Syndicate vs Commissioners of Inland Revenue, , referred to.
