Respondent has been using Sodium Sulphate in the process of manufacture of paper and paper boards, and by virtue of Notification No. 105/82 CE dated 28.2.1982 claimed pro forma credits.
The Superintendent of Central Excise de clined the claim on the ground that Sodium Sulphate was burnt up in the process of manufacture and was not retained in the paper, and therefore, could not be considered .as raw material in the manufacture of paper.
He also issued a show cause notice for the recovery of proforma credits already availed of by the respondent.
On appeal, however, the Assistant Collector set aside the show cause notice holding that Sodium Sulphate was an essential raw material in the manufacture of paper and as such attracted the benefit of the notification.
But, the Collector of Central Excise (Appeals) set aside the order of the Assistant Collector and remitted it back to him for readjudication.
Respondent challenged this order before the Customs, Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal.
Adopting the reasoning in its earlier decision in Seshasayee Paper and Boards Ltd. vs Collector of Central Excise, , the Tribunal allowed the appeal and restored the order of the Assistant Collector.
This appeal under Section 35 L(b) of the is against the Tribunal 's order.
On behalf of the Appellant, it was contended that the word "raw material" connotes something more than what is 'used ' in the manufacture and requires that goods to become "raw material" must either in their original or altered form, endure as a composite element of the end product.
324 The Respondent contended that Sodium Sulphate was an essential chemical ingredient in the chemistry of paper technology and the fact that the ingredient was actually burnt up or sublimated in the process; and did not retain its identity in the end product, will not detract from its being a raw material.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: 1.1.
The Tribunal was right in its conclusion that Sodium Sulphate was used in the manufacture of paper as "Raw Material" within the meaning of the Notification No. 105/82/CE dated 28.2.1982.
[333A] 1.2.
The expression "Raw Material" is not a defined term.
The meaning to be given to it is the ordinary and well accepted connotation in the common parlance of those who deal with the matter.
The ingredients used in the chemi cal technology of manufacture of any end product might com prise, amongst others, of those which may retain their dominant individual identity and character throughout the process and also in the end product; those which, as a result of interaction with other chemicals or ingredients, might themselves undergo chemical or qualitative changes and in such altered form find themselves in the end product; those which, like catalytic agents, while influencing and accelerating the chemical reaction, however, may themselves remain uninfluenced and unaltered and remain independent of and outside the end products and those, as here, which might be burnt up or consumed in the chemical reactions.
It could be that the ingredient should be so essential for the chemi cal processes culminating in the emergence of the desired end product, that having regard to its importance in the indispensability for the process, it could be said that its very consumption on burning up is its quality and value as raw material.
In such a case, the relevant test is not its absence in the end product, but the dependence of the end product for its essential presence at the delivery end of the process.
The ingredient goes into the making of the end product in the sense that without its absence, the presence of the end product, as such, is rendered impossi ble.
This quality should coalesce with the requirement that its utilisation is in the manufacturing process as distinct from the manufacturing apparatus.
[331F H; 332A C] Deputy Commissioner of Sales Tax, Board of Revenue vs Thomas Stephen & Co. Ltd., JT , distinguished.
Seshasayee Paper and Boards Ltd. vs Collector of Central Excise, 325 ; Collector of Central Excise vs Eastend Paper Industries Ltd., SC; Collector of Central Excise, Nagpur vs Ballarpur Industries Ltd., Chan drapur, and Collector of Central Excise, Bhubaneshwar vs Titaghur Paper Mills, , referred to. 2.
It cannot be gain said that Sodium Sulphate used was anterior to and at one stage removed from the actual manu facture of paper.
Section 2(1 ') of the Act defines 'manufac ture ' and it takes within it all ancillary and incidental purposes.
Where any particular process, is so integrally connected with the ultimate production of goods that, but for that process, manufacture or processing of goods would be commercially inexpedient, articles required in that process, would fail within the expression 'in the manufac ture of goods '.
[332F G, 331D] Collector of Central Excise vs Eastend Paper Industries Ltd., SC, followed.
is not always possible to draw a line of strict demarcation between what can be said to be 'goods ' merely used in the manufacture and what constitute goods used as "Raw Material" for that purpose.
In the infinite variety of ways in which these problems present themselves it is nei ther necessary nor wise to enunciate principles of any general validity intended to cover all cases.
The matter must rest upon the facts of each case Though in many cases it might be difficult to draw a line of demarcation, it is easy to discern on which side of the boarder line a particu lar case falls.
[333B C] Pragmatism and Theory in English Law, page 75, Hamlyn Lectures of 1987; Attorney General vs Brighton & Hove Co operative Association, ; Mayor of South Port vs Morris, , relied on.
