The appellant, a contractor had entered into a contract with the Respondent on 22nd April 1978 for the construction of an embankment across Musaliyar Podom between chainage 2573.5 M to 2827 M of E.B. Main conal of Kallada Irrigation Project.
Under the contract agreement, the work was to the completed by March 30, 1980 i.e. two years From the date of selection notice which was dated March 30, 1978.
The appel lant having failed to complete the work as per the terms of the contract, the Respondent by a notice dated 26.4.80 cancelled the contract at his risk and cost.
Consequent there to the appellant filed a claim before the named Arbi trator (Case No. 132 of 1980), claiming enhancement of rates in respect of the earth work involved in the contract.
He also claimed interest on delayed payment and costs.
The respondent resisted the claim and urged that the appellant was not entitled to any enhancement, as the appellant should have visualised and assessed the position before entering into work contract which was to be completed within 2 years.
According to respondent the appellant had not even completed 35% of the work.
Respondent, No. 2, therefore, filed a counter claim for Rs.28,84,000.
The Arbitrator made the award on 22.1.1981 in respect of claim No. 1 thereby directing the Respondents to pay 35 per cent increase in the agreed rate for the item of earth work.
However claim regarding interest on delayed payment was disallowed.
As regards the counterclaim filed by the Re spondent, the Arbitrator ordered that those issues will be considered separately and thus no award in respect thereof was made.
The appellant thereupon filed O.P. (Arbitrator) 81 of 1981 before the Sub Judge Trivandrum for making the award a rule of the Court.
399 The Respondents having raised objection to the making of the award a Rule of the Court, the Sub Judge remitted the reference to the arbitrator by his order dated 18.8.81 for fresh consideration, as the arbitrator had failed to consid er the counter claim made by the respondent.
The appellant applied for review of the said order passed by Sub Judge.
Contemporaneously, the appellant filed another claim peti tion before the arbitrator (case No. 276 of 1980) in respect of the wrongful termination of the contract and made claim in respect of 13 items.
On 29th October 1981, the arbitrator made an award whereby he ordered that the re arrangement of the work should not be at the risk and cost of the appel lants.
He also ordered 30% increase in rates for all items of work carried out by the appellant, except however those items, which stood covered by his earlier award.
Some of the other claims were also allowed.
The appellant filed O.P. (Arbitrator) 296 of 1981 for making the second award a Rule of the Court to which the Respondents raised objections.
The Sub Judge by his order dated March 18, 1982 made the award a rule of the Court dismissing the plea of res judicata raised by the Respondents.
The Respondents being dissatisfied with the order passed by Sub Judge preferred two appeals before the Kerala High Court.
The High Court allowed both the appeals holding that the Sub Judge could not review his order of the facts of the present case.
The High Court also held that principle of constructive res judicata would apply to the arbitration case.
Accordingly the High Court set aside the orders of the Sub Judge as also the award and directed that the arbitrator shah dispose of the Arbitration case No. 132 of 1980 afresh in the light of the Judgment of Sub Judge in O.P. (Arbitrator) No. 81 of 1981 and in accord ance with law after taking into consideration the claim of the appellant and the counter claim of the Respondents.
Hence these appeals by the appellant by Special Leave.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court, HELD: It is the duty of the Arbitrator while considering the claims of the appellants to consider also the counter claims made on behalf of the Respondents and to make the award after considering both the claims and counter claims.
This has not been done and the Arbitrator did not at all consider the counter claims of the respondents in making the award.
As such the first award dated 22.1.81 made by the Arbitrator in Arbitration Case No. 132 of 1980 is wholly illegal and unwarranted and the High Court was right in holding that the Arbitrator misconducted himself and in the proceedings by making such an award, and in setting, aside the same and directing the Arbitrator to dispose of the reference in accordance with law con 400 sidering the claim of the contractor and the counter claim of the respondent.
[406F G] The order allowing the application for review by the Trial Court is also had inasmuch as there was no mistake or error apparent on the face of the order dated August 18, 1981 made O.P. (Arbitrator) No. 81 of 1981 nor any suffi cient reason has been made out for review of the said order.
[406H; 407A] In the instant case, the contract was terminated by the Respondents on April 26, 1980 and as such all the issues arose out of the termination of the contract and they could have been raised in the first claim petition fried before the arbitrator by the appellant.
This having not been done, the second claim petition before the arbitrator raising the remaining disputes is clearly barred.
[407H; 408A] Section 41 of the Arbitration Act provides that the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure will apply to the Arbitration proceedings.
The provisions of res judicate are based on the principle that there shall be no multiplicity of proceedings and there shall be finality of proceedings.
[408B] Muhammad Hafiz & Anr.
vs Mirza Muhammad Zakaria & Ors., AIR 1922 (PC) 23; Darvao & Ors.
vs The State of U. P. & Ors., ; at 582 83; Satish Kumar & Ors.
V. Surinder Kumar & Ors., , referred to.
