The appellants are interested in running educational institutions which are covered by the expression "private educational institution" within the meaning of Section 2(f) of the Tamil Nadu Private Educational Institutions (Regula tion) Act, 1966.
The vires of the Act especially sections 2(c), 3(a), 3(b), 6, 7, read with sections 15, 22 and 28, was challenged before the High Court, by way of a writ petition.
The High Court struck down section 28 and upheld the other sections.
This appeal by certificate is against the High Court 's judgment upholding the validity of the said sections.
As regards the striking down of section 28, it has not been impugned by the respondent State.
The appellants contended that the Act does not lay down any guideline for the exercise of power by the delegated authority and so the decision of the competent authority is bound to be discriminatory and arbitrary.
It was also con tended that the Act imposed unreasonable restrictions on the appellants in the running of tutorial institutions, and such regulations were violative of Article 29(1)(g) of the Con stitution of India.
On behalf of the respondent, it was stated that suffi cient guidance is available to the authority concerned, by virtue of subsection (2)(c) of Section 4 and hence the appellants ' contentions were not justified.
372 Allowing the appeal, HELD: 1.1.
It is well established that determination of legislative policy and formulation of rule of conduct are essential legislative functions which cannot be delegated.
What is permissible is to leave to the delegated authority the task of implementing the object of the Act after the legislature lays down adequate guidelines for the exercise of power.
Examined in this light, the impugned provisions of the Tamil Nadu Private Educational Institutions (Regulation) Act, 1966 miserably fail to come to the required standard.
These sections are held to be invalid.
They are inextricably bound up with the other parts of the Act so as to form part of a single scheme, and it is not possible to sever the other parts of the Act and save them.
Hence, the entire Act is declared ultra vires.
[376D E; 379G] 1.2.
There is no indication, whatsoever, about the legislative policy or the accepted rule of conduct on the vital issue about the maintenance of academic standard of the institution and the other requirements relating to the building, library and necessary amenities for the students, as the Act is absolutely silent about the criteria to be adopted by the prescribed authority for granting or refusing permission.
Even the rules which were made under Section 27 in 1968 and called the Tamil Nadu Private Educational Insti tutions (Regulation) Rules, 1968, are not called upon to lay down any norm on these issues and naturally do not make any reference to these aspects.
The result is that the power to grant or refuse permission is to be exercised according to the whims of the authority and it may differ from person to person holding the office.
The danger of arbitrariness is enhanced by the unrestricted and unguided discretion vested in the State Government under Section 2(c) of the Act in the choice of competent authority.
[377E G] 2.1.
Section 6 which empowers the competent authority to grant or refuse to grant permission for establishing and running an institution does not give any idea as to the conditions which it has to fulfil before it can apply for permission under the Act, nor are the tests indicated for refusing permission or cancelling under Section 7 of an already granted permission.
[376H; 377A] 2.2.
The only safeguard given to the applicant institu tion is to be found in the first proviso to Section 6 which says that the permission shall not be refused unless the applicant has been given an opportunity of making his repre sentation, but that does not by itself protect the applicant from discriminatory treatment.
So far as Section 7 dealing with 373 power to cancel the permission granted earlier is concerned, no objection can be taken to the first part of the section, whereunder the permission may be cancelled in case of fraud, misrepresentation, suppression of material particulars or contravention of any provision of the Act or the Rules.
But the other ground on which the authority can exercise its power being contravention "of any direction issued by the competent authority under this Act" again suffers from the vice of arbitrariness.
[378B D] 2.3 Section 15 is too wide in terms and does not indi cate the nature of the direction or the extent within which the authority should confine itself while exercising the power.
Similarly under Section 22, the State Government has been vested with unrestricted discretion in picking and choosing the institutions for exemption from the Act.
[378D E] State of West Bengal vs Anwar Ali Sarkar, ; ; Kunnathat Thathunni Moopil Nair vs The State of Kerala and Anr., ; ; Harakchand Ratanchand Banthia and Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; , relied on.
