The Respondent had filed a suit for defamation in the Bombay High Court against the petitioner, claiming Rupees one crore as damages for the injury alleged to have been caused to his reputation by the publication/imputation of certain alleged defamatory statements made by the petitioner at a Press Conference held at New Delhi on January 10, 1989.
The allegation in the plaint was that the petitioner le velled several accusations at the said Press Conference which were widely circulated/reported in the newspapers of January 11, 1989.
In substance the allegation was that the Respondent and his family members pocketed more than Rs.300 crores through fraudulent deals in lands situate in Banga lore and other parts of Karnataka, whereby the respondent favoured his relatives/friends, besides non resident Indi ans.
By the instant petition, filed by the petitioner under section 25.
Code of Civil Procedure, the petitioner prays for the transfer of the said suit pending in Bombay High Court to any Civil Court in Karnataka, preferably the City Civil Court at Bangalore on the ground of forum non conven ience.
In support of the petition it is urged by the peti tioner that: (i) the petitioner 's father maintains a family house at Bangalore; (ii) that all the events that provide the defence to the litigation took place in Karnataka at Bangalore; (iii) that the entire documentary evidence touch ing the alleged acts being in official files and in private custody would be easily available in Bangalore, (iv) that most of the witnesses who are in the know of respondent 's wrongs are residents of Karnataka, more particularly Banga lore; (v) that the discovery and inspection of documents can be conveniently had in Bangalore; (vi) that the evidence relating to telephone tappings done at the behest of the respondent would be available in Karnataka, and (vii) that the people of Karnataka State are vitally interested in the outcome of the litigation.
For these reasons, amongst oth ers, the petitioner prays for the Transfer of the suit from Bombay to Bangalore.
470 The respondent while opposing the transfer of the suit contends that the petitioner having aligned himself with the Ruling Party at the Centre was indulging in making intemper ate, slanderous and false allegations against him with a view to maligning him and advancing the political interest of the Ruling Party at the Centre.
According to him the hearing of the suit has been delayed as the petitioner has not filed his written statement.
The respondent further contends that being the dominus litis he was entitled to choose the forum.
Allowing the petition, this Court, HELD: The Supreme Court is empowered at any stage to transfer any suit, appeal or other proceeding from a High Court or other Civil Court in one State to a High Court or other Civil Court of another State if it is satisfied that such an Order is expedient for the ends of justice.
[474H; 475A] The question of expediency would depend on the facts and circumstances of each case but the paramount consideration for the exercise of power must be to meet the ends of jus tice.
[476C] Words of wide amplitude for the ends of justice have been advisedly used to leave the matter to the discretion of the apex court as it is not possible to conceive of all situations requiring or justifying the exercise of power.
[475D] If the ends of justice so demand, the case may be trans ferred under this provision notwithstanding the right of dominus litus to choose the forum and considerations of plaintiff 's convenience, etc.
cannot eclipse the requirement of justice.
Justice must be done at all costs, if necessary by the transfer of the case from one Court to another.
[476D E] The ends of justice in the instant case demand that the suit be transferred from the Bombay High Court to the City Civil Court, Bangalore, where most of the documentary evi dence and the majority of witnesses are available.
Since the respondent ordinarily resides in Bangalore and was the Chief Minister of Karnataka during the period the various acts of which he is accused of took place, the impact of the accusa tion would be as much, if not more, on the readers of Banga lore.
No prejudice, much less substantial prejudice would be caused to the respondent if the suit is transferred as prayed.
[477C & F G] 471 Sanjay Gandhi and Anr.
vs Rani Jethmalani, ; and Union of India vs Shrimani Gurdwara Prabandhak Committee and Ors.
, ; , referred to.
