The respondent, employed as Yard Master in the South Central Railway, was on duty between 14.00 and 22.00 hours on 23rd February '86.
In the absence of a reliever, he was to continue his duty till 8.00 hours on 24th February '86.
He allowed his staff to take meals and since they did not return within a reasonable time, he went towards the cabin where the staff usually took their meals.
The Divisional Safety Officer who was coming down from the cabin, enquired of the respondent 's identity.
The respondent in turn asked for the identity of the said officer.
The officer was an noyed at this and threatened the respondent with dire conse quences.
Immediately thereafter the respondent was placed under suspension.
Further suspension followed and the re spondent was visited with the order of premature retirement under Rule 2046 of Indian Railway Establishment Code.
Respondent challenged the said order before the Central Administrative Tribunal and the Tribunal, relying on its decision in Shri Gafoor Mia & Ors.
vs Director, DMRL, AISLJ held that the Divisional Railway Manager who passed the impugned order of premature retirement was not competent to make such an order, and set aside the order.
This appeal, by special leave, is against the Tribunal 's order.
Though under sub clause (ii) of rule 2046(h), a class III employee cannot be retired prematurely after he has attained the age of 55 years, (unlike officers of class I & II) this clause was invoked in the case of respondent who was admittedly in class III service and did not attain the age of 55 years.
Appellant relied on para 620(ii) of the Railway Pension 457 Manual which gives the authority power to remove from serv ice a railway servant after he completed 30 years service.
On behalf of Respondent, it was contended that the appellant had been shifting its stand and trying to support the order on an extraneous ground which did not find a place in the order viz. unsatisfactory service record of the respondent; and there is no basis for it in view of the promotionS secured by the respondent, the last of which was just before the premature retirement.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.1 The order was passed under Rule 2046(h)(ii) of the Indian Railway Establishment Code without verifying whether or not the incumbent had attained the age of fifty five years.
Since the respondent was indisputably in class III service at the time the order came to be made, his case was governed by the second clause of Rule 2046(h).
The impugned order recites that the respondent had already completed thirty years of qualifying service but it does not state that he had attained the age of fifty five years.
According to the respondent he was running 54th year on that date.
That obviously took his case out of the purview of the said rule.
Even if the order was intended to he under Rule 2(2) of the Liberalised Pension Rules, 1950, this require ment had to be satisfied.
The immediate and proximate reason for passing the impugned order was undoubtedly the unfortu nate incident of 23/24th February, 1986.
BUt for that inci dent there was no occasion for the Review Committee to examine the case of the respondent.
If the service record of the respondent was so bad as is now sought to be made out, he would not have been promoted to the post of Asstt.
Yard Master an 22nd August, 1984 and later to the post of Yard Master on 31st January, 1986.
The order of premature retire ment is punitive in nature and having been passed in fla grant violation of the principles of natural justice, cannot be allowed to stand.
[426G H; 460F G; 463A B] 1.2 F.R. 56(j) of the Fundamental Rules is substantially the same as Rule 2046(h)(ii) of the Railway Establishment Code and Rule 2(2) of the Liberalised Pension Rules, 1950 is substantially the same as paragraph 620 of Railway Pension Manual.
Since Rule 2(2) has been struck down as violative of Article 14 of the Constitution, paragraph 620(ii) would meet the same fate.
Apart from the competence of the Divisional Railway Manager to pass the order, the order cannot also he supported under paragraph 620(ii).
[462B D] 458 Senior Superintendent of Post Office & Ors., vs Izhar Hussain, ; , relied on.
Union of India vs R. Narasimhan, ; , referred to.
The authorities concerned will do well to amend Rule 2(2) of the Liberalised Pension Rules, 1950, and paragraph 620(ii) of the Railway Pension Manual, so as to incorporate therein the requirement of public interest, making it clear that premature retirement on completion of qualifying serv ice of thirty years can be ordered in public interest only.
[463C D]
