The appellant is engaged in the business of manufacture of various pharmaceutical products including sulphamethoxa zole which is also known as 'SMX '.
One of the important ingredients or raw materials for the manufacture of SMX is a chemical known as 'isoxamine '.
On April 23, 1974 the Ministry of Industrial Development of the Government of India issued to the appellant an indus trial licence enabling it to manufacture 18 tonnes of SMX per year.
Under one of the conditions of the industrial licence, the appellant was permitted to import the material, isoxamine, for a period of two years only from the date of licence, and thereafter the product SMX was to be manufac tured from indigenous materials.
The appellant 's request for permission to import isoxamine till the middle of 1979 was not acceded to by the Government and the appellant was asked to manufacture SMX from indigenous materials.
In the mean time, the appellant had placed orders for the import of isoxamine under an import licence issued on October 13, 1976, and between March and June 1979 got the goods cleared after giving a declaration that the appellant was an Actual User, and that its registration had not been cancelled or withdrawn or otherwise made inoperative.
496 The Collector of Customs, Bombay, issued show cause notice on the appellant for confiscation of goods and impo sition of penalty, inter alia, on the ground that it had made a false statement that its registration had not been cancelled, withdrawn or otherwise made inoperative for the manufacture of SMX by using imported material, that is, isoxamine, inasmuch as the industrial licence had ceased to be valid for the manufacture of SMX with imported material after April 22, 1976.
The Collector of Customs, after bearing the appellant, held that the appellant was not an Actual User (Industrial) in respect of the said imported raw material, isoxamine, after April 22, 1976, and that since the industrial licence was invalid for manufacture of SMX with imported material the importation of the raw material, namely, isoxamine, was impermissible.
The Collector also held that the appellant had furnished a false declaration on the basis of which it got the goods cleared by the Custom Officer.
The Collector, therefore, set aside the decision of the Custom Officer allowing clearance of the goods.
The Collector of Customs further directed confiscation of the goods imported by the appellant and also imposed a penalty.
The appellant 's writ petition was dismissed by the learned Single Judge of the High Court, and appeal against his judgment was dismissed by the Division Bench.
Before this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that the goods, namely, isoxamine, having been imported under a valid Open General Licence (OGL), the customs authorities had no jurisdiction to confiscate the same; that the appellant having secured the OGL for the import of isoxamine for its own use and not for business or trade in it, the appellant should be held to be an Actual User; that the Collector of Customs could not, in exercise of his revisional jurisdiction under section 130(2) of the , as it stood then, for the first time confiscate the goods and impose penalty on the appellant; and that as the goods have been confiscated and the penalty has been imposed by the Collector of Customs in exercise of his revisional jurisdiction, the appellant has been deprived of his right to prefer an appeal before the Central Board of Excise and Customs under Section 128(a) of the .
While dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: (1) There can be no doubt that the definition of "Actual User (Industrial)", as contained in clause (3) of paragraph 5 of chapter 2 of Import Policy 1978 79 should be read with the definition of "Actual 497 User" in clause (1) of paragraph 5.
So read, it is clear that an "Actual User (Industrial)" means an industrial undertaking which is entitled to utilise the imported goods "in the manufacturing process or operations conducted within its authorised premises.
In other words, the importer must not be debarred from utilising the imported goods under the terms of the industrial licence.
[504C D] (2) The declaration of the appellant that it is an Actual User, and that its registration has not been other wise made inoperative is a false declaration, as rightly held by the Collector of Customs.
When the industrial li cence granted to the appellant does not permit the use of the imported goods for the manufacture of SMX, the importa tion of the goods under the OGL is illegal and could not be allowed to be cleared by the appellant.
[505A B] (3) In view of the provisions of section 122 read with section 124 of the , the Collector of Customs has the jurisdiction to confiscate goods or impose penalty after issuing show cause notice.
He has, therefore, both the original jurisdiction as also revisional jurisdiction.
In exercise of his revisional jurisdiction under section 130(2) of the Act, he set aside the order of the Customs Officer allowing the goods to be cleared by the appellant and, thereafter, in exercise of his original jurisdiction under section 122 read with section 124 of the Act, he issued a show cause notice on the appellant and, after hearing the appellant, confiscated the goods and imposed penalty on the appellant.
[506E F] (4) It appears, however, that the confiscation was made and the penalties imposed by the Collector of Customs in exercise of his revisional power under section 130(2) of the act.
This is a mere irregularity not affecting the order.
When an authority has the power to do a certain act and in exercise of such power he does the same, but refers to a wrong provision of the law, that would be a mere irregulari ty and would not vitiate such act.
[506G H; 507A] Addl.
Commissioner of Income Tax vs J.K. D 'Costa, , distinguished.
(5) In the order of the Collector it has been specifi cally stated at the very outset that an appeal against the order lies to the Central Board of Excise and Customs.
It cannot, therefore, be said that the appellant was misled, as the order was purported to have been passed by the Collector of Customs in exercise of his revisional jurisdiction. 498
