The respondent company obtained sanction of a building plan from the New Delhi Municipal Committee for the con struction of a building on a plot held by it on lease.
After incorporating certain changes, the respondent company sub mitted a revised plan for sanction of the New Delhi Munici pal Committee, but the same was rejected by an order Dated 18.12.1987.
A rectified plan was thereafter submitted by the re spondent to the New Delhi Municipal Committee, for necessary sanction, but as no orders were received, the respondent filed a writ petition in High Court seeking a direction to the New Delhi Municipal Committee to deal with the same for grant of necessary sanction.
During the pendency of the aforesaid writ proceedings the Delhi Urban Art Commission approved the plans as re quired under Section 12 of the Delhi Urban Art Commission Act, 1973.
The Chief Fire Officer also gave clearance to the building plans in relation to the Fire Safety Precautions.
The High Court allowed the Writ Petition by an Order dated 28.4.1989 holding that inspite of the clearance grant ed by the Urban Art Commission and the Chief Fire Officer, New Delhi Municipal Committee 's disinclination to accord the sanction was unjustified, and directed the New Delhi Munici pal Committee to convey the formal sanction in respect of the building plans.
In appeal to this Court, it was contended on behalf of the New Delhi Municipal Committee, that (i) in the matter of fire safety requirements, the building plans were not in accordance with Building Bye Laws for the Union Territory of Delhi, 1983; (ii) The clearance given by the Chief Fire Officer is not binding on the New Delhi Municipal Committee which can examine the question independently of such clear ance and (iii) the proposed building plan does not provide for a 'Podium"/"Pedestrian Walk way" as required under the approved Zonal Development Plan under Sec.
9(2) of the Delhi Development Act, 1957.
Setting aside the High Court Order dated April 28, 1989, this Court, HELD: 1.
The requirements of Bye Laws 16.4.8 arc not inflexible and in appropriate cases where the plans and designs incorporate fire safety measures which, in judgment of the Corporation are 593 considered to provide for the safety in a measure better than those envisaged by the bye laws 16.4.8 the Corporation would not be precluded from accepting them i.e. if a build ing design incorporate fire safety measures in a measure promoting fire safety precautions far better than those suggested by the Bye laws they should not fetter the hands of the licencing authority to accept them.
[609H; 610A, 609C] 1.1 Whether the plans submitted by Respondent distribut ing Refuge Area in each floor provide such a better and more reliable fire safety measures is a matter for the decision of the Corporation.
[610A] 1.2 It is, of course, wise in the interests of uniformi ty of administration of these Bye laws and of elimination of possible complaints of ' partisanship, that the Corporation should insist upon adherence to the requirements of the Bye law 16.4.8 on its own strict terms.
That should not, however, denude the power of the Corporation to accept designs which, in its judgment offer and incorporate fire safety precautions of higher measure.
[608H: 609A] 1.3 When fast and sweeping changes are overtaking the fundamental ideas of building design and construction and new concepts of building material emerging, it would be unrealistic to impute rigidity to provisions essentially intended to promote safety in building designs.
[609A] 2.
The clearance from the Chief Fire Officer envisaged by Bye law 17.1 is an additional condition and not a limita tion on the power of the Corporation to satisfy itself that the building plans provide for adequate fire safety precau tion in accordance with its bye laws or in a better measure.
The clearance by the Chief Fire Officer, which is expected to involve and follow a technical assessment and evaluation, obliges the Corporation to give due weight to it but, having regard to the scheme and language of the bye laws the deci sion of the Chief Fire Officer is not binding on the Corpo ration.
[609E] 2.1 The clearance of the plans by the Chief Fire Offi cer would not render it obligatory on the part of the Corpo ration ipso facto to treat the plans as necessarily comply ing with the requirements of relevant bye laws.
While the clearance by the Chief Fire Officer is an indispensable condition for eligibility for sanction, however, such clear ance, by itself, is not conclusive of the matter nor binding on the Corporation which is entitled to examine the question independently of such clearance from the Chief Fire Officer.
[609G; 610B] 594 3.
Bye law 16.4.8.1 requires that Refuge Areas shall be provided on the "external Walls" by means of cantilever projections or "in any other manner".
The words "in any other manner" in Bye law 16.4.8.1 are not intended to envis age a totally different idea of the location of Refuge Areas, but, prima facie, intended to suggest some feasible alternative to the technical design of the construction of the Refuge Area whether it should be a cantilever projec tion or designed in some other way.
The purpose of Refuge Areas include that in the event of an out break of fire in the building, persons exposed to the hazard should be able to have immediate access to a place of safety which by its access to fresh air insulates them from heat and smoke and further that those persons could conveniently be extricated and rescued to safety by rescue operations.
Therefore, "Refuge Areas" must be located on walls which open into vacant space from which rescue operations are possible.
[610C, 611B, 610D G] 3.1 The word "external wall" in bye law 16.4.8.1 which is a provision intended to promote public safety, health and well being must receive a purposive construction which promotes those objects and purposes.
Having regard to the very purpose of providing for Refuge Areas the expression "external wall" must be held to be one which abuts a vacant space to which fighting and rescue equipment can have access and from which rescue operations are feasible.
[610D; 610F] 3.2 In the instant case, the Refuge Areas are provided on the wails that open into an inner vacant space.
Refuge Area located on a wail though abutting an inner vacant space would not, by itself, promote the object if the vacant space is such that no rescue operations are possible to be con ducted therefrom.
If the fire fighting and rescue equipment cannot have access to such inner vacant space, then, in the context of the specific objectives of bye law 16.4.8.1 the wail abutting such inner vacant space would not be an "external wall" for the purpose of the said bye law.
The Corporation should decide this question and examine whether such rescue operations are feasible from the inner circular vacant space.
This is an exercise individual to each case and to be judged on case to case basis.
[610C; E, H; 611A] 4.
Though the Zonal Development Plans envisaged a raised pedestrian walk way on either side of Barakhamba Road and the provision for podia connecting the building with the walk way were accepted and an appropriate notification issued way back in 1966, no steps appear to have been taken to give effect to them in a uniform manner.
In fact several authorities including a Committee constituted by the Lt. Gover 595 nor of Delhi in 1983, and the Chief Fire Officer, have advised against the implementation of the proposal.
In such circumstances insistence to have such a pedestrian walk way for the building, if such walk ways do not already obtain in other buildings on the Road, requires reconsideration.
Moreover, the insistence for provision of such a walk way in an individual case without the integration and continuation of the walk way along the whole of the road, would indeed, be purposeless.
[611G H; 612A B] [Respondent to effect such rectifications to 'the plans in regard to the Refuge Area as may be necessary, the New Delhi Municipal Committee to consider and decide the ques tion of according sanction to the plans without insisting upon any fresh clearance from Delhi Urban Arts Commission or the Chief Fire Officer.
Appeal to be kept pending and be taken for final disposal after the submission of the report from New Delhi Municipal Committee]
