The appellants had Fried separate writ petitions in the High Court challenging the basis for determination of 'irr igated land ' under section 4A of the U.P. Imposition of Ceiling on Land Holdings Act, 1960.
In view of conflicting interpretations given earlier by Single Judges of that High Court, a reference was made to the Division Bench in the case of the petitioner/appellant Kallu Following the ratio laid down by the Division Bench in Kallu vs State of U.P., the writ petitions were dismissed.
Before this Court, the appellants disputed the correct ness of the view taken by the Division Bench, and contended that in order to classify a land as irrigated land, there should be evidence of 'assured irrigation ' and, secondly, that the two crops in a Fasli year should have been raised on the entire extent of the land and not in a portion of land alone.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court, HELD: (1) The Uttar Pradesh Imposition of Ceiling on Land Holdings Act, 1960 is a piece of social legislation for achieving the several objectives set out in the preamble.
In order to give greater thrust to the objects underlying the Act, the Legislature has changed the basis for reckoning the ceiling area from that of 'fair quality land ' to that of 'assured irrigation facilities ' available to a land.
[574C D] (2) On a reading of section 4A, it may be seen that the Legislature has prescribed different kinds of tests on the basis of which the authorities have to determine whether a land is irrigated or not for the purpose of determining the ceiling area of a tenure holder.
The two broad tests are (1) availability of irrigation facilities and (2) the factum of raising or the capability of the soil raising at least two crops in an agricultural year.
[573F G] 568 (3) There is no merit in the contention that in addition to the materials and records set out in the section there must be independent evidence of assured irrigation facility before ever a Prescribed Authority can form an opinion about a land having assured irrigation facility.
[574F] (4) Sub clause (b) of section 4 A cannot be read so as to mean that two crops should have been grown on the entire extent of a land having irrigation facility for classifying the land as 'irrigated land ' as it would have the effect of limiting the operation of the sub clause contrary to the legislative intent.
[575A] (5) The classification has to be made with reference to the potentiality of the land to yield two crops in one Fasli year and not on the basis of the actual raising of two crops on the entire extent of the land.
[574H] (6) The raising of two crops even on a portion of the land will prove in the absence of material to show poor quality of soil in portions of the land due to salinity etc.
the uniform nature and content of the soil of the entire land.
[575D]
