The proviso to section 7(2)(a) of the Andhra Pradesh Build ings (Lease, Rent and Eviction) Control Act, 1960 prohibits payment of any sum exceeding one month 's rent by way of advance, clause (b) thereto makes any such sum refundable or at the option of the tenant otherwise adjustable, and sub section
(3) declares the stipulation for payment of rent in advance beyond that of one month as null and void.
The appellant tenant took the demised premises on a thirty year lease beginning from September 9, 1969 and paid a large amount as advance, only a part of which was adjust able towards the stipulated rent in the subsequent months and the balance was to be paid back under a valid receipt after the expiry of the lease period.
The lease deed did not have a forfeiture clause.
The respondent land lord initiated action for eviction in October 1973 on the plea that the tenant had failed to pay rent for a certain subsequent period.
The tenant advanced the plea of payment.
The land lord placed the account books of the appellant and claimed the benefit of section 34 of the Evidence Act.
All the courts below found that the payment as claimed had not been estab lished.
In this appeal by special leave, it was contended that the balance of advance which lay in the hands of the re spondent landlord was either refundable to the tenant or adjustable against rent under section 7 of the Act, and if out of that sum the arrears were available to be adjusted the tenant was not at all in default; that the lease of 1969 being for a term of thirty years certain, eviction could not be claimed against a contractual tenant during the subsist ence of the lease, and that the lease did not have a forfei ture clause so as to bring the matter within the ambit of section 111(g) of the Transfer of Property Act.
726 Allowing the appeal by special leave, HELD: 1.
The stipulation in the lease deed that the amount of advance would be refundable at the end of the tenancy was null and void under section 7(3) of the Act.
The said amount became payable to the tenant immediately.
It was thus held by the landlord on account of the tenant on the date of filing of the petition for eviction.
The tenant could not, therefore, be considered a defaulter for a smaller amount by not paying the rent for some months.
[730D, 729BC, 730E] Mohd. Salimuddin vs Misri Lal & Anr., ; and M/s. Sarwan Kumar Onkar Nath vs Subhas Kumar Agarwalla, ; referred to.
The lease being for a term of thirty years was to expire in September, 1999.
The deed did not stipulate a forfeiture clause.
In the absence of such a clause the contractual tenancy was subsisting under the provisions of the Transfer of Property Act.
There could not, therefore, be any eviction from such a tenancy.
[730F]
