Under Heading No. 44.01 of Schedule to the , timber was chargeable to customs duty (basic effective duty) at 60%.
However, under a Notification issued by the Government under Section 25(1) of the , timber imported from certain countries was ex empted, but an additional duty (auxiliary duty) was payable on Such imports in terms of Notification No. 265 dated 1.12.1982 and its successor Notifications No. 53 of 1983 and 126 of 1984.
The assessee imported logs of timber from an exempted country, and as it was not liable to pay the basic duty, it cleared the goods by paying the auxiliary duty at 40%, with reference to the effective basic duty at 60%, as prescribed under Notification No. 126 of 1984.
Subsequently, however, the assessee felt that it should have paid an auxiliary duty of only 30%, and not 40% since no basic effective duty was payable on the goods imported.
It, therefore, applied to the respondent for refund of the excess duty paid by it.
This claim was rejected by the Assistant Collector.
On appeal, the Collector of Customs (Appeals) held that the assessee was entitled to the refund claimed.
This order was confirmed by the Customs Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal (CEGAT), on the view that the explanation would come into operation only if there was more than one notification granting concession or exemption, in respect of basic duty, providing for different rates in respect of articles import ed from different countries.
Hence, the appeals by the Department.
Allowing the appeals, this Court, HELD: 1.
The Tribunal has erred in its interpretation of the Notification No. 126 of 1984.
The assessee 's case is clearly covered by 780 the explanation in the notification.
The auxiliary duty paid by the assssee was perfectly in order and its refund appli cations are not maintainable.
[783D, 785E] 2.1 The notification and the explanation make it clear that the auxiliary duty has to be paid with reference to each article based on the effective basic duty applicable to such article in terms of the First Schedule read with any relevant notification under Section 25.
[785D] 2.2 No doubt, the main part of Notification No. 126 of 1984 provides for auxiliary duty at 40% where rate of effec tive basic duty is 60% or above i.e. rates set out in First Schedule read with any relevant notification and at 30% where such effective rate is nil or less than 60%.
However, the explanation to the notification has made an inroad into this simple rule by providing that where two or more effec tive basic rates are applicable in respect of any article, and the differentiation in rates is referable to the country of origin, then the auxiliary duty payable will be the higher of the two, or highest of the rates.
[783E G] 2.3 In the instant case, when timber is imported from the countries specified in the notification or notifications under Section 25(1), the rate of basic duty is nil, but if the goods are imported from other countries, the notifica tion does not apply and a basic duty of 60% would be levi able under the entry in the First Schedule.
Thus, when the rates specified in the First Schedule are read along with the relevant notifications, it is found that the effective basic duty is leviable on it at two rates and this differen tiation in rates is attributable to the country of origin in regard to the import.
Hence, the explanation squarely comes into operation and the auxiliary duty will have to be paid by reference to the higher of the two rates of the effective basic duty, namely, 60%.
[783G H; 784A] 2.4 The differentiation referred to in the explanation need not arise on account of the existence of more than one notification, altering the basic duty set out in the Sched ule.
It does not matter whether the difference in the rates is because the First Schedule applies in certain cases and a concession notification in other cases.
If there is no notification the rate specified in the First Schedule has to be taken into account for purpose of the notification in question.
[784D E] 2.5 A person will have to pay an auxiliary duty even though the effective basic duty is nil.
That is the clear intention of the statutory instrument and the explanation is based on good reason.
It is equitable 781 that all importers should pay the additional duty at the same rate and that they should have no advantage or disad vantage inter se.
A grant of concession in the matter of auxiliary duty as well would result in widening the gulf between one importer and another and also that between such an importer and the local trader.
[784F; 785A]
