Import of timber is charged to effective basic .customs duty at 60 per cent under the .
The Government of India had, however, issued notification under section 25 of the absolutely exempting timber imported from Burma.
But the importers are liable to pay auxiliary duty in terms of Notification No. 265 dated Decem ber 8, 1982 and its successor Notification Nos.
59 of 1983 and 126 of 1984, which prescribed two rates with reference to the rate of duty of customs.
The explanation thereto provides that where there are two effective basic rates applicable in respect of any article and the differentiation in rates is attributable to the country of origin of the goods imported, then the auxiliary duty payable will be the higher of the two rates.
The respondents had imported certain consignments of timber from Burma which were assessed to auxiliary duty at the higher rate as per notification.
The Appellate Tribunal held in favour of the assessee respondents.
In these appeals by the Revenue under section 130E(b) of the , it was contended for the respondents that exemptions Or concessions in respect of goods imported from certain countries were generally granted in pursuance of trade agreements entered into with those countries under section 5 of the Tariff Act, that the expression "country of origin" in the notification had a special meaning and its determina tion governed by special provisions, and that, therefore, the explanation to the notification in question had to be confined in its application only to a comparison of the rates applicable under notification of concession and basic auxiliary duty determined accordingly.
Allowing the appeals, 776 HELD: The auxiliary duty, in a case where imports from different countries attract different degrees of exemption under different notifications in pursuance of agreements under section 5 of the should be determinable separately by reference to the effective basic duty notified in respect of each such country.
But, if there are different rates of effective duty notified for goods imported from different countries of origin, then, notwithstanding the agreement with each of these countries, the auxiliary duty under such a notification will not be determined, in respect of the import from each of such countries, by reference to the effective basic duty leviable in respect thereof, but will be determined with reference to the highest of the effective rates of duty applicable to all the imports.
[778A C] in the instant case, there is no material to show that the notification was issued in pursuance of an agreement.
It is a case where the imports come from two sets of countries the imports from which attract two different effective basic rates of duty.
The differentiation arises because in respect of one set of countries there is no notification of conces sion while in relation to the other there is a complete exemption granted under a notification.
There is nothing in the language of the explanation that excludes such a case from its purview.
The auxiliary duty is, therefore, to be determined with reference to the higher of the two effective rates of duty.
[777H, 778C D, F] Collector of Customs vs Western India Plywood Manufac turing Co. Ltd., [1989] Supp. 1 SCR 779, applied.
