Under Rule 8(1)(a) of the Defence Research & Development Service Rules, 1970, Junior Scientific Officers in the Defence Research & Development Organisation were eligible for promotion to the posts of Scientists 'B ' upto 50 per cent of the vacancies in the grade.
The respondents who were holding the posts of Junior Scientific Officers, and were promoted to the posts of Scientists 'B ' with effect from October 16, 1985 or from the date they actually assumed charge of the posts filed an application before the Central Administrative Tribunal, contending that since the posts to which they had been promoted were created between 1984 and 1985, they should have been promoted with effect from July 1984, as was done on previous occasions upto 1983, when promotions were ef fected from 1st July of the year in which promotions took place.
The Tribunal rejected the prayer of the respondents and directed that the promotions should be effective from the date on which the promotional posts were created.
The Union of India being aggrieved appealed to the Court.
On the question whether the Tribunal was justified in directing the promotions to be effective from the date the promotional posts were created.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: After a post fails vacant for any reason whatsoev er, a promotion to that post should be from the date the promotion is granted and not from the date on which such post falls vacant.
Similarly, when additional posts are created, promotions to those posts can be granted 752 only after the Assessment Board has met and made its recom mendations for promotions being granted.
If, however, promo tions are directed to become effective from the date of creation of additional posts, then it would have the effect of giving promotions even before the Assessment Board has met and assessed the suitability of the candidates for promotion.
[754C E] In the instant case, there is no statutory provision that the promotion to the post of Scientist 'B ' should take effect from 1st July of the year in which the promotion is granted.
There is also no law or rule under which a promo tion is effective from the date of creation of the promo tional posts.
The Tribunal was, therefore, in error in holding that the promotions should be effective from the date the promotional posts were created.
The orders of the appellants promoting respondents from October 16, 1985 will stand.
[754B C & F]
