The respondent 's predecessor in interest received notice under the East Punjab Utilisation of Lands Act, 1949 for bringing his uncultivated land under cultivation.
Thereafter he sold a portion of his land by executing two sale deeds in favour of two different vendees for the purpose of utilising the sale proceeds to reclaim the remaining land.
The re spondents fried suits for setting aside the sales, contend ing that the alienation was made without legal necessity, which were dismissed by the Trial Court.
The first appeals were dismissed by the Senior Subordinate Judge.
On second appeal a learned single judge of the High Court held that the sale in favour of the first vendee was for legal necessity only to the extent of Rs.1,O00 and the sale in favour of the second vendee was entirely without necessity.
On a further appeal the Division Bench reversed the decision of the single judge with regard to first vendee holding that the sale was for necessity but upheld the decision with regard to second vendee holding that the sale in his favour was without legal necessity.
Hence this appeal by the second vendee.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
The sale in favour of the second vendee was a valid sale and is not liable to be impugned by the represen tatives or the successors in interest of the vendor.
[774E] 770 2.
Under the provisions of the East Punjab Utilisation of Lands Act, 1949 a notice could be given requiring a land holder to bring uncultivated land under cultivation after reclamation within a period of 30 days from the date of issue of a notice in that regard.
Failing this, the area could be resumed by the Government and leased out to some other cultivators or society for cultivation for a period of at least 8 years.
[773B] 2.1 A land owner receiving a notice under the said Act has two options before him.
He can either own his helpless ness to reclaim the land and permit it to be leased out by the Government to other persons for cultivation for a sub stantial period.
Or he may decide that he should make an attempt to make atleast a part of the lands fertile by selling a portion of the land and reclaiming the rest with the help of the sale proceeds.
A bona fide decision taken by him to exercise the latter option cannot be said not to be an act of good management.
[773G H; 774A] 3.
If the sale in favour of the first vendee in the same circumstances was a valid sale, it is very difficult to say that the sale in favour of the second vendee was not.
The necessity for both the sales was the situation arising out of the receipt of the notice under the East Punjab Lands Utilisation Act.
In fact the findings of the Trial Court and the first appellate court on this issue were findings of fact which did not call for interference by the High Court.
[774A B]
