The petitioners in the special leave petition started, without recognition, a teachers training college in Bihar, and later applied for permission to allow its students to appear at the examination on the ground that the question of its recognition had not been decided by the Government.
The petitioners failed to get the desired relief from the High Court.
Dismissing the special leave petition, this Court, HELD: (1) A number of mushroom institutions have sprung up in the State of Bihar without getting any recognition and thereafter have tried to get the permission from courts that its students be allowed to appear at the examination on grounds of sympathy.
[24G] (2) It is not possible to grant any such permission as prayed for because the granting of such permission would be clearly violating the provisions of the Education Act.
[25B] S.L.P. No. 12014 of 1987 decided on November 25, 1987 A.P. Christians Medical Educational Society vs Government of A.P. & Anr., ; , referred to.
(3) The application for recognition in this case was made by the petitioners as early as 1986 and that applica tion has not still been disposed of.
The same should be disposed of within 4 weeks from today.
[25F] (4) The concerned department of the Government of Bihar, should see to it that applications for recognition of educa tional institutions are decided promptly and where such an application is without 24 merit, the Government should promptly reject, the same and take steps to see to it that the rejection is brought to the attention of the students of the institution concerned so that they may not waste further time and money by undergoing training in that institution.
[25C] (5) The failure of the Government to take such action would only reflect callous indifference to the interests of the young students to whom the Government certainly owes certain responsibilities.
[25D] (6) The State should consider taking such steps, Crimi nal or Civil, as open to it in law, to stop such institu tions and those who run them from misleading students and deceiving them.
[25E] (7) The State Government of Bihar shall get published advertisements in at least three newspapers in that State with wide circulation warning students not to take admission in any educational institution which has not got recognition and making it clear that if they do so, they would be doing so at their own risk.
