The petitioner, Madan Lal Anand, was detained alongwith two other persons, under section 3(1) of the , 1974 COFEPOSA ACT.
In the grounds of detention it was inter alia alleged that the detenu had imported polyester filament yarn and polyester fibre in the names of M/s Jasmine and M/s Expo International on the basis of "Actual User" advance licences obtained under the Duty Exemption Entitlement Certificate Scheme on the condition that they would manufac ture ready made garments out of the imported polyester filament and export the same; that they had no intention to manufacture or export the manufactured goods, as there was neither any machinery at their so called factory nor any power connection; that investigations had revealed that both the firms had sold the imported polyester filament yarn in contravention of the orders and conditions of the advance licences; and that the said firms were benami firms and Madan Lal Anand had played a very active and major role for obtaining advance licences in the names of the said firms, importing the yarn and selling it in the local market.
The three detenu, including Madan Lal Anand, filed a petition in the High Court of Punjab and Haryana praying for the issuance of a writ of habeas corpus and challenging the validity of the order of detention.
The High Court dismissed the petition.
Before this Court it was contended on behalf of the detenu that: 734 (i) as the detenu was prevented from complying with the condition of the advance licence within six months of the first clearance by the issuance of an abeyance order by the by.
Chief Controller of Imports & Exports, the provision of section 111(0) of the Customs Act was not violated, for the goods could not be confiscated and, accordingly, there was no question of smuggling within the meaning of section 2(e) of the COFEPOSA ACT read with section 2(39) of the Customs Act, 1962; (ii) certain documents/orders, including the abeyance order, which could influence the subjective satis faction of the detaining authority in favour of the detenu were not placed before him; (iii) while the detaining au thority had relied upon and referred to the confessional statement of the detenu, the retraction made by the detenu was not placed before the detaining authority; (iv) the counter affidavit not having been sworn by the detaining authority himself, the averments made therein should not be taken notice of; (v) there was delay in considering the representation of the detenu; and (vi) the life of each of the advance licences having expired, there was no chance of the detenu now involving himself in smuggling activities.
Dismissing the appeal as well as the writ petition this Court, HELD: (1) In view of clause (0) of section 111 of the if any goods exempted from payment of duty is imported without observing the condition, subject to which the exemption has been made, it will be a case of smuggling within the meaning of section 2(e) of the COFEPOSA ACT, [740D] (2) It was more than certain that the imported goods would not and could not be utilised in accordance with the condition of the advance licence, the provision of section 111(0) of the was violated on the very importa tion of the goods.
There was, therefore, no substance in the contention that there was no smuggling in this case.
[741D] (3) Even if certain documents/orders had not been placed before the detaining authority that could not, in the least, affect the subjective satisfaction of the detaining authori ty.
[742D] Kirpal Mohan Virmani vs Tarun Roy, ; Vakil Singh vs State of Jammu & Kashmir, and Kirit Kumar Chaman Lal Kundaliya vs Union of India, , referred tO. (4) The detenu was not prejudiced for non supply to him of the 735 copies of certain documents and accordingly there was no substance in the contention that there was non application of mind by the detaining authority.
[745C] (5) Even assuming that the ground relating to the con fessional statement made by the detenu under section 108 of the was an inadmissible ground as the subsequent retraction of the confessional statement was not considered by the detaining authority, still then that would not make the detention order bad, for, in the view of this Court, such order of detention shall be deemed to have been made separately on each of such grounds.
Therefore, even exclud ing the inadmissible ground, the order of detention can be justified.
[746A B] Prakash Chandra Mehta vs Commissioner & Secretary, Government of Kerala, ; , referred to.
(6) There can be no doubt that a deponent who has no personal knowledge about any fact may, on the basis of some other facts, make his submission in court.
[746G] (7) Merely because the detaining authority has not sworn an affidavit, it will not in all circumstances be fatal to the sustenance of the order of detention.
[747H] P.L. Lakhanpal vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; Asgar Ali vs District Magistrate Burdwan & Ors., and Suru Mallick vs State of West Bengal, , referred to.
(8) There was no laches or negligence on the part of the detaining authority or the other authorities concerned in dealing with the representation of the detenu.
The observa tions made by this Court that each day 's delay in dealing with the representation must be adequately explained are meant to emphasize the expedition with which the representa tion must be considered and not that it is a magical formu la, the slightest breach of which must result in the release of the detenu.
[749C D] Mst.
L.M.S. Ummu Saleema vs Shri B.B. Gujaral, ; , explained.
(9) The said two firms had really no existence and were the benami concerns of the detenu, and the detenu if re leased, may indulge in such economic offences in setting up fictitious firms and taking out 736 advance licences in the name of such firms.
[750B] Achla Kakkar vs Administrator, Union Territory of Delhi
