In a suit for injunction and possession of the suit property, on the basis of a registered sale deed executed by the widow of the owner of the property, filed by the appel lants, the question of admissibility of an unregistered document, said to be Deed of Adoption, by which the widow conferred on the adopted son rights in her property and relinquished her right to alienate any part of the property, came up for consideration.
The trial court accepted the document only in proof of adoption, and decreed the suit.
The first appellate court set aside the decree.
On appeal.
the High Court maintained lower appellate court 's judgment and held that after execut ing the deed of adoption, the widow had no right left in the property and, therefore, a transfer executed by her would not confer any title on the appellants.
Aggrieved, the appellants filed an appeal, by special leave, in this Court contending that as the deed 'would be hit by section 17(1)(b) read with section 49 of the Indian , regarding relinquishment or conferment of right on the adopted son, the High Court was not right in relying on this clause to come to the conclusion that the widow had no right to transfer the property in favour of the appellants.
Allowing the appeal, the Court, HELD: 1.
Proviso (c) Section 12 of the , departs from the Hindu General Law and 145 makes it clear, that the adopted child shall not divest any person of any estate which has vested in him or her before the adoption.
Section 13 enacts that when the parties intend to limit the operation of proviso (c) to Section 12, it is open to them by an agreement to the contrary.
[148C] In the instant case, the widow was the limited owner of the property after the death of her husband.
But after , came into force, she has become an absolute owner.
Therefore, the property of her husband vested in her.
Merely by adopting a child, she could not be deprived of any of her rights in the property.
The adoption would come into play and the adopted child could get the rights for which he is entitled, after her death.
[147G H] 2.
Section 17(1)(b) of the clear ly provides that a document, where any right in movable property is either assigned or extinguished, will require registration.
[148D] In the instant case, that part of the deed which refers to creation of an immediate right in the adopted son and divesting of the right of the adoptive mother in the proper ty will squarely fail within the ambit of Section 17(1)(b) and, therefore, under Section 49 of the , this could not be admitted if it is not a registered docu ment.
[148E]
