The appellant purchased the suit property by a regis tered sale deed dated 27th December, 1950 for a considera tion of Rs.7,000.
On 1st January, 1951, the respondent executed a rent agreement in favour of the appellant ac knowledging her as landlady at Rs.80 per month.
The mother of the appellant died in 1963.
In 1974, the respondent filed a suit against the appellant for conveyance of the suit property in his favour on the basis of a 'ya dast ', alleged to have been written by the mother of the appellant on 24th December, 1950 in his favour providing for conveyance of the property in his favour after .paying the sale price of Rs.7,000 and Rs.1,000 for registration ex penses.
This 'yadast ' was however neither stamped, regis tered, nor attested.
It was marked as exhibit A 11.
The Trial Court decreed the respondent 's suit relying on the 'yadast '.
On appeal the Additional District Judge after detailed examination of all the facts involved in the case and the evidence of the parties, came to the finding that the appel lant acquired title to the property on the basis of the sale deed which was a registered document in her favour and that the suit property was leased out to the respondent under a rent agreement, and that as the mother of the appellant was not a party to the sale deed she had no right to agree o convey the property or to ask her daughter to convey the same in favour of the respondent.
He also came to the con clusion that the Yadast was not a genuine document but a forged one which was just got up for the purposes of the suit.
He accordingly allowed the appeal, and held that the suit for specific performance was further barred as it was filed more than 20 years after the alleged 'Yadast '. 834 The High Court in Second Appeal, however interfered with the findings of fact arrived at by the lower Appellate Court solely on the basis that the evidence of the scribe of the 'Yadast ' was not discussed by the lower appellate Court, and accordingly allowed the Second Appeal.
In the Special Leave Petition to this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellant that the suit for specific performance of the contract could only be decreed against the executant of the contract provided the executant had a right to dispose of the property about which the suit was filed, and that there was no question of law on the basis of which the High Court exercised jurisdiction under Section 100 C .P.C. and interfered with the findings of fact.
Allowing the appeal, this Court HELD: 1.
Section 100 C.P.C. clearly indicates that the High Court had the jurisdiction to interfere only when a substantial question of law is involved and even then it is expected that such a question shall be so framed although the court is not bound by that question as the proviso indicates.
There may be some other substantial questions of law which may need decision and which can be so decided.
[838G H] In the instant case, the Single Judge of the High Court has chosen to interfere with the findings of fact solely on the basis of one ground, that the evidence of the scribe of the 'Yadast ' PW 2 was not discussed by the lower appellate court, and its failure has affected the validity of the finding rendered by it.
This was no substantial question of law, much less a question of law on which the High Court could interfere with the findings of fact.
At best the questions on which the High Court chose to interfere could be said to be questions of appreciation of evidence.
[837H; 839F] 2.
The suit for specific performance of the contract could only be decreed against the executant of the contract provided the executant had a right to dispose of the proper ty about which the suit is filed.
[836H; 837A] In the instant case, admittedly the mother of the appel lant who, was alleged to have executed the 'Yadast ' was not the owner of the property.
Both the parties to the 'Yadast ' were strangers to the sale deed, and the sale deed does not refer to any one of them nor there is anything in the sale deed to indicate that it was not an out and out sale.
[837D] 835
