The appellant was a candidate for election to the Legis lative Assembly.
As he was standing for election from a constituency other than the one in which he was an elector, he filed an attested copy of the relevant part of the elec toral roll relating to the constituency in which he was an elector, along with the nomination paper.
On an objection by one of the candidates, the Returning Officer rejected the.
appellant 's nomination paper for non compliance with Section 33(5) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
The appellant filed an Election Petition before the High Court, which dismissed the same.
In the appeal filed before this Court, the appellant contended that since he had produced before the Returning Officer an attested copy of the relevant part of the elec toral roll of the constituency in which he was an elector, the rejection of his nomination paper on the ground of non compliance with Section 33(5) of the said Act was wrong and bad in law.
Dismissing the appear, this Court, HELD: The publication of the integrated roll is not essential for the revision of the electoral roll to be complete and the electoral roll with the amendments duly published becomes the final electoral roll for the constitu ency.
[103D] In the instant case, admittedly, the electoral roll of the State Assembly was directed to be revised and was, in fact, revised as on January 1, 1984 and the supplementary electoral roll notifying the 101 changes to be incorporated on the revision was published and available before February 1985.
[102F] However, what the appellant produced before the Return ing Officer was not an attested copy of the final electoral roll for the said constituency although the final roll was available, but only an attested copy of the electoral roll as it stood on July 21, 1983.
The production of such attest ed copy of the relevant part of the electoral roll as it stood before the final revision cannot amount to compliance with the provisions of sub section (5) of Section 33 of the said Act.
His nomination was, therefore, rightly rejected.
[103F] Ranjit Singh vs Pritam Singh & Ors., ; , relied on.
Jagannath Ramchandra Nunekar vs Gene Govind Kadam & Ors., [1988] 3 Judgments Today 662, distinguished.
