Section 10(1) of the empowered the appropriate Government to prohibit employment of contract labour in any process, operation or other work in any establishment.
The Government of West Bengal issued a notification on February 9, 1980 under section 10(1) of the Act prohibiting the employment of contract labour in certain departments in the establishments of M/s Indian Iron and Steel Company Ltd. Paragraph 9 of the Schedule thereto listing the departments, included cleaning and stacking and other allied jobs in the brick department, except loading and unloading of bricks from wagons and trucks.
In the writ petition, the affected workmen assailed this action of the State Government in excluding them from the beneficial purview of the notification as arbitrary, dis criminatory and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
It was contended for them that the job of loading and un loading was not peculiar to the brick department alone, that the work of stacking was directly dependent on the loading and unloading of bricks, and that the two jobs being allied and incidental the workmen holding these jobs could not be treated differently.
For the respondents, it was contended that the job of loading and unloading of bricks in the brick department was not of perennial nature, the supply of bricks being intermittent depending upon the requirement, avail ability of bricks as also the availability of the wagons and trucks.
Allowing the writ petition, HELD: 1.1 The is 183 an important piece of social legislation for the welfare of the labourers and has to be liberally construed.
[186D] Standard Vacuum Refining Co. of India Ltd. vs Its Work men; , and Catering Cleaners of Southern Railway vs Union of India & Anr., ; , referred to. 1.2 In the instant case, it was not denied that the bricks handled by the brick department were used in furnaces of the company as refractory.
Therefore, the work done by the brick department including loading and unloading of bricks was incidental to the industry carried on by the company.
It was also not denied that the petitioners were , employed as contract labour by the company for the last 15/20 years.
There was, therefore, no justification to treat the petitioners differently and deny them the right of regular appointment.
[186E F] 1.3 The purchase of bricks, transportation to the facto ry, unloading, stacking and use in the furnace were the jobs in one continuing process.
It could not thus be said that all these jobs were not incidental or allied to each other.
That being so, all the workmen performing these jobs were to be treated alike.
On the same reasoning it could not be said that the loader 's job was not, and other jobs in the brick department were, of perennial nature.
There was, therefore, no justification for excluding the job of loading and un loading of bricks from wagons and trucks from the purview of the notification dated February 9, 1980.
[187G 188A] 2.
The words "except loading and unloading of bricks from wagons and trucks" in paragraph 9 of the Schedule to the notification are struck down being discriminatory and as such violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
[188A B] [The petitioners and co workers to be treated at par with effect from the date of notification with those who were doing the job of cleaning and stacking in the brick department, and such of them who have been retrenched during the pendency of the writ petition to be put back into serv ice with all back wages and consequential benefits.] [188B C]
