These appeals are by tenants against the land owners.
One Bishan Das owned considerable extent of land in Pakistan.
He died on April 11, 1948 after he had migrated to India.
After his death the Rehabilitation Department allot ted 124 standard acres and 4 I/4 units of evacuee land to Respondents Nos. 2 to 5 his sons and to Nos. 6 & 7 who were the legal heirs of one his deceased son.
Each of the five sons was deemed entitled to 24 standard acres and 13 units of land and accordingly mutuation in respect of each of them was allowed by the Rehabilitation Department.
Permanent rights in regard to the allotted land were also conferred by the authorities on the said respondents.
Thereupon the said respondents land owners initiated ejectment proceedings under sec.
9(1)(i) of the Punjab Security of Land Tenures Act, 1953 against the tenants who were then in occupation of the Lands in question on the ground that each one of them was a small land owner as defined in Section 2(2) of the Act and that they required the land for self cultivation.
The Assistant Collector, Hissar rejected the application.
Their appeals were dismissed by the Collector on 4.4.1965.
Their revision preferred before the Commissioner, Ambala Division was also rejected.
Land owners ' further revision to Finan cial Commissioner also failed whereupon they filed a Writ Petition before the High Court on the ground that the land had been allotted to them in lieu of the land owned by their father in Pakistan and consequently the permissible area of each of them was to be computed under the proviso to section 2(3) of the Act, and so computed the holding of each of the five was well below the permissible limit of 30 standard acres prescribed thereunder.
The High Court dismissed the Writ petition.
Respondents preferred Letters Patent Appeals wherein the High Court held that in view of the Explanation to the proviso to section 2(3), the heirs and successors of the displaced persons to whom lands were allotted could not claim the benefit of the proviso and that the permissi 210 ble area under the substantive part of section 2(3) was 60 ordinary acres, The respondents preferred appeals to this Court.
This Court confirmed the view of the High Court.
However this Court accepted an argument advanced on behalf of the re spondents land owners that in computing the permissible area of each of the land owner, the uncultivated area of "banjar Jadid", "banjar Kadim" and "gair Mumkin" lands as on April 15, 1953 could not be included.
As the authorities had wrongly included these types of lands, their orders were set aside and the case was remanded to the Collector concerned with a direction that should ascertain the extent of "banjar Jadid", "banjar Kadim" and "gair mumkin" lands of the Re spondents allotted as on 15.4.1953.
When these proceedings were pending, applications filed by the appellants tenants under section 18 of the Act for purchase of surplus area also came to be considered by the authorities.
When the matter came up before the Financial Commissioner he set aside the orders of the Collector and remanded the appel lants tenants cases for purchase of surplus land with a direction that the Collector must decide the cases of sur plus area after allowing the permissible 60 acres to the land owners.
In a subsequent proceedings, the Financial Commissioner directed the Collector to determine the permis sible area after excluding all "banjar lands".
The tenants filed Petitions before the Financial Commissioner against the order.
However by the time these cases came up for orders, this Court had decided the land owners ' eviction cases viz in Munshi Ram & Ors.
vs Financial Commissioner.
Haryana & Ors., ; As such the revision Petitions were dismissed and the Collector was asked to determine the permissible area with reference to relevant date viz., April 15, 1953.
By his order dated 6.5.82 the Collector accordingly determined the area held by each of the land owner after excluding the "banjar lands", as less than the permissible area and found that no area owned by them could be declared surplus and on that footing dismissed the purchase applications filed by the appellantstenants.
Their Petitions having been dismissed by the Authorities under the Act, they fried Writ Petitions questioning the dismissal of their purchase applications.
The High Court having dismissed the Writ Petitions, they have filed these appeals.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court, HELD: The Punjab Security Land Tenures Act 1953 is intended to 211 place a ceiling on holding of land by fixing a maximum area permissible to be held by a land owner.
In other words the excess over the permissible area shall be available as surplus area to be dealt with under the provisions of the said Act.
[217H] In calculating the total extent held by a person on the date of the Act for purposes of determining whether a person is small land owner, the banjar lands cannot be taken into account.
[216C] The need to make a reservation would arise only when the land owner on the relevant date held land in excess of the permissible area.
[217C] The right of reservation given to a person who holds land in excess of the permissible area is, among others to give him an option to select that land which he would like to retain for himself and avoid one of the consequences of enabling the tenant to choose under section 18 of the Act any land including that which is under the personal cultiva tion of the land owner.
[218B] It is not necessary and the Act does not make it obliga tory, on pain of consequences provided under section 5C, for a small land owner to make a reservation under sections 3, 4, 5, 5A or 5B. [218C] Bhagwan Das vs State of Punjab, ; Gurbux Singh vs State of Punjab, AIR 1964 SC 502, referred to.
