The Municipal Board, Jaunpur invited applications for the post of Tax Inspector.
The employees working in the Revenue Department of the Municipal Board were eligible for consideration alongwith the outsiders.
Respondent No. 3, the seniormost Tax Collector in Municipal Board, was called for interview but he refused to appear on the plea that the post of Tax Inspector should be exclusively filled by promotion and being the seniormost Tax Collector he should be promoted without considering any outsider.
Ignoring his claim the Municipal Board selected and appointed the appellant to the post of Tax Inspector.
Respondent No. 3 represented to the Commissioner challenging the appellant 's appointment.
The Commissioner set aside the order of the Municipal Board and cancelled the appellant 's appointment holding that pursuant to the directions contained in the Government 's Order dated 10.4.50, Respondent No. 3 was entitled to promotion.
The appellant challenged the Commissioner 's order before the High Court by filing a writ petition.
Disagreeing with the decision of another Single Judge, a Single Judge of the High Court dismissed the writ petition, and affirmed the order of the Commissioner on the findings that the appellant 's ap pointment was made in violation of the Government 's Order dated 10.4.50.
Hence this appeal.
202 Allowing the appeal and setting aside the order of the High Court, this Court, HELD: 1.
The orders of the High Court and the Commis sioner are not sustainable in law.
[208B] 1.1.
It is a well settled principle of judicial disci pline that if a Single Judge disagrees with the decision of another Single Judge, it is proper to refer the matter to a larger Bench for an authoritative decision.
But in the instant case, the learned Single Judge of the High Court acted contrary to the well established principles of judi cial discipline in ignorning those decisions.
[205B C] 2.
Section 71 of the U.P. Municipalities Act, 1916 before its amendment in 1964 did not confer power on the State Government to issue any direction regulating the conditions of service of Municipal employees.
[205D] Ramesher Prasad and Ors.
vs Municipal Board, Pilibhit, A.I.R. 1958 All. 363; Ram Kripal Garg vs State of U.P., Writ Petition No. 4556 of 1965 dated 16.9.66 and Inder Bahadur vs Municipal Board, Mirzapur and Ors.
, Writ petition No. 235 of 1970 dated 20.10.1972 approved.
I Even after conceding supervisory power to the State Government to issue directions laying down conditions of service of Municipal employees, there are no directions in the Government Order dated 10 4 50 requiring a Municipal Board to fill the post of Tax Inspector only by promotion and not by direct recruitment.
Therefore, it was open to the Municipal Board to make appointment to the post of Tax Inspector either by direct recruitment or by promotion.
[205G; 207D] 2.2 In the instant case, the Municipal Board gave oppor tunity to its employees working in the revenue class of service to appear for selection in competition with outsid ers.
Respondent No. 3 however did not avail the opportunity for which he himself is to be blamed.
The Municipal Board acted within its jurisdiction in making appointment to the post of Tax Inspector by direct recruitment.
[207E] 2.3 A Govt.
Order declared ultra vires by the High Court, could not be revived by any subsequent Govt.
Order without there being any statutory power for the same.
[205E] 3.
It is an elementary principle of natural justice that no person 203 should be condemned without hearing.
The order of appoint ment conferred a vested right in the appellant to hold the post of Tax Inspector, that right could not be taken away without affording an opportunity of hearing to him.
Any order passed in violation of the principles of natural justice is rendered void.
In the instant case, there is no dispute that the Commissioner 's order had been passed with out affording any opportunity of hearing to the appellant.
Therefore the order was illegal and void.
The High Court committed serious error in upholding the Commissioner 's order setting aside the appellant 's appointment without giving any notice or opportunity to him.
[207G H; 208A]
