The appellants were prosecuted on charges under section 120B read with section 165A of the Indian Penal Code, for having conspired to commit the offence of bribing a public servant in connection with the discharge of his public duties.
The case against them was that on August 24, 1953, when the Inspector of Police who was in charge of the investigation of a case in which the second appellant was involved, was on his way to the police station, the appellants accosted him on the road and the second appellant asked him to hush up the case for valuable consideration.
Some days later, on August 31 the first appellant offered to the Inspector at the police station a packet containing Rs. 500 in currency notes and told him that the second appellant had sent the money through him in pursuance of the talk that they had with him on August 24, as a consideration for hushing up the case.
The courts below accepted the evidence adduced on behalf of the prosecution and convicted the appellants.
On appeal by special leave it was contended that the court had no reasonable grounds to believe that the appellants had entered into a conspiracy to commit the offence and that the statement of August 3 I was not admissible against the second appellant because (1) the charge under section 120B had been deliberately added in order that the act or statement of the one would be admissible against the other, and (2) the object of the conspiracy, namely the payment of the hush money, had been accomplished before the statement in question was made: Held, (1) that the incident of August 24 was evidence that the intention to commit the offence had been entertained by both the appellants on or before that date showing a clear indication of the existence of the conspiracy, and that the statement made by the first appellant on August 31 was admissible not only to prove that the second appellant had constituted the first appellant his agent in the perpetration of the crime but also to prove the existence of the conspiracy ; the court was therefore justified in drawing up the charge under section 120B along with that under section 165A of the Indian Penal Code.
(2)that the payment of the bribe and the statement of August 31 accompanying it, were part of the same transaction, having been made in the course of the conspiracy, and the 1142 statement in question was therefore admissible under section 10 of the Indian Evidence Act.
Mirza Akbar vs The King Emperor, (1940) L. R. 67 I. A. 336 and R. vs Blake, ; , relied on.
