Disciplinary proceedings were started against the appel lant who was a headmaster in a private school in accordance with the Rule 74.2 of the Grant in aid Code since the school was a recipient of grant as per the code.
The Director of Education approved the findings of the Dispute Settlement Committee and permitted the termination of the appellant by the Principal of the School.
The said order of termination was challenged by the appellant before the High Court of Bombay, Panaji Bench, in a Writ Petition.
The petition was dismissed by the High Court upholding the preliminary objec tion that the petition was not maintainable under Article 226 of the Constitution of India against the management of the School which was a private body.
Aggrieved by the deci sion of the High Court the appellant fried this appeal by special leave.
According to the relevant rule of the Grant in aid Code the management could not have terminated the services of the appellant without the communication received by it from the Director of Education who was a public functionary and was discharging a governmental function as an authority consti tuted for the said purpose by the government.
Obviously in such circumstances it cannot be said that the decision is just that of a private management governed by private law.
The High Court erred in not properly following the ratio of the decision of this Court in Tika Ram 's case the facts of which were not substantially different from the facts of the present case.
This Court while setting aside the judgment of the High Court and remanding the case to the High Court to hear the Writ Petition on merits, 253 HELD: Any private school which receives aid from the government under the Grant in aid Code, which is promulgated not merely for the benefit of the management but also for the benefit of the employees in the school for whose salary and allowances the government was contributing from public funds under the Grant in aid Code cannot escape from the consequences flowing from the breach of the Code and partic ularly where the Director of Education who is an instrumen tality of the State is participating in the decision making process.
[260F G] The High Court was wrong in upholding that the orders of the Director of Education and of the Dispute Settlement Committee were not amenable to the jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
[260G] Tika Ram vs Mundikota Shikshan Prasarak Mandal & Ors., [1985] 1 SCR 339, referred to.
