Sub clause (2) of section 7 of the Andhra Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings Act, 1961 mandates the Revenue Divi sional Officer to serve a notice on every person liable to surrender land in excess of the ceiling area requiring him to file a statement indicating the land which he proposes to surrender.
Sub clause (3) requires the Revenue Divisional Officer to pass orders on that statement approving the surrender, and the said land shall thereupon be deemed to have been surrendered.
Section 8 provides for the Revenue Divisional Officer to take over such land on payment of compensation under section 10.
Section 10 lays down the mode of compensation.
In the instant case, proceedings under section 7(3) of the Act in respect of appellant 's land having concluded the Revenue Divisional Officer had made an order under section 10 fixing the compensation.
The District Revenue Officer howev er instead of making the payment, issued a notice, purport ing to be under section 19(1), as amended, proposing to revise the said order.
The appellant filed a writ petition contending that when the proceedings are concluded under sub clause (3) of section 7 the surrender is complete and the land vests in the State, that what remains under the scheme of section 10 is only the question of determining compensation, and once that is determined the authorities have no jurisdiction to revise the compensation.
On behalf of the State it was contended that cl.
(3) of section 7 uses the words "deemed to have been surrendered" which indicates that although by an order passed by the Revenue Divisional Officer the proposal about the surrender of land is finalised but still it is only 315 deemed surrender, and that the land only vests in the State when it is taken over after payment of compensation in accordance with section 8.
The High Court took the view that unless taking over is completed under section 8 the land does not vest in the State and, therefore, it could not be said that the proceedings under the Act had come to an end and at this stage if the authorities have jurisdiction to revise the compensation it could not be said that the authorities have done something beyond their jurisdiction.
Dismissing the appeals, the Court, HELD: The scheme of section 7 of the Andhra Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings Act, 1961 indicates that the sur plus land which a holder will surrender is finally deter mined when an order under cl.
(3) is passed.
However, in spite of the finality of these proceedings the legislature instead of using the phrase "have been surrendered" in the said clause uses the term "deemed to have been surrendered.
" It is clear from these words that something more remains to be done, and that is what is provided in section 8 by authorising the Revenue Divisional Officer to take over the land, which is deemed to have been surrendered, on payment of compensa tion determined under section 10.
It is only after this taking over that the land vests in the State.
[319G; 320A; 320C D] It is, therefore, apparent that orders under section 8 can only be passed after compensation as determined under section 10 is paid, and so far action under section 8 has not been taken it could not be said that the land vests in the State.
The competent authorities can revise the orders passed under section 10 if an amendment has taken place in between.
[321H; 321B] In the instant case, action under section 8 had not been taken.
The High Court was, therefore, right in rejecting the writ petitions.
[321H; 322B]
