The Respondent firm made an application to the appel lantElectricity Board for the supply of 60 KVA electricity and the Board entered into an agreement with the Respondent firm in that behalf and gave electricity connec tion on 13.4.1981.
Thereafter the Respondent firm applied for reduction of electricity from 60 KVA to 45 KVA and a fresh agreement was executed on May 2, 1981 and fresh con nection of 45 KVA was given on 29.5.1981.
It is respondent 's case that it had requested the Electricity Board on 19.6.1981 to cut off the Electricity.
The firm received Bills for minimum guaranteed charges for four months i.e. from June to September 1981.
The firm refuted its liability to pay the bill on the ground that it consumed no electrici ty during the aforesaid period of 4 months.
Consequent upon the firm 's failure to pay the Bill, the Board disconnected the electricity connection on 28.9.1981.
The firm ultimately received a bill for Rs.22,951.50p for the period commencing from June to August 1981.
On the firm 's failure to pay the Bill, the Board sent a requisition to the Certificate Offi cer who sent a notice to the firm on 6.7.1981.
The Certifi cate Officer rejected the plea of the firm that it was not liable to pay the Bill and proceeded to attach the property of the firm.
Being dissatisfied with the action, the re spondent firm filed a Writ Petition in the High Court for quashing the bills as also the certificate proceedings.
The High Court took the view that the Board itself having disconnected the connection, it was not entitled to any charges for the period after September 1981 and it was not open to the Board to contend that under clause 9 of the agreement it was not open to either party to terminate the agreement of minimum guaranteed charges before the expiry of two years from the date of the agreement.
The High Court accordingly quashed, the bills as well as the certificate proceedings but allowed the charges for July, August and September 1981 to be adjusted against the security money.
276 The Electricity Board has therefore filed this appeal after obtaining Special Leave.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: A supply.agreement to a consumer makes his rela tion with the Board mainly contractual, where the basis of supply is held to be statutory rather than contractual.
In cases where such agreements are made, the terms are supposed to have been negotiated between the consumer and the Board, and unless specifically assigned, the agreement normally would have affected the consumer with whom it is made.
[286D E] The agreement was reasonable and valid and it was not determined with the disconnection of supply to the respond ent firm.
The liability to pay the minimum guaranteed charges, therefore, continued till the determination of the contract.
The Board was therefore entitled to submit the bills and make the demand on that account and recover the same according to law.
[285F G]
