These writ petitions were filed by licencesed dealers who manufacture woollen fabrics and blankets.
They purchase sheep hair and make them yarn for use in manufacturing the above items.
The challenge is against the insistence of the State Govt.
to treat sheep hair as agricultural produce under the Punjab Agricultural Produce Markets Act, 1961 and requiring the petitioners to obtain licence and pay market fee for transactions in sheep hair.
It has been contended by the petitioners that even though goat hair and camel hair are included in the sched ule, sheep hair is not included and hence sheep hair is not agricultural produce within the meaning of the Act.
As regards item No. 41, Wool (0on) appearing in the schedule, it was contended that wool is a manufactured item of sheep hair and not sheep hair itself and the word "wool" according to its dictionary meaning is the soft undercoat of various animals including sheep.
Dismissing the writ petitions, this Court, HELD: 1.1 Item No. 41 of the schedule after the word "wool" uses the word "0on" also within brackets which indi cates as to what was really intended by the us of the word "wool".
Indeed, in the Hindi version of the Act item No. 41 of the schedule uses the word ' '0on" only and does not at all use the word "wool".
The raw material out of which a textile fibre is made is also described as raw wool.
Not only the textile fibre but also the soft under coat of various animals including sheep has itself been described as wool.
Wool has almost invariably been used in the context of sheep hair.
[295G; 296A] 294 1.2 Interpreting item No. 41 Wool (0on) of the schedule in the light of the above, there seems to be no manner of doubt that the word "wool" has been used therein only in the sense in which the word "0on" is understood in the trade by the dealer and the consumer in the popular sense namely that which people conversant with the word '0on ' would attribute to it.
This intention is apparent from the circumstance that care has been taken to specifically include goat hair and camel hair at items 75 and 76 of the schedule.
Had wool (0on) been used at item No. 41 in the comprehensive sense, it would have automatically included goat hair and camel hair and the specific inclusion of Goat hair and Camel hair at item No. 75 and 76 would have been wholly unnecessary.
Thus the word 'Wool (0on) ' has obviously been used in the popular sense and not in the sense used in scientific and technical terminology which the traders and the consumers are not normally supposed to know.
[297D H; 298A] Indian Aluminium Cables Ltd. vs Union of India, ; and Collector of Central Excise, Kanpur vs Krishna Carbon Paper Co., ; , relied on.
Encyclopaedia Britannica Vol. 23, relied on.
