The Petitioners in first two Writ Petitions are Reserve Trained Pool Telephone Operators (RTPTOS) of Delhi and Bombay Mahanagar Telephones who are seeking directions that after their absorption as regular employees following the implementation of the directions of this Court dated 28.7.1986 in an earlier Writ Petition No. 11764 of 1985 filed by the All India Telegraph Engineering Employees Union Class III of Bombay Telephones, they are entitled to be brought on par with the regular Staff for grant of all other service benefits as well since they have been performing the same duties as performed by regular operators.
The other two Petitions pertain to the Department of Posts.
One is by the Reserve Trained Pool Operators (RTPOS) and the other by the Substitute Employees and Casual Labour ers in that Department.
While the RTPOS have claimed relief of being placed at par with regular, permanent or temporary employees in the matter of service conditions, the substi tute employees and casual labourers claim that they be paid the same emoluments as the regular employees.
Disposing of the Petitions, this Court, HELD: The scheme known as Casual Labourers (Grant of Temporary Status in Regularisation) Scheme has been formu lated and put into operation from 1.10.1989.
Hence no fur ther specific direction is necessary as regards applicants covered by the Telephone Nigams of Delhi and Bombay except calling upon the respondents 10 implement every term of the Scheme at an early date.
[332E F] As per existing recruitment rules, extra departmental agents are 330 given preference in the matter of absorption as Group 'D ' postmen.
Directions have already been issued for their absorption against the vacancies.
[333H] The claim to bonus may be left to arbitration or for being dealt with by a Consultative Council.
[334F] After rendering three years of continuous service with temporary status, the casual labourers shall be treated at par with temporary Grade 'D ' employees of the Department of Posts and would thereby be entitled to such benefits as are admissible to Group 'D ' employees on regular basis.
[335B]
