The period of limitation of three years for specific performance of a contract begins to run under the third column of Article 54 of the from the date fixed for the performance, or, if no such date is fixed, when the plaintiff has notice that performance is refused.
Under an agreement dated June 23, 1965 the plaintiff respondent, sister of the defendant appellant, undertook to redeem the disputed property under mortgage and the appel lant agreed to execute the sale deed of the said property in her favour on the date she took papers of the registry in her possession.
She redeemed the property in 1970.
The appellant, however, failed to respect the agreement in spite of repeated demands.
The respondent served a notice in July 1984 demanding specific performance before filing the suit.
The appellant pleaded limitation.
The trial court decided the issue in favour of the respondent.
That order was confirmed by the High Court on the view that since the cause of action of the suit was dependent on the redemption of the mortgage and no period was fixed within which it was necessary for the respondent to have redeemed the mortgage, it could not be said that a date was ' 'fixed" within the meaning of the third column of Article 54.
Allowing the appeal by special leave, HELD: 1.1 The requirement of Article 54 of the Limita tion Act, 1963 is not that the actual day should necessarily be ascertained upon the face of the deed, but that the basis of the calculation which was to make it certain should be found therein.
[291A B] 1.2 In the instant case, under the agreement the date for the appellant to execute the sale deed was fixed, al though not by mentioning 288 a certain date but by a reference to the happening of a certain event, namely, the redemption of the mortgage; and, immediately after the redemption by the respondent, the appellant became liable to execute the sale deed which the respondent was entitled to enforce.
The period of limitation thus started running on that date.
The case, is, therefore, covered by the first part of Article 54 (third column) and not the second part.
[291B C] R. Muniswami Goundar & Anr.
B.M. Shamanna Gouda & Ors., and Duncombe vs The Brighton Club Sathula Venkanna vs Namuduri Venkatakrishnayya & Anr., ; Kruttiventi Mallikharjuna Rao vs Vemuri Pardhasaradhirao, AIR 1944 Madras 218 and Kashi Prasad vs Chhabi Lal & Ors '., AIR 1933 Allahabad 410 (2) distin guished 2.
The agreement in the instant case is a typical illustration of a contingent contract within the meaning of section 31 of the
