The appellant assessee has been manufacturing cushion repair compoud, tread repair compound and cover compound.
According to the assessee, these were not meant either for resoling or retreading of tyres, but for mending injured and defective sections of tyres.
Though normally these goods are dutiable under tariff item No. 16A(2), the assessee claimed exemption from duty under Notification No. 71 of 1968 dated 1.4.68.
The Superintendent rejected the claim.
On appeal by the assessee, the Collector observed that there was no evidence that the goods in question should not be used for the resoling or retreading of tyres and rejected the claim.
The assessee preferred a revision to the Central Govt.
The Central Govt.
while rejecting the Revision Peti tion, referred to the fact that the notification specifical ly excluded cushion compound, cushion gum and tread gum.
As regards cover cushion compound, it observed that the compo sition was such that its use for repair of conveyor belts was indistinguishable from the other use of resoling of tyres.
This appeal has been filed against the order of the Central Govt.
The appellant contended that the Government had overlooked the fact that while tread repair, cushion compound and tread gum are items used for resoling or re treading of tyres, that was not the use to which the arti cles manufactured by the assessee were put.
Since the fact that the goods manufactured by it were employed only for repairing tyres and conveyor belts was not disbelieved, it was argued, the assessee was eligible for the exemption claimed by it.
Allowing the appeal, this court, HELD: 1.
The notification of 1978 only reproduces with some 371 modifications the notification of 1964.
The broad purport of both the notifications is to exempt rubber products other than those which are commonly sold under certain descrip tions and are used for the resoling or retreading of tyres.
The circular of 1966, which can be considered as a contempo raneous exposition of the understanding of the Government while issuing the exemption notification of 1964, makes it clear that at that time, it was not intended to deny exemp tion to rubber products used merely for repair purposes.
The notification of 1973 was one in which various amendments were carried out to a series of notifications relating to various items and does not contain anything to suggest that it was only a clarification that was intended to be given and not a prospective amendment of the previous notifica tion.
[375A C] 2.1 The fact that the appellant is using or marketing the products for use, only for repearing tyres and conveyor belts is not controverted.
Hence the appellant assessee was entitled to exemption under the notification.
In one sense, any rubber compound has a composition which theoretically permits it to be used either for repair purposes or for resoling or retreading of tyres.
But the assessee 's claim is that the product marketed by it has not the physical dimen sions or technical properties to be capable of use for retreading or resoling.
Also, the notification talks of products "used for" resoling and retreading of tyres; and it is not so in the instant case.
[375C E] 2.2 The notification imports a limitation on the exclu sion from the exemption specified in the paranthetical clause of the notification.
That exclusion is only in re spect of compounds used for resoling or retreading.
[375E]
