The Respondent Company was in the business of dyeing acrylic yarn received from traders and manufacturers of hosiery goods on job basis.
It was paying duty at the rate of Rs. 10 per K.G. in terms of Notification No. 125/75 CE dated 12.5.1975 on the presumption that base yarn had dis charged duty liability before it was received for dyeing.
A show cause notice under section 9(2) of the Central Excise Rules, 1944 was issued by the Assistant Collector of Central Excise demanding an amount of Rs.4,300 as central excise duty (C) Rs.24 per K.G. on 180 Kgs.
for the period May 1976 to July 1976.
The demand was resisted by the Respondent Company contending that duty on base yarn was payable by the Manufacturers and the burden of showing that this had not been paid by the Manufacturers was on the Revenue which was not accepted and on appeal by the Assessee the Appellate Collector of Central Excise confirmed the demand.
On further appeal, however, the Appellate Tribunal upheld the conten tion of the Respondent holding that the Manufacturer was liable to pay duty on the base yarn since purchasers could naturally assume that the duty on base yarn would have already been paid by the Manufacturer and that it was for the Department to verify the fact of such payment and take action against the manufacturer, if duty had not been paid particularly when in this case the Assessee had disclosed the names of persons/manufacturers from whom it had received the yarn for dyeing while the matter was pending before the Collector.
Dismissing the appeals preferred by the Revenue, this Court, HELD: Excise is a duty on manufacture.
The liability of payment of this duty is on the manufacturer.
The language of the Notification No. 125/75 dated 12th May 1975 indicates that only the duty for the time being leviable on the base yarn, if not already paid, plus ten rupees per kg.
was the liability.
The description of manufacture was textured yarn produced out of base yarn.
[434B] 431 It would be intolerable if the purchasers were required to ascertain whether excise duty had already been paid as they have no means of knowing it.
It has to be borne in mind that duty of excise is primarily a duty levied on a manufac turer or a producer in respect of the commodity manufactured or produced.
A processor is in the similar position as purchaser of the goods.
[434D E] Sulekh Ram & Sons vs Union of India & Ors., [1978] ELT J 525 and Governor General in Council vs Province of Madras, 72 Indian Appeals 91, referred to.
