Section 7(2)(n) of the Bihar State Madarasa Education Board Act, 1982 confers power on the State Madarasa Educa tion Board to dissolve the managing committee of an aided and recognised Madarasa institution.
The committees of management of the respondent institutions established by the Muslim minority community failed to comply with the direc tions issued by the Board with regard to payment of salary to teachers, whereupon the Board in exercise of its power under section 7(2)(n) of the Act dissolved the said committees.
The respondents filed writ petitions under Article 226 of the Constitution assailing section 7(2)(n) of the Act as violative of Article 30(1) on the ground that it interfered with their right of management of institutions.
The High Court declared section 7(2)(n) unconstitutional It, however, observed that the majority of members of the Madarasa Educa tion Board and its Chairman may not belong to minority community, therefore, the Board 's constitution will not be in consonance with the minorities constitutional right under Article 30 of the Constitution.
Dismissing the appeals by the Board, the Court, HELD: 1. Article 30(1) of the Constitution protects the right of minorities to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice.
The rights so granted are, however, not absolute.
Minorities have no right to malamin ister.
The State has power to impose regula 400 tions made in the interest of efficiency of institution 's discipline, health, sanitation and public order even though such regulations may indirectly impinge on the exclusive right of administration and management of the institution.
The State has, however, no power to completely take over the management of a minority institution under the guise of regulating the educational standards by superseding or dissolving managing committee or by appointing ad hoc com mittees in place thereof.
[403D F; 404C E] In the instant case, section 7(2)(n) of the Bihar State Madarasa Education Board Act, 1982 in so far as it provides for dissolution of the managing committee of a Madarasa is, clearly violative of constitutional right of minorities under Article 30(1) of the Constitution.
[404E F] In re Kerala Education Bill 1957, [1959] SCR 995; Sidha rajbhai vs State of Gujarat; , ; State of Kerala vs Very Rev. Mother Provincial etc.
; , ; Ahmedabad St. Xaviers College Society vs State of Gujarat, ; ; Lilly Kurian vs Lawina, ; and All Bihar Christian Schools Assn.
vs State of Bihar, ; , referred to.
Article 30(1) of the Constitution does not contem plate that an autonomous Educational Board entrusted with the duty of regulating efficiency in the aided and recog nised minority institutions, should be constituted exclu sively by persons belonging to the minority community.
In the instant case, the constitution of the Board under section 3 of the Act ensures that its members are only those who are interested in teaching and research in Persian, Arabic and Islamic studies.
This provision fully safeguards the inter est of Madarasa of the Muslim community.
The observations made by the High Court are contrary to the scope of Article 30(1) of the Constitution.
[404H; 405A, B C]
