M/s. Parekh Automobiles Ltd., respondent No. 1, had been allotted retain outlet by Indian Oil Corporation, respondent No. 2, for sale of its petroleum products at Dangiawas, which was outside the limits of the appellant.
Respondent No. 2 had its depot near Raikabag Station at Jodhpur where it stored petroleum products for supply to various pump stations situated within the limits of the appellant as well as situated outside its limits.
Respondent No. 2, being a public sector undertaking, was provided current account facilities under section 133 of the Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959, and so respondent No. 2 had not to pay octroi tax on such consignments at the time of entry of goods within the limits of the appellant.
For this purpose, respondent No. 2 was provided with the export facilities and supplied with entry passes under Rule 13 of the Rajasthan Municipal Octroi Rules 1962.
Under rule 13(4), the amount of duty payable, in the case or persons who had the current account facilities, was determined and collected on the basis of the total amount of goods that had come in as reduced by the total amount of goods that had gone out, the balance being presumed to have been consumed, used or sold within the municipal limits.
It was alleged that the appellant suspended the current account facility under section 133 of the Act and took the stand that octroi would be charged from Respondent No. 2 on the goods brought within the municipal limits if these were sold within the limits of the appellant although such goods were mean for use and consumption of the consumers outside the municipal limits.
As a consequence of this action of the appellant, respondent No. 2 charged octroi duty on supplies made to respondent No. I at Dangiawas by adding the amount of octroi tax in the bills.
Respondent No. 1 filed a writ petition in the High Court praying inter alia for a direction or an order restraining the Municipal Council from realising any tax on diesel, etc.
which were supplied to respondent No.1 at Dangiawas by respondent No. 2, and for refund of octroi tax already paid.
It was contended on behalf of respondent No. 1, in the High Court, that the Municipal Council had no jurisdiction to levy octroi on the goods brought within the municipal limits but not sold, consumed or used therein and subsequently exported outside the said limits; that actual sale took place only at Dangiawas and since neither the sale nor the consumption nor the use of the petroleum products in ques tion took place within the limits of the municipa 50 lity of Jodhpur, and Municipal Council was not entitled to levy any octroi thereon; alternatively, even if the sale was held to have taken place at Jodhpur, still, octroi could not be levied as the goods so sold were meant for use of con sumption outside the municipal limits; and that the word 'sale ' occuring under section 104 of the Municipalities Act could not be read without reference to use or consumption, as sale simplicitor by itself did not attract the levy of octroi, unless the goods were meant for use or consumption of the ultimate consumer in the area of the Municipal Council.
The defence of the Municipal Council was that because the sale took place at Jodhpur, octroi was chargeable irre spective of the fact where it was consumed or used; that as soon as the goods entered the octroi limits, it gave rise to taxable event unless a declaration as contemplated under rule 9 had been made; that respondent No. 2 did not make the declaration as required by rule 9 and rule 13(4) of the Octroi Rules; and that under sub rule (4) of rule 13 the goods exported were to be lessened only if such goods had not been sold within the municipal limits and were exported out within a period of six months from the date of entry.
The claim of refund was contested on the ground that there was no privity of contract between respondent No. 1 and the Municipal Council as the demand of octroi was not made from respondent No. 1.
The case of the Indian Oil Corporation, respondent No. 2, was that under the terms of the agreement respondent No. 2 was obliged to transport petroleum products out of its depots and supply petroleum products to its dealers at the destination in its own truck tankers, and till the supplies were made at the destination, the goods were at the risk of respondents No. 2 and therefore the goods were sold at the retail outlet where the deliveries were made and not at Jodhpur.
The learned Single Judge did not permit the petitioners to raise the question that the sale took place only outside the municipal limits of Jodhpur since that involved an investigation into facts which could not be undertaken in a writ petition, and proceeded on the footing that the sale of the products in question took place within the limits of Jodhpur.
He, however. accepted the contention of IOC and the dealer that even if the sale was taken to have been effected within Jodhpur, no octroi was leviable as admittedly the goods had been sold in Jodhpur only for their onward trans mission for use and consumption in Dangiawas outside the municipal limits.
The prayer for refund of the octroi tax was, however, refused.
The Division Bench dismissed the appellant 's appeal and partly allowed the appeal filed by respondent No. 1.
On the basis of the judgments of this Court in Burmah Shell Oil Storage & Distribution Co. India Ltd. vs The Belgaum Borough Municipality, [1963] Supp. 2 SCR 216 and Hiralal Thakorlal Dalai vs Broach Municipality, [1976] Supp.
SCR 82 wherein it was held that the sine qua non for levy of octroi was con sumption, and that the sale in order to attract levy of octroi shall be for the purpose of use or consumption 51 of the ultimate consumer, the Division Bench held that sale simplicitor would ot attract the levy of the octroi, that the word 'sale ' in this context had to be read with refer ence to the use or consumption and 'use, consumption and sale ' had to read in a disjunctive manner.
The Division Bench further held that rule 13 was a special provision in regard to; the persons who had been granted current account facilities and this rule was not subject to either rule 6 or rule 9 but was an overriding rule independent of rules 6 and 9.
The Division Bench was of the opinion that section 133 of the Municipalities Act, alongwith rule 13 of the octroi Rules left no doubt that no conclusive presumption of the goods having been brought within the municipal limits for consumption, use or sale therein could be drawn in cases where special current account facilities had been given to a person.
The Division Bench also held that the claim of refund by respondent No. 1 was not maintainable.
The Bench however directed that the Municipal Council would have to refund to the Indian Oil Corporation, respondent No. 2, the amount of octroi duty paid on the petroleum products re exported by it to Dangiawas outlet for supply to respondent No. 1, who would recover the same from the Indian Oil Corporation.
M/s. Motilal Padampat Sugar Mills Co. Ltd. vs State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors., ; and State of Madhya Pradesh & Anr.
vs Bhailal Bhai, ; , relied upon.
Before this Court, the parties reiterated their conten tions raised before the High Court.
In addition, it was contended on behalf of the appellant that there was nothing in the two judgments of this Court to the effect that if goods were brought into a local area for sale to a dealer who then transported the goods outside the local area for sale to consumers, no octroi would be chargeable.
It was further contended that during the period in dispute, as also today, there was no current account facility to the respond ent No. 2 under rule 13 of the Octroi Rules and as admitted ly the respondent No. 2 was not complying with the require ments of rules 6 and 9 of the said Rules and not filing any declaration, the Municipal Council had the right to treat the goods brought within the Municipal limits, as those brought for consumption, use or sale under sub rule (2) of rule 9 of the said Rules and thereby attracting octroi.
On the other hand, it was contended on behalf of the respond ents that it was incorrect to say that the current account facility was suspended or withdrawn.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: (Sabyasachi Mukharji and M.H. Kania, JJ.
Per Sabyasachi Mukharji, J).
(1) The High Court was right in holding that it was difficult and inappropriate under Article 226 to determine the question as to where the sale 52 took place, and that even if the sale took place within the octroi limits of Jodhpur Municipal Council for the use or consumption of the ultimate consumer outside the octroi limits of Jodhpur then the taxable even did not take place in the octroi limits of Jodhpur.
[66F G] (2) In view of the decisions of this Court and in view of the language of section 104 of the Municipalities Act and the facts, the High Court was right in holding that no octroi was leviable on petroleum products re exported out side the municipal limits for consumption and use outside the municipal limits.
[65F] Burmah Shell Oil Storage & Distributing Co. Ltd. vs The Belgaum Borough Municipality, [1963] Supp. 2 SCR 216 and Hiralal Thakorelal Dalai vs Broach Municipality & Ors., [1976] Sup.
SCR 82, followed.
(3) In view of the facts of this case, the title passed to the goods outside the municipal limits even in respect of the petroleum products which were sold within the municipal limits.
If the goods were brought within the municipal limis for the purpose of sale (sale means passing of the title to the purchaser), then different considerations might have applied.
[73D] (4) Analysis of Section 133 and the current account facility therein indicates that only on the goods for use, consumption or sale, octroi is leviable.
Under this provi sion, octroi tax is paid at the tune of settlement of peri odical account, say after every month.
Thus, question of complying with rule 6 or rule 9 does not arise as they apply when octroi tax is paid at the time of entry of goods.
The delivery of entry passes and transport passes is only to facilitate settlement of octroi account on goods which have been retained in Municipal area for use and consumption.
[73H; 74A] (5) A perusal of section 133 would show that current account facility is provided by substantive section, whereas rule 13 is procedure provided with ' the object of providing facility of settlement of account of payment of octroi tax.
In other words, according to rule 13(4), octroi tax is charged on quantity mentioned in entry passed minus the quantity mentioned in transport passes, i.e., on quantity of petroleum products used or consumed within the Municipal limits of Jodhpur Municipality.
[75A B] (6) In view of the confused state of pleadings and averments, it was not possible to hold that current account facilities were withdrawn or cancelled.
If that is the position, then there is no question that the High Court was right in the order it passed and the direction it gave.
[75E] Per Ranganathan, J. (1) When goods arrive at an octroi outpost, they may be coming in either for consumption, use or sale within the municipal limits or for transportation outside these limits.
Rule 9 requires every person bringing goods within the municipal limits to make a declaration as to what the goods are intended for.
[77E] 53 (2) Under the normal procedure for the assessment and collection of octroi duty, the declaration under Rule 9 becomes important and the terms of the declaration deter mines the incidence of the duty.
Rule 13, however, contem plates a totally different scheme for the assessment and collection of octroi for the special type of cases.
[78C D] (3) A comparison of the two sets of provisions will make it clear that they are two independent and mutually exclu sive modes of assessment and collection of duty.
Under the cash system of payment, a declaration under rule 9 is abso lutely essential.
The mode of collection of duty in respect of a person having current account facilities, however, does not depend upon any such declaration or upon the mode of utilisation of the goods as indicated in such declaration, because in the case of the current account holders, the duty payable in respect of the entirety of the goods brought in is straightaway debited to his account on the basis of entry passes.
The duty payable in respect of the goods transported outside is later on credited to his account on the basis of the transport passes.
[79E G] (4) The High Court was fully justified in holding that the terms of rules 6 and 9 have no relevance to the payment of duty in cases covered by the current account facility envisaged under rule 13, and that the present case cannot be brought within the terms of proviso to rule 9(2) on the basis of a deemed consumption, use or sale within the munic ipal limits.
In cases where rule 13 applies, rule 9 is excluded.
[80B] (5) The present case is governed by the terms of rule 13 and the Indian Oil Corporation is entitled to go on paying octroi duty on the basis of the goods brought by it within the Municipality less the goods transported outside the Municipality, may be in pursuance of a sale within the Municipality, so long as such sale is in pursuance of an intention that the goods should be consumed or used outside the Municipal limits.
[80G] (6) The appellant should not be permitted to raise at this stage a new plea that the current account facility granted to the Indian Oil Corporation had been revoked when all along, in the earlier proceedings in the High Court, the case had proceeded on the footing that the Indian Oil Corpo ration had been having and continued to have current account facilities.
