The City Corporation of Bangalore invited objections from the public to the proposed levy of octroi on certain items.
In a meeting of the Corporation after placing the objections on the Table and circulating the Notes of the Commissioner analysing the objections, a unanimous resolu tion was passed levying the octroi.
The respondents challenged the validity of the Resolu tion contending that it was passed in violation of Section 98(1) of the City of Bangalore Corporation Act, 1949.
The High Court declared the Resolution invalid holding that because of shortage of time, the condition precedent for passing the resolution i.e. real consideration of the objections was not satisfied.
Hence these appeals by the Corporation.
Setting aside the judgment of the High Court and allow ing the appeals, this Court, HELD: 1.
Taxation in order to be valid must not only be authorised by a statute, but also be levied or collected in strict conformity with the statute which authorises it.
Where a condition precedent is laid down for statutory power being exercised it must be fulfilled before a sub ordinate authority can exercise delegated power.
When the 444 statute requires that delegated power may be exercised on fulfilment of certain conditions precedent, the Court would presume the regularity of the order including the fulfilment of the condition precedent.
It is 1or the party who chal lenged the legality to show that the condition precedent was not in fact complied with by the authority.
[446H; 447B] 2.
The Municipal Administration is coordinated to secure the vital interest of the general public.
It is the function of the representative body to ascertain the local opinion and decide thereon before imposition of the tax.
It has, therefore, to be assumed that local representatives who had taken note of the objections received in pursuance of the notice published have consciously reached the decision.
Once it is clear that there had been consideration of the objec tion, it is not for the Court to examine the manner in which the legislative will had been indicated.
[447C D] 3.
The Court has no jurisdiction to examine the validity of the reasons that goes into the decision or the motive that induced the delegated authority to exercise its powers.
No judicial duty is laid on the authority in discharge of the statutory obligations, and, therefore, the only question to be examined is whether the statutory provisions have been complied with.
[447H; 448A] 4.
The High Court was not justified in assuming from the time factor alone that there could not have been a consider ation of the objections.
It is not the function of the Court to probe into the details of the discussions and the delib erations before legislative will is seen expressed by pass ing the resolution.
The connotation of the word 'considera tion ' occuring in sub section (1) of Section 98 comprehends 'taking note of ' or 'paying heed to ' depending upon the nature of the subject.
It may be open to the councillors to express their views even within the limited time available.
No standard can be prescribed in such matters.
When it is shown that the council had the opportunity to consider the objections received, it has to be deemed, that they had taken note of the same before reaching a decision.
[448H; 449A B] Municipal Board, Hapur vs Raghuvendra Kripal and Others, ; Sundarjas Kanyalal Bhatija & Ors.
vs The Collector, Thane, Maharashtra & Ors., [1989] 3 Judg ment Today 57; Swadeshi Cotton Mills Co. Limited vs The State of U.P. and Others, ; ; Gopal Narain vs State of Uttar Pradesh & Another, ; , followed.
