The appellant is a partnership firm carrying on business of manufacturing and selling carpets in the State of Rajas than.
It owns three factories.
When the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner took steps to direct the appellant firm to comply with the provisions of the , the appellant con tested the applicability of the Act on the ground that it was not manufacturing textiles included in Schedule I of the Act.
The Regional Provident Fund Commissioner held that the business of manufacturing carpets carried on by the appel lant included textiles and that the Act was applicable to the appellant.
Aggrieved by the said order, the appellant approached the Central Government under section 19A of the Act, which upheld the order of the Regional Provident Fund Commission er.
Thereafter the appellant moved the High COurt under Article 226 of the Constitution.
The writ petition was dismissed.
The appellant preferred an appeal to the Division Bench of the High Court and that appeal was also dismissed.
This appeal, by special leave, is against the order of the Division Bench.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.1 The activity of manufacturing carpets is generally understood as the weaving of carpets and the man who is engaged in such activity is popularly known as a 'carpet weaver '.
Weaving means to form a fabric by interlac ing yarn on a loom.
It also means the method or pattern of weaving or the structure of a woven fabric, [420B C] 418 1.2 Though there may be knotting of the yarn, the fabric which is ultimately produced does not cease to be a textile fabric.
The fact that the Handicrafts Board has issued certificate under the Import Trade Control Policy Handbook of Rules that carpet is a product of handicrafts does not in any way improve the matter.
Even then the carpets do not cease to be textiles.
That certificate is not enough since it is very clear that the activity of making carpet though it involves knotting, in substance, amounts to weaving and the carpet is a fabric which is woven.
Thus it comes within the meaning of the expression "textiles" as explained in clause (d) to the Explanation of Schedule I to the Act.
[420D F] 1.3 The non inclusion of knotting in the explanation to Schedule defining 'textiles ' is, therefore, immaterial.
[42ID] Porrits Spencer (Asia) Ltd. vs State of Haryana, ; , relied on.
The Regional Provident Fund Commissioner, the Govern ment of India and the High Court were right in holding that the establishment of the appellant came within the scope of the Act and the appellant was liable to comply with the requirements of the Act in all respects.
[421D]
