The respondent was appointed on 15.7.1962 as a Chemistry lecturer in Kulohaskar Ashram Agriculture Intermediate College run by the appellant society.
By a communication dated 20.6.1963, he was informed by the management that his services were no longer required after 15.7.1963.
He filed a civil suit for permanent injunction restraining the manage ment from proceeding with the proposed action.
But the management having withdrawn the letter, he withdrew the suit as having become infructuous.
However on 28.8.1964, the respondent was placed under suspension whereupon he again filed a civil suit for a declaration that the order of suspension was illegal.
The trial court dismissed the suit but the first appellate court allowed the appeal and decreed the suit as prayed for.
On appeal the High Court affirmed that decision, on 9.4.69.
During the pendency of the appeal before the High Court, the management appellant had passed a fresh order suspending the respondent pending enquiry on certain allegations.
The respondent again filed a civil suit to challenge the competency of the managing committee to take action against him.
In the said suit he also pleaded that the prior approval of the District Inspector of Schools having not been taken, the order placing him under suspen sion was bad.
The Munsiff Court accepted the suit and de clared the suspension order as illegal and void.
The first appellate court reversed that order and the respondent preferred second appeal to the High Court.
During the pendency of the respondent 's second appeal, U.P. Secondary Educational Laws (Amendment) Act, 1976 came into force from 18.8.76 which inter alia provided that prior approval of the District Inspector of School was necessary before any action could be taken against teaching staff of a college.
The respondent sought to amend the pleadings of second appeal in consonance with the Act but 451 the High Court declined but he succeeded on this question before this Court.
Contemporaneously with the litigation set out above, the respondent filed a suit for recovery of arrears of salary, past pendente lite and future.
It was claimed for the period between 21.2.1964 and 20.2.1967.
The trial court decreed the suit for Rs.7812/92 p. being the arrears of salary for the period of three years.
The management appealed to the Dis trict Court and the respondent filed cross objection.
As stated earlier, the second appeal preferred by the respond ent was pending in the High Court.
Hence the parties moved the High Court for withdrawing the appeal pending before the District Court for being disposed of alongwith the second appeal No. 2038/1970, which request was accepted and the said appeal came to be registered as First Appeal No. 460 of 1982.
The High Court disposed of both the appeals by a common judgment whereby the second appeal was dismissed and the finding as to the validity of the suspension order was confirmed.
However the First Appeal was allowed and the decree of the trial court was reversed and a suit for ar rears of salary filed by the respondent was dismissed.
The respondent appealed to this Court and his appeal was allowed and his claim to salary between 20.2.1964 to 15.1.1966 was settled at Rs. 10,000 and the court further held that the order of suspension ceased to be operative w.e.f. 17.10.1975.
Thereafter the respondent on May 18, 1986 moved the High Court under Article 227 of the Constitution for a writ of Mandamus against the State of U.P. and the management of the College for his reinstatement in service and for payment of entire arrears of salary.
The High Court accepted the writ petition and granted him the relief asked for.
Hence these appeals by the Management of the school and the State of U.P.
Allowing the appeals, this Court, HELD: Indeed, the reinstatement would be an unwise move from any point of view.
In educational institutions, the Court cannot focus only on the individual.
The Court must have regard to varying circumstances in the academic atmos phere and radically changed position of the individual sought to be reinstated.
The court must have regard to interests of students as well as the institution.
[459E] In the instant case, during the gap of twenty five years, the respondent must have clearly lost touch with Chemistry as well as the 452 art of teaching.
It must have been also deeply buried and disintegrated under the new acquisition of his legal knowl edge.
Reinstatement of such a person seems to be unjustified and uncalled for.
[459G] Legal profession may not be considered as an employment but the income from profession or avocation if not negligi ble, cannot be ignored while determining damages or back wages for payment.
[463G] In a case like this.
the Government cannot be saddled with the liability to make payment.
There is no relationship of master and servant between Government and respondent and such relationship existed only between the management and respondent.
So far as statutory liability to pay salary to teacher is concerned, the Government has been paying salary to Dr. Gopendra Kumar who has since been appointed as Lec turer in the place of the respondent.
Therefore, the manage ment alone should pay the amount ordered.
[464D E] Vaish Degree College vs Lakshmi Narain, ; G.R. Tiwari vs District Board, Agra and Anr., ; , 59; The Executive Committee of U.P. Warehousing Corpo ration Ltd. vs Chandra Kiran Tyagi, ; , 265; Bank of Baroda vs Jewan Lal Mehrotra, and Sirsi Municipality vs Kom Francis, ; ; Smt.
J. Tiwari vs Smt.
Jawala Devi Vidya Mandir & Ors., ; ; Deepak Kumar Biswas vs The Director of Public Instruc tions, ; Andi Mukta Sadguru Shree Muktajee Vandas Swami Suvaran Jayanti Mahotsav Samarak Trust & Ors.
V.R. Rudani & Ors., ; at 697; TrilokChand Modichand & Ors.
vs H.B. Munshi & Anr., ; Maimoona Khatun & Anr.
vs State of U. P. & Anr.
, ; ; Managing Director U.P. Warehousing Corporation & Anr.
vs Vinay Narain Vajpayee, ; ; Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda & Ors.
vs R.S. Thakur, AIR 1968 SC 2112 and S.M. Saiyad vs Baroda Municipal Corpora tion, [1984] Supp.
SCC 378, referred to.
