The petitioners, daily rated workers of the respondent Corporation appointed between 1983 and 1986, sought a writ of mandamus to regularise their services in the respective units and payment of wages at par with regularly appointed employees of the respondent performing the same or similar duties.
The Industrial Tribunal, which was directed by the Court to examine the matter, found that all the petitioners/work men were performing same or similar duties as were performed by the incumbents of Group 'D ' posts of the respondent Corporation and concluded that on the principle of 'equal pay for equal work ' enshrined in Article 39(d) read with Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution they were entitled to equal pay for equal work in relation to the regular employ ees.
It further held that non regularisation due to uncer tainty of the contract was only a pretence which was not valid in law, and that reversion of some of the petitioners for lack of requisite educational qualification was discrim inatory, arbitrary and an abuse of power by the management.
The respondent assailed the findings on merits pointing out various contentions raised in its pleading, objections and the documents filed before the Tribunal.
It also con tended that it had not consented to dispense with adducing oral evidence, and that despite the direction of the Court to submit a preliminary report the Tribunal was wrong in 514 stating that the respondent had agreed that the Tribunal would send the final report.
Allowing the writ petitions, the Court, Head l.
The petitioners are entitled to equal pay at par with the persons appointed on regular basis to the similar post or discharge similar duties in the respondent Corpora tion, and are entitled to the scale of pay and allowances revised from time to time for the said posts.
[518D] 2.
The statement of facts recorded by a Court or Quasi judicial Tribunal in its proceedings as regards the matters which transpired during the hearing before it would not be permitted to be assailed as incorrect unless steps are taken before the same forum.
It may be open to a party to bring such statement to the notice of the Court/Tribunal and to have it deleted or amended, It was not, therefore, open to the respondent in the instant case to say that the proceed ings recorded by the Tribunal were incorrect.
[517C D] 3.
Practical experience would always aid a person to effectively discharge the duties and is a sure guide to assess his suitability.
The initial minimum educational qualification prescribed for the different posts is undoubt edly a factor to be reckoned with, but it is so at the time of the initial entry into service.
[517H;518A] In the instant case, the petitioners were appointed between the period 1983 and 1986 and eversince, they have been working and had gained sufficient experience in the actual discharge of duties attached to the posts held by them.
Once the appointments were made and they were allowed to work for a considerable length of time as such, it would be hard and harsh to deny them confirmation in the respec tive posts on the ground that they lack the prescribed educational qualifications.
Three years ' experience ignoring artificial break in service for short period/periods created by the respondent in the circumstances, would be sufficient for confirmation.
Since the petitioners satisfy the require ment of three years ' service so calculated, 40 of the sen ior most of them should be regularised with immediate effect and the remaining 118 should be regularised in a phased manner before April 1, 1991 and promoted to the next higher post according to the standing orders, [517G:518B D] 4.
Those of the petitioners who were ousted from service pending 515 the writ petitions to be reinstated immediately.
[518D E]
