Under the , the State Government referred to the Industrial Tribunal the question whether the nonemployment of certain workmen in the appel lant Company was justified, and if not what was the relief to which they were entitled.
The employer and the workmen filed their respective statements before the Tribunal and the workmen sought an amendment which the Tribunal allowed.
The employer challenged the amendment by way of a writ petition before the High Court.
The High Court took the view that the amendment could be assailed while challenging the award itself.
The award was made and the employer assailed the same in a writ petition filed before the High Court.
The High Court confined the relief to 131 casual employees who have worked for more than 240 days and set aside the award in respect of 50 others since they did not complete 240 days of service.
Aggrieved, both the employer and the workmen filed appeals before the Division Bench.
The Division Bench found that until the amendment was made, the workmen had a different claim from what was ultimately pressed before the Tribunal, that there was great variation in the number of workmen for whom relief was claimed, and came to the conclusion that it was not proved that the employer terminated the services of any of the casual workers.
Thus, the appeal of the employer was allowed and that of the workmen dismissed.
Aggrieved, the workmen have filed these appeals by Special Leave.
14 Allowing the appeals in part, this Court, HELD: 1.
The stand taken by the Union that work had not been provided on 13.10.1980 was wrong in view of the fact that a substantial number of casual workmen out of the 186 had really worked on the 13th and the two following days.
The Union had mixed up its claim of confirmation with stop page of work leading to retrenchment.
The Union obviously realised its mistake when the Company filed its Counter statement making a difinite assertion that bulk of the workmen had worked on 13th, 14th and 15th of October, 1980.
The Tribunal did examine the question of confirmation on the basis of days of work put in by the workmen, It found that 131 persons out of the 186 worked for 240 days.
The number of 186 was reduced to 181 on account of duplication or death.
The remaining 50, according to the Tribunal, had not completed 240 days of work and were, therefore, not entitled to confirmation.
[18C D] 2.
While it is a fact that the workmen had made tall claims which they had failed to substantiate, it was for the Tribunal and the High Court to appreciate the material on record and decide as to which part of the claim was tenable.
The finding of the Tribunal that 13 1 workmen had put in more than 240 days of work was arrived at on the basis of some evidence; it may be that better particulars and clear evidence should have been placed before the Tribunal.
The Tribunal rightly gave the relief on the basis that Section 25F of the industrial Disputes Act had not been complied with.
[18E H] 3.
The claim of confirmation of 131 workmen as found by the Tribunal and upheld by the Single Judge of the High Court shall be restored.
Relief of back wages in the facts and circumstances would, however, not be granted except to the extent it has been covered by two interim orders of this Court dated 14.2.1986 and 5.5.1988.
Such payments as have been made shall not be recovered.
[19B C] 4.
Quantum of evidence of appreciation thereof for recording findings of fact would not come within the purview of High Court 's extraordinary jurisdiction under article 226 of the Constitution.
