Elections to the Madhya Pradesh Vidhan Sabha were held in the months of February/March 1985.
The appellant and Respondent No. 1 were the contesting candidates from Niwadi Legislative Assembly constituency No. 34.
Respondent No. 1 having secured majority of votes, was declared elected on 6.3.1985 to the Madhya Pradesh Vidhan Sabha.
The appellant challenged the election of the respondent No. 1 in the High Court of Madhya Pradesh Jabalpur alleging that the first respondent was guilty of adopting corrupt practices within the meaning of sub sections (2), (3) and (3A) of Section 123 of the Representation of Peoples Act, 1951.
Respondent No. 1 denied the allegations made in the election petition.
The High Court dismissed the Election Petition holding that the appellant had not substantiated all the charges levered by him against respondent No. 1.
Hence this appeal by the appellant.
Before this Court the appellant pressed only issues 3, 4 and 5 and gave up the rest.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: An election petition where corrupt practices are imputed must be regarding as proceedings of a quasi criminal nature wherein strict proof is necessary.
Since, a charge of corrupt practice, the consequence of which is not only to render the election of the returned candidate void, but in some cases to impose on him a disqualification it must be proved on appraisal of the evidence adduced by both the parties particularly by the election petitioner who assails the election of a returned candidate.
[591B C] The element of bargaining is completely absent in the present case.
Needless to say that it is necessary for the purpose of proving the corrupt practice of bribery to estab lish that there was an element of bargaining.
[592C] 582 Dhartipakar Madan Lal Agarwal vs Rajiv Gandhi, [1987] Supp.
SCC 93; Kona Prabhakara Rao vs M. Seshagiri Rao & Anr., ; Manphul Singh vs Surinder Singh, [1974] 1 SCR 52; Jamuna Prasad Mukheriya & Ors.
vs Lachi Ram & Ors., ; ; Rahim Khan vs Khurshid Ahmed & Ors., ; ; Ram Sharan Yadav vs Thakur Muneshwar Nath Singh & Ors., ; ; Rahim Khan vs Khurshid Ahmed & Ors.; , ; Lakshmi Raman Acharya vs Chandan Singh & Ors., [1977] 2 SCR 412 and Ramji Prasad Singh vs Ram Bilas Jha & Ors., ; ; Mohan Singh vs Bhanwar Lal & Ors., ; ; Harjit Singh Mann vs section Umraon Singh & Ors., ; ; lqbal Singh vs section Gurdas Singh & Ors., ; ; Lalroukung vs Haokholal Thangam & Anr., ELR Vol , referred to.
