The respondent No. 1, a Central Board constituted under the United Provinces Muslims Waqf Act, 1936, by a notification under section 5(1) Of the Act dated February 26, 1944, took into ' management the properties of a Darga Sharif and on October 18, 1946, the appellants, three of the five members of the Managing Committee of the said Darga Sharif, brought the suit, out of which the present appeal arises, for a declaration that the Darga properties did not constitute a waqf within the meaning of the Act and that the respondent No. 1 had no lawful authority to, issue the notification and assume management of the said properties.
It was urged on behalf of respondent No. 1 that the suit had not been brought within one year as prescribed by section 5(2) of the Act, and was as such barred by limitation; and, that since the notice prescribed by section 53 Of the Act had admittedly not been served on the respondent, the suit was incompetent.
It was found that in an earlier suit, brought with the sanction of the Advocate General, against the Managing Committee for their removal and the framing of a fresh scheme, a decree had been passed against the appellants on October 16 1941, and it directed them not to interfere with the affairs of the Darga as members of the said Committee and to comply with the direction removing them from office.
On appeal the said decree was set aside by the Chief Court on March 7, 1946.
It was contended on behalf of the appellants that section 5(2) Of the Act had no application and even if it had, the suit was within time by virtue of the provisions of section 15 of the Limitation Act.
Held, that the contentions raised on behalf of the appellants must be negatived.
The expression " any person interested in a waqf " used in section 5(2) Of the United Provinces Muslims Waqf Act, 1936, pro perly construed, means any person interested in a transaction that is held to be waqf by the Commissioner of Waqfs appointed under the Act and as such the appellants fell within that category.
Where a literal construction defeats the object of the statute and makes part of it meaningless, it is legitimate to adopt a liberal construction that gives a meaning to the entire provision and makes it effective.
Chaturbhuj Mohanlal vs Bhicam Chand Choroyia & Sons, , Mathu Kutty vs Varoe Kutty, A.I.R. 1950 Mad.
4 and Lal Chand vs Messrs. Basanta Mal Devi Dayal & Ors., , referred to.
Rules of limitation are arbitrary in nature and in construing hem it is not permissible to import equitable considerations, and effect must be given to tile strict grammatical meaning of he words used.
Section 15 of the Limitation Act can be attracted only where a suit has been stayed by an injunction or order and the test would be whether its institution would or would not be an act in contempt of the court 's order.
Nagendra Nath Dey V. Suresh Chandra Dey, (1932) 34 Bom.
R. 1065, Narayan Jivangouda vs Puttabai, (1944) 47 Bom.
L.R. Beti Maharani vs The Collector of Etawah, All. 198 and Sundaramma vs Abdul Khader, Mad. 490, relied on.
Musammat Basso Kaur vs Lala Dhua Singh, (1888) 15 I.A. 211, held inapplicable.
The order of the court in the earlier suit was neither an injunction nor an order of the nature contemplated by section 15 Of the Limitation Act and so that section was inapplicable.
Offerings made from time to time by the devotees visiting the Darga Sharif were by their very nature an income of the Darga, and failure to mention them in the notification under section 5(1) Of the Act, did not render the notification defective.
The provision as to notice under section 53 Of the Act was applicable to suits in respect of acts of the Central Board as well as suits for any relief in respect of the waqf.
