Under Section 21(1)(a) of the Rajasthan Civil Courts Ordinance, 1950 the District Court is empowered to entertain an appeal from a decree of the value of only upto Rs.10,000.
Appeals in other cases lie only to the High Court.
In the instant case, a joint family house was brought to auction in satisfaction of an ex parte money decree to recover Rs.5,557.10.
The respondent coparceners filed objec tions under Order 21 Rule 58 CPC, which were rejected.
The sale was confirmed in 1958 and the sale certificate issued.
They, thereupon, filed a suit under Order 21 Rule 63 CPC to set aside the sale, in which the valuation of the property sold in execution was put at Rs.15,000.
The trial court dismissed the suit.
The District Court, however, allowed the appeal and decreed the suit for resti tution of the property since possession had in the meantime been taken.
The appellant auctionpurchaser raised objections to the execution on the ground that the said decree was a nullity as the District Court lacked pecuniary jurisdiction to entertain the appeal against the decree in the suit valued at Rs.15,000 under Section 21(1)(a) of the Ordinance, and that the decree being a declaratory one was incapable of execution.
The executing court dismissed the objection petition but on appeal the order was reversed.
On further appeal, the High Court set aside the appellate order.
Allowing the appeal in part, the Court, HELD: The value of the amount of decree would be the value for the purpose of the suit under Order 21 Rule 63 CPC.
In the instant case, the suit was laid to set aside the sale by declaring the decree of 26 Rs.5,557.10 to be invalid.
Merely because the valuation of the property sold in execution had been put at Rs.15,000 the valuation of the suit under Order 21 Rule 63 CPC could not be treated to be that valuation.
Accordingly, Section 21(1)(a) of the Ordinance was attracted.
It could not, therefore, be said that the decree passed by the District Court for restitution of the property was a nullity.
Since, it was not a mere declaratory decree but coupled with a decree for restitution of the property, the plaintiff was entitled to execution.
[27G 28A, 28C] Radha Kunwar vs Reoti Singh, AIR 1916 PC 18 and Phul Kumar vs Ghanshyam Mishra, 35 IA 22 PC, referred to.
However, in view of the fact that litigation was pending for a long period, it would be equitable if the appellant is permitted to pay the proper value of the house.
The District Court is directed to assess the prevailing market value of the house and the site as on date.
The appellant to pay the value thereof within a time fixed by the District Court.
[28D, F]
