The respondent contractor had entered into an agreement with the petitioner for formation of an earth dam.
Disputes and difference arose between the parties.
A reference was made to the arbitrator wherein the respondent made eleven claims out of which one claim was later withdrawn.
The arbitrator gave a non speaking award in favour of the re spondent amounting to a consolidated sum of Rs.19.39 lakhs.
The respondent flied a proceeding before the Court to make the award rule of the Court.
The petitioner preferred an application for setting aside the award which was dis missed.
The High Court dismissed the appeal and the revision of the petitioner.
Before this Court it was contended inter alia that the award purported to grant damages on the basis of escalation of cost and prices, and such escalation was not a matter within the domain of the bargain between the parties.
It was also contended that the fact that the arbitrator had taken into consideration the question of escalation would make the award bad because it was not discernible whether he had awarded any amount on account of excalation.
Dismissing the special leave petition, this Court, HELD: (1) In matters of challenging an award, there are often two distinct and different grounds.
One is an error apparent on the face of the record and the other is that the arbitrator has exceeded his jurisdiction.
In the latter case the Court can look into the arbitration agreement but under the former It cannot, unless the agreement was incorporated or recited In the award.
[58A B] M/s Sudarshan Trading Co. vs Government of Kerala & Anr., ; , referred to.
11 55 (2) Only in a speaking award the court can look into the reasoning of the award.
It is not open to the court to probe the mental process of the arbitrator and speculate, where no reasons are given by the arbitrator, as to what impelled the arbitrator to arrive at his conclusion.
[58D] (3) It is not discernible on the face of the record that the arbitrator has exceeded his jurisdiction in awarding damages on account of escalation.
All that the award states is that he has considered the claim on the basis of escala tion.
Such a consideration does not make the award, on the race of it, bad on the ground of error apparent on the face of the record. ' [58G H; 59A B] (4) The Arbitrator does not state that he has awarded any amount on that account.
There is neither any error apparent on the face of the record, nor any material to satisfy that the arbitrator has exceeded his jurisdiction in awarding the amount as he did.
[59B C]
