The question is whether the property in dispute was the private property owned by the Ruler or State property? On August 25, 1948 the then Maharaja of erstwhile Chhatarpur State made a gift of the house in dispute in favour of his father in law Dewan Shankar Partap Singh, now deceased and represented by his legal representative appellant.
This gift became the subject matter of dispute in the suit filed by the State of Madhya Pradesh in 1962.
The Trial Court 's clear findings were that the property in dispute was not that of the Maharaja as it had been gifted away by him to the de fendant and was mistakenly shown later as 'State Property '.
The High Court allowed the appeal of the State of Madhya Pradesh on the view taken by it that the property in dispute had vested in the United State of Vindhya Pradesh on May 1, 1948 and thereafter no valid gift could be made by the Ruler in favour of the defendant; and whatever rights and power the Ruler had as a sovereign ceased to exist after May 1, 1948 and the gift made thereafter could not give the defend ant a valid title to the property.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: The Ruler of Chhatarpur lost none of his sover eignty by integrating his State with other States except to the extent in which it was arranged or re distributed on some of its aspects.
It is in exercise of that sovereign power that the Ruler, had set apart the property in dispute as one of his private properties in the list submitted on July 5, 1948.
[52F] The High Court committed an error that the Ruler had lost his sovereign right to earmark the property in dispute as his private property after May 1, 1948 or that the said property vested in the State with effect from that date or that the letter Exhibit P 9 of Shri N.M. Buch 44 and the lists attached thereto had the effect of divesting the appellants of the title to the property in dispute in favour of the State with effect from that date.
[53E] Virendra Singh & Ors.
vs State of Uttar Pradesh, [1955] I SCR 415, referred to.
