The first respondent filed an election petition against the 1404 appellant on the grounds: (i) that he committed the corrupt practice specified in section 123(7) Of the Representation of the People Act, 195I inasmuch as he had obtained the assistance of one P, a member of the armed forces, who had acted as his polling agent and (ii) that the nomination of one J had been improperly rejected by returning officer.
The election tribunal held that the corrupt practice was not proved but that the nomination of J had been improperly rejected and consequently it declared the election of the appellant to be void.
On appeal the High Court held that the nomination of J was not improperly rejected but that the corrupt practice alleged was established and dismissed the appeal.
The High Court found that P had signed the form a pointing him as the appellant 's polling agent and had presented it before the presiding officer, that P was seen at the polling booth and that the scribe who wrote this form had also written the form by which the appellant had appointed another polling agent.
From these circumstances the High Court drew the inference that the appellant had appointed P as his polling agent and had in fact signed the form in token of such appointment.
With respect to the rejection of the nomination of J the High Court held that J was a voter in a different constituency and that he had failed to produce a copy of the electoral roll when he presented the nomination paper, nor was it produced at the time of the scrutiny or within the time given by the returning officer and that consequently the nomination was properly rejected.
Held, that to establish that the appellant was guilty of the corrupt practice charged it was not sufficient to show that P had acted as his polling agent but it must also be proved that the appellant had appointed P as his polling agent.
This fact the first respondent had failed to prove by any legal evidence.
The facts and circumstances found by the High Court did not inevitably lead to the conclusion that the appellant had signed the form and hence such an inference could not be drawn.
Held, further, that the nomination of J was not improperly rejected.
Where a candidate is an elector of a different constituency he has to prove that fact in the manner prescribed by section 33(5) by the production of a copy of the electoral roll of that constituency or of the relevant part thereof or of a certified copy of the relevant entries thereof.
In the present case there was failure on the part of J to comply with section 33(5) and his nomination was properly rejected under section 36(2)(b).
The failure to comply with section 33(5) is not a defect of an unsubstantial character so as to attract the application Of section 36(4).
When the statute requires specific facts to be proved in a specific way and it also provides for the consequences of non compliance with the said requirement the application of the penalty clause cannot be resisted on the ground that such application is based on a technical approach.
jagan Nath vs jaswant Singh; , ; Rattan 1405 Anmol Singh vs Atma Ram, ; and Pratap Singh vs Shri Krishna Gupta, A.I.R. 1956 S.C. 140, referred to.
Mohan Reddy vs Neelagiri Muralidhar Rao, A.I.R. 1958 A.P. 485, not approved.
