Union Carbide (India) Ltd. (UCIL) is a subsidiary of Union Carbide Corporation (UCC), a New York Corporation.
UCIL was incorporated in India in 1954.
50.99% of its share holding was with UCC and 22% of the shares were held by Life Insurance Corporation of India and Unit Trust of India.
UCIL owned a chemical plant in Bhopal for the manufacture of pesticides using Methyl Isocyanate (MIC) a highly toxic gas.
On the night between 2nd and 3rd December, 1984, there was a massive escape of lethal gas from the MIC Storage tank at the Bhopal plant resulting in the tragic death of about 3,000 people.
Thousands of people suffered injuries.
The environment also got polluted, badly affecting the flora and the fauna.
On behalf of the victims, many suits were filed in various District Courts in the United States of America.
All such suits were consolidated by the Judicial Panel on Multi District Litigation and were assigned to the U.S. District Court, Southern District of New York and Judge Keenan was the Presiding Judge throughout.
Later, the legal battle shifted to Indian Courts, as it could not proceed in the U.S. Courts, on the ground of forum non conveniens.
599 Meanwhile, the Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster (Processing of claims) 1985 was passed by the Government of India with a view to secure that the claims arising out of or connected with the Bhopal gas leak disaster were dealt with speedily, effectively and equitably.
Union of India filed a suit for damages in the District Court of Bhopal on 5.9.86.
However, there were negotiations for a settlement; hut ultimately the settlement talks had failed.
On 17.12.1987, the District Judge ordered interim relief of Rs.350 crores.
On appeal, the High Court, on 4.4.88 modified the order of the District Judge and ordered an interim relief of Rs.250 crores.
Aggrieved, the UCC as also the Union of India filed petitions for special leave before this Court.
Leave was granted.
By its orders dated 14.2.89 and 15.2.89, this Court, on the basis of a settlement arrived at between the parties, directed UCC to pay a sum of 470 million U.S. Dollars to the Union of India in full settlement of all claims, rights and liabilities related to and arising out of the Bhopal gas disaster.
The said orders were passed keeping in view the Bhopal Gas Disaster (Processing of claims) Act, 1985.
The present Writ Petitions challenge the constitutional validity of the said Act inter alia on the grounds that the Act is violative of the fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles 14, 19 and 21 of the Constitution: that the Act is violative of the Principles of Natural Justice mainly on the ground that Union of India, being a joint tort feasor, in that it has permitted establishment of such factories with out necessary safeguards, has no locus standi to compromise on behalf of the victims; that the victims and their legal heirs were not given the opportunity of being heard, before the Act was passed; that in the guise of giving aid, the State could not destroy the rights inherent in its citizens; nor could it demand the citizens to surrender their rights to the State; that vesting of the rights in Central Govern ment was bad and unreasonable because there was conflict of interest between the Central Government and the victims.
since the Central Government owned 22% share in UCIL, and that would make the Central Government a Judge in its own cause.
Disposing of the Writ Petitions, this Court, 600 HELD: Sabyasachi Mukharji, CJ and K.N. Saikia, J. Per C J: 1.1 The Act is constitutionally valid.
It proceeds on the hypothesis that until the claims of the victims are realised or obtained from the delinquents, namely, UCC and UCIL by settlement or by adjudication and until the proceed ings in respect thereof continue, the Central Government must pay interim compensation or maintenance for the vic tims.
In entering upon the settlement in view of section 4 of the Act, regard must be had to the views of the victims and for the purpose of giving regard to these, appropriate notices before arriving at any settlement, was necessary.
In some cases, however, post decisional notice might be sufficient but in the facts and the circumstances of the present case, no useful purpose would be served by giving a post decision al hearing having regard to the circumstances mentioned in the order of this Court dated 4th May, 1989 and having regard to the fact that there are no further additional data and facts available with the victims which can be profitably and meaningfully presented to controvert the basis of the settlement and further having regard to the fact that the victims had their say, or on their behalf their views had been agitated in these proceedings, and will have further opportunity in the pending review proceedings.
[703E H; 704A] 1.2 Though settlement without notice is not quite prop er, on the materials so far available, it is seen that Justice has been done to the victims but justice has not appeared to have been done.
In view of the magnitude of the misery involved and the problems in this case, the setting aside of the settlement on this ground in view of the facts and the circumstances of this case keeping the settlement in abeyance and giving notice to the victims for a post deci sional hearing would not be in the ultimate interest of justice.
It is true that not giving notice was not proper because principles of natural justice are fundamental in the constitutional set up of this country.
No man or no man 's right should be affected without an opportunity to ventilate his views.
Justice is a psychological yearning, in which men seek acceptance of their view point by having an opportunity of vindication before the forum or the authority enjoined or obliged to take a decision affecting their right.
Yet in the particular situations, one has to bear in mind how an in fraction of that should be sought to be removed in accord ance with justice. "To do a great right" after all.
it is permissible sometimes "to do a little wrong".
In the facts and circumstances of the case, this is one of those rare occasions.
[701G H; 702A C] 2.1 The constitutional validity of the statute would have to be determined on the basis of its provisions and on the ambit of its operation as reasonably construed.
It has to be borne in mind that if so 601 judged it passed the test of reasonableness, then the possi bility of the power conferred being improperly used is no ground for pronouncing the law itself invalid.
[659E G] 2.2 Conceptually and from the jurisprudential point of view, especially in the background of the Preamble to the Constitution of India and the mandate of the Directive Principles, it was possible to authorise the Central Govern ment to take over the claims of the Victims to fight against the multinational corporation in respect of the claims.
Because of the situation the victims were under disability in pursuing their claims in the circumstances of the situa tion fully and properly.
But there is no prohibition or inhibition, for Indian State taking over the claims of the victims or for the State acting for the victims as the Act has sought to provide.
[640E H] 2.3 The Act does provide a special procedure in respect of rights of the victims and to that extent the Central Govt.
takes upon itself the rights of the victims.
It is a special Act providing a special procedure for a kind of special class of victims.
In view of the enormity of the disaster the victims of the Bhopal gas leak disaster, as they were placed against the multi national and a big Indian Corporation and in view of the presence of foreign contin gency lawyers to whom the victims were exposed, the claim ants and victims can legitimately be described as a class by themselves different and distinct, sufficiently separate and identifiable to be entitled to special treatment for effec tive, speedy, equitable and best advantageous settlement of their claims.
There indubitably is differentiation.
But this differentiation is based on a principle which has rational nexus with the aim intended to be achieved by this differen tiation.
The disaster being unique in its character and in the recorded history of industrial disaster, situated as the victims were against a mighty multinational with the presence of foreign contingency lawyers looming on the scene, there were sufficient grounds for such differentia tion and different treatment.
In treating the victims of the gas leak disaster differently and providing them a proce dure, which was just, fair, reasonable and which was not unwarranted or unauthorised by the Constitution, Article 14 is not breached.
[683E H; 684A B] Collector of Customs, Madras vs Nathella Sampathu Chet ty; , ; P.J. Irani vs State of Madras, ; D.K. Trivedi vs State of Gujarat, [1986] Suppl.
SCC 20, relied on.
Ballast Corporation vs O.D. Commission, , referred to 602 3.1 The present case is one where the Govt.
of India only represented the victims as a party ' and did not adjudi cate between the victims and the UCC.
It is the court which would adjudicate the rights of the victims.
The representa tion of the victims by the Government of India cannot be held to be bad, and there is and there was no scope of violation of any principle of natural justice.
[670B] 3.2 The connotation of the term "parens patria" differs from country to country, for instance, in England it is the King, in America it is the people, etc.
According to Indian concept parens patria doctrine recognised King as the pro tector of all citizens as parent.
The Government is within its duty to protect and to control persons under disability.
Conceptually, the parens patriae theory is the obligation of the State to protect and take into custody the rights and privileges of its citizens for discharging its obligations.
Our Constitution makes it imperative for the State to secure to all its citizens the rights guaranteed by the Constitu tion and where the citizens are not in a position to assert and secure their rights, the State must come into picture and protect and fight for the right of the citizens.
The Preamble to the Constitution, read with the Directive Prin ciples contained in Articles 38, 39 and 39A enjoins the State to take up these responsibilities.
It is the protec tive measure to which the social welfare state is committed.
It is necessary for the State to ensure the fundamental rights in conjunction with the Directive Principles of State Policy to effectively discharge its obligation and for this purpose, if necessary, to deprive some rights and privileges of the individual victims or their heirs to protect their rights better and secure these further.
[638E H; 639A] 3.3 The UCC had to be sued before the American courts.
The tragedy was treated as a national calamity and the Govt.
of India had the right, and indeed the duty, to take care of its citizens, in the exercise of its parens patriae juris diction or on principles analogous thereto.
After having statutorily armed itself in recognition of such parens patriae right or on principles analogous thereto, it went to the American Courts.
No other person was properly designed for representing the victims, as a foreign court had to recognise a right of representation.
The Govt.
of India was permitted to represent was permitted to represent the vic tims before the American courts.
Private plaintiffs were also represented by their attorneys.
The order of Judge Keenan permitted the Govt.
of India to represent the vic tims.
If there was any remote conflict of interests between the Union of India and the victims from the theoretical point of view the doctrine of necessity would override the possible violation of the principles of natural justice that no man should be Judge in his own case.
[669C F] 603 3.4 The Act in question has been passed in recognition of the right of the sovereign to act as parens patriae.
The Government of India in order to effectively safeguard the rights of the victims in the matter of the conduct of the case was entitled to act as parens patriae, which position was reinforced by the statutory provisions, namely the Act.
It has to be borne in mind that conceptually and jurispru dentially, the doctrine of parens patriae is not limited to representation of some of the victims outside the territo ries of the country.
It is true that the doctrine has been so utilised in America so far.
Where citizens of a country are victims of a tragedy because of the negligence of any multinational in peculiar situation arises which calls for suitable effective machinery to articulate and effectuate the grievance and demands of the victims, for which the conventional adversary system would be totally inadequate.
The State in discharge of its sovereign obligation must come forward.
The Indian State because of its constitutional commitment is obliged to take upon itself the claim of the victims and to protect them in their hour of need.
[658B F] 3.5 There is no bar on the State to assume responsibili ties analogous to parens patriae to discharge the State 's obligations under the Constitution.
What the Central Govern ment has done in the instant case seems to be an expression of its sovereign power.
This power is plenary and inherent in every sovereign state to do all things which promote the health, peace, moral, education and good order of the people and tend to increase the wealth and prosperity of the State.
Sovereignty is difficult to define.
By the nature of things, the State Sovereignty in these matters cannot be limited.
It has to be adjusted to the conditions touching the common welfare when covered by legislative enactments.
This power is to the public what the law of necessity is to the indi vidual.
It is comprehended in the maxim salus populi suprema lex regard for public welfare is the highest law.
It is not a rule, it is an evolution.
This power has always been as broad as public welfare and as strong as the arm of the state, this can only be measured by the legislative will of the people, subject to the fundamental rights and constitu tional limitations.
This is an emanation of sovereignty and it is the obligation of the State to assume such responsi bilities and protect its citizens.
[658G H; 659A C] 3.6 In the instant case, the victims cannot be consid ered to be any match to the multinational companies or the Government with whom in the conditions that the victims or their representatives were after the disaster physically, mentally, financially, economically and also because of the position of litigation would have to contend.
In such a situation of 604 predicament the victims can legitimately be considered to be disabled.
They were in no position by themselves to look after their own interest effectively or purposefully.
In that background, they are people who needed the State 's protection and should come within the umbrella of State 's sovereignty to assert, establish and maintain their rights against the wrong doers in this mass disaster.
In that perspective, it is jurisprudentially possible to apply the principle of parens patriae doctrine to the victims.
But quite apart from that, it has to be borne in mind that in this case the State is acting on the basis of the Statute itself.
For the authority of the Central Government to sue for and on behalf of or instead in place of the victims, no other theory, concept, or any jurisprudential principle is required than the Act itself.
The Act empowers and substi tutes the Central Government.
The victims have been divested of their rights to sue and such claims and such rights have been vested in the Central Government.
The victims have been divested because the victims were disabled.
The disablement of the victims vis a vis their adversaries in this matter is a self evident factor.
Even if the strict application of the 'parens patriae ' doctrine is not in order, as a concept it is a guide.
The jurisdiction of the State 's power cannot be circumscribed by the limitations of the traditional concept of parens patriae.
Jurisprudentially it could be utilised to suit or alter or adapt itself to the changed circumstances.
In the situation in which the victims were, the State had to assume the role of a parent protecting the rights of the victims who must come within the protective umbrella of the State and the common sovereignty of the Indian people.
The act is an exercise of the sovereign power of the State.
It is an appropriate evolution of the expression of sovereignty in the situation that had arisen.
It has to be accepted as such.
[685C H] 3.7 The concept of parens patriae can be varied to enable the Government to represent the victims effectively in domestic forum if the situation so warrants.
There is no reason to confine the 'parens patriae ' doctrine to only quasi sovereign right of the State independent of and behind the title of the citizen.
[692B C] 3.8 The power to compromise and to conduct the proceed ings are not uncanalised or arbitrary.
These were clearly exercisable only in the ultimate interests of the victims.
The possibility of abuse of a statute does not impart to it any element of invalidity.
[659C D] E.P. Royappa vs State of Tamil Nadu, ; ; Menaka Gandhi vs Union of India, [1978] 2 SCR 621; R.D. Shetty vs International Airport Authority of India, ; followed.
605 Ram Saroop vs S.P. Sahi, relied on.
Budhkaran Chankhani vs Thakur Prasad Shah, AIR ; Banku Behari Mondal vs Banku Behari Hazra, AIR 1943 Cal 203; Medai Dalavoi T. Kumaraswamy Mudaliar vs Medai Dalavoi Rajammal, AIR 1957 Mad.
563 approved.
State of U.P. vs Poosu, ; K.M. Nanavati vs State of Bombay, ; ; Ram Gopal Sarubai vs Smt.
Sarubhai & Ors., ; India Mica & Mican ite Industries Ltd. vs State of Bihar & Ors. ; Alfred L Snapp & SonInc.
vs Puerto Rico, ; 73, Ed.
2d 995, 102 section ct.
3260; State of Georgia vs Tennessee Copper Co., ; , 27 section et.
618, re ferred to.
B.K. Mukherjea on Hindu Religious and Charitable Trusts, Tagore Law Lectures, 5th Edn.
p. 404; Words & Phrases, permanent Edn.
33 p. 99; Black 's Law Dictionary, 5th Edn. 1979, p. 1003; Weaver 's Constitutional Law, p. 490; American Consti tutional Law by Lawrence H. Tribe 1978 Edn. para 3.24, referred to.
4.1 Section 3 provides for the substitution of the Central Government with the right to represent and act in place of (whether within or outside India) every person who has made or is entitled to make, a claim in respect of the disaster.
The State has taken over the rights and claims of the victims in the exercise of sovereignty in order to discharge the constitutional obligations as the parent and guardian of the victims who in the situation as placed needed the umbrella of protection.
Thus, the State has the power and jurisdiction and for this purpose unless the Act is otherwise unreasonable or violative of the constitutional provisions no question of giving a hearing to the parties for taking over these rights by the State arises.
For legis lation by the Parliament, no principle of natural justice is attracted provided such legislation is within the competence of the legislature.
Indeed the present Act is within the competence of the Parliament.
Section 3 makes the Central Government the dominoes litis and it has the carriage of the proceedings, but that does not solve the problem of by what procedure the proceedings should be carried.
[692A D] 4.2 Section 4 means and entails that before entering into any settlement affecting the rights and claims of the victims some kind of notice or information should be given to the victims.
[699D] 606 4.3 Sections 3 and 4 are categorical and clear.
When the expression is explicit, the expression is conclusive, alike in what it says and in what it does not say.
These give the Central Government an exclusive right to act in place of the persons who are entitled to make claim or have already made claim.
The expression 'exclusive ' is explicit and signifi cant.
The exclusively cannot be wittled down or watered down.
The said expression must be given its full meaning and extent.
This is corroborated by the use of the expression 'claim ' for all purposes.
If such duality of rights are given to.
the Central Government alongwith the victims in instituting or proceeding for the realisation or the en forcement of the claims arising out of Bhopal gas leak disaster, then that would be so cumbersome that it would not be speedy, effective or equitable and would not be the best or more advantageous procedure for securing the claims arising out of the leakage.
[683A C] 4.4 Sections 3 and 4 of the Act should be read together alongwith other provisions of the Act and in particular sections 9 and 11 of the Act.
These should be appreciated in the context of the object sought to be achieved by the Act as indicated in the Statement of objects and Reasons and the Preamble to the act.
The Act was so designed that the vic tims of the disaster are fully protected and the claims of compensation or damages for loss of life or personal in juries or in respect of other matters arising out of or connected with the disaster are processed speedily, effec tively, equitably and to the best advantage of the claim ants.
Section 3 of the Act is subject to other provisions of the Act which includes Sections 4 and 11.
Section 4 of the Act opens with non obstante clause, vis a vis, section 3 and, therefore overrides section 3.
[659G H; 660A B] 4.5 In the instant case, the Government of India is only capable to represent the victims as a party.
The adjudica tion of the claims would be done by the Court.
The doctrine of 'Bona fide Representation ' as also 'defacto validity ' are not applicable to the present case.
[690F] Basheshar vs Income Tax Commissioner, ; ; In re Special Courts Bill, ; A.R. Antulay vs R.S. Nayak & Anr., ; ; Ram Krishna Dalmia vs Ten dulkar, ; Ambika Prasad Mishra vs State of U.P. & Ors.
; ; Bodhan Chowdhary vs State of Bihar; , ; Lakshmi Kant Pandey vs Union of India; , ; M/s Mackinnon Mackenzie & Co. Ltd. vs Audrey D ' Costa and Anr., [1987] 2 SCC 469; Sheela Barse vs Secretary, Children Aid Society & Ors.
, ; ; Gokaraju Rangaraju vs State of A.P., ; ; Pushpadevi M. Jatia vs M.L. Wadhwan. ; ; 607 M/s Beopar Sahayak (P) Ltd. & Ors.
vs Vishwanath & Ors., [1987] 3 SCC 693; Dharampal Singh vs Director of Small Industries Services & Ors., AIR 1980 SC 1888; N.K. Mohammed Sulaiman vs N.C. Mohammed lsmail & Ors.; , ; Malkariun Bin Shidrammappa Pasare vs Narhari Bin Shivappa & Anr., 271 A 216, referred to.
Black 's Law Dictionary 5th Edn.
p. 437, referred to.
The restrictions or limitations on the substantive and procedural rights in the Act will have to be judged from the point of view of the particular Statute in question.
No abstract rule or standard of reasonableness can be applied.
That question has to be judged having regard to the nature of the rights alleged to have been infringed in this case, the extent and urgency of the evil sought to be remedied, disproportionate imposition, prevailing conditions at the time, all these facts will have to be taken into considera tion.
Having considered the background, the plight of the impoverished, the urgency of the victims ' need, the presence of the foreign contingency lawyers, the procedure of settle ment in USA in mass action, the strength of the foreign multinationals, the nature of injuries and damages, and the limited but significant right of participation of the vic tims as contemplated by section 4 of the Act, the Act cannot be condemned as unreasonable.
[684C E] State of Madras vs V.G. Row, ; , referred to.
6.1 In view of the principles settled by this Court and accepted all over the world in a case of this magnitude and nature, when the victims have been given some say by Section 4 of the Act, in order to make that opportunity contemplated by section 4 of the Act, meaningful and effective, it should be so read that the victims have to be given an opportunity of making their representation before the court comes to any conclusion in respect of any settlement.
How that opportuni ty should be given, would depend upon the particular situa tion.
Fair procedure should be followed in a representative mass tort action.
[696E F] 6.2 One assumption under which the Act is justified is that the victims were disabled to defend themselves in an action of this type.
If that is so, then the Court cannot presume that the victims were a lot, capable and informed to be able to have comprehended or contemplated the settlement.
In the aforesaid view of the matter notice was necessary.
The victims at large did not have the notice.
The Central Government as the representative of the victims must have the views of the victims and place such view before the court in such manner it considers neces 608 sary before a settlement is entered into.
If the victims want to advert to certain aspect of the matter during the proceedings under the Act and settlement indeed is an impor tant stage in the proceedings, opportunities must be given to the victims.
Individual notices may not be necessary.
The Court can, and should in such situation formulate modalities of giving notice and public notice can also be given invit ing views of the victims by tile help of mass media.
Howev er, it is not necessary that such views would require the consent of all the victims.
[698B C; 698G H; 699A] 6.3 One of the important requirements of justice is that people affected by an action or inaction should have oppor tunity to have their say.
That opportunity the victims have got when these applications were heard and they were heard after utmost publicity and they would have further opportu nity when review application against the settlement would be heard.
1700G H; 701A] 7.1 The Act does not expressly exclude the application of the Code of Civil Procedure.
Section 11 of the Act pro vides the overriding effect indicating that anything incon sistent with the provisions of the Act or in other laws including the Civil Procedure Code should be ignored and the Act should prevail.
Strictly speaking, Order 1 Rule 8 will not apply to a suit or a proceeding under the Act.
It is not a case of one having common interest with others.
Here the plaintiff, the Central Government has replaced and divested the victims.
1696H; 697A B] 7.2 In the instant case, there is no question of aban donment as such of the suit or part of the suit, the provi sions of order XXIII Rule 1 would also not strictly apply.
However, Order XXIH Rule 3B of the Code is an important and significant pointer and the principles behind the said provision would apply to this case.
The said rule 3B pro vides that no agreement of compromise in a representative suit shall be entered into without the leave of the Court expressly recorded in the proceedings; and sub rule (2) of rule 3B enjoins that before granting such leave the court shall give notice in such manner as it may think fit in a representative action.
Representative suit has been defined under Explanation to the said rule vide clause (d) as any other suit in which the decree passed may, by virtue of the provisions this Code or of any other law for the time being in force, bind any person who is not named as party to the suit.
Indubitably the victims would be bound by the Settle ment though not named in the suit.
11his is a position conceded by all.
If that is so, it would be a representative suit in terms of and for the purpose of Rule 315 of Order XXIII of the Code.
If the principles of this rule are the principles of natural justice then we are of the opinion that 609 the principles behind it would be applicable; and also that section 4 of the Act should be so construed in spite of the difficulties of the process of notice and other difficulties of making "informed decision making process cumbersome".
[697C G] 7.3 In as much as section 4 of the Act had given a qualified right of participation to the victims, there cannot be any question of violation of the principles of natural justice.
The scope of the application of the princi ples of natural justice cannot be judged by any strait jacket formula.
[662G H] R. Viswanathan vs Rukn ul Mulk Syed Abdul Wajid, ; ; M. Narayanan Nambiar vs State of Kerala, [1963] Supp.
(2) 724; Chintaharan Ghose & Ors.
vs Gujaraddi Sheik & Ors., AIR 1951 Cal. 456; Ram 'Sarup vs Nanak Ram, AIR 1952 All.
275; referred to.
The Act has to be understood that it is in respect of the person responsible, being the person in charge of the UCIL and the parent company UCC.
This interpretation of the Act is further strengthened by the fact that a 'claimant" has been defined in clause (c) of Section 2 as a person who is entitled to make a claim and the expression "person" in Section 2(e) includes the Government.
Therefore, the Act proceeded on the assumption that the Government could be a claimant being a person as such.
[690A B] 9.1 The fact that the provisions of the principles of natural justice have to be complied with, is undisputed.
This is well settled by the various decisions of the Court.
The Indian Constitution mandates that clearly, otherwise the Act and the actions would be violative of Article 14 of the Constitution and would also be destructive of Article 19(1)(g) and negate Article 21 of the Constitution by deny ing a procedure which is just, fair and reasonable.
[693D E] 9.2 Rules of natural justice are not embodied rules.
Hence, it was not possible to make an exhaustive catalogue of such rules.
Audi alteram partem is a highly effective rule devised by the Courts to ensure that a statutory au thority arrives at a just decision and it is calculated to act as a healthy check on the abuse or misuse of power.
The rules of natural justice can operate only in areas not covered by any law validly made.
The general principle as distinguished from an absolute rule of uniform application is that where a statute does not in terms exclude the rule of prior hearing but contemplates a post decisional hearing 610 amounting to a full review of the original order on merits then such a statute would be construed as excluding the audi alteram partem rule at the pre decisional stage.
If the statute conferring the power is silent with regard to the giving of a pre decisional hearing to the person affected the administrative decision after post decisional hearing was good.
[694A D] 9.3 In the instant case, no question of violation of the principle of natural justice arises, and there is no scope for the application of the principle that no man should be a Judge in his own cause.
The Central Government was not judging any claim, but was fighting and advancing the claims of the victims.
The adjudication would be done by the courts, and therefore, there is no scope of the violation of any principle of natural justice.
[688G H; 689A B] Menaka Gandhi vs Union of India, [1978] 2 SCR 621; Olga Tellis vs Bombay Municipal Corporation, [1985] Supp. 2 SCR 51; Union of India vs Tulsi Ram Patel, [1985] Supp. 2 SCR 131; Swadeshi Cotton Mills vs Union of India, ; , relied on.
Ganga Bai vs Vijay Kumar, ; ; S.L. Kapoor vs Jagmohan, ; Sangram vs Election Commis sion; , , referred to.
Though not expressly stated, the Act proceeds on 'the major inarticulate premise '.
It is on this promise or premise that the State would be justified in taking upon itself the right and obligation to proceed and prosecute the claim and deny access to the courts of law to the victims on their own.
If it is only so read, it can only be held to be constitutionally valid.
It has to be borne in mind that the language of the Act does not militate against this construc tion but on the Contrary.
Sections 9, 10 and the scheme of the Act suggest that the Act contains such an obligation.
If it is so read, then only meat can be put into the skeleton of the Act making it meaningful and purposeful.
The Act must, therefore, be so read.
This approach to the interpre tation of the Act can legitimately be called the 'construc tive intuition ' which is a permissible mode of viewing the Acts of Parliament.
The freedom to search for 'the spirit of the Act ' or the quantity of the mischief at which it is aimed (both synonymous for the intention of the parliament) opens up the possibility of liberal interpretation "that delicate and important branch of judicial power, the conces sion of which is dangerous, the denial ruinous".
Given this freedom it is a rare opportunity though never to be misused and challenge for the Judges to adopt and give meaning to 611 the act, articulate and inarticulate and thus translate the intention of the Parliament and fulfil the object of the Act.
After all, the Act was passed to give relief to the victims, who, it was thought, were unable to establish their own rights and fight for themselves.
[687E H; 688A] 11.1 The circumstances that financial institutions held shares in the UCIL would not disqualify the Government of India from acting as parens patriae and in discharging its statutory duties under the Act.
The suit was filed only against the UCC and not against UCIL.
On the basis of the claim made by the Government of India, UCIL was not a neces sary party.
It was suing only the multinational based on several legal grounds of liability of the UCC, inter alia, on the basis of enterprise liability.
If the Government of India had instituted a suit against UCIL to a certain extent it would have weakened its case against UCC in view of the judgment of this Court in M.C. Mehta 's case.
[668H; 669A B] M.C. Mehta vs Union of India, ; , referred to.
11.2 Even if there was any remote conflict of interests between the Union of India and the victims on account of the sharesholding, doctrine of necessity would override the possible violation of the principles of natural justice.
[669F] Kasturilal Ralia Ram Jain vs State of UP, ; ; State of Rajasthan vs Vidyawati, [1962] 2 Supp.
SCR 989; J. Mohapatra & Co. & Anr.
vs State of Orissa & Anr.
, ; , referred to.
Halsbury 's Laws of England, Vol. 1, 4th Edn.
para 73 Smith 's Judicial Review of Administrative Action, 4th Edn.
276 277; Natural Justice by G.A. Flick, [1979] Edn. pp. 138 141, referred to.
The Act does not create new causes of action or create special courts.
The jurisdiction of the civil court to entertain suit would still arise out of section 9 of the CPC and the substantive cause of action and the nature of the reliefs available would also continue to remain un changed.
The only difference produced by the provisions of the Act would be that instead of the suit being filed by the victims themselves the suit would be filed by the Central Government on their behalf.
[655F] 13.
Normally, in measuring civil liability, the law has attached more importance to the principle of compensation than that of punishment.
Penal redress, however, involves both compensation to the 612 person injured and punishment as deterrence.
The Act, as such does not abridge or curtail damage or liability whatev er that might be.
So the challenge to the Act on the ground that there has been curtailment or deprivation of the rights of the victims which is unreasonable in the situation is unwarranted and cannot be sustained.
[680G H; 681A F] Roshanlal Kuthiala & Ors.
vs R.B. Mohan Singh, Oberoi ; ; Nandram Heeralal vs Union of India & Anr., AIR 1978 M.P. 209; Ryland vs Flatcher, (1868) Vol 3 LR E& I Appeal Cases 330; Rookes vs Barnard, ; , re ferred to.
Salmond 's Law of Torts, 15th Edn.
p. 30, referred to.
The Act in question does not purport to deal with the criminal liability, if any, of the parties or persons concerned nor it deals with any of the consequences flowing from those.
This position is clear from the provisions and the preamble to the Act.
[636F] 15.
The major inarticulate premise apparent from the Act and the scheme and the spirit of the Act is that so long as the rights of the victims are prosecuted the state must protect the victims.
Otherwise the object of the Act would be defeated its purpose frustrated.
Therefore, continuance of the payments of the interim maintenance for the continued sustenance of the victims is an obligation arising out of State 's assumption of the power and temporary deprivation of the rights of the victims and divestiture of the right of the victims to fight for their own rights.
This is the only reasonable interpretation which is just, fair and proper.
[686B C] 16.
The promises made to the victims and hopes raised in their hearts and minds can only be redeemed in some measure if attempts are made vigorously to distribute the amount realised to the victims in accordance with the scheme.
That would be redemption to a certain extent.
The law relating to damages and payment of interim damages or compensation to the victims of this nature should be seriously and scientif ically examined by the appropriate agencies.
[704F H; 705A] 17.
The Bhopal Gas Leak disaster and its aftermath emphasise the need for laying down certain norms and stand ards that the Government may follow before granting permis sion or licences for the running of industries dealing with materials which are of dangerous potentialities.
The Govern ment, should, therefore, examine or have the problem exam ined by an expert committee as to what should be the condi tions on 613 which future licences and/or permission for running indus tries on Indian soil would be granted and for ensuring enforcement of those conditions, sufficient safety measures should be formulated and scheme of enforcement indicated.
The Government should insist as a condition precedent to the grant of such licences or permission, creation of a fund in anticipation by the industries to be available for payment of damages out of the said fund in case of leakages or damages in case of accident or disaster flowing from negli gent working of such industrial operations or failure to ensure measures preventing such occurrence.
The Government should also ensure that the parties must agree to abide to pay such damages out of the said Fund by procedure separate ly evolved for computation and payment of damages without exposing the victims or sufferers of the negligent act to the long and delayed procedure.
Special procedure must be provided for and the industries must agree as a condition for the grant of licence to abide by such procedure or to abide by statutory arbitration.
The basis for damages in case of leakages and accident should also be statutorily fixed taking into consideration the nature of damages in flicted, the consequences thereof and the ability and capac ity of the parties to pay.
Such should also provide for deterrant or punitive damages, the basis for which should be formulated by a proper expert committee or by the Govern ment.
For this purpose, the Government should have the matter examined by such body as it considers necessary and proper like the Law Commission or other competent bodies.
This is vital for the future.
[705B F] 18.
That people are born free, the dignity of the per sons must be recognised, and competent tribunal is one of the surest methods of effective remedy.
If, therefore, as a result of this tragedy new consciousness and awareness on the part of the people of this country to be more vigilant about measures and the necessity of ensuring more strict vigilance for permitting the operations of such dangerous and poisonous gases dawn, then perhaps the tragic experience of Bhopal would not go in vain.
[682D E] Per Singh, J. (concurring): 1.1 In India, the need for industrial development has led to the establishment of a number of plants and factories by the domestic companies and under takings as well as by Transnational Corporations.
Many of these industries are engaged in hazardous or inherently dangerous activities which pose potential threat to life, health and safety of persons working in the factory, or residing in the surround ing areas.
Though working of such factories and plants is regulated by a 614 number of laws of our country, there is no special legisla tion providing for compensation and damages to outsiders who may suffer on account of any industrial accident.
As the law stands today, affected persons have to approach civil courts for obtaining compensation and damages.
In civil courts, the determination of amount of compensation or damages as well the liability of the enterprise has been bound by the shack les of conservative principles.
[707D G] 1.2 The principles laid down in Ryland vs Fletcher made it difficult to obtain adequate damages from the enterprise and that too only after the negligence of enterprise was proved.
[707G H] 1.3 The law laid down in Oleum Gas Leak case made a land mark departure from the conservative principles with regard to the liability of an enterprise carrying on hazard ous or inherently dangerous activities.
[709C] 1.4 In the instant case, there is no scope for any doubt regarding the liability of the UCC for the damage caused to the human beings and nature in and around Bhopal.
[709E] Ryland vs Fletcher, ; ; M.C. Mehta vs Union of India; , , referred to. 2.
In the context of our national dimensions of human rights, right to life, liberty, pollution free air and water is guaranteed by the Constitution under Articles 21, 48A and 51(g), it is the duty of the State to take effective steps to protect the constitutional rights guaranteed.
These rights must be integrated and illumined by evolving interna tional dimensions and standards, having regard to our sover eignty as highlighted by Clauses 9 and 13 of U.N. Code of Conduct on Transnational Corporations.
Such a law may pro vide for conditions for granting licence to Transnational Corporations, prescribing norms and standards for running industries on Indian soil ensuring the above said constitu tional rights of our people.
A Transnational Corporation should be made liable and subservient to laws of our country and the liability should not be restricted to affiliate company only but the parent corporations should also be made liable for any damage caused to the human beings or ecology.
The law must require transnational Corporations to agree to pay such damages as may be determined by the statutory agencies and forum constituted under it without exposing the victims to long drawn litigation.
In order to meet the situation, to avoid delay and to ensure immediate relief to the victims, the law should 615 provide for constitution of tribunals regulated by special procedure for determining compensation to victims of indus trial disaster or accident, appeal against which may lie to this Court on the limited ground of questions of law only after depositing the amount determined by the Tribunal.
The law should also provide for interim relief to victims during the pendency of proceedings.
These steps would minimise the misery and agony of victims of hazardous enterprises.
[710H; 711A F] 3.
Industrial development in our country and the hazards involved therein, pose a mandatory need to constitute a statutory "Industrial Disaster Fund", contributions to which may be made by the Government, the industries whether they are transnational corporations or domestic undertakings, public or private.
The extent of contribution may be worked out having regard to the extent of hazardous nature of the enterprise and other allied matters.
The fund should be permanent in nature.
so that money is readily available for providing immediate effective relief to the victims.
[711 G H; 712A] Ranganathan and Ahmadi, J J Per Ranganathan, J. (Concur ring).
The provisions of the Act, read by themselves, guar antee a complete and full protection to the rights of the claimants in every respect.
Save only that they cannot file a suit themselves, their right to acquire redress has not really been abridged by the provisions of the Act.
Sections 3 and 4 of the Act completely vindicate the objects and reasons which compelled Parliament to enact this piece of legislation.
Far from abridging the rights of the claimants in any manner, these provisions are so worded as to enable the Government to prosecute the litigation with the maximum amount of resources, efficiency and competence at its com mand.
as well as with all the assistance and help that can be extended to it by such of those litigants and claimants as are capable of playing more than a mere passive role in the litigation.
[720G H; 721A B] 2.
Even if the provisions of section 3 had been scrupulously observed and the names of all parties, other than the Cen tral Government, had been got deleted from the array of parties in the suits and proceedings pending in this coun try, the result would not have been fatal to the interests of the litigants.
On the contrary, it enabled the litigants to obtain the benefit of all legal expertise at the command of the Government of India in exercising their rights against the Union Carbide Corporation.
Such representation can well be justified by resort to a principle analogous to, if not precisely the same, as that of, "parens 616 patriae".
A victim of the tragedy is compelled to part with a valuable right of his in order that it might be more efficiently and satisfactorily exploited for his benefit than he himself is capable of.
It is of course possible that there may be an affluent claimant or lawyer engaged by him, who may be capable of fighting the litigation better.
It is possible that the Government of India as a litigant may or may not be able to pursue the litigation with as much deter mination or capability as such a litigant.
But in a case of the present type one should not be confounded by such a possibility.
There are more indigent litigants than affluent ones.
There are more illiterates than enlightened ones.
There are very few of the claimants, capable of finding the financial wherewithal required for fighting the litigation.
Very few of them are capable or prosecuting such a litiga tion in this country not to speak of the necessity to run to a foreign country.
The financial position of UCIL was negli gible compared to the magnitude of the claim that could arise and, though eventually the battle had to be pitched on our own soil, an initial as well as final recourse to legal proceedings in the United States was very much on the cards, indeed inevitable.
In this situation, the legislature was perfectly justified in coming to the aid of the victims with this piece of legislation and in asking the Central Govern ment to shoulder the responsibility by substituting itself in place of the victims for all purposes connected with the claims.
[716C H; 717A] 3.
Section 4 adequately safeguards the interest of individual victims.
It enables each one of them to bring to the notice of the Union any special features or circum stances which he would like to urge in respect of any matter and if any such features are brought to its notice the Union is obliged to take it into account.
The individual claimants are also at liberty to engage their own counsel to associate with the State counsel in conducting the proceedings.
If the suits in this case had proceeded, in the normal course, either to the stage of a decree or even to one of settlement the claimants could have kept themselves abreast of the developments and the statutory provisions would have been more than adequate to ensure that the points of view of all the victims are presented to the court.
Even a settlement or compromise could not have been arrived at without the court being apprised of the views of any of them who chose to do so.
The statute has provided that though the Union of India will be the dominus litis in the suit, the interest of all the victims and their claims should be safeguarded by giving them a voice in the proceedings to the extent indicated above.
This provision of the statute is an adaptation of the principle of Order 1 Rule 8 and of order XXIII Rule 38 of the Code of Civil Procedure in its application to the suits governed by it and, though the extent of participation al lowed to 617 the victims is somewhat differently enunciated in the legis lation, substantially speaking, it does incorporate the principles of natural justice to the extent possible in the circumstances.
The statute cannot, therefore, be faulted on the ground that it denies the victims an opportunity to present their views or places them at any disadvantage in the matter of having an effective voice in settling the suit by way of compromise.
[724G H; 725A D] 4.
Sections 3 and 4 combine together the interest of the weak, illiterate, helpless and poor victims as well as the interest of those who could have managed for themselves, even without the help of this enactment.
The combination thus envisaged enables the Government to fight the battle with the foreign adversary with the full aid and assistance of such of the victims or their legal advisers as are in a position to offer any such assistance.
Though section 3 denies the climants the benefit of being eo nominee parties in such suits or proceedings, section 4 preserves to them substantially all that they can achieve by proceeding on their own.
In other words, while seeming to deprive the claimants of their right to take legal action on their own, it has preserved those rights, to be exercised indirectly.
A conjoint reading of sections 3 and 4 would show that there has been no real total deprivation of the right of the claimants to enforce their claim for damage in appropriate proceedings before any appropriate forum.
There is only a restriction of this right which, in the circumstances, is totally reasonable and justified.
[718D G ] 5.
It is not possible to bring the suits brought under the Act within the categories of representative action envisaged in the Code of Civil Procedure.
The Act deals with a class of action which is sui generis and for which a special formula has been found and encapsuled in section 4.
The Act divests the individual claimants of their right to sue and vests it in the Union.
In relation to the suit in India, the Union is the sole Plaintiff.
none of the others are envisaged as plaintiffs or respondents.
The victims of the tragedy were so numerous that they were never defined at the stage of filing the plaint nor do they need to be defined at the stage of settlement.
The litigation is carried on by the State in its capacity not exactly the same as, but somewhat analogous to that of "parens patriae".
In the case of a litigation by a Karta of a Hindu undivided family or by a guardian on behalf of a ward, who is non sui juris, the junior members of the family or the wards, are not to be consulted before entering into a settlement.
In such cases, court acts as guardian of such persons to scrutinise the settlement and satisfy itself that it is in the best inter est of all concerned.
If it is later discovered that there has been any fraud or collusion, it may be open to the junior members of the 618 family or the wards to call the Karta or guardian to account but, barring such a contingency, the settlement would be effective and binding.
In the same way, the Union as "parens patriae ' would have been at liberty to enter into such settlement as it considered best on its own and seek the Court 's approval therefore.
[723G H; 724A D] 6.
It is common knowledge that any authority given to conduct a litigation cannot be effective unless it is accom panied by an authority to withdraw or settle the same if the circumstances call for it.
The vagaries of a litigation of this magnitude and intricacy could not be fully anticipated.
There were possibilities that the litigation may have to be fought out to the bitter finish.
There were possibilities that the UCC might be willing to adequately compensate the victims either on their own or at the insistence of the Government concerned.
There was also the possibility, which had already been in evidence before Judge Keenan, that the proceedings might ultimately have to end in negotiated settlement.
In most of the mass disaster cases reported, proceedings finally end in a compromise, if only to avoid an indefinite prolongation of the agonies caused by such liti gation.
The legislation, therefore, cannot be considered to be unreasonable merely because in addition to the right to institute a suit or other proceedings it also empowers the Government to withdraw the proceedings or enter into a compromise.
[719B E] M.C. Mehta vs Union of India, ; , referred to.
The Act has provided an adequate opportunity to the victims to speak out and if they or the counsel engaged by some of them in the trial court had kept in touch with the proceedings in this court, they could have most certainly made themselves heard.
If a feeling has gained ground that their voice has not been fully heard, the fault was not with the statute but was rather due to the development leading to the finalisation of the settlement when the appeal against the interim order was being heard in this Court.
[726B D] 8.
In the field of torts, under the common law of Eng land, no action could be laid by the dependants or heirs of a person whose death was brought about by the tortious act of another on the maxim actio personalis maritur cum persona although a person injured by a similar act could claim damages for the wrong done to him.
In England this situation was remedied by the passing of Fatal Accidents Act, 1846, popularly known as Lord Compbell 's Act.
Thereafter the Indian Legislature enacted the .
This Act is fashioned on the 619 lines of the English Act of 1840.
Even though the English Act has undergone a substantial change, our law has remained static and seems a trifle archaic.
The magnitude of the gas leak disaster in which hundreds lost their lives and thou sands were maimed, not to speak of the damage to livestock, flora and fauna, business and property, is an eye opener.
The nation must learn a lesson from this traumatic experi ence and evolve safeguards atleast for the future.
The time is ripe to take a fresh look at the outdated century old legislation which is out of tune with modern concepts.
[728F H; 729A B] 9.
The Central Government will be well advised to insist on certain safeguards before permitting a transnational company to do business in the country.
It is necessary to insist on a right to be informed of the nature of the proc esses involved so as to take prompt action in the event of an accident.
The victims in this case have been considerably handicapped on account of the fact that the immediate tort feasor was the subsidiary of a multi national with its Indian assets totally inadequate to satisfy the claims arising out of the disaster.
It is, therefore, necessary to evolve, either by international consensus or by unilateral legislation, steps to overcome these handicaps and to ensure that foreign corporations seeking to establish an industry here, agree to submit to the jurisdiction of the Courts in India in respect of actions for tortious acts in this coun try; that the liability of such a corporation is not limited to such of its assets (or the assets of its affiliates) as may be found in this country, but that the victims are able to reach out to the assets of such concerns anywhere in the world; and that any decree obtained in Indian Courts in compliance with due process of law is capable of being executed against the foreign corporation, its affiliates and their assets without further procedural hurdles.
in those other countries.
[729G H; 730A E] 10.
It is hoped that calamities like the one which this country has suffered will serve as catalyst to expedite the acceptance of an international code on such matters in the near future.
[730F G]
