The respondent, a Sub Inspector of police, was convicted under section 376 of I.P.C. for having committed rape on a young newly married girl of 19 or 20 years of age, by the Additional Sessions Judge, Nagpur.
The respondent challenged his conviction in appeal to the High Court.
The High Court set aside the order of conviction and sentence imposed by the trial court and acquitted him.
The State feeling ag grieved came up in appeal by special leave.
While allowing the appeal setting aside the order of the High Court and restoring that of the Trial Court, the Court, HELD: A prosecutrix of a sex offence cannot be put on par with an accomplice.
She is in fact a victim of the crime.
The Evidence Act nowhere says that her evidence cannot be accepted unless it is corroborated in material particulars.
She is undoubtedly a competent witness under section 118 and her evidence must receive the same weight as is attached to an injured in cases of physical violence.
The same degree of care and caution must attache in the evalua tion of her evidence as in the case of any injured complain ant or witness and no more.
[123B C] What is more necessary is that the Court must be alive to and conscious of the fact that it is dealing with the evidence of a person who is interested in the outcome of charge levelled by her.
Having regard to the increase in the number of sex violation cases in the recent past, particu larly cases of molestation and rape in custody, it is proper to remove the notion, if it persists, that the testimony of a woman who is a 116 victim of sexual violence must ordinarily be corroborated in material particulars except in the rarest of rare cases.
[123C D; 124B C] Ours is a conservative society where it concerns sexual behaviour.
Ours is not a permissive society as in some of the Western and European countries.
Our standard of decency and morality in public life is not the same as in those countries.
It is, however, unfortunate that respect for womanhood in our country is on the decline and cases of molestation and rape are steadily growing.
An Indian Woman is now required to suffer indignities in different forms, from lewd remark to eve teasing, from molestation to rape.
Decency and morality in public life can be promoted and protected only if we deal strictly with those who violate the social norms.
The standard of proof to be expected by the Court in such cases must take into account the tact that such crimes are generally committed on the sly and very rarely direct evidence of a person other than the prosecu trix is available.
[124D F] Courts must also realise that ordinarily a woman, more so a young girl, will not stake her reputation by leveling a false charge concerning her chastity.
By our criminal laws vide powers are conferred on police officers investigating cognizable offences.
The infrastructure of our criminal 'investigation system recognises and indeed protects the right of a woman to decent and dignified treatment at the hands of the investigating agency.
[124F H] The purpose and setting, the person and his position, the misuse or abuse of office and the despair of the victim which led to her surrender are all relevant factors which must be present in the mind of the Court while evaluating the conduct evidence of the prosecutrix.
A person in author ity, such as a police officer carries with him the awe of office which is bound to condition the behaviour of his victim [125C D] The Court must not be oblivious of the emotional turmoil and the psychological injury that a prosecutrix suffers on being molested or raped.
She suffers a tremendous sense of shame and the fear of being shunned by society and her near relatives including her husband.
Instead of treating her with compassion and understanding as one who is an injured victim of a crime, she is, more often than not, treated as a sinner and shunned.
It must, therefore be realised that a woman who is subjected to sex violence would always be slow and hesitant about disclosing her plight.
The Court must, therefore, evaluate her evidence in the above background.
117 Bharwada Bhognibhai Hirjibhai vs State of Gujarat, ; upon.
