Under the provisions of the Andhra Pradesh (Andhra Area) Estates (Abolitian and Conversion into Ryotwari) Act, 1948, (the Act), the Government took over a hospital which was run by a Zamindar of an impartible estate.
After the take over, the Government made applications before the Estate Abolition Tribunal claiming recovery of certain amounts which were endowed to the hospital by the erstwhile ruler, from out of the compensation paid on the abolition of the estate.
Claims for interest and priority over other creditors were also made.
In the first of such applications, the Tribunal allowed the amount claimed without specific reference to interest but rejected the claim for priority.
In the subsequent proceedings, the Tribunal rejected the claim for interest as also priority and held that in the earlier proceeding also, it has disallowed the claim for interest.
Aggrieved against the Tribunal 's orders, Government preferred appeals before the High Court.
The High Court took the view that while allowing the claim the Tribunal had not only allowed the claim for principal but also interest thereon, and ordered payment of interest as claimed.
These appeals are against the High Court 's orders and the appellant contended that there was no provision in the Act for payment of interest; that the expression 'amount ' claimed before the Tribunal should be construed to mean the principal amount only; that the subsequent claims for inter est were barred by resjudicata; that it would be 135 inequitable to claim interest on the amounts endowed since no interest was paid on compensation; that while the compen sation was shared by others also, the appellant cannot be singled out to pay the interest.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court, HELD: 1.1 The High Court was right in holding that the Tribunal by its order of 15.12.02 had allowed the claim for interest.
Under the scheme of the Act itself, the Tribunal was required to apportion the amounts according to the priorities depending upon the amount of compensation depos ited at the time of giving of the direction in question.
It was, therefore, only to be expected that the Tribunal would first give directions with regard to the payment of princi pal amounts and defer the payment of interest to a future date.
That is exactly what the Tribunal had done in the present case and, hence, in the second set of applications made by the Government, the Government had not only claimed the balance of the principal amounts but also interest thereon.
Thus, the issue with regard to the claim for inter est in the subsequent applications was not barred by resju dicata.
[141B C, D].
1.2 All that the Tribunal had done was to direct the Estate to pay the amounts in question to the Government together with interest at the admitted rate, which interest was in any case payable towards the endowment objects.
Under the Act, the Tribunal had, among other things, to determine the liability of the Estate.
The endowment amounts together with the interest admittedly accruing thereon formed the total liability of the Estate.
The interest, further was a recurring one and the objects of the endowment were to be financed from out of the said interest.
When the Tribunal directed the payment of interest together with the principal amount, it did nothing more than direct the Estate to honour its liability.
[141F G] 2.
Whether or not interest was paid on compensation due to the Estate, it has nothing to do with the Estate 's li ability towards the endowments.
The interest directed to be paid by the Tribunal was not interest over and above the endowed amounts.
It is the principal amount together with the interest accruing thereon which constituted the total endowed amounts at the time of abolition of the Estates, [142A B] 3.
The direction of the High Court to pay the said amount will have to be read as a direction to the appellant to do so in his capacity as the Estate holder and not in his individual capacity.
If the final amounts 136 are already distributed among all the sharers and/or the creditors, the Government has to look for the amount of interest to all the sharers and/or their creditors including of course the appellant.
All the sharers will be liable to contribute towards the payment of the amount of interest in proportion to their share in the compensation.
That is how the order of the High Court and the earlier order passed by the Tribunal will have to be read and construed.
[142E H; 143A]
