After the appellant landed at Trivandrum Airport from Abu Dhabi, he was intercepted by the Customs officials detecting that he smuggled 1280 gms.
of gold.
He was arrest ed on 31.1.1988.
On 12.2.1988 he was granted bail on certain conditions.
With a view to preventing the appellant from smuggling gold, the impugned detention order was passed against him on 25.6.1988 by the Home Secretary, Government of Kerala, in exercise of the powers conferred by section 3(1)(i) of the .
The appellant was taken into custody on 2.8.1988.
The Appropriate Authority and the Advisory Board found sufficient cause for his detention.
The detenu challenged his detention moving a Habeas Corpus petition under Article 226 of the Constitution, read with section 482, Cr.
P.C., which was dismissed in limine by the High Court.
Before this Court.
the main grounds of challenge to the detention order were that (1) after the event there was inordinate delay in passing the detention order which showed that there was no genuine.
need for detention of the appel lant; (2) there was inordinate and unexplained delay of 38 days in execution of the detention order; (3) all the docu ments and materials, particularly the appellants bail appli cation, the bail order, the show cause notice and his reply thereto were not placed before the detaining authority; (4) these documents and the fact that the appellant 's old and new passports were seized and without those it would not be possible for the appellant to carry on smuggling, were not brought to the notice of the declaring authority; and (5) there was 210 non application of mind.
On behalf of the State of Kerala it was submitted, inter alia, that (1) there was no such delay between the date of detection and the date of passing the order of detention so as to make the grounds stale or to snap ' the relation; (2) that the delay in execution of the detention order had been explained; and (3) that the bail application as well as the bail order were placed before the detaining authority but the same having not been referred to or relied on by the detaining authority, copies thereof were not required to be furnished to the detenu along with the grounds of detention.
On behalf of the Union of India it was submitted that all the documents and materials that were required to be placed before the declaring authority were duly placed and on consideration of the relevant materials the declaring authority validly made the declaration.
Allowing the appeal and setting aside the order of detention, this Court, HELD: (1) It has been laid down by this Court in a series of decisions that the rule as to unexplained delay in taking action is not inflexible.
Under a law like the COFE POSA Act enacted for the purpose of dealing effectively with persons engaged in smuggling and foreign exchange racketeer ing who, owing to their large resources and influence, have been posing a serious threat to the economy and thereby to the security of the nation, the courts should not merely on account of the delay in making of an order of detention assume that such delay, if not satisfactorily explained.
must necessarily give rise to an inference that there was no sufficient material for the subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority or that such subjective satisfaction was not genuinely reached.
Taking of such a view would not be warranted unless the Court finds that the grounds are stale or illusory or that there was no real nexus between the grounds and the impugned order of detention.
[217B E] Ashok Narain vs Union of India, ; Smt.
Rekhaben Virendra Kapadia vs State of Gujarat, ; ; Sheikh Salim vs The State of West Bengal, ; ; Rajendrakumar Natvarlal Shah vs State of Gujarat, ; ; Olia Mallick vs The State of West Bengal, ; Golam Hussain vs The Commissioner of Police, ; ; Odut Ali Miah vs The State of West Bengal, ; Vijay Narain Singh vs State of Bihar, 211 ; Gora vs State of West Bengal, ; ; Rai Kumar Singh vs State of Bihar, ; ; Smt.
Hemlata Kantilal Shah vs State of Maharasthra, ; , referred to.
(2) In appropriate cases it could be assumed that the link was snapped if there was a long and unexplained delay between the date of order of detention and the arrest of the detenu and in such a case the order of detention could be struck down unless the grounds indicated a fresh application of mind of the detaining authority to the new situation and the changed circumstances.
But where the delay is not only adequately explained but also is found to be the result of the recalcitrant or refractory conduct of the detenu in evading arrest, there is warrant to consider the 'link ' not snapped but strengthened.
[219C D] Mohammed Saleem vs Union of India, [1989] 3 Delhi Lawyer 77; Bhawarlal Ganeshmalji vs State of Tamil Nadu, ; ; Shafiq Ahmad vs District Magistrate, Meerut, [1989] 4 SCC 556, referred to.
(3) Seizure of the detenu 's passports was no doubt one of the factors that the detaining authority should have taken (and did in fact take) into account, but it was for him to assess the weight to be attached to such a circum stance in arriving at his final decision and it is not open to the Court to interfere with the merits of his decision.
[221E F] (4) From the records it appears that the bail applica tion and the bail order were furnished to the detaining authority on his enquiry.
It is difficult, therefore, to accept the submission of the State Government that those were not relied on by the detaining authority.
[223A B] (5) The constitutional requirement of Article 22(5) is that all the basic facts and particulars which influenced the detaining authority in arriving at the requisite satis faction leading to making the detention order must be commu nicated to the detenu so that the detenu may have an oppor tunity of making an effective representation against the order of detention.
It is immaterial whether the detenu already knew about their contents or not.
[223E F] Ramchandra A. Kamat vs Union of India, ; ; Frances Coralia Muffin vs W.C. Khambra.
; ; Smt.
Ichhu Devi Choraria vs Union Of India, ; ; Pritam Nath Hoon vs Union of India, ; ; Shri Tushar Thakkar vs Union of India, ; Lallubhai Jogibhai Patel vs Union of 212 India; , ; Kirit Kumar Chaman Lal Kundaliya vs Union of India, ; Smt.
Ana Carolina D 'Souza vs Union of India, ; Mehrunissa vs State of Maharashtra, ; Mohd. Zakir vs Delhi Administration, and Khudiram Das vs State of West Bengal, ; , referred to.
(6) If the documents which formed the basis of the order of detention were not served on the detenu along with the grounds of detention, in the eye of law there would be no service of the grounds of detention and that circumstance would vitiate his detention and make it void ab initio.
[225D E] State of U.P. vs Kamal Kishore Saini, ; ; Union of India vs Manoharlal Narang, ; ; section Gurdip Singh vs Union of India, ; Ichhu Devi Choraria vs Union of India, ; ; Smt.
Shalini Soni vs Union of India, ; , referred to.
Haridas Amarchand Shah vs K.L. Verma, ; distinguished.
(7) The bail application and the bail order, in the instant case, were vital materials for consideration.
If those were not considered the satisfaction of the detaining authority itself would have been impaired, and if those had been considered, they would be documents relied on by the detaining authority though not specifically mentioned in the annexure to the order of detention and those ought to have formed part of the documents supplied to the detenu with the grounds of detention and without them the grounds themselves could not be said to have been complete.[226A B] (8) There is no alternative but to hold that non supply of essential documents to the detenu amounted to denial of the detenu 's right to make an effective representation and that it resulted in violation of Article 22(5) of the Con stitution rendered the continue detention of the detenu illegal and entitling the detenu to be set at liberty.
[226B C] (9) Sections 9 and 10 of the COFEPOSA Act imply an obligation on the part of the detaining authority to place the facts and materials that occurred between the date of detention and the date of declaration, so as to justify prolongation of the period of detention.
[228D E] 213 Smt.
Rekhaben Virendra Kapadia vs State of Gujarat & Ors., ; ; Smt.
Madhu Khanna vs Administrator, Union Territory of Delhi, , referred to.
