Respondent instituted a suit against the appellant, the Coal Mines Provident Fund Commissioner without a notice as required under section 80 C.P.C. Appellant objected stating that he was a public officer within the meaning of the term occurring in section 80 C.P.C. and that the suit was incom petent.
The trial court overruled the objection and held that the appellant was not a public officer.
The High Court confirmed the same.
Aggrieved, the appellant, has preferred this appeal by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
I The courts below have erred in holding that the Coal Mines Provident Fund Commissioner is not a public officer within the meaning of the term in section 2(17)(h) of the C.P.C.
The word 'service ' in section 2 (17)(h) C.P.C. must necessarily mean something more than being merely subject to the orders of Government or control of the Gov ernment.
To serve means "to perform function; do what is required for".
The Commissioner appointed by Government performs the functions as envisaged in the Act and the scheme thereunder.
When he is actually acting in the capaci ty of Provident Fund Commissioner, he does not cease to be an officer in the service of the Government.
[184E F; 185F] 1.2 The fact that the Commissioner receives the salary and allowances out of the Coal Mines Provident Fund and not from the Government during the tenure as Commissioner would make no difference when the description as an officer in the service of the Government is answered.
[184D] 182 2.
In the present case, the Provident Fund Commissioner holds the office of Commissioner on appointment by Govern ment by virtue of his office.
His services are temporarily placed at the disposal of the Board constituted under Sec tion 3 of the .
He does not, therefore, cease to be an officer in the service of the Government.
The payment of his pay out of the Fund does not alter his status as Government employee.
[185E] Liquidator of Society Sangakheda Kalan Co Operative Bank, Hoshangabad vs Ayodhyaprasad Shiamlal, ; Kuppu Govinda Chattiar vs Uttukottai Co Operative Society, AIR 1940 Madras 831; Vishnu Wasudeo Joshi vs T.L.H. Smith Pearse, AIR 1949 Nagpur 362; Commissioner of Wakfs, Bengal vs Shahebzada Mohammed Zahangir Shah, AIR 1944 Cal cutta 206 and Kamta Prasad Singh vs The Regional Manager, F.C.I., AIR 1974 Patna 376, referred to.
