The appellants were arrested for offences punishable under the provisions of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1988.
They were remanded to judicial custody till October 13, 1988.
On October 11, 1988 orders were passed under Section 3(1) of the Prevention of illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1988 for the detention of the appellants on the ground that with a view to preventing the appellants from engaging in the transportation and abetting in the export inter state of Psychotropic Substances, it was necessary to detain them and to keep in custody.
The orders were served on them on Octo ber 13, 1988, while in custody.
The High Court dismissed the Writ Petitions filed on behalf of the appellants, challeng ing the legality of their detention.
In the Special Leave Petitions filed in this Court, it was contended that since the appellants were in custody on October 11, 1988, the date of passing of the detention order, there was no apprehension that the appellants would be engaging in any prejudicial activity, and the detention order could not be validly passed.
On behalf of the respondents, it was contended that the detention order was validly passed on October 11, 1988 since the appellants had been remanded to judicial custody upto October 13, 1988 only, and the detaining authority could have apprehended that the remand may not be extended beyond that date and the appellants may be released from custody, and would be free thereafter to engage in prejudicial activ ities.
Allowing the appeals, this Court passed an order on January 11, 1990, setting aside the detention order and directing the release of the appellants.
304 Giving reasons for its order, this Court, HELD: An order for detention can be validly passed against a person in custody and for that purpose it is necessary that the grounds of detention must show that (i) the detaining authority was aware of the fact that the detenu is already in detention; and (ii) there were compel ling reasons justifying such detention despite the fact that the detenu is already in detention.
The expression "compel ling reasons" in the context of making an order for deten tion of a person already in custody implied that there must be cogent material before the detaining authority on the basis of which it may be satisfied that (a) the detenu is likely to be released from custody in the near future and (b) taking into account the nature of the antecedent activi ties of the detenu, it is likely that after his release from custody he would indulge in prejudicial activities and it is necessary to detain him in order to prevent him from engag ing in such activities.
[313C E] Rameshwar Shaw vs District Magistrate, Burdwan & Anr., ; ; Masood Alam Etc.
vs Union of India and Others, ; ; Dulal Roy vs District Magistrate, Burdwan, ; ; Vijay Kumar vs State of Jammu & Kashmir and Others, ; ; Alijan Mian vs District Magistrate Dhanbad and Others, [1983] 4 SCC 301; Ramesh Yadav vs District Magistrate, Etah and Others, ; Suraj Pal Sahu vs State of Maharashtra & Others, ; ; Binod Singh vs District Magistrate Dhanbad, Bihar and Others, ; ; Smt.
Shashi Aggarwal vs State of U. P. & Others, ; ; Vijay Kumar vs Union of India, ; and N. Meera Rani vs Government of Tamil Nadu & Another, ; , referred to.
In the instant case, the detaining authority was aware of the fact that the appellants were in custody on the date of the passing of the order of detention.
Though the fact that the appellants have been remanded to judicial custody till October 13, 1988 has been mentioned, the grounds of detention do not show that the detaining authority appre hended that further remand would not be granted by the Magistrate on October 13, 1988 and the appellants would be released from custody on October 13, 1988.
Nor is there any material in the grounds, which may lend support to such an apprehension.
On the other hand, the bail applications moved by the appellants had been rejected by the Sessions Judge a few days prior to the passing of detention order on October 11, 1988.
The grounds disclose that the appellants were engaged in activities which are offences punishable with imprisonment under the 305 provisions of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1988.
It cannot, therefore, be said that there was a reasonable prospect of the appellants not being further remanded to custody on October 13, 1988 and their being released from custody at the time when the order for preven tive detention was passed on October 11, 1988.
[313F; 314C E] In such circumstances, the order for detention of the appellants cannot be sustained.
[314F]
