The appellant filed two eviction petitions against the respondent.
The first of these was under section 14(1)(e) of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958, on the ground of personal bona fide requirement.
The same was decreed in favour of the appellant, and the respondent was granted six months time to vacate the premises.
This was in accordance with section 14(7) of the Act prohibiting the landlord from obtaining possession before the expiry of six months from the eviction order.
The second eviction petition filed under Section 14(1)(a) of the Act for non payment of rent, was compromised between the parties, and the respondent agreed to put back the appellant in possession of the said premises.
The tenant delivered possession of the premises.
When the possession was delivered, six months period stipulated under Section 14(7) did not expire, for executing the eviction decree obtained in the first suit.
Owing to some reasons, the appellant could not continue in the premises and wanted to let out the premises to a third party.
At that point of time, the erstwhile tenant filed an application under Section 19(2) of the Act claiming re entry into the premises.
The Rent Controller rejected the application.
On appeal, the Rent Control Tribunal directed the appellant to put back the tenant in possession of the premises.
A revision petition was filed by the appellant before the High Court.
It was dismissed in limine.
Appellant has preferred this appeal against the order of the High Court.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
Sub Section (2) of section 19 operates in favour of the tenant who has suffered an order of eviction under section 14(1)(e) or under Sections 14 A to 14 D and 21.
The tenant may move the Rent Controller for a direction against the landlord to put him in possession of the 316 premises or to pay him such compensation as the Controller thinks fit, if the premises is not occupied by the landlord after recovering possession, or not occupied within two months by the person for whose benefit the premises are held.
The tenant has a further right to move the Controller for such reliefs if the landlord has at any time within three years from the date of obtaining possession, re let the premises to third party without obtaining permission of the Controller under sub section (1) of Section 19, or the possession of such premises is transferred to another person not bona fide.
If the possession is recovered under any order other than those referred to in sub section (1) the tenant has no right to invoke the provisions of sub section (2) of section 19.
[318F H; 319A B] 2.
In the instant case, the possession was actually delivered to the appellant by the tenant as per the compro mise recorded in the suit based on arrears of rent under section 14(1)(a) and delivery of such possession cannot therefore, be referable to the decree for eviction under section 14(1)(e).
In fact, that decree for eviction in Suit No. 288/77 was not put into execution and it was perhaps found unnecessary to execute that decree since the tenant has surrendered possession of the premises as per the com promise in Suit No. 330/77 based on arrears of rent.
The application filed by the tenant under sub section (2) of section 19 of the Act was, therefore, clearly not maintain able.
[319E F]
