The appellant a Public Limited Company had two estab lishments in the State of Bihar.
The holidays available to the employees of the appellant company were provided by the settlement dated 14th March, 1971.
The settlement provided for a total number of 18 holidays for office staff and 14 holidays for the factory staff.
There was a dispute between the management and the employees as to whether the International Labour Day (1st May) which was declared as a mandatory holiday under the Bihar Industrial Establishments (National and Festival Holidays and Casual Leave) Act, 1977 should be a paid holi day in addition to the existing holidays.
While the manage ment wanted to declare 1st May as holiday by adjusting the holidays allowed in the settlement, employees wanted it to be given as an additional holiday.
Negotiations having failed and the conciliation officer being unable to bring about settlement, the statutory authorities directed the company to declare 1st May as holiday in addition to the holidays provided for in the settlement.
The appellant company filed a writ Petition before the High Court, chal lenging the direction of the authorities.
Dismissing the Writ Petition, the High Court held that the holiday on 1st May prescribed under the Act being compulsory in nature, must be in addition to the privileges already granted to the workmen under the agreement.
Hence the appeal by the Compa ny.
Allowing the appeal, by special leave, this Court.
HELD: Section 3 of the Bihar Industrial Establishments (National and Festival Holidays and Casual Leave) Act, 1977 provides for three National holidays, one International Labour Day and four 403 festival holidays.
It thus statutorily fixes eight paid holidays; for out of them are left to the choice of the management and employees for festival occasions.
These eight holidays, however, are not in addition to the holidays that are mutually agreed upon in the settlement.
They are the minimum holidays which the employees are entitled to.
If the employees are entitled to more than eight holidays under any contract or usage applicable to the said establishment, or under any other law for the time being in force, those rights and privileges are saved by Section 13.
This is the requirement of the statute.
[407B D] In the present case, the festival holidays have not been identified or specified in the Settlement.
They have to be selected and declared as holidays with notice to employees every year.
It is only three National holidays that have been specified therein in addition to Vishwakarma Puja day for 'the factory staff and factory general staff.
Now, the statute prescribes the same three National holidays, besides International Labour Day and four festival holidays.
But these 8 holidays are not to the exclusion of or in addition to the total number of holidays agreed upon under the set tlement.
The total number of 14 holidays under the settle ment as against 8 holidays under the statute remains undis turbed by section 13 of the Act since it is more favourable to the employees than the rights and privileges conferred by the Act.
That being the position, the management would be entitled to adjust the International Labour Day as a paid holiday within the fourteen days allowed under the settle ment.
The demand of the employees that it should be in addition to fourteen days has no support either under the settlement or by the terminology of the statute.
[468E H; 469A] Tata Oil Mills Co. vs K.V. Gopalan & Ors., , referred to.
