The appellants ' land was acquired under the Land Acqui sition Act on March 24, 1971 for planned development as residential area.
They were then running a plant nursery on the said land.
A large number of potted plants, mother plants and trees also existed there.
They demanded compensa tion for the land at the rate of Rs.35 per sq.
They also claimed compensation for nursery plants, potted plants mother plants and trees.
The Land Acquisition Collector awarded compensation in respect of the land at the rate of Rs.900 per Biswa.
He held that the mother plants and trees were irremovable and as such assessed the value thereof at Rs.2,41,576.
He also awarded charges for the shifting of potted plants.
In re spect of the nursery plants he took the view that the appel lants were not entitled to any compensation as these could be removed from the land and sold.
The District Judge enhanced the rate of compensation for the acquired land at the rate of Rs. 10 per sq.
and also doubled the compensation for trees and mother plants.
The High Court considering the potentiality of the acquired land fixed its value at the rate of Rs. 16 per sq.
It took the view that the court below was in error in doubling the value of the trees as no case was made out in the evidence recorded and therefore set aside the enhance ment.
In these appeals by special leave it was contended for the appellants that the nursery plants if taken out of the land would die after two three days and the appellants had got no other land where they could plant them and keep them alive.
It was further contended that the compensation with regard to mother trees had been awarded with 418 out reference to their market price and that the High Court had arbitrarily rejected the enhancement in the said compen sation granted by the District Court.
Dismissing the appeals, the Court, HELD: 1.
The finding of the Land Acquisition Collector that the nursery plants could be taken out of the land and sold to the customers like potted plants and as such no compensation could be awarded was quite in accordance with law.
Sufficient time had been granted by the State by per mitting the appellants to remove these plants from the acquired land.
Their claim was, therefore, rightly rejected by the High Court.
[422G H, D E] 2.
The land acquired though agricultural land was taken.
for assessment of its market value @ Rs. 16 per sq.
not as agricultural laud but as laud with high potentialities i.e. as urban laud.
The appellants did not at all dispute this value.
On the other hand they withdrew the entire compensation award for the value of these lands.
In these circumstances, it could not be said that the value of mother trees has been wrongly assessed as wood.
The appellants were, therefore, not entitled to enhancement In the value of trees.
[422F G]
