Rule 5 of the Haryana Service of Engineers Class I PWD (Public Health Branch) Rules 1961 requires 50 per cent of the posts of Executive Engineers to be filled by promotion from m.tubers of Class II Service.
Rule .9(3) renders a member of service ineligible for promotion to the rank of Executive Engineer unless he renders five years ' service as an Assistant Executive Engineer, and has passed the depart mental examination.
The first proviso thereto grants pre fernce to an Assistant Executive Engineer over an eligible Class II Officer in the matter of promotion.
The second proviso empowers the Government to reduce the period of five years ' service as an Assistant Executive Engineer.
Rule II prescribes two years ' probation case of direct recruits to the Service.
Rule 15 requires officers appointed to the Service to pass departmental examination within such period as may be prescribed unless they have already done so.
Rule 22 empowers Government to relax the requirement of Rules In cases of undue hardship.
Respondent No. 3, a direct recruit to the post of As sistant Executive Engineer in the Public Health Branch, was promoted to the post of Executive Engineer, Class I Service, defeating the claim of the appellants, members of Class II Service of Engineers In the said Department.
They assailed his appointment by means of a writ petition under Article of the Constitution on the ground that the respondent was not eligible for promotion as he had not rendered five years ' service as an Assistant Executive Engineer and further he had not passed the departmental examination which was the minimum requisite qualification for promotion to the post of Executive Engineer.
Before the High Court the State Govern ment 's plea was that it had relaxed the requirement of Rule 9(3)(a) not only to respondent No. 3 but to other officers also.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition on the view that there was no infirmity in the Government 's order grant ing exemption to respondent 465 In appeal, in addition to the pleas raised before the High Court, it was further submitted that respondent No. 3 was not eligible for promotion as he had not completed two years ' probationary period as Assistant Executive Engineer on the date of his promotion.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, HELD: 1.
There was no legal infirmity in the promotion of respondent No. 3.
The State Government had granted relax ation to him by reducing the period of service under clause (a) to Rule 9(3) in exercise of its power under the second proviso to the said Rule.
This relaxation was granted as he was the only officer in the department who was a direct recruit to Class I Service.
In addition to that, Rule 22 further confers power on the State Government to grant relaxation with regard to the operation of the Rules.
The Government 's order granting relaxation in favour of respond ent No. 3 was sustainable under Rule 22 also.
[468B D] J.C. Yadav & Ors.
vs State of Haryana & Ors.
, [1990] 1 SCR470, referred to. 2.
The respondent 's promotion to the post of Executive Engineer was not rendered illegal merely because he had not undergone departmental examination in the Public Health Branch.
He had been working as Sub Divisional Engineer in the Public Works Department (Buildings and Roads Branch) for a period of 6 1/2 years prior to his recruitment to the post of Assistant Executive Engineer in the Public Health Branch and during that period he had passed departmental examina tion.
The syllabus prescribed for the departmental examina tion in the Buildings and Roads Branch as well as in the Public Health Branch was almost the same.
The Government was satisfied that there was no necessity for him to pass the examination again.
[469B; 468E~G; 469A] 3.
Non completion of probationary period of two years on the post of Assistant Executive Engineer by respondent No. 3 did not affect the validity of his promotion to the post of Executive Engineer under the Rules.
There is no specific provision in the Rules requiring completion of probationary period for the purposes of promotion within the Service.
It was relevant only for the purpose of confirmation in Class I Service.
[469E; C D]
