The appellants belonging to the ministerial service in the subordinate offices of the Directorates of Agriculture of the States of Punjab and Haryana filed writ petitions in the Punjab and Haryana High Court seeking a direction that subordinate offices and the Directorates should be treated as one unit and common seniority of all the employees should be maintained.
The High Court dismissed the petitions.
Hence these appeals by special leave.
In these appeals it was contended that the appellants are entitled to common seniority with their counterparts in the Directorates because their service conditions, pay scales and qualifications were same.
In 536 order to show similarity with their counterparts in the Directorates it was also pointed out that though a common selection was made for Directorates and subordinate offices yet the appointing authority picked up some candidates out of the select list and appointed them in the Directorates thereby deviating from the order of merit prepared by the Selection Board.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court, HELD: 1.
The Punjab Subordinate Agricultural Service Rules 1933 themselves made a distinction between the persons appointed in the Directorate and the Subordinate Offices as separate cadres and the subordinate cadre in some cases is the feeder cadre for promotion to the post in the Head Office.
In this view by no stretch of imagination, the appellants can be considered to be equally placed for treat ing them at par with the Directorate employees for being treated as being in a common cadre.
There is reasonable nexus to differentiate the two cadres.
Therefore, the clas sification can not be said to be arbitrary violating Arti cles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
[543A B] 1.1 The fact that the office of the Directorate and the subordinate offices have been compendiously shown in section 6 of the Appendix to Rules does not by itself mean that office of the Directorate and Subordinate Offices are treat ed under the rules as one unit or at par.
[542A] 2.
It is open to the Government to constitute different cadres in any particular service as it may choose according to its administrative convenience and expediency.
[541E] 2.1 The office of the Director is the apex office obvi ously to control and oversee the functioning of the subordi nate offices and the other allied departments under his control monitoring the implementation of the Government 's agricultural programmes.
It may not be necessary to maintain a common cadre of the employees of the Directorate and the Subordinate offices.
Each cadre is a separate service or a part of the service sanctioned for administrative expedien cy.
Therefore, each may be a separate unit and the posts allocated to the cadre may be permanent or temporary.
[541F G] 2.2 Accordingly the appellants are not entitled to be treated at par with the employees working in the respective Directorates for giving direction to the respondents to maintain common seniority between the employees of the Directorate and Subordinate Offices.
[543D] 537 3.
Normally the order of appointment would be in the order of merit of candidates from the list and must be in accordance with rules.
The exercise of power should not be arbitrary.
The absence of arbitrary power is the first postulate of rule of law upon which our whole constitutional edifice is based.
In a system governed by Rule of Law, discretion when conferred upon an executive authority must be confined within clearly defined limits.
The rules provide the guidance for exercise of the discretion in making ap pointment from out of selection lists which was prepared on the basis of the performance and position obtained at the selection.
The appointing authority is to make appointment in the order of gradation, subject, to any other relevant rules like, rotation or reservation, if any, or any other valid and binding rules or instructions having force of law.
If the discretion is exercised without any principle or without any rule, it is a situation amounting to the antith esis of Rule of Law.
[542D E, F] 3.1 Discretion means sound discretion guided by law or governed by known principles of rules, not by whim or fancy or caprice of the authority.
1542G]
