The appellant is a resident of Tripura State.
He assert ed that he belonged to the Laskar community which was in cluded in State records in the Deshi Tripura community and in the former State of Tripura this community had always been treated as Scheduled Tribes, and the members of the community freely enjoyed all the benefits available to members of the Scheduled Tribes until 1976 when the State Government decided to treat members of this community as not belonging to the Scheduled Tribes and issued instructions to the state authorities to implement the Government decision.
Being aggrieved the appellant filed a writ petition before the High Court in a representative capacity praying for appropriate directions directing the State Government to continue to treat the appellant and members of Laskar commu nity as belonging to Scheduled Tribes and extend all the benefits available to Scheduled Tribes to this community.
In support of his claim the appellant relied upon the two circulars of the erstwhile State of Tripura dated December 1930 and February 1941 as also the census report of the ex state of Tripura, besides the authorities of this Court.
The respondent took the plea that Laskar community was never included in the Scheduled Tribes Order and as such there was no question of excluding it from the List.
After considering the rival contentions of the parties coupled with the his torical background bearing on the subject, the statement made by the Advocate General that the Memos will be given prospective operation, the High Court dismissed the Writ Petition.
Hence this appeal by Special Leave.
This appeal initially came up before a two judges Bench for final hear ing when on a statement made by the Counsel for the Union of India that a representation made by the appellant and mem bers of his community for inclusion their caste Laskar, in the Presidential order under Article 342 is being looked into and is being placed before the Parliamentary Committee for review of the position, the Court disposed of the appeal in terms of the assurance 577 given on behalf of the Union.
It was specifically stated in the Court 's order that in case the community is not included in the Presidential Order, it would be open to the appellant to take such action as may be available to him in law.
Nothing having happened at governmental level, with the consent of the parties, the order disposing of the appeal was recalled and the appeal has thus now come up for hear ing.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: Reservation has become important in view of the increasing competition in society and that probably had led to the anxiety of the appellant and the people in his commu nity to claim reservation.
[586G] In Tripura the Scheduled Tribes within the meaning of the definition given in Article 366 of the Constitution have been 'Jamatia, Noatia, Riang and Tripura/Tripuri/Tippera ' apart from 15 other tribes.
It is the case of the appellant that Laskars are a part of the tribe named as 'Tripura, Tripuri and Tippera ' covered by Entry 18.
[581D] This Court should not assume jurisdiction and enter into an enquiry to determine whether the three terms indicated in the Presidential Order include Deshi Tripura which covers the Laskar community; but it is appropriate to commend to the authorities concerned that as and when the question is reviewed it should be examined whether the claim of the appellant representing the Laskar community to be included in the scheduled tribes is genuine and should, therefore, be entertained.
[586F G] Even if historically this tribe was covered by the general description of Tripura, that by itself may not justify its inclusion in the Order as a Scheduled Tribe.
That is an additional feature which has weighed with us in taking our decision not to interfere in the matter.
[587C] B. Basavalingappa vs D. Munichinnappa, ; Bhaiyalal vs Harikishan Singh and Ors., ; ; Parsram and Anr.
vs Shivchand and Ors.
, ; ; Kishorilal Hans vs Raja Ram Singh and Ors., ; ; Dina vs Narayan Singh, and Bhaiya Ram Munda vs Anirudh Patarand Ors., ; , referred to.
