These are Writ Petitions under Article 32 of the Consti tution of India and a Special Leave Petition against the Judgment of the Karnataka High Court filed by two trade unions and a Society formed by law students of the Universi ty College and two individuals asking for quashing the Karnataka Government 's Notification dated 12th March, 1982 and for directions to confirm the daily rated and monthly rated employees as regular government servants and for payment of normal salary and service benefits as applicable to the appropriate categories of the government servants.
Nearly 50,000 such persons are employed in different Government establishments though many of them have put in 15 to 20 years of continuous service.
They have not been regu larised in their service and are not being paid equal pay for equal work as has been mandated by this Court by way of implementation of the Directive Principles of State Policy.
Pursuant to the directions of this Court, the State of Karnataka filed a draft Scheme.
The Court considering both the aspects of 'equal pay for equal work ' and continuing casual employment for too long re affirmed the view that the principle of 'equal pay for equal work ' is not an abstract doctrine instead it is vital and vigorous doctrine accepted throughout the world.
While accepting the petitions, the Court, HELD: That 'equal pay for equal work ' and providing security for service by regularising casual employment within a reasonable period have been unanimously accepted by this Court as a constitutional goal of our socialist polity.
While giving directions to the State for giving final shape to the Scheme, the Court further held that under the 545 scheme of the Constitution the purse remains in the hands of the Executive.
The Legislature of the State controls the consolidated Fund out of which the expenditure to be in curred, in giving effect to the scheme will have to be met.
[553F; 559H; 560A] The flow into the Consolidated Fund depends upon the policy of taxation depending perhaps on the capacity of the payer.
Therefore unduly burdening the State for implementing the constitutional obligation would create problems which the State may not be able to stand.
Directions have there fore been made with judicious restraint with the hope and trust that both parties would appreciate and understand the situation.
The instrumentality of the State must realise that it is charged with a big trust.
[560B C] The casual/daily rated employees appointed on or before 1.7.1984 shall be treated as monthly rated establishment employees at the fixed pay of Rs.780 p.m. without any allow ances with effect from 1.1.
[558H] The scheme which has been finalised is not the ideal one.
It is the obligation of the Court to individualise justice to suit a given situation in a set of facts that are placed before it.
[559H] Randhir Singh vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; ; Dhirendra Chamoli & Anr.
vs State of U.P., ; Surinder Singh & Ant.
vs Engineer in Chief, C.P.W.D. & Ors.
, ; Kishori Mohanlal Bakshi vs Union of India, AIR 1962 SC 1139; D.S. Nakara vs Union of India, ; ; R.C. Gupta & Ors.
vs Lt. Governor, Delhi Admn.
& Ors.
, ; ; Bhagwan Dass & Ors.
vs State of Haryana & Ors.
, ; Jaipal & Ors.
vs State of Haryana & Ors.
, [1988] 3 SCC 354; Daily Rated Casual Labour employed under P & T Department Contingent Paid Staff Welfare Association vs Union of India & Ors., [1987] Suppl.
SCC 658; State of U. P. & Ors.
vs J.P. Chaurasia & Ors., ; ; Kesavananda Bharati vs State of Kerala, [1973] 4 SCC 225 and Bhagwan Sahai Carpenter & Ors.
vs Union of India & Anr.
, ; , referred to.
