This petition under Article 32 of the Constitution of India has been filed by an Association of about 2,000 em ployees working in 500 Railway Institutes and Clubs in various parts of the country claiming that they should be treated on the same par as the employees in the Statutory Canteens run by the Railway Administration.
In support of their claim the petitioners while enumerating the range of activities handled by them, they have attempted to draw a parallel with the regular employees contending inter alia that not only they receive grants in aid and a number of facilities from the Govt.
, the Railway Board has always treated these institutes and clubs as an integral part of the Railways.
The Respondents resisted the petition stoutly and con tended that the Institutes and Clubs are managed by a Com mittee representing its membership which engages such staff as is required and meets the cost of their wages and allow ances etc., that the Railways are not the principal employ ers of their staff, that they are not paid directly from the Consolidated Fund of India and whatever facilities are provided to them they are confined to the wholetime staff as a special case and not on account of any obligation under any law.
On consideration of respective contentions and documents on record while dismissing the petition, this Court.
HELD: There is a material difference between the can teens run in the Railway establishments and the Institutes and Clubs.
The Institutes/ Clubs have to run on the member ship fees and fixed grants received from the Staff Benefit Fund.
The fund consists of receipts from the forfeited provident fund and bonus, and of fines.
The grant is made as pointed out by the Respondents, to each Institute/Club at the rate of 595 Rs. 14 per capita of the non gazetted staff employed at the relevant establishment.
Out of this contribution, only Rs.4 per capita are spent on the activities of the education.
relief in case of distress and sickness, sports, scouts activities and for other miscellaneous purposes.
There is further no dispute that the wages and allowances of the Staff of the Institutes/Clubs are paid by the Institutes/Clubs themselves and they are not subsidised by the Railway Administration as in the case of the statutory and non statutory recognised canteens.
[600H] 160 [E F & G] On the facts, it cannot be held that there is a rela tionship of employer employee between the Railway Adminis tration and the employees engaged in the Institutes and Clubs.
Neither law nor facts spell out such relationship.
If the present service conditions of these employees are unsat isfactory, the remedy lies elsewhere.
[603B C]
