These writ petitions have been fried by Group 'C ' (class III) employees of the Railways working in its Transportation (Traffic) Department.
The said Department has different streams e.g. 'Control Stream ' and 'Traffic Stream ' and the employees working therein have different scales of pay.
For purposes of their promotion to Group B posts, it was neces sary to fix their inter se seniority, as only those employ ees from the different streams could be considered for promotion as would fall within the zone of consideration as per seniority list.
As the zone of consideration is deter mined with reference to the number of vacancies in Group B for which selection is held, at any point of time, the position of the employee in the combined seniority list of all the streams is important.
The zone of consideration of the employees for promotion Is fixed in the order of the combined seniority of the employees from the different streams.
The Department prior to the implementation of the recommendations of the Third Pay Commission fixed the inter se seniority of the employees of Group C employees on the basis of the grade i.e. employees working In a higher grade on a regular basis were treated senior to those working in the lower grade and the said principle worked well until the enforcement of the recommendations of the Third Pay Commis sion w.e.f.
1.1.1973, when higher or lower scales of pay came to be fixed in respect of certain posts which were having the same scale of pay upto 31.12.1972.
This presented difficulty in fixing the inter se seniority of the employees and the Railway Board in order to resolve the difficulty issued circulars from time to time indicating how their seniority should be fixed but for some reason or the other, the dissatisfaction amongst the employees in the matter of seniority continued.
Being aggrieved by the experiments which according to the petitioners only resulted in chaos and confusion, employees of the Control Stream have flied the writ petition on the Issue of a combined seniority list published by the administration on the basis 451 of instructions on 15.6.85, as they found themselves exclud ed from the panel of staff to be taken into consideration for promotion to Group B. They pray that the circular dt. 6.1.84 and the follow up action taken culminating in the Selection List be set aside.
The petitioner challenge the validity of two circulars issued by the Board, one on 29.7.83 and the other on 26.1.2.1983, restructuring the cadres as discriminatory as according to them they envisage 'mass upgradation ' to their detriment.
The question for determination is whether the principle adopted on the strength of these circulars for fixing the inter se seniori ty of these employees is proper.
Dismissing the writ petitions with liberty to the Peti tioners to move the Central Administrative Tribunal, if so advised with fuller facts, this Court, HELD: The inequity is not apparent.
Having to deal with two different streams, differently placed, the Government has to find out an equitable solution and it has been grop ing towards it.
One method would perhaps have been to have fixed quotas for promotion from each of the streams but that is not necessarily the only method.
An alternative method is being attempted here and the principle that grades of Rs.700 900 and above should be considered together being conceded the Department is trying to give some weightage by granting upgradation to each stream based on its total strength in order to balance the promotional chances in both the streams.
It is possible that some individual cases may be affected but no answer to the question whether any class discrimination has resulted can be given unless fuller details are available and the practical impact of the latest position is placed before the Court.
[463A C]
