The appointment and promotion to Class I Engineering Service in the State of Haryana are regulated by the Haryana Service of Engineers Class I PWD (Public Health Branch) Rules, 1961.
Rule 5 provides for appointment to Class I Service, inter alia, by promotion from Class II Service.
Rule 6(b) prescribed that no person shall be promoted unless he has completed eight years service in Class II and has passed professional examination to the department.
Rule 22 confers power on the Government to relax any of the Rules it may consider necessary.
The appellants and the contesting respondent were mem bers of the Haryana Service of Engineers Class II in the Public Health Branch.
In 1971 the appellants were promoted to the post of Executive Engineers in the cadre of Class I service on ad hoc basis while the respondent was not consid ered for promotion.
Later, a Committee constituted under Rule 8 for selecting suitable candidates for promotion to Class I post, considered the names of the appellants and the respondent but did not find the respondent suitable.
Hence it included the appellant 's|ant 's names only in the select list.
The appellants did not possess the requisite minimum period of service of 8 years in Class II service but since no other suitable candidates were available, the Committee recommended to the Govt.
for granting relaxation to the appellants.
The State Public Service Commission approved the recommendations.
The State Government accepted the recommendations and appointed the appellants to Class I service by a Notification dated May 3, 1973.
471 The contesting respondent filed a Writ Petition before the High Court challenging the validity of the appellants ' promotion on the ground that since the appellants did not possess the requisite qualification for promotion to Class I Service their promotions were contrary to rules.
A Single Judge of the High Court dismissed the petition holding that since the Government had relaxed Rule 6(b) in appellants ' favour, their promotions were sustainable in law.
On appeal, the Division Bench quashed the appellants ' promotion on the ground that the State Government had no authority in law to grant relaxation to the appellants under Rule 22 in a general manner as the power of relaxation could be exercised only in individual cases to mitigate hardship caused to an individual.
Hence the appeal by special leave.
Allowing the Appeal, this Court, HELD: 1. Power to grant relaxation may be exercised in case of an individual to remove hardship being caused to him or to a number of individuals who all may be similarly placed.
This power may also be exercised to meet a particu lar situation where on account of the operation of the rules hardship is being caused to a set of individual officers.
[477G H] 2.
I Rule 22 of the Haryana Service of Engineers Class I PWD (Public Health Branch) Rules 1961 confers power on the Government to dispense with or to relax the requirement of any of the Rules to the extent and with such conditions as it may consider necessary for dealing with the case in just and equitable manner.
The object and purpose of conferring this power on the Government is to mitigate undue hardship in any particular case.
If the Rules cause undue hardship or operate in an inequitable manner, the State Government has power to dispense with or to relax the requirement of Rules.
The Rule does not restrict the exercise of power to individ ual cases.
The Government may in certain circumstances relax the requirement of Rules to meet a particular situation.
[477A B] 2.2.
The expression "in any particular case" does not mean that the relaxation should be confined only to an individual case.
One of the meanings of the expression "particular" means "peculiar or pertaining to a specified person thing time or place not common or general".
The meaning of the word 'particular ' in relation to law means separate or special, limited or specific.
The word 'case ' in ordinary usage means 472 'event ', 'happenings ', 'situation ', 'circumstances '.
The expression 'case ' in legal sense means 'a case '. 'suit ' or 'proceeding in Court or Tribunal '.
Having regard to these meanings the expression 'in any particular case ' would mean in a particular or pertaining to an event, situation or circumstance.
[477C D] 2.3.
Rule 22 postulates relaxation of Rules to meet a particular event or situation, if the operation of the Rules causes hardship. '[he Scope of the said Rule is wide enough to confer power on the State Government to relax the re quirement of Rules in respect of an individual or class of individuals to the extent it may consider necessary dealing with the case in a just and equitable manner.
[477E F] 2.4 The power of relaxation is generally contained in the rules with a view to mitigate undue hardship or to meet a particular situation.
Many a time strict application of service rules create a situation where a particular individ ual or a set of individuals may suffer undue hardship and further there may be a situation where requisite qualified persons may not be available for appointment to the service.
In such a situation, the Government has power to relax requirement of rules.
The state Government may in exercise of its powers issue a general order relaxing any particular rule with a view to avail the service of requisite officers.
The relaxation even if granted in a general manner would enure to the benefit of individual officers.
[477F G] 2.5 Rule 22 is a beneficial one.
It must be construed in a liberal manner and should not be interpreted in a manner to defeat the very object and purpose of such power.
A narrow construction would nullify Government 's power of relaxing rules of meet a particular situation.
[480C] Jit Singh & Ors.
vs State of Punjab & Ors.
, ; differed; Ashok Gulati vs B.S. Jain, ; referred to.
In the instant case, the non availability of Class II officers in Engineering Department possessing the necessary and prescribed qualifications for promotion to Class I posed a problem for the State Government, as on account of the large scale expansion of Engineering Department a number of posts in Class I service were lying vacant.
A similar situa tion prevailed in the Building and Road Branch of Public Works Department.
In the circumstances, the State Government with a 473 view to meet the particular situation decided to relax the qualifying length of service to such officers who had com pleted four years of service in Class 1I.
It, therefore, relaxed the requirement of Rule (b) to the extent that a member of Class II service having four years service was qualified for being considered for promotion in Class I service.
These facts would clearly show that the relaxation had been granted to particular individuals with a view to meet the situation which was in public interest.
There is no legal infirmity in the order of ' relaxation.
[478D F] 3.
I If power of relaxation is exercised on extraneous consideration for oblique purposes or mala fide, the Court has power to strike down the same, but bona fide exercise of power of relaxation to meet a particular situation cannot be held to be arbitrary or illegal.
[479A] 3.2 Since the appellants were found suitable for promo tion by the screening committee, the Commission and the State Government, and as the contesting respondent was not found suitable even otherwise for promotion, the State Government granted relaxation of Rule (b) in favour of the appellants.
In such a situation, it cannot be said that the power of relaxation under Rule 22 was exercised arbitrarily or that it caused hardship to any one.
In the absence of relaxation, there could be no promotion to the post of Executive Engineer and the officers who were found suitable would have suffered great hardship.
Therefore, the State Government with a view to meet the particular situation exercised its power of relaxation in appellants ' favour.
Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case, there is no illegality in the appellants ' promotion, pursu ant to the relaxation granted by the State Government.
[480D E; G H] Ashok Gulati vs B.S. Jain, AIR 1987 424; Jit Singh & Ors.
vs State of Punjab & Ors.
, ; and Ram Sarup vs State of Punjab, [1979] 1 SCC 168 referred to.
