The petitioners in this group of Writ Petitions are workers in canteens run in different railway establishments.
The relief claimed in all the petitions is that the workers concerned should be treated as railway employees and should be extended all service conditions which are available to the railway employees.
For convenience sake, the canteens have been classified into three categories, viz., (i) Statutory canteens; (ii) Non statutory Recognised Canteens, and (iii) Non Statutory Non Recognised canteens.
Chapter XXVIII of the Railway Establishment Manual contains the necessary instructions for running the can teens.
Paragraph 2829 of Chapter XXVIII of the Manual refers to the provisions of Section 46 of the and under writes the fact that under these provisions, there is a statutory obligation on the Railway Administration to set up canteens in Railway establishments which are governed by the said Act and which employ more than 250 persons.
Paragraph 2831 lays down the principles governing the set ting up of the canteens which apply also to the non statuto ry canteens provided for under paragraph 2830.
Paragraph 2832 inter alia states that although the Administration can employ as agent a Staff Committee or a Co operative Society for management, the legal responsibility for proper manage ment rests not with the agency but solely with the Railway Administration.
The Department of Personnel & Training, Ministry of Personnel, Government of India, had issued Administrative Instructions on Departmental Canteens in Offices and Indus trial Establishments of the Government.
It is made clear in these instructions that the orders issued under the said Instructions are applicable to all Canteens/Tiffin Rooms functioning or to be set up in any Ministry, Department, Establish 688 ment, Office, or Installation of the government of India (Industrial or non industrial), including those functioning under the Ministries of Defence, P & T and Railways unless these three Ministries had previously decided to exempt any of the said Instructions due to specific reasons.
It was contended on behalf of the petitioner workers that, in view of the documents on record there is no reason why the employees in the canteens concerned should not be given the status of the railway employees with all conse quential benefits.
On the other hand, it was contended on behalf of the Railways that (i) the canteen employees are appointed by the Staff Managing Committees or Co operative Societies and not by the Railway Administration and as such there is no rela tionship of master and servant between the Railwasy Adminis tration and the Canteen employees, and in no case can they be deemed as holders of civil posts, either for Article 309 or for Article 311 of the Constitution; (ii) the control exercised by the Railway administration is only to ensure that the canteens are run in conformity with certain re quirements; (iii) the Railways have a primary objective of carrying goods and passengers and the welfare activities are ancillary to the main objective; (iv) the canteens continue at the discretion of the Railway Administration, and at any stage the Government can change the form of this welfare measure and choose to have another set up; (v) the Railways undertake varied welfare activities, and if it is decided to treat the employees engaged in the canteens as railway employees, it will be difficult to resist the claim from employees of these other institutions for a similar status; and (vi) the Railway Establishment Manual contains the necessary instructions for running the canteens, and hence the Railway Administration should be deemed to have been exempted from the operation of the Administrative Instruc tions on Departmental Canteens in Offices and Industrial Establishments of the Government, issued by the Department of Personnel & Training.
Allowing the petitions filed by the employees of the statutory canteens and non statutory (recognised) canteens.
and dismissing those of the non statutory (non recognised) canteens.
this Court.
HELD: Statutory Canteens (1) In terms of the Rules made by the State Governments under Section 46 of the it is obligatory on the Railway Administration to provide a canteen in an establishment which employs 689 more than 250 persons.
The provision of the canteen is therefore, deemed by the statute as a necessary concomitant of the manufacturing activity.
[692C; G] The employees of the departmental canteens/tiffin rooms were declared as holders of civil posts under the Government of India Notification dated December 11, 1979 which is annexed to the Administrative Instructions on Departmental Canteens in Offices and Industrial Establish ments of the Government.
That Notification states that all posts in the said canteens/tiffin rooms are to be treated as posts in connection with the affairs of the Union, and hence the incumbents would qualify as holders of civil posts.
Accordingly, service rules were framed under Article 309 as per the notification issued by the Government of India, Department of Personnel & Training on December 23, 1980.
[705H; 706A B] (3) The provisions contained in the Administrative Instructions, show that the Government has a complete con trol over the canteens and the workers employed therein 'are holders of civil posts within the meaning of Article 311 of the Constitution.
There recruitment and service conditions are governed by the rules applicable to the employees of the Department/Office/Establishment to which the canteens are attached.
[701E] (4) Although there is nothing expressly on record to show that the railway canteens are exempted from the said Administrative Instructions, but even assuming that the railway canteens are exempted by virtue of the relevant provisions of the Railway Manual, the fact remains that there are as yet no notifications on the lines of December 11, 1979 and December 23, 1980 issued for the benefit of the employees in the railway canteens.
[706E F] (5) It cannot be argued that there is any difference in the work performed by the employees in the canteens run in the establishments of the Ministries.
If the said two noti fications are applicable to the employees in the canteens run by the other departments of the Government of India, there is no reason why the same should not apply also to the employees in the canteens run by the Railways.
In the cir cumstances, it would be highly discriminatory not to apply the said two notifications to the employees in the Railway canteens.
It would be violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The employees in the Statutory canteens of the Railways will therefore have to be treated as Railway serv ants.
[706F H; 707A] 690 (6) Thus the relationship of employer and employee stands created between the Railway Administration and the canteen employees from the very inception.
Hence, it cannot be gainsaid that for the purposes of the the employees in the statutory canteens are the employees of the Railways.
[707B] Order dated 22.10.1980 in Civil Appeal No. 368 of 1978 (Supreme Court); Madras High Court; Writ Appeals Nos.
414 415 of 1978.
referred to.
(7) If by virtue of all these facts the employees are entitled to the status of Railway employees they cannot be deprived of that status merely because some other employees similarly or dis similarly situated may also claim the same status.
The argument to say the least can only be described as one in terroram.
and as any other argument of the kind has to be disregarded.
[708E] Non Statutory Recognised Canteen (8) These canteens are run in the establishments which employ 250 or less than 2.50 employees; and are established with the prior approval and recognition of the Railway Board.
There is hardly any difference between the statutory canteens and non statutory recognised canteens.
The only material difference is that while one is obligatory under the , the other is not.
However.
there is no difference in the management of the two type of canteens.
[71 I G; 712C] (9) The Administration Instructions on Departmental Canteens in Government Offices and Government Industrial Establishments do not make any difference between the two so far as their applicability is concerned.
Hence, it cannot be seen why any distinction be made between the employees of the two types of canteens so far as their service conditions are concerned.
For this very reason, the two notifications of December 11, 1979 and December, 23, 1980 should also be equally applicable to the employees of these canteens.
[7 12G H] (10) If that is so, then these employees would also be entitled to be treated as railway servants.
A classification made between the employees of the two types of canteens would be unreasonable and will have no rational nexus with the purpose of the classification.
Surely it cannot be argued that the employees who otherwise do the same work and work under the same conditions and under a similar manage ment have to be treated differently merely because the canteen happens to be 691 run at an establishment which employees 250 or less than 250 members of the staff.
[712H; 713A B] Non Statutory Non Recognised Canteens (11) These canteens are run at establishments which employ 100 or less than 100 employees, and are established without prior approval or recognition of the Railway Board.
[692E] The Canteens are run more or less on ad hoc basis, the Railway Administration having no control of their function ing.
They are not required to be managed either as per the provisions of the Railway Establishment Manual or the Admin istrative Instructions.
In the circumstances the workers engaged in these canteens are not entitled to claim the status of the railway servants.
[713H; 714A]
