The appellant landlady and the respendent tenant ap peared before the Rent Controller for creation of a tenancy under Section 21 of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958.
Ac cordingly, the authority passed an order creating tenancy for a limited period of two years.
Since the respondent did not vacate the premises on the expiry of two years, the appellant moved the Rent Controller for issuance of warrant of possession.
The Respondent filed his objection.
Enter taining the objection the Rent Controller dismissed the petition, holding that the order granting permission for the tenancy under section 21 of the Act was not in accordance with law.
The appellant 's first appeal before the Rent Control Tribunal, as also her second appeal before the High Court met the same fate.
This appeal, by special leave, is against the High Court 's order dismissing the second appeal in limine.
On behalf of the appellant, it was contended that the Rent Controller should not have entertained the objection of the respondent as the same has not been filed during the currency of the tenancy.
It was also contended that some of the considerations which weighed with the Rent Control Tribunal were not relevant for judging the bona fides and genuineness of actions taken at the time of creating the tenancy.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
Section 14 of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 deals with a normal tenancy and protects the tenant against unreasonable eviction.
Section 21 of the Act, on the other hand, places the tenant outside the purview of section 14 and provides for an order of eviction at the time of creation of the tenancy.
There is a purpose behind enacting section 21 of the Act.
The Legislature considered it appropriate that should a 716 landlord not need his residential premises for a period, instead of keeping it vacant the same could be available for a tenant 's use on being let out for a limited period condi tional upon the tenant 's surrendering possession as soon as the tenancy terminates by efflux of time and the need of the landlord revives.
[719G H; 720A] 2.1.
The rule in Noronah 's case has to be confined to a particular set of facts and should not be freely extended so as to take away the effect ors.
[724F G] 2.2.
In Vohra 's case and in Shiv Chander Kapoor 's case, though not arising for determination in either, it has been stated while laying down the rule that proceeding to chal lenge limited tenancy has to be taken during the currency of the tenancy, an objection filed by the tenant could be looked into, is indeed an obiter.
The rule having been stated to the contrary in Vohra 's case, there was indeed no warrant to indicate the contra situation.
Perhaps to meet the eventuality which might arise in a particular case, the exception has also been indicated.
If, the tenant has an objection to raise to the validity of the limited tenancy it has to be done prior to the lapse of the lease and not as a defence to the landlord 's application for being put into possession.
Even if such an exercise is available that must be taken to be very limited and made applicable to excep tional situations.
Unless the tenant is able to satisfy the Controller that he had no opportunity at all to know the facts earlier and had come to be aware of them only then, should such an objection be entertained.
[725E H] 2.3.
In the facts and circumstances of the present case the belated objections of the tenant should not have been entertained and prayer for possession made by the landlady after the limited tenancy ran out should have been granted.
[726A] S.B. Noronah vs Prem Kumari Khanna, ; ; J.R. Vohra vs India Export House Pvt. Ltd. & Anr., ; ; Inder Mohan Lal vs Ramesh Khanna, ; and Shiv Chander Kapoor vs Amar Bose, JT , referred to.
[This Court directed that the landlady be put into possession of the premises by 31st March, 1990.]
