Election of six Members to the Rajya Sabha by the elect ed Members of the Tamil Nadu Legislature Assembly was held in June 1986.
The appellant and respondent nos.
1 to 7 were the eight candidates in the field.
Respondent Nos. 1 to 6 were declared duly elected and the appellant was declared as having lost the election.
The appellant thereupon filed an election petition which was dismissed by the High Court.
Before this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that: (1) the first preference vote in his favour in which the first preference was marked on the ballot paper in green ink had been wrongly rejected on the ground that it was marked otherwise than with the article supplied for the purpose, i.e., the ball point pen with blue ink which had been kept in the voting booth; and (2) the three ballot papers indicating the first preference in favour of the first respondent, which did not contain the figure 'I ' in the space intended for marking the said figure, had been wrongly accepted.
In support of the first contention it was argued that: (1) the expression "article supplied for the purpose" used in Rule 39A(2)(b) and Rule 73(2)(e) of the Conduct of Election Rules, 1961, was misconstrued by the High Court; (2) in the context of the election law, the instructions contained in the hand books, and the procedure followed in respect of the election to Lok Sabha and State Assemblies, the expression "article supplied for the pur pose" should be interpreted as meaning "actually given" or "handed over", and as such the ball point pen for marking the preference should have been personally handed over to the voter with instructions to use it for marking his pref erence; (3) the mistake in the present case, namely, marking 768 of the preference with green ink on the ballot paper, had occurred because no bail point pen was handed over to the voter concerned; and (4) the fundamental rule of election law is that effect should be given to the intention of the voter and this could be done only by treating the vote as valid.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: (1) There is a material difference between an election to Lok Sabha or a Legislative Assembly which is a direct election with one constituency for each seat and only the vote is to be cast, and an election to Rajya Sabha which is an indirect election with the preferential system of voting.
This difference has to be taken into account in interpreting the relevant words used in the Rules relating to an election.
[779D E] (2) Rule 39A(2)(b) read with Rule 37A(2)(a) of the Conduct of Election Rules 1961 prescribes that at an elec tion in a council an elector in giving his vote shall place on his ballot paper the figure 'I ' in the space opposite the name of the candidate for whom he wishes to vote in the first instance with the article supplied for the purpose.
Further, Rule 73 which is directly applicable to the count ing of votes at elections by Assembly Members, prescribes that if on the ballot paper there is any figure marked otherwise than with the article supplied for the purpose, the ballot paper shall be invalid.
[777H; 778A; D] (3) The High Court was right in interpreting the expres sion "article supplied for the purpose" in Rule 39A(2)(b) and Rule 73(2)(e) of the Election Rules as meaning "made available for the purpose" or "provided for the purpose.
" [778E] Ram Utar Singh Bhaduria vs Ram Gaopal Singh & Ors., ; distinguished.
(4) The difference in the case of an election to the Rajya Sabha makes it wholly unnecessary that the Presiding Officer or the Polling Officer should hand over to every votor individually a hall point pen to mark his vote and it is enough if the article for marking the preference, namely, bail point pen, is provided to the voter to use the same for marking his preference or if the pen is placed in such a way as to make it clear that the marking of the preference is to be done with that pen and instructions given to use that pen for marking the preference.
[779H; 780A B] (5) It is not enough for the vote to be valid that it is possible 769 to gather the intention of the voter to vote for a particu lar candidate.
When the law prescribes that the intention should be expressed in a particular manner, it can be taken into account only if it is so expressed.
[777E G] Hari Vishnu Kamath vs Syed Ahmad Ishaque & Ors., ; , refterred to.
(6) Assuming that the voter in this case had expressed his intention clearly by marking the figure 1 in green ink, he did so in violation of the express provisions of the Rules which have a statutory force and hence no effect can be given to that intention.
[778D] (7) Clause (a) of sub rule (2) of Rule 37A only provides that the voter shall place on his ballot paper the figure 1 in the space opposite the name of the candidate for whom he wishes to vote in the first instance.
It is significant that this rule does not specifically say that the figure 1 must be placed in the column earmarked for marking the preference but only requires that the figure 1 should be placed oppo site the name of the candidate.
[781D E] (8) In the case of the three first preference votes cast in favour of respondent No. 1 the figure 1 was clearly marked opposite the name of respondent No. 1, being the candidate concerned, as required by the express provision of the said Rule 37A, and the intention of the voter was clear ly to cast the first preference in favour of respondent No. 1.
[782E] section Sivaswami vs V. Malaikannan & Ors., ; , referred to.
