The appellants are teachers in the Kerala Education Society Senior Secondary School, New Delhi.
They challenged the appointment of Respondent No. 5 as Vice Principal by filing a writ petition in the Delhi High Court.
The circum stances that led to the filing of writ petition are: The Kerala Education Society is a recognised and aided Society.
Its primary objects are to promote the study of Malayalam language and to provide facilities for the educa tion of children and to conserve Malayalam language, script and culture.
In furtherance of these objectives, the Society is running Senior Secondary School in New Delhi.
Delhi Administration as also the educational authorities have recognised the Institution, as a linguistic minority school.
The institution is.
regulated by the provisions of the Delhi School Education Act and the rules framed thereunder.
One post of Vice Principal was created in the school w.e.f. 1.10.80.
In March 1981, Departmental Promotion Committee was constituted to make selection for the appointment to the post of Vice Principal in accordance with the recruitment rules.
The Departmental Promotion Committee made selection from amongst the teachers of the institution to fill up the post of Vice Principal by promotion in accordance with the Rules.
The Departmental Promotion Committee recommended the name of Respondent No. 5 for promotion to the post of Vice Principal though he did not fall within the zone of consid eration being junior to the appellants.
The management of the school accepted the recommendation of the Departmental Promotion Committee and forwarded the papers to the Director of Education for necessary approval.
The appellants made representations to the Director of Education against the selection and appointment of Respondent No. 5.
The Director of Education rejected the proposal of the 806 management and declined to approve the selection and ap pointment of Respondent No. 5 on the ground that he did not fail within the zone of consideration and further that he did not possess the necessary qualification of five years experience as Post Graduate Teacher as required by the recruitment rules.
The Director of Education however permit ted the management to advertise the post for filling the same by direct recruitment.
The management then issued advertisement prescribing the necessary qualifications for the post which included Master 's Degree with second divi sion; five years teaching experience as Post Graduate Teach er or 10 years experience as trained graduate teacher and ability to speak Malayalam as an essential qualification.
The appellants were straightaway not eligible for appoint ment as they were not able to speak or write Malayalam.
On the recommendation of the selection committee, respondent No. 5 was appointed as direct recruit to the post of Vice Principal and the Director of Education approved the ap pointment.
Thereupon the appellants, as stated earlier filed writ petition in the High Court challenging the appointment of Respondent No. 5 and the writ petition was dismissed.
Hence this appeal by special leave.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: An institution set up by the religious or linguis tic minority is free to manage its affairs without any interference by the State but it must maintain educational standards so that the students coming out of that institu tion do not suffer in their career.
But if the recognised minority institution is recipient of Government aid, it is subject to the regulatory provisions made by the State.
The regulatory provisions however cannot destroy the basic right of minority institutions as embodied under Articles 29 and 30.
[811F G] The Kerala Education Society is a recognised and aided institution.
It is subject to the reguIatory provisions contained in the Delhi School Education Act, 1973 and the rules made thereunder.
[811H] The institution is for promotion of Malayalam language and as Malayalam is a compulsory subject for students upto Vth standard and it is an optional subject for Vlth to XIIth standard.
In the circumstance it is not only proper but desirable that the incumbent holding the office of Principal or Vice Principal being administrative in nature should have knowledge of speaking and writing Malayalam.
[812B] The management of the institution acted within its right in pre 807 scribing an additional essential qualification regarding knowledge of Malayalam and no exceptional can be taken to the same as it is the constitutional right of the linguistic minority to insist on the knowledge of the language, on the basis of which the linguistic minority is recognised.
[812C] The Kerala Education Bill, 1957 Reference under Article 143 of the Constitution, [1959] SCR 995; The Ahmedabad St. Xaviers College Society and Anr.
vs State of Gujarat and Anr.
, ; ; Lilly Kurian vs Sr.
Lewina and Ors.
, ; ; Frank Anthony Public School Employees ' Association vs Union of India & Ors., ; ; Mrs. Y. Theclamma vs Union of India and Ors., ; and All Bihar Christian Schools Association vs State of Bihar, ;
