The land in dispute was agreed to be sold in favour of the appellant under an agreement.
Subsequently, a third party in execution of a decree got the property attached.
The sale deed was executed thereafter.
A question arose as to the validity of the sale.
The High Court held that the sale would be subject to attachment.
Allowing the appeal by special leave, the Court, HELD: The agreement for sale creates an obligation attached to the ownership of the property.
The attaching creditor is entitled to attach only the right, title and interest of the judgment debtor.
Hence, if an agreement for sale is entered into before attachment, the attachment cannot be free from the obligation so incurred, and the attaching creditor will not get any right higher than the judgment debtor had on the date of the attachment.
He cannot ignore that obligation and proceed to bring the property to sale as if it remained the absolute property of the judgment debtor.
[835C, 834F, 835E] Accordingly, though section 64 CPC is intended to protect the attaching creditor, but if the subsequent conveyance is in pursuance of an agreement for sale which was entered into before the attachment, the contractual obligation arising therefrom must be allowed to prevail over the rights of the attaching creditor.
The rights of the attaching creditor shall not be allowed to override the contractual obligation arising from the antecedent agreement for sale of the at tached property.
[835D E] Paparaju Veeraraghavayya vs Killaru Kamala Devi & Ors., AIR 1935 Mad. 193; Veerappa Thevar & Ors.
C.S. Venkataram ma Aiyar & Ors.
, AIR 1935 Mad. 872; Angu Pillai vs
M.S.M. Kasiviswanathan Chettiar, ; Puma Chandra Basak vs Daulat Ali Mollah, AIR 1973 Cal. 432; Rango Rama chandra vs Gurlingappa 833 Chinnappa, AIR 1941 Bom.
198; Yashvant Shankar Dunakhe vs Prayarji Nurji Tamboli, AIR 1943 Bom.
145 and Kochuponchi Varughese vs Quseph Lonan, AIR 1952 Travancore Cochin 467, approved.
Mohinder Singh & Anr.
vs Nanak Singh & Anr., AIR 1971 Pb. & Haryana 381, overruled.
The sale in the instant case would not thus be subject to the attachment.
The purchaser would get good title de spite attachment.
[833F, 834D]
