This petition under Article 32 of the Constitution of India was filed by the wife of the detenu challenging the validity of the Detention Order dated 15.8.1989 passed against her husband by the Collector and District Magistrate of Kamarajar District Virudhunagar, Tamil Nadu on allega tions inter alia that the District Magistrate had issued the impugned order for detention of her husband, who is an active member of the All India Anna Drayida Munnetra Kazha gam party, an active social and political worker and ex member of the Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly, at the behest of Respondent No. 3 a Minister in the present DMK Govern ment, on account of personal and political animosity between the two.
Counsel for the Detenu urged two grounds to attack the order of detention.
Firstly that the order did not specify the period of detention, and secondly that the sole ground of detention as reflected in the Grounds of Detention has no relevance to the maintenance of 'Public Order ' as the facts mentioned therein donot make out any case of violation of public order.
At best, it may be a case of law and order only which exhibits non application of mind by the detaining authority.
837 Allowing the writ petition and quashing the impugned order of detention on the ground of non application of mind by the Detaining Authority in passing the Detention order, this Court, HELD: (1) Since the Act does not require the detaining authority to specify the period for which a detenu is re quired to be detained the order of detention is not rendered invalid or illegal in the absence of such specification in the Detention order.
[843E] Commissioner of Police & Anr.
vs Gurbux Anandram Birya ni, [1988] Supp.
SCC 568 Over ruled.
Ashok Kumar vs Delhi Administration & Ors., , Ujagar Singh vs The State of Punjab, ; Suna Ullah Butt vs State of Jammu & Kashmir, ; ; Suresh Bhojraj Chelani vs State of Maharashtra, and A.K. Roy vs Union of India & Ors., ; , approved.
(2) In a case where the detaining authority may not be present at the place of the incident or the occurrence, he has to form the requisite opinion on the basis of materials placed before him by the sponsoring authority but where the detaining authority was himself present at the scene of occurrence he should have relied more on his own knowledge and observation then on the report of the sponsoring author ity.
[853H; 854A] In the instant case, the detaining authority though present at the scene of occurrence does not support the incident as presented to him by the sponsoring authority, and yet he issued the detention order on the report of sponsoring authority.
In these circumstances, there was nonapplication of mind by the detaining authority in making the order of detention.
[854B] Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia vs State of Bihar, ; ; Pushkar Mukher]ee & Ors.
vs The State of West Bengal, ; ; Shyamal Chakraborty vs Commissioner of Police Calcutta & Anr., ; ; Arun Ghosh vs State of West Bengal, ; Nagendra Nath Mondal vs State of West Bengal, ; ; Sudhir Kumar Saha vs Commissioner of Police, Calcutta, ; ; S.K. Kedar vs State of West Bengal, ; Kanu Biswas vs State of West Bengal, ; ; Kishori Mohan vs State of West Bengal, ; Amiya Kumar Karmakar vs State of West Bengal, and Manu Bhusan Roy Prodhan vs State of West Bengal & Ors.
, ; , referred to. 838
