The respondent Delhi Cloth Mills has a complex over an area of 63 acres at Bara Hindu Rao and Kishan Gnaj, Delhi, which is a nonconforming area and the industry of the kind in which the mill is engaged in was required to be shifted consequent upon the enforcement of Master Plan prepared by Delhi Development Authority under the Delhi Development Act, 1966, which plan amongst other things was to assign land use.
The Delhi Cloth Mills in September 1982, approached the DDA and put forth a proposal for shifting the mill and for redeveloping the Mill area for group housing and flatted factories.
The DDA by Resolution No. 26 agreed to the scheme to be implemented in phases but it took care to examine the matter further from Delhi 's economics point of view.
In September 1983, the DDA turned down the request of the respondent for allotment of an alternate site in a conform ing area for shifting the mill.
Thereupon the Mill applied to the Secretary, Labour/Labour Commissioner, Delhi Adminis tration for permission to close down the Mill under Sec.
25(D) of the Industrial Disputes Act, on the ground that the Mill could not be kept located in a non coforming area as otherwise penal consequences would follow.
On April 15, 1985, the request of the Mill was turned down by the Secre tary, Labour/Labour Commissioner.
Thereupon the Delhi Mill filed a writ petition before the High Court for direction that the DDA be directed to implement its resolution No. 26 dated Feb. 1, 1983.
It may be mentioned here that during the pendency of the writ petition before the High Court, DDA had reviewed the situation and passed a fresh resolution No. 3 dated August 1, 1986 reviewing the earlier resolution dated Feb. 1, 1983 recalling the grant of approval with regard to the scheme propounded by the DCM.
Thereafter DDA reiterated its Resolution of August 1, 1986 by another resolution dated November 3, 1986.
952 The High Court quashed the two later resolutions and re stored the resolution dated February 1, 1983.
It took the view that the Mill could not be kept working in a non con forming area as otherwise it would attract penal action under the law after the lapse of three years from Jan. 18, 1986.
Both Union of India and DDA have filed appeals in this Court by special leave against the High Court 's order.
In the meantime DCM filed a writ petition in the High Court which was allowed by a Full Bench of the High Court on March 1, 1989 ordering closure of the Mill.
Delhi Adminis tration filed special leave petition in this Court against the said order and the Mill filed another special leave petition against the order of the High Court dated 3.3.1989 extending time for grant of permission by the Lt. Governor for Closure of the factory till March 30, 1989.
When these matters reached hearing in this Court, DCM and its employees had reached an agreement in the matter of closure of the factory.
The Special Leave Petitions were therefore dis missed by this Court; and on the file of this Court remained these two appeals.
Dismissing the appeals with a direction, this Court, HELD: The factory has been ordered to be closed and the employer and the employees have entered a settlement.
The supposed basis for reviewing or recalling resolution dated February 1, 1983 on the basis of its affectation to the industry and economy of Delhi as also to the workmen has vanished.
On this footing and on the events which have come by, the challenge to the judgment and order of the High Court loses rigour.
[956F G] Resolution No. 26 dated February 1, 1983, approving the scheme is given by the DCM provided that the scheme had taken all necessary safeguards and controls which would help triggering re development and rehabilitation in the congest ed areas of the central core of the capital.[956G] Appeals dismissed conveying a direction that the DDA shall grant the DCM conditional approval subject to removal of the enumerated objections raised or such of them as are valid and tenable in law after DCM is heard by the Municipal Corporation of Delhi.
The matter be formalised forthwith by the DDA and other authorities connected therewith within eight weeks so that the settlement between the workers and the DCM and other matters connected do not stagnate and move to the benefit of all concerned.
[960G H] 953
