Clause (b) of sub rule (11) rule 3 of the Karnataka Excise (Sale of Indian and Foreign Liquors) Rules, 1968 as amended by the Amendment Rules, 1989, requires the State Government to issue distributor licence only to such company owned or controlled by it as may be specified.
The petitioner assailed the constitutional validity of clause (b) on the ground that the policy of prohibition was not being implemented as enjoined by Article 47 of the Constitution inasmuch as the State of Karnataka instead of bringing total prohibition in the State, had evinced inter est in taking up the responsibility of selling liquors to the general public, and sought a direction to the Union and other State Governments to enforce the policy of total prohibition.
Dismissing the writ petition, the Court, HELD: 1.
There is no direct or casual violation of any fundamental right of which the petitioner can legitimately claim enforcement.
Article 47 is in Part IV of the Constitution which contains Directive Principles of State Policy.
Article 37 enjoins that the provisions of this part shall not be en forceable by any court.
Article 32 gives the Supreme Court the power to enforce rights which are fundamental rights.
Fundamental rights are justifiable, Directive Principles are not.
2 Directive Principles are aimed at securing certain values or enforcing certain attitudes in the law making and in the administration of law.
Directive Principles cannot in the very nature of things be enforced in a court of law.
Akhil Bharatiya Soshit Karamchari Sangh vs Union of India, ; , referred to.
Whether a law should be made embodying the principles of Directive Principles depends on the legislative will of the legislature.
In the instant case, what the petitioner sought to achieve by his application was to inject a sense of priority and urgency in that legislative will.
Determin ing the choice of priorities and formulating perspective thereof, is a matter of policy.
Article 32 is not the ma chinery through which policy preferences or priorities are determined.
It is not the nest for all the bees in the bonnet of 'public spirited persons '.
Rustom Cavasjee Cooper vs Union of India, , referred to.
