The appellant and the respondents applied for the post of Reader in Psychology in Lucknow University.
Under the University Statute, the minimum qualification for the post was a Doctorate degree or a published work of high standard in the subject.
The respondents possessed Ph.D. degree, while the appellant 's thesis was nearing completion.
On the basis of her experience, performance at the interview and published work, which was found to be of high standard on the subject, the Selection Committee recommended the appellant 's appointment by grading her No. 1. 85 By a split of the majority, the Executive Council disa greed with the recommendation of the Selection Committee on the ground that the appellant did not possess the essential qualification for the post of Reader and it preferred the appointment of respondent No. 2.
In view of the Council 's disagreement, the matter was referred to the Chancellor for his decision under Section 31(8)(a) of the U.P. State Universities Act, 1973.
The Chancellor rejected the opinion of Executive Council and accepted the recommendations of the Selection Committee and directed that the appellant should be appointed as a Reader.
Respondent No. 1 challenged the Chancellor 's order by filing a writ petition in the High Court, which following its earlier Full Bench decision wherein it was held that the Chancellor must explicitly state the reasons for his deci sion and was enjoined by the Act to act quasijudicially quashed the Chancellor 's order with a direction to reconsid er the matter.
In the appeal to this Court on the question of the nature of the Chancellor 's power under Section 31(8)(a) of the U.P. State Universities Act, 1973: Allowing the appeal and setting aside the order of the High Court, this Court, HELD: 1.
Three authorities are involved in the Selection of University teachers ' (i) Selection Committee, (ii) Execu tive Council and (iii) The Chancellor.
The Selection Commit tee for appointment of University teachers is a recommenda tory body the composition of which has been prescribed under section 31(4)(a).
The Executive Council is the principle executive body of the University.
Subject to the provisions of the Act, it has power to appoint officers, teachers and other employees of the University.
Section 31(8)(a) seems to suggest that if the Executive Council wants to agree with the recommendation and appoint candidates in the order of merits, no reasons are to be given.
But if it wants to disagree with the recommendations made by the Selection Committee, it must give reasons for disagreement.
It has however, no power to override the recommendation and appoint a candidate of its own choice.
It may disagree, but should give reasons for disagreement and refer the matter under section 31(8)(a) to the Chancellor.
Then the decision of the Chancellor shall be binding on the Executive Council.
The Chancellor is not an appellate authority in matters of appointment.
His decision is called for when the Executive Council disagree with the recommendation of the Selection Committee.
What is referred to him 86 under section 31(8)(a) of the Act, is therefore, not a dispute between the Selection Committee and the Executive Council on any issue.
Nor it is a dispute between two rival candidates on any controversy.
It is indeed a decision with regard to appointment of a particular person or persons in the light of the recommendation and opinion if any, of the two statutory authorities.
[94H; 95A, IL F G; 99F H] 1.1 The power of the Chancellor under Section 31(8)(a) is purely of administrative character and is not in the nature of judicial or quasijudicial power.
No judicial or quasi judicial duty is imposed on the Chancellor and any reference to judicial duty, seems to be irrelevant in the exercise of his function.
Such a power cannot be considered as quasi judicial power.
[101 F H] L.N. Malhur vs The Chancellor, Lucknow University, Lucknow & Ors., ; Dr. U.N. Roy vs
G.D Tapase, [1981] UPLBEC, 309, disapproved.
Section 31 confers no right to make representation to the Executive Council or to the Chancellor against the recommendation of the Selection Committee.
There is no provision in the Section for hearing any candidate or the Executive Council.
There is also no provision for receiving evidence.
The decision of the Chancellor in the exercise of this statutory function does not expressly or impliedly require the application of the principle of natural justice.
[ I 01 B 1)] Dr. G. Sarana vs University of Lucknow and Ors., ; ; held inapplicable.
R.S. Dass vs Union of India.
[1966] (Supp.) SCC 617; re ferred to.
2.1 The Chancellor, however, has to act properly for the purpose for which the power is conferred.
He must take a decision in accordance with the provisions of the Act and the Statutes.
He must not be guided by extraneous or irrele vant consideration.
He must not act illegally, irrationally or arbitrarily.
Any such illegal.
irrational or arbitrary action or decision, whether in the nature of a legislative, administrative or quasi judicial exercise of power is liable to be quashed being violative of Article 14 of the Constitu tion.
[102B C] 2.2 The order of the Chancellor impugned in this case indicates very clearly that he has considered the recommen dation of the question Committee and the opinion expressed by the Executive Council.
The 87 minimum qualification prescribed for the post is a Doctorate in the subject of study concerned or a published work of high standard in the subject.
The appellant was found to have an alternate qualification though not a Doctorate in the subject.
The Selection Committee has accepted the alter nate qualification as sufficient and did not relax the essential qualification prescribed for the post.
The Execu tive Council appears to have committed an error in stating that the appellant has lacked the essential qualification and the Selection Committee has relaxed the essential quali fication.
The Chancellor was, therefore, justified in re jecting the opinion of the Executive Council.
His decision gets support from the Statute I 1.01 of the First Statute of the Lucknow University.
Accordingly the judgment of the High Court and the consequential order made by the Registrar of the University reverting the appellant to her substantive post of Lecturer are set aside.
Her original appointment as Reader pursuant to the decision of the Chancellor shall remain undisturbed with all consequential benefits.
[102E, 103B C, G] 3.
An administrative function is called quasi judicial when there is an obligation to adopt the judicial approach and to comply with the basic requirements of justice.
Where there is no such obligation, the decision is called 'purely administrative ' and there is no third category.
197G H] Ridge vs Baldwin, ; ; G. Nageshwara Rao vs Andhra Pradesh State Transport Corporation, ; Administrative Law by H.W.R. Wade 6th Ed.
p. 46 47, referred to.
3.1 The conclusiveness of the decision without the need for confirmation or adoption by any other authority is generally regarded as one of the features of judicial power.
But the order made by a statutory authority even it is given finality does not thereby acquire judicial quality if no other characteristic of judicial power is present.
Power to make orders that are binding and conclusive is not, by itself a decisive factor to hold that the power is judicial.
[101 E F] Prof. Desmith, 'Judicial Review of Administrative Ac tion ' 4th Ed., p. 82; referred to.
3.2 An administrative order which involves civil conse quences must be made consistently with the rule expressed in the Latin Maxim audi alteram partem.
The person concerned must be informed of the case against him and the evidence in support thereof and must be given a fair opportunity to meet the case before an adverse decision is taken.
[98G H] 88 State of Orissa vs Dr. Binapani Dei & Ors., ; ; Ridge vs Baldwin, ; ; referred to.
3.3 So far as the administrative officers are concerned, the duty is not so much to act judicially as to act fairly.
For this concept of fairness, adjudicative settings are not necessary, nor it is necessary to have lis inter parties.
There need not be any struggle between two opposing parties giving rise to a 'lis '.
There need not be resolution of lis inter parties.
The duty to act judically or to act fairly may arise in widely different circumstances.
It may arise expressly or impliedly depending upon the context and con siderations.
All these types of non adjudicative administra tive decision making are now covered under the general rubric of fairness in the administration.
But then.even such an administrative decision unless it affects one 's personal rights or one 's property rights, or the loss of or prejudi cially affects something which would juridically be called atleast a privilege does not involve the duty to act fairly consistance with the rules of natural justice.
[99A E] Keshva Mills Co. Ltd. vs Union of India, ; ; Mohinder Singh Gill vs Chief Election Commissioner. ; ; Swadeshi Cotton Mills vs Union of India, ; Management of M/s M.S. Nally Bharat Engi neering Co. Ltd. vs The State of Bihar & Ors., Civil Appeal No. 1102 of 1990 decided on 9.2.1990; ' referred to.
In matters of appointment in the academic field the Court generally does not interfere.
The Courts should be slow to interfere with the opinion expressed by the experts in the absence of mala fide alleged against the experts.
When appointments are based on recommendations of experts nominated by the Universities, the High Court has got only to see whether the appointment had contravened any statutory or binding rule or ordinance.
The High Court should show due regard to the opinion expressed by the experts constituting the Selection Committee and its recommendation on which the Chancellor has acted.
[103D E] University of Mysore & Anr.
C.D. Govinda Rao, ; Dr. J.B. Kulshreshtha & Ors.
vs Chancellor, Allahabad University, Raj Bhavan & Ors.
, ; ; Dalpat Abasaheb Soluke vs
B.S. Mahajan, ; followed.
The principle of equality enshrined in Article 14 must guide every state action, whether it be legislative, executive or quasi judicial.
[102C D] 89 E.P. Royappa vs State of Tamil Nadu & Anr., ; ; Mrs. Maneka Gandhi vs Union of India & Ant., [1978] 1 SCC 248; Ajay Hasia & Ors.
vs Khalid Mujib Sehravardi & Ors., [1981] I SCC 722; Som Raj & Ors.
vs State Of Haryana, JT ; referred 5.1 In matters relating to public employment whether by promotion or direct recruitment, only requirement to be complied with is the mandate of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
There shall be equality of opportunity and no discrimination only on ground of religion, race, caste, sex, dissent, place of birth or residence or any of them.
The eligible candidate has a right to have his case considered in accordance with law.
[100F]
