The officers of the Department of Revenue Intelligence (DRI) intercepted one truck.
On search, a large quantity of hashish was recovered.
In the course of investigation the names of the appellant and the petitioner surfaced.
Both of them made confessional statements to the DRI officials.
Complaints were lodged against the appellant and the petitioner under the Narcotic DrUgs & Psychotropic Sub stances Act, 1985 and the .
On their apply ing for enlargement on bail, the selfincriminating statements made by them to the DRI officials were used against them by the prosecution.
The appellant and the petitioner argued before the Single Judge of the High Court hearing the bail applications that the said statements were not admissible in evidence in view of section 25 of the Evidence Act.
The learned Single Judge referred the question of admissibility of the confessional statements to the Division Bench which concluded that the officials of the DRI invested with powers under section 53 of the Narcotic Act did not possess any of the attributes of an officer in charge of a police station conducting an investigation under Chapter XII of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Against this decision of the Division Bench, the appellant and the petitioner have appealed to this Court.
It was contended before this Court on behalf of the appellant and the petitioner that: (1) the expression 'police officer ' used in section 25 64 of the Evidence Act must not be read in the narrow sense of only those officers belonging to the regular police force but must be construed broadly to include all those who have been invested with powers of the police in the matter of investigation of a penal offence; (2) when such extensive powers are conferred on the officers appointed under the Act and the consequences are so drastic, it is desirable that the protection of section 25, Evidence Act, should be ex tended to persons accused of the commission of any crime punishable under the Narcotic Act; (3) since the Act does not prescribe the procedure for investigation, the officers invested with power under section 53 of the Act must neces sarily resort to the procedure under Chapter XH of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 which would require them to culminate the investigation by submitting a report under section 173 of the Code, and (4) since the officers referred to in section 53 have been invested with all the powers of an officer in charge of a police station for investigation of offences under the Narcotic Act, they have all the at tributes of a police officer investigating a crime under Chapter XII of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and would, therefore, fail within the expression "police offi cer" in section 25 of the Evidence Act.
Dismissing the appeal and the special leave petition, this Court, HELD: (1) Section 25, Evidence Act, engrafts a wholesome protection.
It must not, therefore, be construed in a narrow and technical sense but must be understood in a broad and popular sense.
But at the same time it cannot be construed in so wide a sense as to include persons on whom only some of the powers exercised by the police are conferred within the category of police officers.
[73B C] Balbir Singh vs State of Haryana, J.T. ; The State of Punjab vs Barkat Ram, ; at 347 and Raja Ram Jaiswal vs State of Bihar, ; at 761, referred to.
(2) Even if an officer is invested under any special law with powers analogous to those exercised by a police officer in charge of a police station investigating a cognizable offence, he does not thereby become a police officer under Section 25, Evidence Act, unless he has the power to lodge a report under Section 173 of the Code.
[76C] Badku Joti Savant vs State Of Mysore, ; ; Romesh Chandra Mehta vs State of West Bengal, ; Illias vs Collector of Customs, Madras, ; ; State of U.P. vs 65 Durga Prasad, and Balkishan A. Devidayal vs State of Maharashtra; , , referred to.
(3) The role of the officers effecting arrest or sei zure, except in the case of a police officer, ends with disposal of the person arrested and the article seized in the manner provided by sections 52 and 52A of the Act.
Section 57 obliges the officer making the arrest or seizure to report the same to his superior within 48 hours.
These powers are more or less similar to the powers conferred on Customs Officers under the .
[80F G] (4) The important attribute of police power is not only the power to investigate into the commission of cognizable offence but also the power to prosecute the offender by filing a report or a charge sheet under section 173 of the Code.
[81H; 82A] (5) There is nothing in the provisions of the Act to show that the legislature desired to vest in the officers appointed under section 53 of the Act, all the powers of Chapter XII, including the power to submit a report under Section 173 of the Code.[82C D] (6) Section 36A (1)(d) of the Act makes it clear that if the investigation is conducted by the police, it would conclude in a police report but if the investigation is made by an officer of any other department including the DRI, the Special Court would take cognizance of the offence upon a formal complaint made by such authorised officer of the concerned Government.
[82F G] (7) The Division Bench is right in holding that a con fessional or self incriminating statement made by a person accused of having committed a crime under the Narcotic Act to an officer invested with the power of investigation under section 53 of the Act was not hit by section 25 of the Evidence Act.
[67G] Mahesh vs Union of India, ; Mangal Singh vs The State of Gujarat, ; Radha Kishan Marwari vs King Emperor, Patna 46 and Sheikh Ahmed vs Emperor, Bombay 78, referred to.
