'B ', who received some agricultural lands and a house in the partition of his ancestral properties, and his minor sons 'H ' and 'R ' (Respondent) mortgaged their properties for a sum of Rs.5,500 by executing a conditional sale deed on 22nd April, 1948 in favour of 'N '.
But by a reconveyance deed dated 11th February, 1953 they got their properties reconveyed in their favour by 'N '.
On the same"day i.e. 11 th February, 1953 they sold some agricultural lands and the house for Rs.5,500 to 'M ', (Appellant) who was brother of 'N '.
Subsequently 'M ' sold the house to 'W ' and others.
The remaining land was sold by them on the same date to 'V ' and his brother. 'B 's sons and wife (Plaintiffs) filed a suit against 'M ' (Defendant No. 1), 'V ' and his brother (Defendant No. 2 and 3), 'W ' and others (Defendant No. 4 to 8) and 'B ' (Defendant No. 9) for a decree of possession of the agricultural lands and house which came in their share as members of the Joint Hindu Family contending that alienation made by 'B ' was not binding on them because it was neither for any legal neces sity nor for the benefit of the minors or their Estate, but was for satisfying the personal needs of 'B ' who had the vices of drinking and gambling and was spending everything he used to earn in his business of grain delali.
41 The Trial Court dismissed the suit by holding that (i) 'B ' was not indulging in any vices, (ii) the alienation made by 'B ' was for the satisfaction of ' the antecedent debt due on mortgage '; and (iii) 'B ' was a broker who needed cash capital for his business and (iv) the plaintiffs and 'B ' were estopped from challenging the title of 'W ' and others, since 'W ' and others (Defendant No. 4 to 8) had spent Rs.25,000 on the reconstruction of the house purchased from 'M ' within the knowledge of plaintiffs and without their objection.
Plaintiffs preferred an appeal before the High COurt contending that 'M ' and 'N ' ran a family firm of which they were owners and the execution of the conditional sale deed, reconveyance deed and the subsequent sale deed of the same day were nothing but a device and were really a part of one and the same transaction and that if the original transac tion of 22nd April, 1948 of the conditional sale with 'N ' was not valid and binding on the minor sons of 'B ' then the subsequent transaction of 11th February, 1953, for payment of debt or liability due under that alienation cannot be supported.
Allowing the appeal, the High Court reversed the judg ment of the Trial Court, had passed a decree for possession of the suit properties in favour of the plaintiffs by hold ing (i) that the transactions dated 22nd April, 1948 as well as all other transactions of 11th February, 1953 were part of the same transaction; (ii) that since transaction dated 22nd April, 1948 was invalid because it was not supported by any legal necessity, then the subsequent transactions of sale and reconveyance of 11th February, 1953 were also invalid.
Hence this appeal by special leave by the defend ants.
Allowing the appeal in part, this Court, HELD: 1.
The doctrine of pious obligation under which sons are held liable to discharge their father 's debts is based only on religious considerations.
This doctrine inevi tably postulates that the father 's debts must be vyavaharik.
If the debts are not vyavaharik or are vyavaharik the doc trine of pious obligation cannot be invoked.
[59E] Luhar Amrit Lal Nagji vs Doshi Jayantilal Jethalal & Ors., ; , relied on.
Where the sons are joint with their father, and debts have been contracted by the father even for his own personal benefit, the sons are liable to pay the debts provided they were not incurred for an immoral 42 or illegal purpose and such debts were antecedent to the alienations impugned.
[61B] 2.1 Even if any loan is taken by the father for his personal benefit which is found as vyavaharik debt and not avyavaharik, the sons are liable to discharge their father 's debts under the doctrine of pious obligation and if any alienation of the joint family property is subsequently made to discharge such antecedent debt or loan of the father, such alienation would be binding on the sons.
[6 ID] Mulla, "Principles of Hindu Law", 15th Edn.
Paragraph 295; lrukulapati Venkateshwara Rao vs Vemuri Amayya & Ors.
, A.I.R. 1939 Mad. 561, referred to.
Vyankates Dhonddeo Deshpande vs Sou.
Kusum Dattatraya Kulkarni & Ors., [1979] 1 955, relied on.
Atchutaramayya vs Ratanjee Bhootaji, [1926] A.I.R. Mad. 211; Suraj Bansi Koer vs Sheo Prasad Singh, 6 I.A. 88 (PC) cited.
Benares Bank Ltd. vs Hari Narain & Ors., LIX I.A. 300, distinguished.
"Antecedent debt" means antecedent in fact as well as in time i.e. to say, that the debt must be truly independent and not part of the transaction impeached.
To constitute a debt an "antecedent" debt it is not necessary that the prior and subsequent creditors should be different persons.
All that is necessary is that the two transactions must be disassociated in time as well as in fact.
[53E F] Mulla, "Principles of Hindu Law", 15th Edn.
paragraph 295; Brij Narain vs Mangala Prasad, A.I.R. 1924 P.C. 50, referred to. 4.
It is necessary to examine each transaction independ ently and then to arrive at a conclusion whether such a transaction or alienation can be held to be valid or not.
[52G H] 4.1 The approach of the High Court in considering trans action dated 22nd April, 1948 as well as all the other transactions of 11th February, 1953 being part of the same transaction, is not correct.
[57B] 5.
The conditional sale deed dated 22nd April, 1948 was not void even if the amount was taken by 'B ' for his person al benefit of starting a 43 new business of grain.
It was an independent transaction both in fact as well as in time to the subsequent transac tions of 11th February, 1953.
The transaction of reconvey ance deed dated 11th February, 1953 was for the benefit of not only 'B ' but for the entire family including the plain tiffs.
There was no consideration for this reconveyance of the property except the transaction of sale made in favour of 'M ' on 11th February, 1953.
This sale deed was perfectly valid and was made in order to pay the antecedent debt.
[57F G] 6.
So far as the house property is concerned, the Trial Court 's finding that defendants Nos. 4 to 8 had spent Rs.25,000 on the reconstruction of the house within the knowledge and without the objection of the plaintiffs Nos. 1 and 2 and as such plaintiffs No. 1 and 2 and defendant No. 9 were estopped from challenging the title of those defendants had not been set aside by the High Court.
This finding of the High Court has to be upheld.
[61F G] 7.
So far as the transactions of sale of the remaining properties in favour of 'V ' and his brother are concerned, they stand on a different footing altogether.
The High Court in this regard has recorded a clear finding that the afore said alienations were made neither for any legal necessity nor for the benefit of the State nor for payment of any antecedent debt.
[61H; 62B] The evidence in this regard is also fully convincing that the aforesaid transaction had no connection with pay ment of any antecedent debt.
The finding of the High Court has to be upheld in this regard.
[62C] 8.
Accordingly the Judgment and decree passed by the High Court is set aside to the extent of granting a decree for possession of the house property and agricultural lands sold in favour of 'M ' on 11th February, 1953, and the suit with regard to these properties is dismissed.
The rest of the Judgment and decree of the High Court in respect of agricultural lands which were alienated in favour of 'V ' and his brother is maintained and 'the suit of the plaintiffs for possession with regard to these properties stands decreed.
[62D E]
