Held, that in order that a stay may be granted under section 34 of the Indian , it is necessary that the following conditions should be fulfilled: (1) The proceeding must have been commenced by a party to an arbitration agreement against any other party to the agreement; (2) the legal proceeding which is sought to be stayed must be in respect of a matter agreed to be referred ; (3) the applicant for stay must be a party to the legal proceeding and he must have taken no step in the proceeding after appearance.
It is also necessary that he should satisfy the court not only that he is, but also was at the commencement of the proceedings, ready and willing to do everything necessary for the proper conduct of the arbitration ; and (4) the Court must be satisfied that there is no sufficient reason why the matter should not be referred to an arbitration in accordance with the arbitration agreement.
The first and essential pre requisite to making an order of stay under a. 34 of the is that there is a binding arbitration agreement between the parties to the suit which is sought to be stayed.
The question whether the dispute in the suit falls within the arbitration clause really pre supposes that there is such agreement and involves consideration of two matters, viz., (1) what is the dispute in the suit and (2) what disputes the arbitration clause covers.
It is incumbent upon the Court, when invited to stay a suit under section 34 of the Indian , to decide first of all whether there is a binding agreement for arbitration between the parties.
If, in the present case, it is held that the arbitration agreement and the contract containing it were between the parties to the suit, the dispute in the present suit would be one relating to the rights and liabilities of the parties on the basis of the contract itself and would come within the purview of the arbitration clause 863 worded as it is in the widest of terms.
If, on the other hand, it is held that the plaintiff was not a party to the agreement, the application for stay must necessarily be dismissed.
Case sent back for the decision of the question whether the respondent was or was not a party to the arbitration agreement.
Heyman vs Darwins ([1942] A.C. 356), Khusiram vs Hanutmal ((1948) , A. M. Mair and Companay vs Gordhandas ([1960] S.C.R. 792) and Patiram Y. Kankarah Company ((1915) I.L.R. referred to.
