The respondent, who had filed a complaint in respect of an alleged offence under section 500 of the Indian Penal Code in the Court of the Additional District Magistrate of Indore, made a number of aspersions against the Magistrate in an application I74 1368 made to him under section 528 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, two of which were of a serious character.
It was alleged that the Magistrate was a party to a conspiracy with certain others the object of which was two implicate the complainant in a false case of theft and that a lawyer appearing for the accused persons, to whom the Magistrate was favourably inclined, had declared that he had paid a sum of Rs. 500 to the Magistrate.
Those allegations were later on repeated in an affidavit.
The Magistrate reported the matter to the Registrar of the High Court for necessary action.
The High Court called upon the respondent to show cause why he should not be proceeded against in contempt under the .
The judges of the Division Bench who heard the matter, without going into the merits of the case, held that, Prima facie, the offence was one of intentional insult under section 228 of the lndian Penal Code and, consequently, the jurisdiction of the High Court was ousted under section 3(2) Of the .
Held, that the High Court had taken an erroneous view of the matter and its order must be set aside.
The mere existence of an element of insult in the alleged act of contempt was not conclusive as to the applicability of section 228 Of the Indian Penal Code so as to oust the jurisdiction of the High Court under section 3(2) of the .
While Judges and Courts are not beyond criticism, and there are well recognised limits to such criticism, and contempt proceedings are not meant to shield judges from personal insults, there can be no question that where defamatory aspersions are cast upon the character and ability of individual judges or of Courts in general, which in substance scandalise the Court itself and have the effect of undermining the confidence of the public in it and thus hinder due administration of justice, the contempt is of a kind which exceeds the limits of section 228 of the Indian Penal Code.
The true test, therefore, is: is the act complained of an offence under section 228 of the Indian Penal Code, or something more than that ? If it is something more, the jurisdiction of the High Court is not ousted by section 3(2) Of the .
So judged, there could be no doubt that the aspersions cast in the present case amounted to scandalising the court itself, and were no mere personal insults, and the High Court had jurisdiction to take cognizance of the same.
Bathina Ramkrishna Reddy vs The State of Madras, [1952] section C. R. 425 and Brahma Prakash Shayma vs The State of Uttar Pradesh, , relied on.
Ambard vs Attorney Geneyal for Trinidad and Tobago, , referred to.
1369 The question whether an insult offered to a public servant is intentional so as to attract section 228 of the Indian Penal Code has to be decided on the facts of each particular case and it is neither necessary nor advisable to Jay down any hard and fast rule.
Narotam Das vs Emperor, A.I.R. 1943 All. 97, Queen Empress vs Abdullah Khan, and Emperor vs Murli Dhar, All. 284, considered.
