The petitioners, employed in temporary capacity with the Oil and Natural Gas Commission when it was a Department of the Government of India, were subsequently absorbed in the said Commission when it was established as a statutory body under the .
The was made applicable to the Commission.
The petitioners opted for Contributory Provident Fund and availed the bene fit.
The petitioners filed a writ petition in this Court claiming the benefit of pension in addition to the Provident Fund contending that (i) under the relevant Rules governing their service, they were entitled to pension on their being made permanent and that the right to pension, 157 which was part of their service condition, was protected by Section 13(1) of the read with Regulation 3(2) of the Oil and Natural Gas Commission (Terms and Conditions of Appointment and Service) Regula tions 1975; and (ii) In spite of the introduction of the Contributory Provident Fund Scheme 'their right to pension was preserved by Section 12 of the Provident Fund Act.
Dismissing the writ petition, this Court, HELD: 1.
The scheme of Contributory Provident Fund, by way of retiral benefit, envisaged by the Provident Fund Act, is in the nature of a substitute for old age pension because it was felt that in the prevailing conditions in India, the institution of a pension scheme could not be visualised in the near future.
It was not the intention of Parliament that Provident Fund benefit envisaged by the said Act would be in addition to pensionary benefits.
[165G H; 166A] 2.
Section 12 of the Provident Fund Act seeks to protect the wages of an employee to whom the scheme framed under the said act applies as well as the total quantum of certain specified benefits to which he is entitled under the terms of his employment.
It prohibits an employer from reducing, whether directly or indirectly, the wages of an employee to whom the Scheme applies or the total quantum of benefits in the nature of old age pension, gratuity, Provident Fund or life insurance to which the employee is entitled under the terms of his employment express or implied.
The said section proceeds on the basis that if an employee is entitled to any benefit in the nature of old age pension under the terms of his employment the said benefit would not be denied to him on the application of the Scheme.
[166A C] 2.1 In the instant case, on the date of application of the Provident Fund Scheme to the Oil and Natural Gas Commis sion.
the benefit of pension was not a part of the terms of employment of the petitioners and they were not entitled to receive pension on that date.
Consequently, the petitioners cannot invoke the provisions of Section 12 of the Provident Fund Act.
[166D] Som Prakash Rekhi vs Union of India & Anr., ; , held inapplicable.
The petitioners were employed on temporary basis at the time when the Commission was established as a statutory body under the "and on that date they were not 158 entitled to claim pension because under the relevant Rules pension was not payable to a person employed on temporary basis.
The petitioners, therefore, cannot claim that on the date of their becoming the employees of the Commission established under the Oil and Natural (;as Commission Act in 1959, they had a right to pension which has been protected under sub section (1) of Section 13 and clause 12) of Regu lation 3 of the Regulations.
[164A B] 3.1 Under the relevant service rules applicable to petitioners, they could either claim pension or the benefit of the Contributory Provident Fund and they could not avail both the benefits.
Since the petitioners are entitled to the benefit of the Contributory Provident Fund under the Provi dent Fund Act and the Provident Fund Scheme and have availed the said benefit for the past 28 years, they should be taken to have opted for said benefit and they cannot invoke the service rules with regard to pension and claim the right to receive pension as part of their conditions of service.
I 164C D] 3.2 The persons who were employed in temporary capacity with the Oil and Natural Gas Commission when it was being run as a Department of the Government of India prior to the enactment of the and who were subsequently absorbed in the Commission, as established under the said Act, are not entitled to pension in addition to the Provident Fund benefit to which they are entitled under the provisions of the Provident Fund Act.
[167B C]
