In the Writ Petition flied in this Court, the validity of Rajasthan Agricultural Produce Markets Act, 1961, levying market fee on sale and purchase of agricultural produce was challenged for lack of legislative competence, and arbitrary inclusion of Khandsari, Shakkar, Gur and Sugar as agricul tural produce in the Schedule.
It was contended that inclu sion of sugar was arbitrary inasmuch as it being a declared commodity of public importance under Entry 52 of List I of Schedule VII, the State Legislature was precluded from legislating on it and that being a mill or factory produce, it could not be deemed to be agricultural produce, which was basically confined to produce of or from soil.
Dismissing the Petitions, this Court, HELD: 1.1 Sugar is one of the items which was included in the Schedule to the Rajasthan Agricultural Produce Mar kets Act, 1961, statutorily, right from the inception.
Such inclusion is found in many States.
Whether it was subse quently deleted or re included or regrouped or was added later was immaterial, as Section 40 of the Act empowered State Government to amend or include any item in the Sched ule of agricultural produce.
Existence of such delegated power is 143 usual feature of the statutes.
No illegality or infirmity could be pointed out in it.
Any challenge, therefore, round ed on excessive delegation of legislative power was miscon ceived.
[144H, 145A B] 1.2 The definition of the word "agricultural produce" in the Act includes all produce whether agricultural, horticul tural, animal husbandry or otherwise as specified in the Schedule.
The legislative power to add or include and define a word even artificially, apart, the definition which is not exhaustive but inclusive, neither excludes any item produced in mill or factories nor it confines its width to produce from soil.
Nor switch over from indigenous method of produc ing anything to scientific or mechanical method changes its character.
To say, therefore, that sugar being produced in mill or factories could not be deemed to be agricultural produce is both against the statutory language and judicial interpretation of similar provisions of the Act in statutes of other States.
[145C D, F] Kewal Krishan Puri vs State of Punjab, ; ; Ramesh Chandra vs State of U.P., ; Rathi Khandsari Udyog vs State of U.P., ; Sreenivisa General Traders vs State of Andhra Pradesh, AIR 1983 SC 1264; Ramesh Chandra vs U.P. State and State of U.P. vs Ganga Das Mill, , re ferred to.
Halsbury 's Law of England, Vol.
I and Paragraph 1845, re ferred to. 2.
In view of the settled position of law that sugar legislations are within the scope of Entry 33 of Concurrent List, no further discussion on clash between Entry 52 of List I of Vllth Schedule and Entry 28 of List II is neces sary.
There is no repugnancy in the Central and State legis lation.
Even if there would have been any, the Act having received assent of the President is fully protected by Article 254(2) of the Constitution.
[146B D] Choudhary Tika Ram and Others vs State of U.P., ; , followed.
