The petitioner was detained under section 3(3) of the , under an order passed by the detaining authority after consideration of the documents placed before it by the sponsoring authority alleging that the detenu was a hardened criminal and habitual offender against whom many cases were registered.
The documents placed before the detaining authority were also served on the detenu along with the ground of detention.
The appellant filed a writ of Habeas Corpus in the High Court challenging the validity of the detention which was dismissed.
Hence this appeal.
The appellant also filed a writ petition in this Court challenging his detention.
In this appeal it was contended on behalf of the appellant that the detaining authority had acted on irrelevant and extrane ous matters therefore the detention order is liable to be quashed.
On behalf of the respondent it was contended that the order of detention was not invalid merely because some extraneous materials were placed before the detaining au thority since the impugned order could be sustained on the material set out in the grounds of the detention itself.
Allowing the appeal and disposing the Writ Petition, this Court, 213 HELD: 1.
The averments made in the documents, the copies of which are furnished to the detenu along with grounds of detention unequivocally and clearly spell out that the detenu is a hardened criminal, having a gang under his control often committing heinous crimes, that many cases are against the detenu are registered in various police stations and that he is in the habit of committing offences.
These averments which are extraneous touching the character of the detenu though not referred to in the grounds of detention, might have influenced the mind of the detaining authority to some extent one way or other in reaching the subjective satisfaction to take the decision of directing the detention of detenu.
Had these extraneous materials not been placed before the detaining authority, he might or might not have passed this order.
Therefore the detention order is suffer ing from the vice of consideration of extraneous materials vitiating the validity of the order.
detention order is therefore quashed.
[217B E] Ram Krishna Paul vs The Government Of West Bengal & Ors., ; ; Smt.
Pushpa vs Union of India & Ors., [1980] Supp.
SCC 391; Merugu Satyanarayana vs State of A.P. & Ors., ; and Mehboob Khan Nawab Khan Pathan vs Police Commissioner, Ahmedabad & Anr., ; followed.
Section 5A provides that where there are two or more grounds covering various activities of the detenu, each activity is a separate ground by itself and if one of the grounds is vague, non existent, not relevant, not connected or not proximately connected with such person or invalid for any other reason whatsoever, then that will not vitiate the order of detention.
In the instant case the impugned order has not been made on two or more grounds covering various activities of the detenu.
but has been passed on the sole ground relatable to a single incident.
The conclusion ar rived at is only on the basis that the extraneous materials placed before the detaining authority might have influenced the mind of the detaining authority, but not on the ground that one of the grounds of the detention order has become invalid or inoperative for the reasons mentioned in Section 5(A)(a).
Therefore the submission that the factual material set out in the grounds of detention alone led to the passing of the order with a view to preventing the detenu from acting in any manner prejudicial to the public order is not correct.
[218B D] Prakash Chandra Mehta vs Commissioner and Secretary Government of Kerala & Ors., [1985] Supp.
SCC 144; distin guished.
