Sub section (i) of section 3 of the Andhra Pradesh Land Reforms (Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings) Act, 1973 defines the expression "holding" as meaning the entire land held by a person as an owner, a limited owner, usufructuary mortga gee, a tenant and as one who is in possession by virtue of a mortgage by conditional sale or through part performance of a contract of sale.
The Explanation thereto states that where the same land is held by one person in one capacity and by another person in any other capacity such land shall be included in the holding of both such persons.
The appellants/petitioners had alienated agricultural lands under agreements of sale and the possession of these lands was delivered in part performance of the said agree ments but no conveyance of the said lands had been executed till the relevant date.
A question arose whether such land could be excluded from the holding of the owner vendor within the meaning of the Act.
The Land Reforms Appellate Tribunal found that the vendees alone were in possession and enjoyment of the respective lands and, therefore, the appel lants could not be said to be holding the said lands.
The High Court held that the lands covered by the agreements of sale have to be included in the holdings of the appellants as well.
In these appeals and special leave petitions filed by them it was contended that use of the word 'held ' in the definition in section 3(i) indicates that the person who is supposed to hold the land must necessarily be the person in possession of the said land and hence where, in part per formance of an agreement of sale or under a lease, the purchaser or lessee has been put in possession of any land, the owner of the said land cannot any longer be regarded as holding the same, and that although the 221 Explanation to sub s.(i) of s.3 was very widely worded, its meaning could not be so extended as to cover a case where the owner of the land had parted with the possession thereof under an agreement creating a right, legal or equitable, in the land concerned.
Dismissing the appeals and the special leave petitions, the Court, HELD: 1.
The Andhra Pradesh Land Reforms (Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings) Act, 1973 is a piece of agrarian legislation enacted with a view to achieve a more equitable distribution of land for common good and with a view to subserve the objectives enshrined in Article 39 of the Constitution, being one of the Directive Principles embodied in the Constitution.
Provisions of such a legislation have to be interpreted liberally and with a view to furthering the object of the legislation.
[226B C] 2.1 The very language of sub s.(i) of s.3 indicates that a person can 'hold ' land for the purposes of the Act as an owner, as a limited owner, as a usufructuary mortgagee, as a tenant and as one who is in possession by virtue of a mort gage by conditional sale or through part performance of a contract of sale.
The Explanation thereto in plain language states that the same land can be held by one person in one capacity and by another person in a different capacity and provides that such land shall be included in the holdings of both such persons.
The Explanation thus clearly contemplates that the same land can be "held" as contemplated under sub section (i) by one person as the owner and by another person as his lessee or as a person to whom the owner has delivered possession of the land in part performance of an agreement to sell.
It cannot, ,therefore, be said that only where the land is in possession of a person can that land be regarded as held by him.
1226G 227B] 2.2 The Explanation to section 3(i) was incorporated in the Andhra Pradesh Land Reforms Act because the legislature took the view that, but for such a drastic provision, it would not be possible to effectively implement the provisions of the said Act regarding the acquisition and distribution of the surplus land to the landless and other deserving per sons.
If the legislature has used language in section 3(i) and the Explanation thereto which on a plain reading shows that in case of land covered under an agreement for sale or an agreement of lease, even though the purchaser or the lessee might be in possession of the land, it would be included in the holdings of both of the purchaser as well.as the owner or the lessee and the owner, there is no reason to cut down the plain meaning of the language employed in that provision [230B, C D] 222 State of Andhra Pradesh vs Mohd. Ashrafuddin, ; applied; Begulla Bapi Raju etc.
vs State of Andhra Pradesh etc.
; , referred to.
Burmah Shell oil Storage and Distributing Co. of India Ltd. & Anr.
vs The Commercial Tax Officer & Ors., , distinguished.
The Authorised Officer (LR), Vijayawada vs Kalyanam China Venkata Narasayya, [1978] 1 A.P. Law Journal 98 over ruled.
