The first appellant made an order under Rule 13(1) of the A.P. Civil Service (CCA) Rules, 1963 keeping the re spondent, a Police Inspector, under suspension pending prosecution against him in the case of death of a person in lock up in the Police Station to which the respondent was attached.
The respondent challenged the order before the State Administrative Tribunal.
The Tribunal set aside the suspension order, holding that the order became invalid after six months since the Government had not made a fresh order extending the period of suspension, and that the first appellant had no power to suspend the respondent pending prosecution against him.
Hence the appeal, by Special Leave.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.1 Rule 13(1) of the A.P. Civil Service (CCA) Rules, 1963 provides power tO keep an officer under suspen sion from service pending investigation or enquiry into grave charges, where such suspension is necessary in the public interest.
Proviso thereunder requires the authority who made the order of suspension to report to the Government where the investigation into the charges and the action proposed to be taken against the officer has not been com pleted within the period of six months from the date of suspension.
Upon receipt of the report, the Government may make such orders as they deem fit having regard to the circumstances or development in the case.
Proviso thus imposes only an obligation on the authority to report to the Government, but it does not limit the period of suspension.
It does not state that the suspension order comes to an end by the end of six months.
The suspension order is not an interim suspension.
Nor Rule 13(1) limits its operation only for six months.
The order of suspension once made will continue 234 till it is revoked by an appropriate order under Rule 13(5).
[236B D] Government of A.P.v.
Sivaraman, Civil Appeal No. 1064 of 1990, decided on January 12, 1990, referred to.
1.2 It is a well accepted principle that a wrong wording in the order does not take away the power if it is otherwise available.
[238E] Rule 13(1) empowers the authority to keep the respondent under suspension pending investigation or enquiry into the criminal charges.
When the First Information Report was issued registering the offence of murder, names of the accused could not be mentioned since there was no authentic information as to how the death occurred and who were responsible for it.
However, after the Commission of Inquiry submitted its report, indicting certain police officials including the respondent, the State Government decided to initiate prosecution against the officers and asked the first appellant to take immediate action in that regard.
Thus, the first appellant made the order keeping the re spondent under suspension pending prosecution against him.
Merely because the word 'prosecution ' has been used instead of 'investigation ', the order of suspension cannot be said to be beyond the scope of Rule 13(1).
The investigation commenced when the First Information Report was issued, and indeed it has commenced when the respondent was kept under suspension.
[237G H; 238B, C D]
