Rule 8 of the Punjab Civil Services (Judicial Branch Rules, 1951, as adapted by the State of Haryana, lays down that no candidate shall be considered to have qualified in the examination unless he obtains at least 55% marks in the aggregate of all papers, including the viva voce test.
The petitioners assailed the said provision on the ground that fixation of 55% marks has resulted in denial of equality of opportunity to the scheduled castes and sched uled tribes segments of the community vis a vis general candidates for determining their suitability and/or eligi bility for appointment in the judicial branch of the Haryana Civil Services in the absence of lower percentage having been prescribed for them as in other States.
Disposing of the writ petition and the appeal, the Court, HELD: 1.
Public services and public employment do not exist for providing jobs in terms of equality or otherwise to all.
Only public services and public employment must serve public purpose and nothing that hampers or impairs the efficiency or efficacy of public services should be permit ted in ensuring conditions of constitutional equality.
These should be done objectively, rationally and reasonably.
329 2.
Scheduled castes and scheduled tribes for reasons historical or otherwise, are unequal with the general mem bers of the community in respect of ability and qualifica tion for public employment.
They are unable to compete in terms of absolute equality with the members of other commu nities or groups in the society.
Hence, in order to make them compete on conditions of equality with others in re spect of jobs and employments of the State certain relaxa tions and other factors ensuring equality are imperative.
Our Constitution so enjoins it.
Article 38 of the Constitu tion read with Article 14, 15 and 16 so mandates it.
[332D E; C] 3.
In the instant case, high efficiency is required because the recruitment is in the judicial branch, that is to say, for prospective judicial officers who will be in charge of administration of justice in the country.
But at the same time, if possible, in order to ensure that there is equality of opportunity, a percentage should be fixed which without, in any way, compromising with the efficiency re quired for the job which will be attainable by backward communities, that is to say, scheduled castes and scheduled tribes.
Unless such a percentage is fixed on the aforesaid basis and a percentage is fixed for qualification which would normally be unattainable by the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes determined on an objective basis, it would not be possible to ensure equality of opportunity.
[333D F] 4.1 The Government is directed to make a conscious decision objectively before the next selections take place, and determine a minimum percentage of marks consistent with efficiency and the need for ensuring equality of opportunity to scheduled castes and scheduled tribes.
[334B] 4.2 The Government should also consider whether further relaxation in age in favour of scheduled castes and sched uled tribes can be made; and if so, to what extent without hampering efficiency of the administration.
This should also be considered before the next selections for appointment to the post are made.
[334C]
