Staff Artists of All India Radio/Doordarshan, after complying with the initial requirements, used to be appoint ed to various positions like Announcer, News Readers, Con ductor, Music Compere, Instrumentalists, Producer and Script Writer etc., on contract basis upto the age of 55 years.
In May 1982, Union of India bifurcated the Staff Artists into two categories like (i) Staff Artists to be treated as artists and (ii) Staff Artists to be treated as Government Servants.
These two sets of writ petitions have been filed by the Staff artists challenging the said Government deci sion conveyed through circular dated 3.5.1982 and calling upon the staff to exercise option by the end of December, 1983 for final allocation to the two categories aforesaid.
In the first writ petition direction is sought to the re spondents to treat the Staff Artists at par with regular government servants and to restrain the respondents from enforcing their direction in regard to their exercise of option and in the other writ petition, the petitioners have asked for a direction to treat the staff artists as govern ment servants entitled to pensionary benefits.
The Court by its order dated 25.4.1988, on perusal of the letter together with the scheme, Sent by the Director General of All India Radio and following its earlier deci sion in Civil Appeal No 384 of 1977 Union of India vs
M.A. Chowdhary; , declared that all the staff artists of All India Radio are holding civil posts under the Government, and they are governed by Article 311(2) of the Constitution and accordingly inter alia directed the Govern ment of India to review the entire situation and to prepare a fresh scheme in accordance with law having regard to the nature of duties performed by each category of staff artists and further directed the case to come up for directions on 5.9.1988.
Thereafter the Government of India formulated a scheme in compliance with the courts order and submitted it to the Court.
340 Disposing of the writ petitions with directions, this Court, HELD: While dealing with the Artists as a class it is necessary that their special status be borne in mind.
It is a class of people who are indeed specially privileged either by natural gift or by their own culturing of the article This category of people cannot be equated with ordinary Govern ment servants for every purpose.
[348F] The All India Radio and the Doordarshan in their normal functioning would to a considerable extent depend upon qualitative and efficient artists in order to make their programmes reach the desired level.
[348G] The age old practice of the job of the staff artists being contractual (whether short or long) is being given up and contractual employment is being substituted by status based Government service.
If there are really efficient Artists of different classifications who do not want to be branded as Government servants, there is no immediate justi fication for discontinuing and disturbing them in toto.
[348H; 349A] Administrative scrutiny instead of judicial determina tion would be more helpful.
The Court therefore directed that in the appropriate Ministry a High Power Committee be set up for examination of the objections with reference to the terms of the scheme and the final decision be taken by the Government within six months.
The views expressed in the present decision be taken into account while dealing with the objections for purpose of finalising the scheme.
[349E; F G]
