The appellant company was maintaining a large eucalyptus plantation for captive consumption in its production of Rayon Grade Pulp.
The State of Kerala claimed that as a consequence of the Kerala Private Forests (Vesting and Assignment) Act, 1971, the eucalyptus plantation being a 'private forest ' stood transferred to and vested in it.
The company resisted the State 's claim on the ground that the term 'private forest ' excludes the eucalyptus plantation.
The High Court decided the question in favour of the State and against the appellant.
402 In the appeal to this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellant that since the eucalyptus plantation was covered by the expression 'any other agricultural crop ' in section 2(47)(iv) of the Kerala Land Reforms Act, 1963 the similar expression used in section 2(f)(1)(i)(C) of the Vesting Act, 1971 must also carry the same meaning.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court.
HELD: 1.
Judicial interpretation given to the words defined in one statute does not afford a guide to construc tion of the same words in another statute unless the stat utes are pari materia legislations.
[408G] 1.1 The definition of 'private forest ' in the Kerala Land Reforms Act is not just the same as the definition of 'private forest ' in the Vesting Act.
Indeed, there is a vast difference between the two.
Two separate definitions have been provided in the Vesting Act; the first is applicable to the Malabar district where the Madras Preservation of Pri vate Forests Act, 1949 applied immediately before the ap pointed day; the second concerned is in relation to the remaining areas in the State of Kerala.
The definition of 'private forest ' as is applicable to the Malabar district is not general in terms but limited to the areas and lands to which the Madras Preservation of Private Forests Act ap plied, and exempts there from lands described under sub clauses (A) to (D).
This significant reference to this Act in the definition of 'private forest ' in the Vesting Act makes all the difference in the case.
The scheme of this Act appears to be that if the land is shown to be private forest on the date on which the Act came into force, it would continue to be a forest, even if there was subsequent re plantation.
[408H; 409A D] 1.2 The lands involved in this appeal were all forests as defined in the Madras Preservation of Private Forests Act and continued to be so when the Vesting Act came into force.
Therefore, it seems inappropriate to transplant the meaning accorded to 'private forest ' from the Kerala Land Reforms Act to the Vesting Act.
[409E F] State of Kerala vs Anglo American D.T.T. Co., and State of Kerala vs
K.C. Moosa Haji, A.I.R. referred to.
Malankara Rubber and Produce Co. vs State of Kerala & Ors.
, ; , Held inapplicable.
403 State of Kerala vs Gwalior Rayon Silk Mfg.
(Wvg.) Co. Ltd.; , , referred to.
The term 'agriculture ' and 'agricultural crop ' have wider as well as narrower connotation.
The wider concept covers both the primary or basic as well as the subsequent operations.
It takes within its fold among other things, the products of the land which have some utility either for consumption or for trade and commerce including forest products such as timber, sal and piyasal, trees, casuarina plantations, tendu leaves, coconuts etc.
Of course there must be present all throughout the basic idea that there must be cultivation of the land in the sense of tilling of the lands, sowing of the seeds, planting and similar work done in the land.
The forest growth or spontaneous growth of any product, plants or trees, however, would be outside the characteristic of agricultural products or operations.
[407D F] Commissioner of 1.
T. West Bengal vs Raja Benoy Kumar Sahas Roy, ; , referred to.
2.1 Under Section 3(1), private forests vest in Govern ment.
Subsection (2) however, excludes from such vesting lands within the ceiling limits applicable to an owner if they are under his personal cultivation.
Cultivation for this purpose 'includes cultivation of trees or plants of any species '.
The explanation to sub section (2) makes this aspect beyond doubt.
The lands used for the cultivation of any kind of tree, fruit bearing or yielding only timber or pulp are not vested under section 3 sub section (2).
The legislature has thus excluded from vesting under section 3 sub section (2) the trees of every variety.
But while pro viding for exclusion under sub clause (C) of section 2(f)(1)(i), the legislature could not have again thought of trees or plants of all kinds.
It seems to have considered only fruit bearing trees and not of other species.
Sub clause (C) refers to lands which are principally cultivated with cashew or other fruit bearing trees.
It next refers to lands which are principally cultivated with any other agri cultural crop.
If the legislature had intended to ' use the term 'agricultural crop ' in a wide sense so as to take within its fold all species of trees fruit bearing or other wise, it would be unnecessary to have the first limb denot ing only the cashew or other fruit bearing trees.
Therefore, there is no indication that the words 'any other agricultur al crop ' in sub clause (C) are quite wide enough to compre hend all species of trees including eucalyptus plantations.
These words exclude only fruit bearing trees.
[410H; 41 1A D] State of Kerala vs Amalgamated Malabar Estates, A.I.R. 1980 404 Ker. 137; State of Kerala vs Malayalam Plantation Ltd., A.I.R. 1981 Ker. 1 and State of Kerala vs
K.C. Moosa Haji & Ors., A.I.R. , approved.
In seeking legislative intention, judges not only listen to the voice of the legislature but also listen atten tively to what the legislature does not say.
[410G H]
