The appellant landlord obtained a decree of eviction of respondent No. 1 company from the suit premises.
Aggrieved, respondent No. 1 filed a Writ Petition before the High Court.
Dismissing the Petition, the High Court granted eight weeks ' time to respondent No. 1 for vacating the suit prem ises, subject to the filing of an undertaking that it will not part with the possession of, or create third party interest in, the suit premises in any manner whatsoever.
After some correspondence respondent No. 3, by an affidavit, filed the required undertaking on behalf of respondent No. 1 but without mentioning that the respondent No. 1 had not already parted with possession of the suit premises or created any third party interest therein.
Later, counsel for respondent No. 1 clarified that when the undertaking stated that respondent No. I would not part with possession it meant that respondent No. 1 was in possession.
But, in the meantime, respondent No. 2 Chairman of respondent No. 1 Company filed a suit claiming a declaration that he was the lawful sub tenant and the decree for possession was a nulli ty and obtained an injunction, thus preventing the appellant from executing the decree.
Thereupon, the appellant filed a petition for contempt before the High Court praying that the respondents should be punished under the provisions of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1972.
The High Court rejected the petition.
381 In the appeal before this Court, it was contended on behalf of the landlord appellant that the High Court was in error in holding that no contempt was established against the respondents, that the undertaking clearly implied that respondent No. 1 was in possession of the premises and was in a position to hand over vacant and peaceful possession of the same after eight weeks, which was also made clear from the clarification given by counsel for respondent No. 1 that this assurance/undertaking was false, as by that time re spondent No. 2, had already filed a suit claiming sub tenan cy from respondent, that the record disclosed that respond ents No. 1 and 2, were acting in collusion with a view to defeat the decree obtained by the appellant and to prevent the execution of the decree and that the resolution of the respondent No. 1 under which respondent No. 2 was claiming sub tenancy was fabricated and antedated.
It was submitted on behalf of the respondent that before a Court could take any action for contempt, it must be strictly established that the contempt had been proved beyond reasonable doubt, as an action for contempt was in the nature of a criminal proceeding.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: .
I The Proceedings in the contempt are quasi criminal in nature, and law of contempt has to be strictly interpreted, and the requirements of that law must be strictly complied with before any person can be committed for contempt.
However, where there is patent dishonesty writ large on the face of the record, the law does not require that this Court should sit back with folded hands and fail to take any action in the matter.
In exercise of its juris diction under clause (1) of Article 142 of the Constitution, this Court may pass such decree or make such order as is necessary for doing complete justice in any case or matter pending before it.
[391G H; C D] 1.2 In the instant case, respondent No. 1 gave an under taking based on an implication or assumption which was false in its knowledge and to the knowledge of respondent No 2.
Respondent No. 2 was equally instrumental in the giving of this undertaking.
This implication or assumption was made explicit by the clarification given by the counsel for respondent No. 1.
Respondent No. 2 was equally responsible for instructing counsel to give this clarification which was false to the knowledge of both, respondents Nos. 1 and 2.
Both respondent No. 1 and respondent No. 2 have tried to deceive the Court and the appellant.
In view of this, it cannot be said that they are not guilty of contempt.
382 Respondent No. 1 is guilty of misconduct amounting to con tempt and must be held to have committed contempt by giving the undertaking and instructing its counsel to give the clarification of the meaning of the undertaking knowing fully well that it was not in possession of the suit prem ises, and was not in a position to give possession of the suit premises, to the appellant in execution of the decree in favour of the appellant or otherwise.
There is no doubt that respondent No. 2 was a party to this breach of the undertaking being committed and, in fact, it was at his instance that respondent No. 1 committed the breach of the undertaking.
[391H, 392A B, 391E F] 1.3 Respondents No. 1 and 2 cannot be allowed to thwart the execution of the decree and continue to remain in pos session of the suit premises.
No doubt, the claim set up by respondent No. 2 in the declaratory suit filed by him to establish that he is a sub tenant of the suit premises and entitled to protection of the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodg ing House Rates (Control) Act, 1947 cannot be foreclosed.
However, by reason of any interim order obtained in that suit, the appellant can no longer be deprived of the posses sion of the said premises pursuant to the decree obtained by her, till the claim in the declaratory suit is established.
[392C, E] 1.4 The Court Receiver.
High Court, who has already been appointed should appoint the appellant as his agent in place of the existing agent, and hand over possession of the suit premises to her on such terms and conditions as he may think fit.
It would be open to respondent No. 2 to apply for vacation or variation of the order, in the event of his being able to establish his right to sub tenancy.
[392G, 393C] Noorali Babul Thanewala vs Sh.
K.M.M. Shetty and Ors.
, J.T. , relied on.
