The respondent joined service in the Department of Examiner of Accounts, Local Fund and in the service book his date of birth was recorded on the basis of S.S.L.C. Certifi cate.
He made an application for alteration of his date of birth but the Head of Department rejected his prayer by an order dated 5.1.1968.
After the coming into force of the Andhra Pradesh Public Employment (Recording and alteration of date of birth) Rules, 1984, he made another application for alteration of his date of birth which was also rejected by the Head of Department on the ground of limitation.
The respondent filed a petition before the Andhra Pra desh Administrative Tribunal challenging the order rejecting his application and also the Constitutional validity of Rules 4 and 5 of the 1984 Rules.
The tribunal by its order dated 18th October, 1985 directed the appellants to consider the respondent 's appli cation for the alteration of his date of birth on the basis of the extracts of the entry in the births and deaths regis ter, holding that the respondent 's application was wrongly rejected by the Head of Department on the ground of limita tion; and (ii) Rule 5 of the 1984 Rules was void as it was repugnant to Section 9 of the 366 .
In the appeal it was contended on behalf of the State that (i) since the respondent 's application for alteration of his date of birth had been rejected in 1968 he was not entitled to maintain any fresh application; and (ii) there was no repugnancy between Rule 5 of 1984 Rules and section 9 of the 1886 Act.
Allowing the appeal and setting aside the order of the Tribunal, the Court, HELD: 1.
Rule 4 of the Andhra Pradesh Public Employment (Recording and alteration of date of birth) Rules, 1984 lays down a salutory principle prohibiting re opening of the question of correction of date of birth which may have become final prior to the enforcement of 1984 Rules.
Since the question of alteration of the respondent 's date of birth had been made on the basis of the School Certificate and his application for alteration had already been rejected in 1968, he was not entitled to claim alteration of his date of birth after the enforcement of 1984 Rules.
It was not open to the respondent to claim alteration of his date of birth, even on the basis of extracts of the entry contained in births and deaths register maintained under the as the question of correction of his date of birth had already been finally decided in 1968.
[372C D] 2.
Rule 5 lays down that where application of a Govern ment employee for alteration of his date of birth was pend ing on the date of the commencement of the 1984 Rules the same will be dealt with on the basis of date of birth re corded in the School and College records at the time of the entry of the employee in service.
Thus if on the date of entry in service the date of birth of an employee was re corded in his service book on the basis of his age as re corded in the School and College Certificate, in that event the date so recorded shall be treated to be correct date of birth.
However, if the date of birth recorded in the service book at the time of entry of the employee is not based on School or College records, Rule 5 does not operate as a bar against consideration of other relevant materials in deter mining the date of birth of the employee, [372F G] In the instant case the respondent 's date of birth had been recorded in his service book on the basis of his S.S.L.C. Certificate, at the time of his entry into service therefore, that entry had become final and he was not enti tled to reopen the correctness of that entry on the 367 basis of extract of birth register.
Moreover, since the respondent 's application for alteration of his date of birth had already been decided prior to enforcement of Rule 5 he was not entitled to maintain application for any alteration of his date of birth.
In either case the respondent was not entitled to claim alteration of his date of birth, his application was rightly rejected although on different grounds, [372H; 373A B] 3.
The question of repugnancy cannot arise if the State makes law in exercise of its legislative powers in respect of an entry specified in List II of VIIth Schedule, even though it may incidentally trench upon a law made by the Union in respect of a matter referable to an entry in Union List of the VIIth Schedule.
[373E] 3.1 The is a central law which is referable to Union List.
Section 9 of the Act merely lays down that copies of entries of the registers relating to births and deaths maintained under the Act will be admissible in evidence for the purpose of proving the births and deaths.
It merely relates to admissibility of documents, it does not seek to regulate conditions of service of a State employee.
Rule 5 and Sec tion 9 of the Act operate in different areas and there is no question of conflict in the two provisions.
There is, there fore, no question of repugnancy between Rule 5 and Section 9.
The Tribunal 's view that Rule 5 was repugnant to Section 9 of is wholly misconceived and its order dated October 18, 1985 is not sustainable in law.
[373D E; G] Lingerker Vaidyanath vs Government of Andhra Pradesh and Anr., Andhra Pradesh Administrative Tribunal 's Judgment dated 2.9.1987, approved.
