Rule 5 of the A.P. Police Service Rules, 1966 makes a person ineligible for appointment as Deputy Superintendent of Police unless he has completed the age of 21 years on the first day of July of the year in which the selection is made.
The appellant Service Commission notified on August 25, 1983 a combined examination for Grade I Services of the State, to be held in November, 1983 wherein the minimum age prescribed for selection to the post of Deputy Superintend ent of Police was 21 years as on July 1, 1983 as against 18 years for other posts.
The respondent who was 19 days short of 21 years as on July 1, 1983 was not considered for appointment to the post of Deputy Superintendent of Police.
He was, however, select ed as Deputy Registrar of Cooperative Societies.
He filed a petition before the State Administrative Tribunal seeking a direction to the appellant to select him to the post of Deputy Superintendent of Police, contending that the date for attaining the minimum age prescribed under the notifica tion was contrary to Rule 5 of the Police Service Rules in as much as it ought to be the date of preparation of the list of selected candidates and not any date anterior to it.
The Tribunal accepted that contention.
Allowing the appeal by the Service Commission, the Court, HELD: The word 'selection ' occurring in Rule 5 of the A.P. Police Service Rules, 1966 cannot be construed only as the factum of preparation of the select list.
[467B] The process of selection which begins with the issuance of 464 advertisement and continues through scrutiny of applica tions, rejection of defective applications or elimination of ineligible candidates, conducting examinations, calling for interview or viva voce, ends with preparation of the select list for appointment.
Rule 3 of the Rules of Procedure of the Public Service Commission is also indicative of all these steps.
When such were the different steps in the process of selection, the minimum or maximum age for suit ability of a candidate for appointment cannot be allowed to depend upon any fluctuating or uncertain date.
If the final stage of selection is delayed, and more often it happens for various reasons, the candidates who are eligible on the date of application may find themselves eliminated at the final stage for no fault of theirs.
The date to attain the minimum or maximum age must, therefore, be specific and determinate as on a particular date for candidates to apply and for recruiting agency to scrutinise applications.
[466F 467A]
