The normal age of retirement of an employee of an aided school prescribed under section 208 of the Delhi Education Code, 1965 was 60 years.
The proviso to section 8(1) of the Delhi Education Act, 1973, prohibited the administrator from varying the conditions of service of an employee of an existing school at the commencement of that Act to his disadvantage While fixing the retirement age of employees of recognised private schools at 58 years sub rule (1) of rule 110 of the Delhi Education Rules, 1973 protected the entitlement of existing employees to higher age of retire ment.
The petitioner teacher, who had joined service before the coming into force of the Act, assailed her retirement on attaining the age of 58 years on the ground that under section 8 of the Act read with rule 110 of the Rules she had a statu tory right to continue upto the age of 60 years in terms of section 208 of the Code and that the management had acted arbi trarily and discriminately in depriving her of two years of service and consequential benefits.
For the respondents it was contended that the management of the school was neither a State nor an authority under Article 12 of the Constitu tion and as such no writ petition against the respondent management was maintainable, and that the Education Code had no force of law and as such the petitioner had no enforce able right much less under Article 32 of the Constitution.
Allowing the writ petition, the Court, HELD: 1.
The petitioner 's claim is just.
She was enti tled to be ,retired at the age of 60 years.
[417A, E] 413 2.
Prior to the coming into force of the Act and the Rules the management was following the Delhi Education Code which provided 60 years as the age of superannuation for the school teachers.
The age of superannuation provided in Rule 110 of the Rules is 58 years except in the case of existing employees who were in service on April 1, 1973, the date of coming into force of the Act, and in their case the higher age of retirement to which they were entitled has been protected.
The petitioner was an existing employee of the respondent management.
[417E, 415D] 3.
The respondent management was under a statutory obligation to uniformly apply the provisions of the Act and the Rules to the teachers employed in the school.
When an authority is required to act in a particular manner under a statute it has no option but to follow the statute.
The authority cannot defy the statute on the pretext that it is neither a State nor an "authority" under Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
[416G H] 4.
The petitioner having already attained the age of 60 years the respondents are directed to pay her salary and allowances for the period of two years.
The post retirement benefits to which she is entitled be redetermined assuming her to have retired at the age of 60 years.
The arrears of salary and allowances be paid to her within three months.
[417F G]
