Andhra Pradesh Animal Husbandry Service Rules, 1961, governed the conditions of service of the Andhra Pradesh Animal Husbandry Department and under those Rules Veterinary Assistant Surgeons were eligible for promotion to three categories of Class IV posts.
Rule 6 of the said Rules provided special eligibility qualifications for those posts and only those Veterinary Assistant Surgeons were considered for promotion to Class IV posts who fulfilled the qualifica tions/specialised training prescribed under Rule 6 of the 1961 Rules.
Some of the Veterinary Assistant Surgeons chal lenged the vires of Rule 6 of 1961 Rules on the ground that it was violative of Article 14 of the Constitution inasmuch as it conferred arbitrary powers on the Government to pick and choose any person for the specialised training and may deny such an opportunity to another person who may be equal ly or better suited for such training, there being no guide lines prescribed for selection of persons for specialised training.
The main contention was that at the time of re cruitment all the Veterinary Assistant Surgeons possessed Bachelor Degree in Veterinary Science and the special quali fication and training prescribed under Rule 6 could only be acquired after joining as Veterinary Assistant Surgeon by only those Assistant Surgeons whom the Government selected for the purpose.
The High Court held Rule 6 of the 1961 Rules as intra vires but made certain observations advising the Animal Husbandry Department to frame a rule for the said Department and see that as far as possible the area of discretion on the part of the authorities concerned is reduced if not eliminated altogether, so far as the question of imparting specialised training as provided under Rule 6 was concerned.
Thereupon the State Government amended Rule 6 of the 1961 Rules as a result whereof the 1961 Rules were superseded by the Andhra Pradesh Animal Husbandry Service Special Rules, 1977, Rule 1 whereof pro 419 vided for the constitution of the service.
Class IV posts, which were re designated as Assistant Directors, were divid ed into eight categories and Rule 2 provided method of promotion from Class V to Class IV.
Under those Rules Veter inary Assistant Surgeons who were Class V were only eligible for promotion to Class IV in their respective categories.
That is to say category I Class V was only eligible for promotion to category I Class IV and similarly category 2 of Class V was eligible for category 2 of Class IV and so on, and in this way common seniority of class V officers became irrelevant, promotion being category wise.
Being dissatis fied some officers belonging to Class IV filed Representa tion Petition before the Andhra Pradesh Administrative Tribunal seeking a direction that the special rules be amended or modified in terms of the observations made by the Andhra Pradesh High Court in Civil Writ No. 4532 of 1971, referred to above whereby the said High Court had declared Rule 6 of 1961 Rules as intra vires.
The contention raised by the petitioner was that promotions from Class V to Class IV be made on the basis of seniority alone irrespective of the categories contemplated by 1977 Rules.
The Tribunal by its judgment allowed the petition and issued the directions asked for by the petitioners.
The Tribunal observed that not to speak of direction, even an observation from the High Court was binding on the State Government when the State Government had not chosen to get the said observation set aside by the Supreme Court.
Accordingly the Tribunal direct ed the State to evolve a proper and rational method of determination of seniority among the Veterinary Assistant Surgeons in the matter of promotions to the next higher rank of Assistant Director of Veterinary Surgeons.
Being aggrieved, the State of Andhra Pradesh and some of the officers who have been affected by the High Court 's judgment and who were not parties before the High Court have filed these appeals.
The following questions arose for determination: (1) can the High Court/Administrative Tribunal direct the State Government to frame or amend the existing statutory Rules to alter the conditions of service of the Civil servants in terms of the directions, and (2) when there are specialized posts in a feeder cadre and also in the higher cadre, can the Government restrict the promotions from feeder cadre to the higher cadre only speciality wise irrespective of sen iority.
Allowing the Appeals and remanding the matter to the Tribunal for decision on other points: this Court, 420 HELD: The observations of the High Court which have been made as the basis for its judgment by the Tribunal were only of advisory nature.
The High Court was aware of its limita tions under Article 226 of the Constitution of India and as such the learned Judge deliberately used the words 'advisa ble ' while making the observations.
It is neither legal nor proper for the High Courts or the Administrative Tribunals to issue directions or advisory sermons to the executive in respect of the sphere which is exclusively within the domain of the executive under the Constitution.
[428E F] The power under Article 309 of the Constitution of India to frame rules is legislative power.
This power under the Constitution has to be exercised by the President or the Governor of a State as the case may be.
[429C] The High Court or the Administrative Tribunals cannot issue a mandate to the State Government to legislate under Article 309 of the Constitution of India.
The Courts cannot usurp the functions assigned to the executive under the Constitution and cannot even indirectly require the execu tive to exercise its rule making power in any manner.
The Courts cannot assume to itself a supervisory role over the rule making power of the executive under Article 309.
[429D E] The Administrative Tribunal in the judgment under appeal transgressed its limits in issuing the impugned directions.
[429F] Narender Chand Hem Raj & Ors.
vs Lt. Governor, Union Territory, Himachal Pradesh & Ors., ; ; State of Himachal Pradesh vs A parent of a student of medical college, Simla & Ors., [1985] 3 S.C.C. 169 and Asif Hameed & Ors.
vs State of Jammu & Kashmir & Ors.
, [1989] Supp. 2 S.C.C. 364, referred to.
