The assessee, a private limited company in Saurashtra, was assessed for the assessment year 1952 53 on a total income of Rs. 26,385.
It was assessable at the rate of four annas per rupee but in view of the provisions of the Part B States (Taxation Concession) Order, 1950, it was actually assessed at the rate of sixteen pies per rupee.
The assessee had declared dividend of Rs. 30,000 out of which Rs. 15,159 was found to be excess dividend.
On this excess dividend the assessee was liable to pay additional income tax and the dispute was regarding the rate at which tax was to be computed.
Clause (ii) of the proviso to para.
B of Part.
I of the First Schedule to the Finance Act, 1951, which applied to the case, provided that the additional income tax was to be equal to the sum by which the aggregate amount of income tax actually borne by the excess amount fell short of the amount Calculated at the rate of five annas per rupee on the excess dividend.
Sub clause (b) of cl.
(ii) to the second explanation to proviso to para.
B provided that the aggregate amount of income tax actually borne by the excess dividend was to be determined at the rate applicable to the total income of the company.
The assessee contended that the words 'at the rate applicable to the total income of the company ' meant the rate prescribed by para.
8 of the Act, i.e. four annas per rupee, and not the rate as reduced by the Order at which the income tax had actually and in fact been levied and that consequently it was liable to pay additional income tax on the excess dividend at the rate of one anna per rupee only.
Held, that the expression 'rate applicable to the total income of the company ' meant the rate actually applied and that the assessee was rightly charged at the rate of forty four pies per rupee being the rate by which the rate at which the assessee was actually assessed fell short of the rate of five annas per rupee.
The clause referred to the specific or definite rate which was determined to be applicable to the taxable income of the company for that specific year and not to the rate prescribed by the Act for the relevant year generally in reference to incomes of companies.
143 Elphinstone Spinning and Weaving Mills Co. Ltd. vs Commis sioner of Income tax, Bombay City, , con sidered.
