The State of Bihar published an advertisement inviting applications for appointments to the junior teaching posts in medical colleges in the State of Bihar.
For the post of Assistant Professor.
only such officers who had worked as Resident or Registrar in Medical Hospitals recognised for imparting M.B.B.S. studies by the Medical Council of India and having three years experience of such post were consid ered eligible.
The last date for receipt of applications was fixed as 31st January 1988.
Pursuant to the said advertise ment.
applications from eligible candidates were received and a select list or panel was prepared for appointments to the respective posts.
The respondents and some other inter venors who were working then in the Medical colleges as junior teachers challenged the State action in fixing the 3 1st of January 1988 as the cut off date for receipt of applications for the advertised posts.
as they had by then not completed three years which was prescribed as the requi site experience.
It was contended by them that the cut off date was arbitrarily fixed and was therefore violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
The High Court took the view that the State Government in fixing the 31st January 1988 as the cut off date.
had deviated from its usual practice of fixing the cut off date as 30th of June of the relevant year.
Hence this appeal by the State of Bihar by special leave.
It is contended by the State that the decision of the High Court was based on an erroneous premise that the cut off date for eligibility purposes was 'always ' fixed as 30th of June of the relevant year in the past.
Allowing the appeal, this Court.
HELD: The past practice was to fix the last date for receipt of applications a month or one and a half months after the date of actual publication of the advertisement.
Following the past practice the State 469 Government fixed the last date for receipt of applications as 31st January 1988.
These who had completed the required experience of three years by that date were.
therefore.
eligible to apply for the posts in question.
[474G H] The choice of date cannot be dubbed as arbitrary even if no particular reason is forth coming for the same unless it is shown to be capricious or whimsical or wide off the reasonable mark.
The choice of 'the date for advertising the post had to depend on several factors, e.g. the number of vacancies in different disciplines.
the need to fill up the posts.
the availability of candidates etc., [475C D] Merely because the respondents and some others would qualify for appointment if the last date for receipt of applications is shifted from 31st January 1988 to 30th June 1988.
is no reason for dubbing the earlier date as arbitrary or irrational.
[475D] The High Court was clearly in error in striking down the Government 's action of fixing the last date for receipt of application as 31st January 1988 as arbitrary.
[475E] Municipal Board, Pratabgarh & Anr.
vs Mahendra Singh Chawla & Ors., ; Union of India & Anr.
vs M/s. Parameswaran Match Works & Ors., ; and Uttar Pradesh Mahavidyalaya Tadarth Shikshak Niyamitika ran Abhiyan Samiti, Varanasi vs State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors., , referred to.
