In its industrial policy, the State Government declared on 1.8.1961 that where power has to be generated by indus trialists themselves, exemption from electricity duty would be granted for a period of five years from the date of plant goes into production, and that the concession would be applicable only to new generating sets installed during the Third Plan period.
The Respondent indicated to the Government on 3.5.1955 that about 5000 K.W. of electricity would be required by it to run its paper plant and that it would by itself make arrangements for obtaining the necessary generating equip ment.
It also applied for import licence for the import of a production plant as also a power plant to run it.
The import licence was granted and the Respondent started negotiation with the foreign supplier.
Since the price had gone up it was rather impossible for the Respondent to import both the production plant and the power plant, and if the power plant was not purchased along with the production plant, it would make the project unsound.
Hence the Respondent was in two minds whether to have the power plant or not.
Meanwhile, the above said industrial policy was announced and the Respond ent on installation of the power plant was able to start its production w.e.f. 16.2.1965.
Thereafter to formalise the matter, the Respondent corre sponded 437 with the appellant for the grant of the requisite exemption, which was rejected, and the Respondent approached the High Court by way of a petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India.
The High Court held that the Peti tioner was entitled to invoke the doctrine of promissory estoppel in order to claim exemption from payment of elec tricity duty for a period of five years from 16.2.1965 in terms of the assurance of the State Government dated 1.8.1961.
Against this order of the High Court the State has come in appeal by Special Leave.
On behalf of the appellant State it was urged that there was no occasion to invoke the doctrine of promissory estop pel, since the Respondent had not in any manner acted on the assurance of the Government to its own prejudice but on its own it was taking steps to set up a generating plant much before the industrial policy was announced.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
Whether the respondent was of one mind right from the beginning to set up a power plant, with or without the assurance of the State Government dated 1.8.1961, as asserted by the State, is neither borne out nor is the view of the High Court arrived at from the record.
On the con trary, the view taken is that the respondent 's indecision in that regard ended and it became decisive on the announcement of the assurance dated 1.8.1961.
Such view of the High Court was a possible view to be taken on the material placed before it and the inference drawn therefrom could be that the respondent had acted on the basis of the assurance.
[441E F] 2.
This Court ordinarily does not interfere with factual findings arrived at by the High Court and this case has not been shown to be an exception.
The view taken by the High Court was unexceptional warranting it to be left uninter ferred with.
[441F] 3.
Without commanding the State Government to issue such a Notification, the High Court has granted relief to the respondent to which there was no bar.
Accordingly no provi sion of Madhya Pradesh Electricity Duty Act, 1949 or any other law can be said to have been transgressed.
[442A]
