The appellants fried an Execution Application in 1970 in the Court of Munsiff under Section 13(B) of the Land Reforms Act 1969 for the restoration of the possession of the properties which were sold in Court auction in pursuance of a decree for arrears of rent.
The decree holder and Court auction purchasers were close relatives.
The sale took place on 26.11.
1962 and was confirmed on 14.8.1964.
It is the 3rd Respondent a stranger in the present appeal who purchased the property in the Court auction and got the possession of the same on 9.1.1965 from the appellants.
The appellants trespassed into the suit property again and were ejected in 1966 pursuant to a decree in a suit.
Thereafter the 3rd Respondent i.e. the auction purchaser assigned the property in favour of Respondents No. 1 & 2 who were the close rela tives vide sale deeds dated 5.12.1966 (Exts A2 and A3).
The appellants had already filed Execution Application, for restoration of possession after making necessary deposit for the purchase money under section 6 of Act 9 of 1967.
The same was pending when Act 35 of 1969 came into force and so the appellants made an application with a prayer that the earlier deposit be treated as a deposit under section 13(B) of 1969 Act.
The Court auction purchaser i.e. 3rd Respondent and his assignees Respondents No. 1 & 2 strongly contended that appellants have no interest in the properties.
The appel lants attacked the validity of the sale deeds being made without consideration.
The trial Court held that the appel lants were tenants when they were dispossessed and also held that the deposit made by the appellants was sufficient for restoration of possession, and Respondents No. 1 & 2 are not bona fide purchasers for consideration, and hence set aside the sale.
The Respondents No. 1 & 2 made application before the sub court 540 and the court held the petitioners were competent to main tain the application and were bona fide purchasers as per records such as revenue and tax receipts plus the admission of the vendor and vendee as to the payment of consideration.
As to the deposit made by the appellants it was considered to be sufficient in case they were found entitled for resto ration of possession; set aside the Trial Court order and allowed the appeal.
The appellants therefore filed E.S.A. in the High Court and the High Court upheld that the decision and the decree of the lower Appellate Court as per evidence, and as circum stances of the case complied with public records establish ing that Respondents 1 & 2 are the bona fide purchasers for consideration.
But the first appellate court concurred with the Trial Court regarding the deposit already made to be sufficient and the interest accrued would be directed to be deposited if the appellants were found entitled to restora tion of possession.
The said finding has not been dislodged by the High Court.
Allowing the Special Leave Petition, this Court, HELD: In the instant case, two substantial questions are involved i.e. (1) whether respondents 1 & 2 are bona fide purchasers of the scheduled land in dispute for adequate consideration and thereby entitled to the benefit of the proviso inserted vide Act 35 of 1969 to sec.
13(B)(1).
[547F] (2) Whether the appellants are entitled to the benefit of subsection (1) of section 13(B) of the Act.
[547F G] As per section 13(B) where any holding has been sold in execution of any decree for arrears of rent and the tenant has been dispossessed of the holding after the 1st day of April 1964 and before the commencement of the Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Act 1969, such sale shall stand set aside and such tenant shall be entitled to restoration of possession of the holding subject to the provisions of this section.
[558 B C] Provided that nothing in this sub section shah apply in any case where the holding has been sold to a bona fide purchaser for consideration after the date of such dispos session and before the date of the publication of Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Bill 1968 in the Gazettee.
[554D E] 541 The concurrent finding of facts by both the appellate courts that Respondents No. 1 & 2 are bona fide purchasers for consideration warrant interference because both the appellate courts have conveniently ignored and excluded from consideration even the relationship of the parties inter se i.e. the decree bolder, court auction purchaser are close relatives and have assigned the property in favour of their close relatives and a stranger This assumes much importance and significance in evaluating the evidence in the light of the facts and circumstances of the case for reaching satis factory conclusion.
The court has failed to render any finding on substantial question of Law.
The lack of recitals with regard to the consideration has also been completely ignored It seemed to have disposed of the case summarily.
[553B D] It is not merely the inadequacy of consideration as pointed out by the lower appellate court but there is lack of evidence in substantiating the recitals of the documents that Respondents No. 1 & 2 are bona fide purchasers.
The receipts for the payment of tax, rent or revenue are by themselves cannot dispel the claims of the appellants.
[545C] The conclusion arrived at by both the courts is only backed by assertions rather than by acceptable reasoning based on the proper evaluation of evidence.
So the evidence and circumstances of the case coupled with the evidence on record do establish that the Respondents 1 & 2 are not bona fide purchasers for consideration.
[553E F] Discretionary powers under Article 136 has to be exer cised sparingly but when there are exceptional and special circumstances justifying the exercise of discretionary powers and where manifest injustice or grave miscarriage of justice has resulted by overlooking or ignoring or excluding material evidence resulting in undue hardships, this Court will be justified in stepping in and interfering with the concurrent findings of facts in the interest of justice and it is also the duty of this Court to remedy the injustice so resulted.
Dipak Baneriee vs Lilabatichakraborty, ; , relied on.
[552H; 553A B] On the question whether the appellants are entitled to the benefit of section 13(B)(1) of the Act, it was held: [553G] The Kerala Land Reforms Act of 1963 came into force on 1.4.1964, Act 9 of 1967 was a temporary Act and remained in force till 31.12.1969, Act 35 of 1969 came into force from 1.1.1970 and section 13(B) is substantially on the same terms as section 6 of 1967 Act with a 542 proviso super added.
To invoke section 13(B) two conditions are sine qua non.
(1) Any holding to which a tenant is entitled to restoration of possession should have been sold in execution of any decree for arrears of rent.
(2) The tenant should have been dispossessed of the holding after 1.4.1964 and before the commencement of 1969 Act.
[553H; 554A C] Thus the tenant shall be entitled to restoration of possession under section 13(B) provided the holding is not sold to a bona fide purchaser for consideration, after the date of dispossession and before the publication of the Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Bill 1968 in the Gazettee.
The appellants are entitled to have the benefit of sub section (1) of section 13(B) only if they have made the deposit of the purchase money together with interest at the rate of 6% Per Annum in the Court and applied to the Court for setting aside the sale and for restoration of the hold ing.
The appellants in the instant case had already made deposit under 1967 Act and it was pending when Act 35 of 1969 came into force.
So the appellants made an application with a prayer to treat the said deposites continuation unaffected by the provisions of 1969 Act.
[554D F] The Language of section 13(B) is plain, clear and unam biguous and the very purpose of the section is to vest rights on the displaced tenants, which is the dominant purpose of the statute, which should be considered.
[554G H] P. Rami Reddy & Ors.
vs State of Andhra Pradesh & Ors.
, ; Skandia Insurance Co. Ltd. vs
Kokilaben Chandravadan & Ors., [1987] 2 SCC 654 and M/s. Doypack Systems Pvt. Ltd. vs Union of India & Ors., ; relied on.
The sale of holdings of the appellants was in execution of the decree for arrears of rent in O.S. No. 817 of 1943, and appellants are tenants who were dispossessed of the holdings after 1.4.1964 and before the commencement of 1969 Act.
They are therefore entitled to restoration of posses sion of the properties in dispute but without prejudice of the rights if any of the Respondents Nos. 7 to 10 who are the wife and children of Gopalan Nambiar.
The amount under deposit made by the appellants is permitted to be withdrawn by respondents 1 to 3.
[558B C]
