The appellant, defendant No. 1 in the suit, from which the appeal arises, and the father of defendants 2 to 7, as the highest bidders, obtained a seventeen years ' lease of a salt factory from the Government and the license to manufacture and sell salt under the Madras Salt Act, 1889.
They entered into a partnership with the plaintiffs to carry on their business for the period of the lease.
On the death of their father, defendants 2 to 7 were admitted into the partnership.
The partnership agreement made no provision for the continuation of the partnership on expiry of the lease or for the acquisition of a fresh lease on behalf of the partnership.
The lease expired, the license came to an end and the partnership stood automatically dissolved.
The Government changed its old policy of granting leases to the highest bidders and adopted one of renewing them in favour of previous lessees in whom they had confidence.
The appellant 10 74 and defendants 2 to 7 applied for the renewal of the lease that stood in their names.
The plaintiffs also applied for a grant of it to them.
No premium was called for and none had to be paid.
The Revenue Authorities chose to renew the lease in favour of the appellant and the said defendants f or a further period of 25 years.
The plaintiffs filed the suit claiming that the renewal of the lease was an asset of the dissolved partnership.
The trial Court found against them but the High Court on appeal reversed that finding.
The suit was instituted months before the renewal of the lease and years before the renewal of the license, which alone could enable the licensee to manufacture and sell salt.
The Courts below found that the allegation of the plaintiffs that the goodwill and assets of the firm had been utilised for obtaining the renewal of the lease was unfounded, as they had failed to prove that a partnership firmatall existed.
It was also found that during the last three years of the existence of the partnership, the parties had fallen apart and lost mutual confidence.
The question for decision was whether section 88 of the Indian Trusts Act applied and the renewal of the lease in favour of the appellant and the said defendants for running the salt factory could be treated as an asset of the dissolved partnership between the contesting parties.
Held, that in order that a case might be brought within the purview of section 88 of the Indian Trusts Act, it must be shown either that (1) a person had a fiduciary character and was thus in duty bound to protect the interests of others or that (2) he had placed himself in such a position as to render his interest adverse to those of the others and had thereby obtained a pecuniary interest which he must hold for their benefit as well.
As in the instant case the fiduciary character of the partners came to an end with the termination of the original lease and of the partnership business along with it, there could no longer be any subsisting interest in a partner which another was bound to protect nor could one partner be said to have availed of his character as a partner when he obtained the fresh lease.
Section 88 of the Indian Trusts Act or the illustrations (d) or (e) thereto could, therefore, have no application, nor could section go of the Act, which in terms had no application even if applied, improve the position of the plaintiffs.
No question of a constructive trust could also arise under the general law apart from the statute.
There is no absolute rule of law or equity in England that renewal of a lease by one partner must necessarily enure to the benefit of all the partners.
There is, however, a presumption of fact that there is an equity in favour of the renewal of the lease enuring to the benefit of all the partners.
Such a presumption may be rebutted by the facts of a particular case.
The Indian law as enacted in the Indian Trusts Act, and particularly sections 88 and go of that Act, is substantially the same.
In the instant case, the facts and circumstances amply rebut that presumption.
75 Featherstonhaugh vs Fenwick, ; , Clegg vs Fishwick; , , Clements vs Hall, ; , Clegg vs Edmondson, ; , In Ye Biss, Biss vs Biss, and Griffith vs Owen, [1907] I Ch. 195, G considered.
