The appellant, an officer of Bihar State, filed a writ petition before the High Court, challenging the order of compulsory retirement passed by the respondent State, under Rule 74(b)(ii) of Bihar Service Code, 1979, contending that throughout his service of 30 years he had an exemplary service career and his integrity remained unquestionable and that neither any adverse remarks were communicated to him nor any departmental proceedings were initiated against him, nor any explanation called for from him.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition by a laconic order.
In the appeal, by special leave, the appellant contended that though the order was couched in innocuous terms and made in compliance with the provisions of Rule 74(b)(ii) of Bihar Service Code on appellant 's reaching the age of more than 50 years, and prima facie not appearing to cast any stigma, it was not made in public interest, but made by way of punishment for oblique purposes, in consideration of extraneous matter and purporting to removal from service on certain serious allegations of misconduct, casting a stigma, and hence the order was illegal, bad and in violation of audi alterem partem rule and Article 311(2) of the Constitu tion and was liable to be quashed.
On behalf of the respondent State it was contended that the order had been made in public interest under Rule 74(b)(ii) and there was nothing to show from the order itself that it had been made by way of punishment, casting a stigma, the language of the order was innocuous, and the appellant could not delve into the secretariat files, to find out the basis of the order.
680 Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.1 Even though the order of compulsory retirement is couched in innocuous language without making imputations against the government servant, who is directed to be com pulsorily retired from service, the Court, if challenged, in appropriate cases can lift the veil to find out whether the order is based on any misconduct of the government servant concerned or the order has been made bona fide and not with any oblique or extraneous purposes.
Mere form of the order in such cases cannot deter the Court from delving into the basis of the order if the order in question is challenged by the concerned government servant.
[693F G] Shamsher Singh & Anr.
vs State of Punjab, and Anoop Jaiswal vs Government of India and Am '.
, ; , relied on.
Shyam Lalv.
The State of U. P. & Anr., ; ; Baldev Raj Chadha vs Union of India and Ors., ; and Union of India vs Col. J.N. Sinha and Anr., [1971] 1 SCR 791, referred to.
I.N. Saxsena vs The State of Madhya Pradesh, ; , distinguished.
1.2 The object of Rule 74(b)(ii) of the Bihar Service Code is to get rid of the government servant who has become dead wood.
This order is made only to do away with service of only those employees who have lost their utility, become useless and whose further continuance in service is consid ered not to be in public interest.
[655D] 1.3 In the instant case, the appellant had an unblem ished career, and undoubtedly by dint of merit and flawless service career, had been promoted to the post of Joint Director and ultimately to the post of General Manager.
The counter affidavit filed on behalf of the respondent State has categorically stated that while passing the order of compulsory retirement the officers concerned were guided by the report dated September 19, 1987 which stated that the appellant was responsible for grave and serious financial irregularities resulting in financial loss to the State Government, without giving any opportunity of hearing and without intimating allegations to the appellant before forming the opinion.
The memorandum in question has clearly stated that the order of compulsory retirement was made as the appellant 's misconduct tarnished the image of the Gov ernment in the public.
This categorical 681 statement clearly proves that the basis of making the order is the report dated September 19, 1987.
Therefore, the order of compulsory retirement cannot be defended on the mere plea that it has been made in accordance with the provisions of Rule 74(b)(ii) which prima facie does not make any imputa tion or does not cast any stigma on the career of the appel lant.
[657E, 689F H, 690A, 693H, 694A] In view of the clear and specific averments made by the respondent State that the order has been made under Rule 74(b)(ii) as the appellant was found to have committed grave financial irregularities leading to financial loss to the State, the order cannot but be said to have been made by way of punishment.
Such an order is in contravention of Article 311 of the Constitution and arbitrary as it violates princi ples of natural justice.
It has not been made bona fide, but for collateral purposes and for extraneous consideration by way of punishment and is, therefore, illegal, unwarranted and liable to be quashed.
[694A B, C] Accordingly the order of compulsory retirement is set aside and the respondents are directed to reinstate the appellant with full back wages.
[694D]
