Two persons, B and C, formed a partnership firm on April 20, 1936, and the firm was dissolved on March 31, 1948.
I and C along with R formed a second firm on July 30, 1941, and it was dissolved on March 31, 1949.
B and C along with five others formed a third firm on December 1, 1941, and it was dissolved on January 1, 1949.
All the three firms were carrying on business in yarn and cloth and all of them were registered under section 26 A of the Income tax Act.
For the years 1943 44 and 1944 45 tile said firms were treated as separate entities and separate assessment orders were passed in respect of the income of each one of them for the said years.
Subsequently, the Income tax Officer served notices under section 34 Of the Act on C on behalf of the firms and after hearing the parties he held that the firms were fictitious and so cancelled their registration under r. 6B of the Income tax Rules and passed fresh orders of assessment against them on the basis that they were unregistered firms.
One Y who was a partner in the third firm and C filed four writ petitions under article 226 of the Constitution in the High Court challenging the validity of the orders passed.
The High Court dismissed the petitions but granted certificates of fitness to appeal 190 under article 133.
The appellants contended that r. 6B was inconsistent with section 23(4) of the Act and was ultra vires, that consequently the cancellation of registration of the firms was without jurisdiction and was void and that the proceedings taken under section 34 Of the Act were invalid as the required notice was not issued against the individual partners who were the assesses.
Held, that r. 6B of the Income tax Rules was not inconsis tent with section 23(4) Of the Act and was not ultra vires.
Rule 6B dealt with cancellation of registration in cases where the certificate of registration had been granted without there being a genuine firm in existence, while section 23(4) dealt with cancellation of registration on account of failure to comply with the requirements of law, though the registered firm was genuine.
Rule 6B was obviously intended to carry out the purpose of the Act and was valid.
The fact that no appeal had been provided against an order made under r. 6B was no ground for challenging its validity.
It was also not open to the appellants to contend that the orders passed under section 6B were invalid on the ground that the rule did not require the giving of any notice before the can cellation of registration as in the present case notice had actually been given and the appellants had been afforded an opportunity of being heard.
Held, further, that in the cases of registered firms, the firms themselves were the assessees and as such the notices issued under section 34 against the firms and served upon C were valid and proper notices, :and it was not necessary to serve notices upon the individual partners of the firms.
The notice prescribed by section 34 was not a mere procedural requirement.
If no notice was issued or if the notice issued was shown to be invalid then the proceedings taken by the Income tax Officer would be illegal and void.
Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay City vs Ramsukh Motilal, and R. K. Das & Co. vs Commissioncy of Income tax, West Bengal, , approved.
The contention that the assessments were completely illogical and therefore illegal could not be urged in a petition under article 226 of the Constitution since it did not raise any question of jurisdiction.
