The respondent college, a religions minority institu tion, invited application for the post of Principal from candidates possessing First or Second class Master 's Degree, five years teaching experience and possession of working knowledge of Urdu.
The Selection Committee selected the appellant by relaxing the qualification of experience in her favour but the University declined its approval to the appointment under Section 31(11) of the Uttar Pradesh State Universities Act, 1973 and directed the Management Committee to readvertise the post.
The appellant challenged the University 's decision before the High Court contending that the college being a minority institution any interference by the University under the Act was violative of Article 30(1) of the Consti tution and that there was no justification to withhold the approval.
The High Court rejected the attack on the ground of Article 30 by holding that the provisions of the Act were regulatory but held that the Selection Committee was not justified in relaxing the qualification and that the quali fication 'possessing working knowledge of Urdu ' was unjust.
Hence this appeal by special leave.
700 Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
In the absence of statutory rules providing power of relaxation, the advertisement must indicate that the Selection Committee/Appointing Authority has the power to relax the qualifications.
The High Court has rightly held the relaxation granted by the Selection Committee to be arbitrary.
[702B] 2.
The college being a Muslim minority institution, the prescribing of the qualification of possession working knowledge of Urdu for the post of Principal, is in.
conform ity with the object of establishing the institution.
The said qualification is not unjust.
[702B] [In the interest of justice and in view of the facts and circumstances of the case, the Lucknow University and its Vice Chancellor are directed to grant the necessary approval to the appointment of the appellant to the post of Principal of College, which the appellant is holding as a result of the Court orders, with effect from the date she is holding the said post, and the appellant shah be entitled to salary, allowances and all other consequential benefits to which a regular Principal of the said college would have been enti tled.] [702G]
