Sub rule 3(a) of rule 3 of the Andhra Pradesh (Roads and Buildings) Engineering Service Rules, 1965 prescribes that the substantive vacancies in the category of Assistant Engineers 37 1/2 per cent shall be filled up by direct recruitment and the remaining 62 1/2 per cent by transfer and promotion of junior officers.
In K. Siva Reddy vs State of Andhra Pradesh, ; , filed by direct recruits, the Court had directed the State Government to ascertain the exact sub stantive vacancies in the category of Assistant Engineers in the service as on December 31, 1982, work out the quota prescribed under rule 3(3)(a) of the Rules and draw up a seniority list accordingly.
In the draft seniority list drawn up by the State Gov ernment on the basis of the guidelines, it placed the 1982 direct recruits from serial Nos.
234 to 269 without disturb ing promotees upto serial No. 233 and the remainder of promotees given promotion prior to 1982 were placed against serial Nos. 270 to 300.
In C. Radhakrishna Reddy vs State of A.P., W.P. No. 369 of 1989 decided on November 10, 1989 the Court found the said list in accord with the directions.
In these writ petitions preferred by the promotee As sistant Engineers, it was contended for them that serious injustice had been done to them as the accrued rights of theirs had been disturbed and some of the direct recruits had been given the benefit of seniority above them by count ing service prior to their actual recruitment.
Dismissing the writ petitions, the Court, HELD: 1.
A Government servant is justified in taking legal action 704 when he feels that a stigma or punishment is undeserved but he is expected to bear with fortitude and reconcile to his lot suppressing disappointment when he finds a co worker raised to a position which he himself aspired after.
[707G] Dr. G. Marulasiddaiah vs Dr. T.G. Siddapparadhya & Ors., ; , referred to.
In K. Siva Reddy 's case, the Court had taken a very equitable view in not disturbing the regularisation contrary to the quota and had taken every care to ensure that the cause of justice was not made to suffer and a balance was maintained by an appropriate admixture of relief by confin ing the reconsideration for a period after 1982.
The year 1982 was fixed on account of two features, (i) that regular disputes had been raised from that time, and (ii) a period of 5 6 years was not too long a period to give rise to a sense of conclusiveness generated by long lapse of time.
The promotee engineers should have been happy and thankful to their lot that their regularisation was not disturbed and even seniority prior to 1982 was not being affected though they had acquired these benefits out of turn.
[707C E]
