The respondent employees, are Traffic Apprentices be longing to Class III Railway service which has four grades carrying different payscales.
Above Class III posts, are Class II and Class I posts.
The entire Class II service was filled by promotion by selection from Class III service.
The Class III service in the Traffic and Transportation Depart ment consisted not only of Traffic Apprentices but also of other categories.
However, the promotion to Class II post was not made exclusively from Class III service of the said Department, but the incumbents of Class III service in the Commercial Department were also entitled to be considered for promotion.
Consequently, a combined seniority list of Class III service both of the Traffic and Transportation Department as well as the Commercial Department, was main tained.
The promotions to further posts, viz., to Class I posts were thereafter made from the incumbents of Class II posts.
In Class I service, 60 per cent posts were filled by direct recruitment and 40 per cent by promotion from Class II service.
The appointment to the posts of Traffic Apprentices was by direct 770 recruitment to the extent of 25% and this quota was to be carried forward in the case of shortfall in any particular year.
The remaining 75% of the vacancies were earmarked to other departmental officials for promotion who were called rankers.
Subsequently, both the sources of recruitment were merged and a new single unified cadre of "Relieving Trans portation Assistants" was constituted.
The respondents filed a writ petition in the High Court challenging the seniority list in the aforesaid newly con stituted cadre on the ground that their seniority in the newly constituted cadre was not correctly fixed according to quota rota rule of 25:75 either because the quota rule was not observed properly or the unfilled vacancies in the 25% quota reserved for them were not carried forward since 1954 onwards.
A single judge of the High Court rejected the petition on the ground of laches.
On appeal, the Division Bench set aside the decision of the single judge on the question of laches and directed the Railway Administration to draw a revised seniority list.
Against the decision of the Division Bench, the Railways preferred a Special Leave Petition in this Court which was dismissed.
Accordingly, the Railways prepared a fresh sen iority list in 1976.
Since the said seniority list took care of the grievances only of the employees who were parties to the petition, some of the Traffic Apprentices fried an application before the Central Administrative Tribunal for a direction to quash the seniority list of 1976 and to prepare a fresh seniority list.
In the meanwhile pursuant to the directions of the High Court the Railways prepared a fresh seniority list in 1983 superseding the seniority list of 1976.
The Tribunal disposed of the application by its order dated June 25, 1986 by directing that the seniority list of 1983 shall be acted upon, and that the confirmations and promotions be made on the basis of that list.
Consequently the Railways worked out the promotions upto and inclusive of Class II posts.
Subsequently the respondent fried a contempt petition before the Tribunal contending that full effect had not been given to its judgment dated June 25, 1986.
The Tribunal by its order dated 14th September, 1986 held that the respond ents are entitled to further promotions to Class II and Class I; and are entitled to emoluments on such higher posts with retrospective effect.
Hence this appeal by the Railways 771 against the Tribunal 's order dated 14th September, 1986.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
The Tribunal has gone beyond the scope of the original petition while dealing with the contempt petition.
The promotions to Class II and above were not the subject matter of the writ petition before the High Court, and in its direction the High Court said nothing about the promo tions to Class II service.
However, the appellant Railways worked out the promotions to Class ii service on the basis of the new seniority list of class Iii service of the year 1983 under which the respondents have gained substantially.
Therefore, the respondents are not entitled to claim as a matter of right promotions to any higher posts.
This Court, however, does not desire to make any observations which will come in their way if the Union Public Service Commission is inclined to look into the matter.
[780D G] 2.
The entitlement of the respondents to the higher grades in Class111 posts as per the directions of the High Court was on the basis of quota and rota rule, which in itself is both inequitable and irrational.
Time and again, the rule has been criticised on account of the absurd result to which it leads, viz., the deemed appointments have to be given to the concerned employees even from the dates when they were not in service and probably when they were still in their schools and colleges.
[780H; 781A B] In the instant case, this is the situation with respect to some of the respondents.
The quota and rota rule had to be worked out from the year 1954 as per the directions of the High Court and the Tribunal.
There is, therefore, nei ther equity nor justice in favour of the respondents to award them emoluments of the higher posts with retrospective effect.
[781B C] P.S. Mahal & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; , held inapplicable.
2.1 On the principle of "no work no pay", the respond ents will not also be entitled to the higher salary as they have not actually worked in the said posts.
[781F]
