In the 1987 election to Kerala Legislative Assembly the appellant contested against the first respondent.
The appellant and respondents belonged to two different fronts, each consisting of several political parties.
The appellant was declared elected, by a margin of 1873 votes over his nearest rival, the first respondent.
The first respondent filed an election petition in the High Court claiming that the appellant 's election was void and that he should be declared elected in place of the appellant.
In support of his contention, he alleged various corrupt practices on the part of the appellant.
The High Court negatived all except two of the allegations, viz., (i) printing and publication on March 22, 1987, a day prior to the election, pamphlets containing a news item in daily "Malayala Manorama" dated May 22, 1983, and (ii) publication of a wail poster, maligning the 720 personal character and conduct of the first respondent.
The High Court held that both the said acts amounted to corrupt practices within the meaning of Section 123(4) of the Representation of People Act, 1951 and were sufficient to void the election.
This appeal under section 116A of the Representation of People Act, is against the High Court 's judgment.
Allowing the appeal, this court, HELD: 1.1.
As regards the pamphlets, the first respond ent in his election petition had relied upon an innuendo, and the innuendo was based upon the fact that, firstly, he was a Marxist leader and, secondly, he was arrested for harbouring the murderers.
However, in the election petition, no averment was made that it was because he was a Marxist leader and was also arrested for harbouring the murderers that the electorate was likely to construe the said two statements as accusing him as the murderer.
No facts were pleaded in the Election Petition whereby the electorate would gather an impression that the first respondent was the murderer of the said four victims.
[733B C; 746 E F] 1.2.
Barring his own testimony, all other evidence led by the first respondent is also totally silent on this aspect of the matter.
None of his witnesses has stated anywhere that the contents of the pamphlet had made out the first respondent as the murderer of the four victims or even that they were capable of doing so.
On the other hand, all his witnesses without exception are unanimous that after reading the pamphlet the impression it created on them was that it referred to an incident which had taken place on the previous day or to an earlier incident and nothing more.
None of the witnesses has stated that the said pamphlet even remotely connected the first respondent with the murders.
The impression conveyed by the document that the Marxists or Communists were murderers and therefore the electorate should not vote for them and hence it was unfavourable to the first respondent, was not an impression about his per sonal character/ conduct.
It was an impression at best about his political character/ conduct.
In particular there was no impression that he was the murderer or one of the murderers.
Although the first respondent has also added at the end that many persons who gathered such an impression, viz., that he was meant by the publication, had contacted him over phone, he admitted that he did not examine anyone from among the said persons.
This is a telling circumstance against him because he had 721 followed as a witness after all his witnesses were examined, and he knew that none of his witnesses had stated that they had connected the imputations in the publication with him.
On the other hand, as stated earlier, not only all his witnesses had stated that they had gathered the impression that the incident had taken place the previous day but he himself was of the view that the publication was meant to create such impression and that it did so.
Hence, there was no reason for the electorate to connect him with the said incident even remotely.
On his own testimony as well as on the testimony of his witnesses, therefore, it is clear that the publication was intended to create an impression and did create an impression that the incident of murders had taken place a day previous to the election.
If that is so, then the publication and the two allegedly offending statements in the same did not connect him with the murders much less had they called him a murderer.
Even his arrest for harbour ing the accused in the old incident of murders was not capable of identifying him as the murderer in the eyes of the people.
None knew who were the accused and who were arrested in connection with the murders which were committed the previous day.
The people, however, certainly knew that the first respondent was not arrested in connection with the said murders.
Hence the extrinsic facts which the first respondent stated in his testimony for the first time even if they were given in the pleadings would not have spelt out the corrupt practice.
For those facts in the face of the assertion of the first respondent himself were incapable of identifying him as the murderer in the eyes of the elector ate.
For these reasons, the extrinsic facts given for the first time by the first respondent in his testimony were incapable of identifying him as the hand behind the murders or as the murderer in the eyes of the people.
[746F H; 751A B; 755D H; 756A B] 1.3.
In the absence of the extrinsic facts supporting the innuendo meaning of the publication, the petition lacked the statement of material facts for spelling out the corrupt practice complained of.
Either, therefore, the allegation of the corrupt practice should have been struck off or the petitioner ought not to have been allowed to lead evidence in support of it.
[756C] 2.1.
Where the defamatory words complained of are not defamatory in the natural or ordinary meaning, or in other words, they are not defamatory per se but are defamatory because of certain special or extrinsic facts which are in the knowledge of particular persons to whom they are ad dressed, such innuendo meaning has to be pleaded and proved specifically by giving the particulars of the said extrinsic facts.
It is immaterial in such cases as to whether the action is for 722 defamation or for corrupt practice in an election matter, for in both cases it is the words complained of together with the extrinsic facts which constitute the cause of action.
It is true that Section 123(4) of the Act states that the statement of fact in question must be "reasonably calculated to prejudice the prospects" of the complaining candidate 's election.
However, unless it is established that the words complained of were capable of being construed as referring to the personal character or conduct of the candi date because of some specific extrinsic facts or circum stances which are pleaded and proved, it is not possible to hold that they were reasonably calculated to prejudice his prospects in the elections.
For, in the absence of the knowledge of the special facts on the part of the elector ate, the words complained of cannot be held to be reasonably calculated to prejudice such prospects.
Once, however, it is proved by laying the foundation of facts that the words in question were, by virtue of the knowledge of the special facts, likely to be construed by the electorate as referring to the personal character or conduct of the complaining candidate, it may not further be necessary to prove that in fact the electorate had understood them to be so.
That is because all that Section 123(4) requires is that the person publishing the complaining words must have intended and reasonably calculated to affect the prospects of the com plaining candidate in the election.
[745E H; 746A B] 2.2.
Whenever an innuendo is alleged, a statement of material facts as required by Section 83(i)(a) of the Act is not complete without stating the extrinsic facts spelling out the innuendo meaning.
It is the publication together with the extrinsic facts which in such circumstances consti tute the corrupt practice.
The absence of the statement of such facts is not an absence of the particulars of corrupt practice but an absence of the averment of material facts themselves.
Sheopat Singh vs Ram Pratap, ; ; Kumara Nand vs Brijmohan Lal Sharma, ; ; Habib Bhai vs Pyarelal & Ors., AIR 1964 MP 62; Manmohan Kalia vs Yash & Ors.
, ; ; W. Hay & Ors.
vs Aswini Kumar Saman ta, AIR 1958 Cal. 269; Hough vs London Express Newspaper Ltd., ; Fullam vs Newscastle Chronicle and Journal Ltd. & Anr., ; Cassidy vs Daily Mirror Newspapers, ; Nevill vs Fine Art and General Insurance Co. Ltd., and Capital and Counties Bank Ltd. vs George Henty & Sons, , referred to.
Halsbury 's Laws of England, Vol. 28, 4th Edn. paras 174 178; Gatley on Libel and Slander, 8th Edn.
paragraph 95; Street on Torts, 723 6th Edn., p. 294 and Duncan & Neil on Defamation, [1978] Edn., p. 17, referred to.
Both, for libel action as well as for an allegation of corrupt practice in an election petition, it is necessary to plead as well as to prove the extrinsic facts to spell out the innuendo meaning of the words complained of.
Howev er, whereas in a libel action it may further be necessary to prove that those with special knowledge of the extrinsic facts were likely to interpret or understand the words complained of in a defamatory sense, in an election action, it may not be necessary to do so and all that is necessary is to prove that the words complained of were reasonably calculated to prejudice the prospects of the defamed candi date 's election.
However, this latter distinction does not obliterate the similarity between the two actions viz., that in each case in the first instance the defamation is to be spelt out by pleading the necessary extrinsic facts.
In a libel action, the extrinsic facts constitute a cause of action whereas in the election action they constitute the corrupt practice.
In other words, without them, there is no cause of action in the libel suit and no allegation of corrupt practice in an election petition.
[756F H; 757A] 4.1.
As regards the wail posters in which the first respondent was described as a murderer and it is stated that hence he should be defeated, the first respondent in his petition has stated generally that it was the appellant, his agents and his workers who had pasted the wallposters.
He has not specified any wail or wails on which the poster was pasted.
He has not mentioned either the agent or the elec tion agent nor did he state that the pasting was done with the knowledge and consent of the election agent.
It is important to note that he mentioned the pasting of the poster only on one wail, though there was a vague reference to "walls".
[761F H; 765B] 4.2.
Time and again, the courts have uttered a warning against the acceptance of a non corroborted oral testimony in an election matter because it is not only difficult to get a non partisan witness but is also easy to procure partisan witnesses in such disputes.
The courts have, there fore, insisted upon some contemporaneous documentary evi dence to corroborate the oral testimony when in particular such evidence could have been maintained.
Such a danger is illustrated by the testimony of PW. 25 in the instant case.
It is not only contradictory, and fails to impress this court but also leads to the belief that there is much force in the contention of the appellant that the poster in ques tion was concocted at a later day.
It is difficult to ex plain as to why the witness a 724 professional photographer who in the ordinary course should maintain his accounts and other documents should keep them off from the court on pretexts which are not only far from convincing but positively doubtful.
Although he stated that he was paid Rs.8,00 for the photographs and Rs.1,000 for copies thereof, he did not enter the amounts in his ac counts.
He stated that he had a Bank account but he did not remit the amount to the Bank.
He then stated that in his studio there would be no record to show that the photographs were taken.
He also stated that he had not given any receipt for receiving the payment.
[764G H; 767A D] 4.3. "Election agent" as defined in Section 40 of the Act is accorded a special status of almost an alter ego of the candidate so much so that whatever is done by the elec tion agent or with his consent is deemed to have been done by the candidate himself whether it is with the candidate 's consent or not.
He is empowered to discharge almost all the functions that a Candidate can himself perform.
1729E FI 4.4.
It was alleged that the wall poster was written at the specific instructions of the Chief Agent and the Conven or.
It was not specified who the Chief Agent and the Conven or of the Election Committee were.
The argument that the expression "Chief Agent" should be construed to mean elec tion agent, cannot be accepted since the pleadings with regard to corrupt practice have to be specific since every one who is guilty of the corrupt practice is liable to be prosecuted for the offence.
And except in one place, there is no reference to any such person as Chief Agent.
Wherever the first respondent wanted to refer to the election agent, he has done so.
It cannot, therefore, be said that he did not know the difference between the election agent and the Chief Agent.
[762B E] 4.5.
The first respondent has come to the court with a version that the wail poster and such other posters were pasted on wails in the different parts of the constituency at least a week prior to the election.
Admittedly, such false propaganda is an electoral offence punishable both under Section 127A of the Act and Section 171 C of the Indian Penal Code.
The first respondent or his agents and workers could have made complaints both to the Election Officer as well as to the police in that connection immedi ately, and a regular panchnama of the same could ,also have been made at the time.
That would have been the best evi dence of the said allegation.
The first respondent and his workers would not have failed to do so had the posters been pasted at the time alleged by them.
[767E F] 725
