The appellants had given the highest offers for certain specified plots for lease in response to invitation by public tender by the respondent Corporation a Government Company, and complied with the requirements of deposit.
The respondent, however, rejected the said offers without as signing any reason.
The appellants challenged the action of the respondent before the High Court as arbitrary, unconstitutional and contrary to rule of law.
The High Court, dismissed the writ petitions in limine.
In these appeals by special leave, it was contended for the appellants that the respondent Corporation was a 'State ' under Article 12 of the Constitution, that the power of rejection of offers without assigning any reason was unregu lated and unfettered, contrary to the requirement of rule of law, and that it was in the interest of the public authority itself, the State and everyone in the society at large that reasons for State action are placed on record and or even communicated to the persons from whom the offers came.
827 Dismissing the appeals, the Court, HELD: 1.
The respondent No. 1 was 'State ' within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution and in its deal ings with the citizens of India, it would be required to act within the ambit of rule of law and would not be permitted to conduct its activities arbitrarily.
[829B C] R.D. Shetty vs International Airport Authority of India Sehravardi; , , referred to. 2.
The State is certainly entitled to look for the best deal in regard to its properties.
In the instant case, there was no allegation of mala fides in the conduct of respondent No. 1 in refusing to accept the highest offers.
It could, therefore, be presumed that in so doing the respondent had been actuated by the consideration of looking for better offers for the specific plots in its economic interest.
There was thus no arbitrariness in respondent trying to get proper price for its plots.
[829E F, 828E F] 3.
When highest offers of commercial nature are rejected reasons sufficient to indicate the stand of the public authority should be made available and the same should be communicated to the concerned parties unless there be any specific justification not to do so.
That would assure credibility to the action, discipline public conduct and improve the culture of accountability and provide an oppor tunity for an objective review in appropriate cases both by the administrative superior and by the judicial process.
[830F G, E F] State of U.P. vs Raj Narain & Ors., ; , re ferred to.
