The appellant, who was a candidate for election to Parlia ment, signed a very large number of blank forms for the appointment of polling agents and made them over to one Kalyan Singh.
Kalyan Singh passed on three of the forms to Kashmira Singh after inserting therein the name of a particular polling station.
Kashmira Singh filled in the name of Amar Singh as the polling agent in one of these three forms and gave it to Amar Singh, who, duly signed the form, filed it before the presiding officer of the polling station and acted as the appellant 's polling agent.
Amar Singh was a member of the armed forces but this fact was not known to the appellant or to Kashmira Singh or Kalyan Singh.
After the poll the appellant was declared elected but on an election petition being filed his election was set aside on the ground that he had committed the corrupt practice of procuring the assistance of a person in the service of the Government.
The appellant contended that Amar Singh had not been duly appointed as the appellant 's polling agent as neither the appellant nor his election agent had made the appointment, and that the appellant could not be held guilty of the corrupt practice for he did not know that Amar Singh was in the service of the Government and consequently did not have the necessary mens Yea.
214 Held, that the appellant did appoint Amar Singh as his polling agent by personally signing the appointment form.
The fact that the name of the polling agent was written in the form by another person after the appellant had signed it does not make it an appointment by the other person.
Held, further, that the appellant was guilty of the corrupt practice inasmuch as he appointed Amar Singh as his polling agent and Amar Singh by acting as the polling agent assisted in the furtherance of the prospects of the appellant 's election.
A presumption arises under section 123(7) Explanation (2) that the appellant by so doing procured Amar Singh 's assistance in furtherance of the prospects of his election, irrespective of whether he intended to procure such assistance or not.
The knowledge of the appellant whether the person whose assistance he procured was a person in the service of the Government or not was irrelevant.
Mens rea was not a necessary ingredient of the corrupt practice.
