On 9.6.1936 the predecessor in interest of the respond ents executed a lease deed in favour of the predecessor in interest of the appellant, for a period of 15 years.
The property leased out was vacant land, well and Kaichalai, and the lessee was permitted to construct on the vacant land and install petrol selling business.
It was further stipulated that after the expiry of the lease period the lessee shall at his own expense remove the structure put up by him and deliver possession of the vacant land together with well and Kaichalai.
The lease was extended from time to time.
The lessor had filed petitions in 1962 and 1979 to evict the lessee under the Madras Buildings (lease and Rent Control) Act, 1950 but without success.
Thereafter, in 1979 the present respondents instituted a petition for eviction of the lessee on the ground of demolition and reconstruc tion, and of wilful denial of title, within the meaning of Sections 14(1)(b) and 10(2)(vii) of the Tamil Nadu Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act.
In the meantime, the provisions of the Tamil Nadu City Tenants ' Protection Act, 1922 were extended to the municipal limits of Udamalpettai.
Taking advantage of this, the lessee filed petition claiming the benefit of compulsory purchase conferred on tenants of land under the said Act.
The Dis trict Munsif cum Rent Controller allowed the lessor 's peti tion for eviction and dismissed the lessee 's petition for compulsory purchase.
The Sub Judge dismissed the appeals.
The lessee fried two revision petitions before the High Court which declined to interfere.
Before this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that the original lease comprised only of the vacant site, well and Kaichalai; the kaichalai was merely in the nature of a shed put up for the tethering 783 of cattle and it was not a 'building ' within the meaning of Section 2(2) of the Rent Control Act; though the small Kaichalai was situated in a corner of the site, the lease intended by the parties was only that of the site.
It was further contended that where a lease was a composite one of land and buildings, the court had to address itself to the primary or dominant intention of the parties; if the inten tion was to lease a building the lease of land being ad junct or incidental, the Rent Control Act would apply; on the other hand, if the dominant intention was to lease a site the presence of a building thereon not being consid ered material by either party the lease would not be one of a 'building ' covered by the Rent Control Act.
Larsen & Toubro case ; , relied upon.
On behalf of the respondents it was contended that, in the case of a composite lease; the existence of a building or hut on the land (howsoever small, insignificant or use less it may be) was sufficient per se to bring the lease within the scope of the Rent Control Act.
Irani vs Chidambaram Chettiar, AIR 1953 Madras 650 and Salay Mohd. Sait vs
J.M.S. Charity, [1969] 1 MLJ SC 16, relied upon.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court, HELD: (1) The Tamil word "kaichalai" seems to denote a structure or a roof put up by hand.
Whatever may be the precise meaning of the term, the definition in Section 2(2) of the Rent Act clearly includes the 'kaichalai ' in the present case.
[789D] (2) Since the Rent Act applies to residential and non residential buildings alike, the expression 'hut ' cannot be restricted only to huts or cottages intended to be lived in.
It will also take in any shed, hut or other crude or third class construction consisting of an enclosure made of mud or by poles supporting a tin or asbestos roof that can be put to use for any purpose, residential or non residential, in the same manner as any other first class construction.
[789E F] (3) In the case of composite lease of land and building, a question may well arise whether the lease is one of land although there is a small building or hut (which does not really figure in the transaction) or of a lease of the building (in which the lease of land is incidental) or a lease of both regardless of their respective dimensions.
[790G] 784 (4) It is not always necessary that there should be a dominant intention swaying the parties.
There may be cases where all that is intended is a joint lease of both the land and the building without there being any consideration sufficient to justify spelling out an intention to give primacy to the land or the building.
The test of dominant intention or purpose may not be very helpful in such cases in the context of this legislation.
[791F; 792B] Sivarajan vs Official Receiver, AIR 1953 Trav.
Co. 105; Nagamony vs Tiruchittambalam, AIR 1953 Trav.
Co. 369; Offi cial Trustee vs United Commercial Syndicate, ; Raj Narain vs Shiv Raj Saran, AIR ; Ven kayya vs Subba Rao, AIR 1957 AP 619; Uttam Chand vs Lalwani, AIR 1965 SC 716 and Dwarka Prasad vs Dwarkadas, ; (5) In the context of this case, we should be guided not by any theory of dominant purpose but by the consideration as to whether the parties intended that the building and land should go together or whether the lessor could have intended to let out the land without the building.
[794B] Sultan Bros. P. Ltd. vs C.I.T., ; , referred to.
(6) Having regard to all the facts and circumstances, the correct inference appears to be that what the lessor intended was a lease of both the land and the building, this being a composite lease with a composite purpose.
In these circumstances, this letting would come in within the scope of Rent Control Act.
[795C] (7) Where a person leases a building together with land, it seems impermissible in the absence of clear intention spelt out in the deed, to dissect the lease as (a) of build ing and appurtenant land covered by the Rent Control Act and (b) of land alone governed by other relevant statutory provisions.
What the parties have joined, the court cannot tear as under.
[796B]
