The petitioner filed a writ petition in this Court under Article 32 of the Constitution of India by way of public interest litigation seeking directions for (i) inquiry against police officials under whose jurisdiction the malady of forced prostitution, Devdasi system and Jogin traditions were flourishing and (ii) for rehabilitiation of the victims of this malady.
Disposing the writ petition, this Court.
HELD: 1.
The malady of prostitution is not only a social but also a socio economic problem and, therefore, the meas ures to be taken in that regard should be more preventive rather than punitive.
This cannot be 862 eradicated either by banishing, branding, scourging or inflicting severe punishment on the helpless and hapless victims most of whom are unwilling participants, and invol untary victims of compelled circumstances and who, finding no way to escape, are weeping or wailing throughout.
This devastating malady can be suppressed and eradicated only if the law enforcing authorities in that regard take very severe and speedy action against all the erring persons such as pimps, brokers and brothel keepers.
[867D; E G] 2.
In spite of the stringent and rehabilitative provi sions of law contained in Constitution of India, 1950, the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956, Indian Penal Code, 1860 and the Juvenile Justice Act, 1986, it cannot be said that the desired result has been achieved.
It cannot be gainsaid that a remarkable degree of ignorance or callous ness or culpable indifference is manifested in uprooting this cancerous growth despite the fact that the day has arrived imperiously demanding an objective multi dimensional study and a searching investigation into the matter relating to the causes and effects of this evil and requiring the most rational measures to weed out the vices of illicit trafficking.
[867C D] 3.
The Courts also in such cases have to always take a serious view of this matter and inflict consign punishment on proof of such offences.
However, it is neither practica ble and possible nor desirable to make a roving enquiry through the C.B.I. throughout the length and breadth of the country.
and no useful purpose will be served by issuing any such direction.
[867G; 867E] 4.
Apart from legal action, both the Central and the State Governments have got an obligation to safeguard the interest and welfare of the children and girls of this country.
[867H] Lakshmi Kant Pandey vs Union of India, and Guarav Jain vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; , referred to.
All the State Governments and the Governments of Union Territories should direct their concerned law enforc ing authorities to take appropriate and speedy action under the existing laws in eradicating child prostitution without giving room for any complaint of remissness or culpable indifference.
They should also set up separate Advisory Committees for making suggestions for eradication of prosti tution, implementation of the social welfare programmes for the care, protection, treatment, development and rehabilita tion of the victims, and for 863 amendments of the existing law, or for enactment of any new law for prevention of sexual exploitation of the children.
These Governments should also devise a machinery for ensur ing proper implementation of the suggestions of their re spective committees.
[868D H; 869A E]
