The petitioners are social workers and Members of Kisan Adivasi Sangathan, Kerala.
They, alongwith a large number of tribal people, had staged peaceful 'dharnas ' in front of the office of Block Education Officer demanding appointment of regular teachers in the school located in the tribal ham lets.
The local police initiated criminal proceedings against them for offences punishable under section 186 IPC on the allegations that they had obstructed public servants in discharge of their public functions.
The Magistrate convicted petitioners 1 to 3 and sentenced them to undergo simple imprisonment for a period of one month.
The petition ers 1 and 2 though having served their one month imprison ment from 22.4.1989 to 21.5.1989 were not released from jail but continued to be detained on the allegation that they were wanted in two more cases.
In the writ petitions filed in this Court the main grievance was that petitioners 1 to 3 on being arrested were subjected to torture and treated in a degrading and inhuman manner by handcuffing and parading them through the public thoroughfare during transit to the Court.
in utter disregard to the judicial mandates of this Court.
On these allegations the petitioners contended that they were entitled to compen sation.
The respondents have not denied the allegation of hand cuffing.
but have attempted to justify the action of the escort police.
In this connection.
the respondents have relied on Paragraph 465(1) of Part III dealing with escort ing of arrested and convicted persons (including 872 Political Persons) failing under Chapter VII of Madhya Pradesh Police Regulations.
Under this regulation, if the escort in charge feels the necessity of handcuffing persons, he is empowered to do so.
Disposing of the petitions, this Court, HELD: (1) In spite of weighty pronouncement made by this Court decrying and severely condemning the conduct of the escort police m ' handcuffing the prisoners without any justification, it is very unfortunate that the Courts have to repeat and re repeat its disapproval of unjustifiable handcuffing. ]862G] Prem Shankar Shukla vs Delhi Administration, ; ; Bhim Singh, M.L.A.v.
State of Jammu & Kashmir & Ors., ; Maneka Gandhi vs Union of India, [1978] 1 SCC 248; Sunil Batra vs Delhi Administration, ; and Sunil Batra (II) vs Delhi Administra tion; , , referred to.
(2) The petitioners are educated persons and selflessly devoting their service to the public cause.
They are not the persons who have got tendency to escape from the jail custo dy.
In fact, the petitioners 1 and 2 even refused to come out on bail, but chose to continue in prison for a public cause.
The offence for which they were tried and convicted under section 186 of Indian Penal Code is only a bailable offence.
[884B C] (3) When a person is remanded by a judicial order by a competent court, that person comes within the judicial custody of the Court.
Therefore.
the taking of a person from a prison to the Court or back from Court to the prison by the escort party is only under the judicial orders of the Court.
[884D] (4) Even if extreme circumstances necessitate the escort party to bind the prisoners in fetters, the escort party should record the reasons for doing so in writing and inti mate the Court so that the Court considering the circum stances either approves or disapproves the action of the escort party and issues necessary directions.
[884D] (5) Undeniably, the escort party neither got instruc tions nor obtained any orders in writing from the Magistrate or the Jail Superintendent regarding handcuffing of the petitioners.
[881D] (6) Even assuming that the petitioners obstructed public servants in discharge of their public functions during the 'dharna ' or raised any 873 slogans inside or outside the Court, that would not be sufficient cause to handcuff them.
Further, there was no reason for handcuffing them while taking them to Court from jail on 22.4.1989.
[884C D] (7) It is most painful to note that the petitioners who staged a 'dharna ' for public cause and voluntarily submitted themselves for arrest and who had no tendency to escape had been subjected to humiliation by being handcuffed which act of the escort party is against all norms of decency and which is in utter violation of the principle underlying Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
[884E F] (8) The Government of Madhya Pradesh is directed to take appropriate action against the erring escort party for unjustly and unreasonably handcuffing petitioners 1 and 2 on 22.4.89, in accordance with law.
[884H] (9) It is open to the petitioners to take appropriate action against the erring officials, in accordance with law, if they are so advised, and in that case.
the Court in which the claim is made can examine the claim not being influenced by any observation made in this judgment.
[885C]
