The appellant had filed a suit in the High Court of Calcutta for a declaration that the properties set out in the schedule belonged to a joint family and that the trust created by the father of the plaintiff/appellant in respect of the said properties was void.
Pending the suit, a Receiv er was appointed by Justice A.N. Sen.
While making the appointment the learned Judge had passed an order restrain ing the Receiver from selling or ' 'transferring ' ' any of the properties.
The property in dispute is a building at Alipore, Calcutta, which comprised of four fiats.
Grindlays Bank Ltd., respondent No. 1, had taken all the four flats on lease for 10 years from 1st June, 1958.
After the expiry of the period of lease, Grindlays continued to be the tenant.
On 1st April, 1978 Grindlays surrendered a portion of the tenancy, namely, two fiats i.e. fiats Nos. 1 and 2, in favour of Tatas.
The Receiver let out these two fiats to M/s Tata Finlay Ltd. with effect from February 1979.
Questioning the action of the Receiver, an application was filed in the High Court contending that the Receiver had no authority to create 962 any tenancy, that he had virtually created two new tenancies after terminating the original tenancy of Grindlays, and that neither Grindlays nor Tatas was entitled to occupy the premises and they were liable to be evicted summarily.
The learned Single Judge was not inclined to order summary eviction as prayed for.
An appeal was filed before the Division Bench.
The Division Bench inter alia observed that any such relief could be obtained in a suit but the same could not be filed in the High Court inasmuch as the per mises in question was situated outside the Original Side Jurisdiction of the High Court.
Before this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that (i) the Receiver had only such powers as were expressly granted by the Court; (ii) "transfer" included lease and therefore the Receiver by creating a new lease i.e. tenancy, had violated the injunction order passed by Justice A.N. Sen; (iii) after the expiry of the stipulated period of lease in favour of Grindlays, the tenancy turned to be a monthly tenancy and therefore the entire character of tenancy changed, and the monthly tenancy therefore was a new tenancy; (iv) protection under the West Bengal Premises Tenancy Act could not be extended to the tenant of a Receiv er; (v) the break up of the tenancy affected the integrity of the tenancy inasmuch as by virtue of this break up two new tenancies had come into existence; and (vi) the lease in favour of Grindlays had expired and by creating a monthly tenancy which may even go beyond three years, the Receiver had created a new lease in violation of Chapter 21 Rule 5(a) of the Original Side Rules.
In reply, it was contended on behalf of Tatas that a monthly tenancy in respect of the said two flats had been created in their favour and therefore they were entitled to protection under the Tenancy Act.
On behalf of Grindlays it was contended that after the expiry of the period of the original lease in 1968, rela tionship between Grindlays and the Trust continued to be of landlord and tenant; that at all material times they re tained the tenancy in respect of flats Nos. 3 and 4, and were governed by the Tenancy Act; that the surrender of flats Nos. 1 and 2 by the Grindlays and their continuation as tenants at reduced rent did not amount to a new lease in respect of flats Nos. 3 and 4, and hence there was no trans fer and no violation of the injunction.
Dismissing the appeal as against respondent No. 1 and allowing it against respondent No. 2, this Court, HELD: (1) In the Transfer of Property Act, the word 'trans fer ' is 963 defined with reference to the word 'convey '.
Similarly, the term 'transfer ' as used in Section 11 or Section 88 of the Bengal Tenancy Act, included a lease, as a lease is a trans fer of an interest in immovable property.
A lease, there fore, comes within the meaning of the word 'transfer ' [968A B] Hari Mohan alias Hari Charan Pal vs Atal Krishana Bose & Ors., XXIII Vol.
Indian Cases 925, referred to.
(2) Surrender of part of the tenancy did not amount to implied surrender of the entire tenancy.
Likewise the mere increase or reduction of rent also would not necessarily import a surrender of an existing lease and the creation of a new tenancy.
[972C D] Konijeti Venkayya & Anr.
vs Thammana Peda Venkata Subba rao & Anr.
AIR 1957 A.P. 619 and N.M. Ponniah Nadar vs Smt.
Kamalakshmi Ammal, AIR 1989 S.C. 467, referred to.
(3) The Tenancy in favour of Grindlays continued as monthly tenancy for a period exceeding three years.
It was an accretion to the old tenancy and not a new tenancy It could not therefore be said that the Receiver had created tenancy for a period exceeding three years in violation of Chapter 21 Rule 5(a) of the Original Side Rules.
Merely because there was change in the character of a tenancy, namely that it had become a monthly tenancy, it did not amount to a new tenancy.
[972G H] Utility Articles Manufacturing Co. vs Raja Bahadur Motilal Bombay Mills Ltd., , referred to.
(4) A clear injuction order was passed by Justice A.N. Sen specifically restraining the Receiver from creating any new tenancy.
But the injunction did not apply to the tenancy in favour of Grindlays in respect of fiats Nos. 3 and 4 inasmuch as it was an old tenancy though in a modification form.
The Grindlays were therefore entitled to the protec tion under the provisions of the Tenancy Act.
[974G H; 975A, C] Damadilal & Ors.
vs Parshram & Ors., [1976] Supp.
SCR 645 and Biswabani (P) Ltd. vs Santosh Kumar Dutta, ; , referred to.
Ashrafi Devi & Anr.
vs Satyapal Gupta & Ors., Suit No. 966 58 dated 9th Sept. 1977.
Calcutta High Court and Armugha Gounder vs Ardhanari Mudaliar & Ors., , distinguished.
964 (5) In the case of Tatas, it was a new tenancy.
Such a lease came within the meaning of 'transfer ' and in view of the injunction order passed by Justice A.N. Sen, creation of such a new tenancy was legally barred.
Consequently the Tatas could not claim any protection under the provisions of the Act and were liable to be evicted.
[978C] Kanhaiyalal vs Dr. D.R. Banaji, ; at p. 729; Smt.
Ashrafi Devi & Anr.
vs Satyapal Gupta & Ors., (supra) and Armugha Gounder vs Ardhanari Mudalier, (supra), referred to.
