The parties in these matters are Engineers in the em ployment of the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat.
In 1937, Government of Bombay created two new Provincial Engineering Services known as the Bombay Engineering Service Class I consisting of posts of Chief Engineer, SUperintending Engi neers, ExecUtive Engineers and Assistant Engineers Class I, and the Bombay Engineering Service Class II 901 having officers designated as Deputy Engineers.
All the posts were permanent.
In 1939, Rules were made for regulating the methods of recruitment to the said services which directed the recruit ment to be made either by nomination from amongst the stu dents of the College of Engineering, Pune or by promotion of officers holding inferior posts.
A resolution was passed on 21.11.1941 for determination of the seniority of the direct recruits and the promotee officers, containing only two rules.
Rule 2 thereof was to the effect that in case of officers promoted to substantive vacancies, the seniority would be determined with reference to the date of their promotion to the substantive vacancies.
In 1960, detailed rules for recruitment to Class I and Class 1I Services were framed.
In place of nomination from the successful students of College of Engineering, Pune as direct recruits, these Rules prescribed for a competitive examination to be held by the Public Service Commission, and introduced a quota system by fixing a ratio of appointments of direct recruits and promotees.
The Rules also made refer ence to promotion, as Executive Engineers on officiating basis, and temporary Deputy Engineers and officiating Deputy Engineers.
By r. 8 the posts of Deputy Engineers were re organised, and by sub rule (iii) it was provided that the direct recruits in any year shall in a bunch be placed senior to promotees confirmed during that year.
A review of these Rules was later undertaken by the Government and ultimately in partial supersession thereof a fresh set or rules, were adopted in 1970.
In the meantime, however, a serious dispute in regard to the interpretation of one of the provisions of the 1960 Rules arose which was settled by this Court in the case of P.Y. Joshi and Others vs The State of Maharashtra and Oth ers, During the period 1960 70 adequate number of direct recruits were not available, and a large number of promo tees, therefore, had to be appointed to officiate as Deputy Engineers on continuous basis.
These appointments were made after following the procedure applicable to regular promo tions, including consultation with the Public Service Com mission.
The strength of the permanent Deputy Engineers was fixed at the total number of (a) the Deputy Engineers con firmed up to the date of commencement of the Rules, (b) direct recruits to the posts of Deputy Engineers appointed till the date of commencement of the Rules, and (c) the Deputy Engineers officiating on 30.4.1960; and it was pro vided that no fresh appointments in future would be made to 902 this cadre and the vacancies arising would be transferred to the officers holding subordinate posts detailed in the sub rule in proportions indicated.
As per rule 33 of the 1970 Rules, the seniority list in each cadre in Class I and Class II was to be prepared in two parts one for the confirmed officers and other for those who were not confirmed; and that the confirmed officers would be treated as senior to the unconfirmed officers.
Since the direct recruits were all appointed against the permanent posts, they were reckoned to be senior to the officiating Deputy Engineers irrespective of the period for which they had been working continuously on the Deputy Engineer 's posts.
Though the Rules were amend ed in 1972, there was no departure from the main scheme especially the principle governing seniority.
In pursuance of the 1970 Rules seniority lists were prepared.
The validity of r. 8(iii) of the 1960 Rules and of r. 33 of the 1970 Rules was successfully challenged as being violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
S.B. Patwardhan and Ors.
vs State of Maharashtra and Ors. , ; In view of the judgment in Patwardhan 's case, it became necessary to prepare fresh seniority lists.
Rules were framed under Article 309 of the Constitution read with section 81(6) of the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960, and were called the Re organised Bombay State Overseers and Deputy Engineers Seniority Lists Rules, 1978.
In 1981 further rules called Re organised Bombay State Assistant Engineers and Executive Engineers Seniority Lists Rules,.
1981, were flamed laying down the rule of determina tion of seniority of the Assistant Engineers and the Execu tive Engineers for the period 1.11.1956 to 30.4.60.
These rules have been successfully challenged in the High Court.
The main Rules which are the subject matter of the present cases were framed in 1982 under Article 309 of the Constitution laying down the principle for fixing the sen iority for the period dated 1.5.1960 to 20.12.70 and are called the Maharashtra Service of Engineers (Regulation of Seniority and Preparation and Revision of Seniority Lists for Specified Period) Rules, 1982.
These rules were framed in view of the decision of the Bombay High Court in S.B. Patwardhan 's case.
By including two rules therein Rules 4 and 9, deleted later fixing rigid quota with retrospective effect, attempt was made to neutralise the 903 decision and rob the promotees the benefit of their continu ous officiation.
For the purpose of fixing the seniority of Executive Engineers and Assistant Engineers for the period commencing from 21.12.1970, separate rules were framed under Article 309 of the Constitution and are called the Executive Engi neers and Assistant Engineers belonging to the Maharashtra Service of Engineers Class I and the Maharashtra Service of Engineers Class II (Regulation of Seniority and Preparation and Revision of Seniority Lists) Rules, 1983.
As a result of a decision of the High Court striking down Sections 4 and 9 of the 1982 Rules, the 1984 Rules were framed by the Govern ment.
The present appeals, special leave petitions and Writ Petitions challenge the validity of the Rules framed in 1978, 1982, 1983 and 1984.
Dismissing all these matters, this Court, HELD: 1.
The period of continuous officiation by a government servant, after his appointment by following the rules applicable for substantive appointments, has to be taken into account for determining his seniority; and sen iority cannot be determined on the sole 'test of confirma tion, for, confirmation is one of the inglorious uncertain ties of government service depending neither on efficiency of the incumbant nor on the availability of substantive vacancies.
The principle for deciding inter se seniority has to conform to the principles of equality spelt out by Arti cles 14 and 16.
If an appointment is made by way of stop gap arrangement, without considering the claims of all the eligible available persons and without following the rules of appointment, the experience on such appointment cannot be equated with the experience of a regular appointee, because of the qualitative difference in the appointment.
To equate the two would be to treat two unequals as equal which would violate the equality clause.
But if the appointment is made after considering the claims of all eligible candidates and the appointee continues in the post uninterruptedly till the regularisation of his service in accordance with the rules made for regular substantive appointments, there is no reason to exclude the officiating service for purpose of seniority.
Same will be the position if the initial appoint ment itself is made in accordance with the rules applicable to substantive appointments as in the present case.
To hold otherwise will be discriminatory and arbitrary.
[914G H; 915A D] S.B. Patwardhan vs State of Maharashtra. ; ; 904 Baleshwar Das vs State of U.P., [1981] 1 SCR 449; Delhi Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Committee & Ors.
R.K. Kashyap & Ors., [1989] Supp. 1 SCC 194 and Narender Chaddha 2.1 It is incorrect to say that the 1970 Rules indicate that the officiating posts were not included in the cadre of the Deputy Engineers.
It is true that the use of word "promotions" in r. 8(i) of the 1960 Rules is not quite appropriate, but that by itself cannot lead to the conclu sion that the officiating Deputy Engineers formed a class inferior to that of the permanent Engineers.
One cannot attribute fixed connotation to the expression 'promotion ' without reference to the context.
The expression has been used in the sense of confirmation.
The language used in several other rules is inconsistent with two cadre theory, and by way of illustration r. 12(a) may be considered.
Rules 5 and 24 of the 1970 Rules mention only 4 cadres in Class II namely, those of Sub Divisional Officers, Sub Divisional Engineers, Assistant Engineers Class II and Deputy Engineers and there was no separate cadre of officiating Deputy Engi neers.
Rule 12(a) of the 1970 Rules expressly includes some of the officiating Deputy Engineers within the cadre of Deputy Engineers, although it leaves behind the other offi ciating Deputy Engineers who started officiating later than 30.4.1960.
Rule 13 speaks of officers "officiating in the erstwhile cadre of Deputy Engineers" and r. 27 of "officiat ing promotions" which are inconsistent with two cadre theo ry.
In r. 33 of the 1970 Rules also two lists were directed to be prepared, not cadre wise but in each cadre, clearly indicating that the lists were different from cadres.
In r. 8(1) of the 1960 Rules also the different groups were not described as different cadres.
They were referred to as "categories" and what the re organisation suggested was with reference to "lists" to be prepared.
It will not, therefore, be right to equate the lists with cadres.
It is true that the Rules have not in express language stated that the officiating posts also will be in the cadre but if all their relevant provisions are considered, they unmistakably lead to the said conclusion.
[918A F] 2.2 Questions of vital importance affecting a very large number of officers in the departments concerned and many disputes have been settled by following the judgment in Patwardhan 's case.
In such a situation it is not expedient to depart from the decision lightly.
It is highly desirable that a decision, which concerns a large number of government servants in a particular service and which has been given after careful consideration of the rival contentions, is respected rather than scrutinised for finding out any possi ble error.
It is not in the interest of 905 the service to unsettle a settled position every now and then.
[918G H; 919A] 2.3 Even on an independent consideration of the provi sions of the Rules, and the relevant materials the temporary posts of Deputy Engineers against which promotees officiat ed, did not form a separate cadre and were additions to the main cadre.
These temporary posts were created in pursuance of several resolutions of the State Government and the language used therein amply supports this view.
[921A E] S.B. Patwardhan vs State of Maharashtra, ; and P.Y. Joshi vs
State of Maharashtra, , followed.
State of Gujarat vs
C.G. Desai & Ors., [1974] 2 SCR 255, distinguished.
Baleshwar Dass vs State of U.P. & Ors., [1981] 1 SCR 449, referred to.
3.1 The quota rule was for the first time introduced by the 1960 Rules.
These Rules were introduced through execu tive instructions issued by the State Government.
The ratio of 3:1 was fixed for the purpose of "appointment" and not for the strength in the service.
It permitted the State Government to exercise its discretion according to the demand of the exigencies, by using the expression "as far as practicable.
" There is no reason to so restrict the scope and meaning of the expression "as far as practicable".
The quota rule must he held to be realistic and flexible, true to life rather than abstractly absolute.
[923C H; 924A B] 3.2 When recruitment is from more than one source, there is no inherent invalidity in introducing quota system, but the unreasonable implementation of such a rule may attract the frown of the equality clause.
Further, if a rule fixing the ratio for recruitment from different sources is framed, it is meant to he respected and not violated at the whims of the authority.
It ought to be strictly followed and not arbitrarily ignored.
This, of course, may not prevent the Government from making slight deviations to meet the exigen cies.
If it is discovered that the rule has been rendered impracticable, it should be promptly substituted by an appropriate rule according to the situation.
[925A C] 3.3 In the present cases direct recruits were not avail able in adequate number for appointment, and appropriate candidates in the 906 subordinate rank capable of efficiently discharging the duties of Deputy Engineers were waiting in their queue.
The development work of the State peremptorily required experi enced and efficient hands.
In the situation the State Gov ernment took a decision to frill up the vacancies by promo tion in excess of the quota, but only after subjecting the officers to the test prescribed by the rules.
All the eligi ble candidates were considered and the opinion of the Public Service Commission was obtained.
[925D E] 3.4 If appointments from one source are made in excess of the quota, but in a regular manner and after following the prescribed procedure, there is no reason to push down the appointees below the recruits from the other source who are inducted in the Service subsequently.
The later appoint ees may have been young students still prosecuting their studies when the appointments from the other source take place and it will be highly inequitable and arbitrary to treat them as senior.
Further, in cases where the rules themselves permit the Government to relax the provisions fixing the ratio, the position for the appointees is still better; and a mere deviation therefrom would raise a pre sumption in favour of the exercise of the power of relaxa tion.
There would he still a third consideration relevant in this context: namely, what is the conclusion to he drawn from deliberate continuous refusal to follow an executive instruction fixing the quota The inference would be that the executive instruction has ceased to remain operative.
In all these cases, the matter would however he subject to the scrutiny of the Court on the ground of mala fide exercise of power.
All the three circumstances mentioned above which are capable of neutralising the rigours of the quota rule are present in the cases, and the principle of seniority being dependant on continuous officiation cannot be held to have been defeated by reason of the ratio fixed by the 1960 Rules.
1926C G] P.C. Sethi vs Union of India, ; and N.K. Chauhan vs State of Gujart, ; , relied on.
S.B. Patwardhan vs State of Maharashtra, ; , affirmed.
P.S. Mahal vs Union of India, ; and V.B. Badami etc.
vs State of Mysore & Ors., [1976] 1 SCR 815, distinguished.
Paramjit Singh Sandhu vs Ram Rekha & Ors.
, ; ; 907 A.K. Subraman vs Union of India, [1975] 2 SCR 979; Bishen Sarup Gupta vs Union of India, [1975] Supp.
SCR 491 and S.G. Jaisinghani vs Union of India & Ors., ; , referred to.
It is not possible to hold that the principle of seniority being dependant on continuous officiation will not apply to certain groups of the officers.
The reasons for rejecting the case of the appellants in Patwardhan 's case are equally applicable to all the promoted Deputy Engineers including those who were earlier Sub Divisional Engineers and Sub Divisional Officers, as well as all the directly recruited Deputy Engineers.
The suggested division of the two groups into further subcategories will result in illegal discrimination.
[929F G] 5.
Rules 4 and 9 of the 1982 Rules were rightly struck down by the High Court and consequently the 1984 Rules were correctly framed and have to be upheld as legal and valid.
[930A B] 6.
It is well established that the principles of res judicata are applicable to Writ Petitions.
A dispute raised by a petition under Article 32 of the Constitution must be held to be barred by principles of res judicata including the rule of constructive res judicata underlying Explanation IV of Section 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure, if the same has been earlier decided by a competent court by a judgment which became final.
[932E; 933D E] Daryao & Ors.
vs State of U.P. & Ors.
, ; and Forward Construction Co. vs Prabhat Mandal, (Regd.) Andheri & Ors.
, ; , relied on.
