Under Rule 2 of the Special Rules for the A.P. Medical and Health Services, 1982, which provided for the method of recruitment to different classes and categories in the A.P. Medical and Health Services, there were three requirements for eligibility for consideration for promotion to the Class I, Category I posts of Additional Director (Medical Educa tion) and equivalent posts.
These were (i) the person should be in categories 2 and 3 posts of Professors, (ii) he should have a minimum service of two years in the said categories, and (iii) he should have a total service of not less than three years.
The respondents were all originally recruited as Civil Assistant Surgeons, upon selection by the State Public Service Commission.
In the Select List prepared by the Commission, respondents No. 1 to 12 were recruited above the other respondents.
However, they were not considered for promotion to the category of Additional Director and other equivalent posts.
Hence the aggrieved respondents took their grievance to the State Administrative Tribunal.
The dispute before the Tribunal was whether the requirement of three years service should be only in Class I, Categories 2 and 3, or it was inclusive of service in Class II.
The Tribunal held that it should be on the basis of total period of service including in the lower categories, subject to the condition that the person should be holding the post of Professor or equivalent post for at least two years.
56 In the appeal before this Court, on behalf of the State.
it was contended that the seniority for zone of considera tion for promotion should always be of the feeding cadre and not from any other cadre.
and that the minimum of three years must be in Class I in any category and can never be in Class II service.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court, HELD: 1.1 The juniors who get accelerated promotion on account of fortuitous circumstances depending upon their speciality and availability of vacancies in such speciality should not be allowed to march over their seniors for ap pointment to administrative posts.
Any advantage gained by juniors on such fortuitous circumstances of having some speciality and promotion should not impair the rights of their seniors for promotion to posts where speciality or teaching experience is not called for.
The seniority deter mined in order of speciality should not.
therefore, be the basis for promotion to administrative posts.
Any rule pro viding for the contrary may be vulnerable to attack on the ground of arbitrariness.
[62G H; 63A] 1.2 It would be unreasonable and unjust to exclude the service and overlook the vertical seniority in the substan tive cadre to which everyone was selected by the Public Service Commission.
In medical profession, there are spe cialities but it is generally accepted that they are not of equal importance or utility.
However, the promotions are allowed on the basis of the respective specialities and the availability of promotional vacancies in such specialities.
A junior with relatively less important speciality may be fortunate enough to get quick promotion than his senior with a different speciality.
[62E G] 1.3 The seniority in the category of professors in the teaching and non teaching cadre or in the lower cadre based on speciality wise will not be relevant for preparation of a panel for promotion to the cadre of Additional Director and other equivalent posts in Category I. Equally.
the service rendered as Deputy Civil Surgeon in Category 5 cannot also be the basis for preparing the panel for consideration.
Further more.
Rule 2 does not expressly exclude the service in Class 11 Cadre for preparing panel for consideration for promotion to the Category of Additional Director and equiva lent posts.
[62B E] 2 Imprecise drafting of the Rules has led to misunder standing and litigation.
It would, therefore.
be proper for the State Government to have the wordings of the Rules properly amended with perspicuity to 57 give effect to the view indicated ' herein.
[63B C]
