This appeal has been preferred by the State against an order of acquittal recorded by the High Court in respect of the accused respondent.
According to the prosecution there were two rival factions in village Deotaha (U.P.), one led by the accused respondents and the other by the deceased victims.
There existed bitter enimity between the two fac tions, one faction was out to take the blood of another and due to this deep rooted animosity Accused 1, 2 and 27 hatched a conspiracy with some other associates to murder Prabhu Nath and his men on 14.1.
on which date they were scheduled to cut the standing sugar cane in Plot Nos. 736 and 737.
It is alleged by the prosecution that in pursu ance of this conspiracy, Accused 3 deposited his licensed gun with the arms dealer on 12.1.1974 with a view to screen himself from any prospective accusation and Accused 1, 2 and 27 in order to set up a plea of alibi connived with Accused 40, Travelling Ticket Examiner in the Railways, traveled without ticket, got themselves checked and sentenced to imprisonment by the railway magistrate on 13.1.1974 and were incarcerated in the Gorakhpur jail till 18.1.1974.
According to the prosecution on 14.1.1974, when the deceased 13 per sons and others went for cutting the sugar cane crops raised by one of the deceased.
At about 1 p.m. by which time the cut crop was being loaded in the tractor trolley brought by the deceased persons, Accused persons with their men 80 to 90 in number attacked them with spears, lathes and pharsas and started firing indiscriminately.
The deceased persons and others ran with a view to save their lives; some hid themselves behind the tractor and trolley, and others ran towards north and south directions.
As a result of the attack PWs 3 and 24 received injuries and 13 persons suc cumbed to their injuries instantaneously.
It is alleged by the prosecution that during the course of the occurrence, the deceased Prabhu 940 Nath who had a gun rued at the accused party in self defence and injured Accused 36, Rambali.
Thereafter Accused 10 and 16 covered the dead bodies with sugar cane leaves and sprin kled diesel oil by taking it from the tractor and set fire to the bodies.
Thereafter the accused left the scene of occurrence; accused 32 carried away the gun of the deceased Prabhu Nath.
P.W. 1 thereupon lodged the F.I.R. and the police took up the investigation.
After completing the investigation, P.W. 38 laid the chargesheet in 4 batches which gave rise to 4 different sessions trials which were disposed of by a common judgment by the Sessions Judge.
All the accused pleaded not guilty and denied their complicity with the offence.
Accused 36, Rambali admitted his presence and stated that the sugar cane belonged to one Phunni and not to Tirjugi and his men and while Phunni and his men were cutting the crops, the deceased Prabhu Nath and other de ceased persons attempted to forcibly take away the crops and during the course of such attempt, Phunni and his men at tacked the deceased party and that he was shot by the de ceased Prabhu Nath when he entreated that the sugar cane should not be taken away.
Accused 1, 2 and 27 denied the charge of conspiracy contending that they were in prison on the date of occurrence consequent upon their conviction by the railway magistrate.
The learned Sessions Judge acquitted 25 accused persons out of the total of 41 accused, viz., 4 6, 11 14, 17 22, 24 26, 28 32, 35 and 39 41 finding them not guilty of any of the charges and convicted the remaining 16 accused for various offences and passed sentences of the prisonment in respect of each accused.
It may be mentioned that Accused Nos. 10 and 16 were convicted under Section 302 read with Section 149 I.P.C. and each of them was sentenced to death, besides their convic tion under Section 307 I.P.C.
All the convicted accused filed Criminal appeals in the High Court.
The reference made by the Trial Court for con firmation of the sentence of death imposed on A I0 and A 16 was heard as Referred Case No. 31 of 1976.
The State pre ferred appeal under Section 378 Cr.
P.C. against the acquit tal of all the 24 acquitted persons.
In the case of A 40, the High Court did not grant leave as required under Section 378(3), Cr.
The High Court disposed of all the appeals inclusive of the State Appeal and the Referred Case by the common judgment whereby all the criminal appeals preferred by the convicted accused except the appeal preferred by Rambali (A 36) was allowed and their sentences were set aside.
The State Appeal was dismissed and the referred case in view of the acquittal of the accused was rejected.
Hence this 941 appeal by the State.
The contention of the State is that the acquittal of the accused is not proper and unwarranted on the basis of the evidence led in the case.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court, HELD: When viewed from any angle, the reasons assigned by the High Court for disbelieving the testimony of all the ocular witnesses are not unreasonable.
The evidence is ambulatory and vasulating besides suffering from insurmount able infirmities and improbabilities.
The totality of the evidence is unworthy of the credence when examined by the standard of yardsticks of credibility.
[956G] There is a deliberate false implication of the Accused 1, 2 and 27 to whom overtacts are attributed in exhibit Ka 1.
In fact, the High Court has gone in great depth into the facts and circumstances of the case and rightly concluded that the prosecution has miserably failed in establishing the guilt of the accused except A 36.
[956H: 957A] Suspicion by itself however strong it may be is not sufficient to take the place of legal proof and warrant a finding of guilt of these three accused.
[957C] The entire evidence is nothing but a coloured version with concocted story and exaggerated account mixed with falsehood and that the prosecution has miserably failed to make out the charges against all or any of the accused beyond all reasonable doubt except Rambali (A 36) who him self admitted his presence at the scene.
[957H; 958A] No doubt it is true that this heinous offence is diabol ical in conception and executed in gruesome and ghastly manner.
It is shocking that 13 persons have been done away with in a broad day light in the course of the same transac tion.
Nonetheless the Court when satisfied that the evidence adduced by the prosecution is not only unworthy of credence, but also manifestly and inextricably mixed up with falsehood cannot be carried away merely on the fact of multiplicity of victims and on the bias of speculations and suppositions in the confused stream of facts.
The High Court has apprised the evidence in the proper perspective and arrived at a correct conclusion which is neither perverse nor unreasona ble.
[958D E] Balaka Singh & Ors.
vs State of Punjab, ; , referred to. 942
