Anandi Bai wife of Appellant No. 1 and mother of Appellant No. 2 had a lease of suit shop in Jaipur for a period of 11 months beginning May 1, 1964 wherein she was carrying on small kirana business.
The Respondent landlord terminated the lease by a notice issued under section 106 of the Transfer of Property Act at the end of the term of the lease.
However Anandi Bai continued to remain in possession and the landlord went on accepting the rent even after the termination of her tenancy and thus she became a statutory tenant.
She died sometime in September 1966.
Respondent landlord initiated action for ejectment of her heirs the appellants herein from the demised shop on the ground that on the death of Anandi Bai the appellants have no right to continue in occupation of the premises.
The trial court dismissed the suit on the finding that Anandi Bai paid and the respondent accepted the rent after the determination of the lease, so she was holding over.
The first appellate court confirmed the decree of the trial court though on different grounds.
Second appeal by the plaintifflandlord was allowed by the High Court holding that since the heirs of the tenant had not carried on the business with Anandi Bai during her life time as family business they were not entitled to the benefits of the definition of 'tenant ' as amended by Section 3(ii) of the Rajasthan Premises (Control) of Rent and Eviction) Amendment Act, 14 of 1976 and accord ingly reversing the decrees of the courts below, the suit for ejectment of the appellants from the demised shop was decreed.
Allowing the appeal by special leave against the Judg ment and Decree of the High Court preferred by the heirs of the tenant Anandi Bai, this Court, HELD: Under Hindu Succession Act the heirs of the de ceased tenant are entitled to succeed, not only to his/her business but also to his/her tenancy rights under the Rent Act which protects the 7 8 heirs from ejectment except in accordance with that Act.
Therefore, despite the termination of the tenancy, the tenancy rights are heritable and the heirs of the tenant are entitled to enjoy the protection of the Act.
[18A B] Admittedly Smt.
Anandi Bai was inducted into possession of the demised property under a contract of tenancy which was determined by issuance of a notice under Section 106 of Transfer of Property Act.
Even thereafter she continued to remain in possession as statutory tenant under the Act.
The finding of the Trial Court as affirmed by the First Appel late Court is that the respondent landlord after termination of tenancy received the rent from her and thereby she became tenant holding over till the date of her death.
[18F G] The appellants by virtue of intestate succession under Hindu Succession Act, being Class I heirs, succeeded to the heritable interest in the lease hold right of the demised premises held by Smt.
Anandi Bai.
They, thereby, stepped into the shoes of the tenant.
They continued to remain in possession as on the date of the suit as statutory tenants.
Thereby, they are entitled to the protection of their con tinuance as a statutory tenant under the Act.
[19B C] J.C. Chaterjee vs Sri Kishan, ; ; Damadi lal & Ors.
vs Parashram & Ors.
, ; Anand Niwas (Pvt.) Ltd. vs Anandji Kalyanji Pedhi & Ors., ; ; Smt.
Gian Devi Anand vs Jeevan Kumar & Ors., ; V. Dhanpal Chattiar vs Yesodai Ammal, ; Bhavarlal Labhchand vs Kanaivalal Nathalal Intawala, , referred to.
