The respondents organised two music programmes by formu lating an ostensible savings scheme under which the entry to the programme was open to persons on becoming members of the scheme by paying an admission fee of Rs.2, non refundable, and membership subscription of Rs. I0, refundable after 10 years.
The entry to the programme was strictly on the pro duction of invitation card as well as membership card.
Many persons paid the admission fee and the membership subscrip tion.
At the time of giving entry to the programme, the respondents collected the membership forms and money re ceipts from the persons concerned as a result of which they were left neither with membership form nor with the money receipts.
Although the promise was that such programmes would be repeated for 10 years yet no such performances were arranged.
The result was that members of the public were defrauded of their money and the State Government of its tax revenue.
The Entertainment Tax Collector checked the receipts of the respondent on both the dates of performances and accord ingly issued notices to them demanding the tax and the duty surcharge thereon under the Madhya Pradesh Entertain ments Duty and Advertisement Tax Act, 1936.
The respondents challenged the validity of the notices by filing a writ petition in the High Court which allowed the petition and quashed the notices by holding that the assessment of tax was arbitrary because (i) there was no allegation that the invitation cards were sold; and (ii) 1001 membership subscription of Rs. I0 was not divided by 10 since the entertainment tax could be collected only on Re. 1 per year for the next 10 years.
Hence this appeal by the State.
Allowing the appeal and setting aside the decision of the High Court.
this Court.
HELD: The Scheme was not meant for promoting music.
It was a pure business preposition meant to collect money and earn profits.
and it was to be used as a device to evade the entertainment duty.
The receipts and the invitation cards were nothing but tickets for the show and only for one show, and were collected at the door.
Therefore.
whatever be the description given to the receipts or cards they were liable to the entertainment duty.
The impugned notices were proper ly issued by the appellants.
Since the High Court completely missed the crucial point and, therefore, mis directed it self, it is not possible to accept its reasoning that Rs. 10 collected by the respondents were the membership subscrip tion or that tile duty could not have been collected at a time on Rs. 10.
[1005E F; 1003D]
