The appellant was appointed as a non official member of the State Sales Tax Appellate Tribunal for a period of two years from 17.7.1958, under sub section(2) of Section 4 of the Mysore Sales Tax Act, 1957.
The appointment was extended from time to time and continued upto 8.2.1972.
By a letter dated 8.2.1972, the respondent intimated the appellant that he had been granted 52 days Earned Leave as terminal leave from 9th February, 1972.
The appellant represented for grant of superannuation pension.
This was rejected by the Govern ment on the ground that he was not eligible for pension.
The appellant 's writ petition was dismissed by a single Judge of the High Court who held that rule 64 of the Karna taka Sales Tax Rules, 1957 was applicable to him, and that he was not eligible to claim superannuation pension.
This was upheld by the Division Bench.
In the appeal before this Court, on behalf of the appellant it was contended that as a non official member of the Tribunal, he was a government servant, and as such, like other Government servants, he was entitled to grant of pension in accordance with Mysore Civil Service Rules, that he was retired from service after reaching the age of super annuation, that his appointment was not a contract appoint ment, that he was paid traveling allowance under the Mysore Civil Service Rules, and that Rule 64(6) of Mysore Sales Tax Rules inserted in 1964, and substituted in 1971, not being in existence at the time of his appointment, could not be made applicable to him as to deprive him of the benefit of superannuation pension as provided in the Mysore Civil Service Rules.
208 Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
The terms and conditions of service of the appellant who was appointed as a non official member in the Karnataka Sales Tax Appellate Tribunal under sub section (2) of Section 4 of Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957 and was given last extension of the period of service under clause (b) of sub rule (1) of Rule 64 of the Mysore Sales Tax Rules, 1957, will be governed by the Mysore Sales Tax Rules and not by the provisions of Mysore Civil Services Rules.
Since sub rule (6) of rule 64 of Mysore Sales Tax Rules was substitut ed in place of original subrule (6) before the appellant retired from service on expiry of his period of service, this rule applies to him, and he is not entitled to get any superannuation pension.
[211D E; G] 2.1 Sub rule (2) of Rule 2 of Mysore Civil Service Rules 1957, clearly says that in cases where special provisions have been made by or under any law for the time being in force, the Mysore Service Rules do not apply.
Furthermore, Rule 283 of the said Rules states that a superannuation pension is granted to a Government Servant who is compelled by Rule to retire at a particular age.
Rule 95 provides that the date of compulsory retirement of a Government servant is the date on which he attains the age of 55 years, and the Government servant may be retained upto 60 years of age with the sanction of Government, but not after the age of 60 years.
[212C; E F] 2.2 Rule 64(6).of the Mysore Sales Tax Rules, 1957 clearly says that the non official member of the Sales Tax Tribunal will become ineligible for any pension.
Hence,provisions relating to pension as provided in Mysore Civil Service Rules, 1957 will not apply to a non official member.
[212D E] 2.3 In the instant case, the appellant was appointed as a member of the Tribunal for a period of two years initial ly, and thereafter his tenure was extended periodically and he left the service as non official member of the Tribunal after he crossed the age of 61 years.
There was no specific order that the appellant was due to retire at the age of 55 years.
There is no rule for a non official member to retire at a particular age.
Moreover, the Government sanctioned certain terms and conditions of his appointment.
It is periodical and not upto a maximum age, nor it is a whole time service but a part time one and the appellant was permitted to take up audit of any person, firm, institution etc.
on certain restrictions.
A Government servant has to render whole time service.
Therefore, the Mysore Civil Service Rules, 1957 do not apply to the 209 appellant, and he is not eligible for superannuation pen sion.
[212F G; 213C D]
