In the former appeal, the appellant is a nationalised Bank.
In 1977, some demands for wage revision made by the employees of all Banks were pending and in support of their demands, a call for a country wide strike was given.
The appellant Bank issued a Circular on September 23, 1977 to its managers and agents directing them to deduct wages of the employees for the days they go on strike.
The respondent Unions gave a car for a four hour strike on December 29, 1977.
Two days before the strike, the appellant Bank issued an Administrative Circular warning the employees that if they participate in the strike, they would be committing a breach of their contract of service and they would not be entitled to salary for the full day and they need not report for work for the rest of the working hours on that day.
However, the employees went on strike as scheduled, for four hours which included banking hours of the public, and re sumed duty thereafter.
The appellant Bank did not prevent them from doing so.
The appellant Bank by its circular di rected the managers and agents to deduct the full day 's salary of those employees who participated in the strike.
On a writ petition filed by the respondents, the High Court quashed the said Circular.
The Letters Patent Appeal filed by the appellant was dismissed.
Hence, the appeal by the Bank.
In the latter appeal, the appellant is a company whose workers had indulged in "go slow" in July 1984, thereby bringing down production.
The workers did not attend to their work and were loitering in the premises and were indulging in go slow tactics to pressurise the 215 company to concede their demands.
The company suspended its operation by giving a notice of lock out.
It did not pay wages to the workers for July , 1984 on the ground that they did not work during all the working hours and had not their wags.
The workers ' union filed a complaint before the Indus trial Court complaining that the appellant company had indulged in unfair labour practice and that the lock out declared was illegal The Industrial Court held that the deduction of wages for July, 1984 on account of the go slow was not justified It also declared that the company had committed an unfair labour practice by not paying full monthly wages to the workers and directed the company to pay the said wages for the month of July, 1984.
Aggrieved, the appellant company has preferred the appeal.
Allowing the appeals, this Court, HELD: 1.1 There is no doubt that whenever a worker indulges in a misconduct such as a deliberate refusal to work, the employer can take disciplinary action against him and impose on him the penalty prescribed for it which may include some deduction from his wages.
However, when miscon duct is not disputed but is, on the other band, ' admitted and is resorted to on a mass scale such as when the employ ees go on strike, legal or illegal, there is no need to hold an inquiry.
To insist on an inquiry even in such cases is to pervert the very object of the inquiry.
In a mass action such as strike it is not possible to hold an inquiry against every employee nor is it necessary to do so unless, of course, an employee contends that although he did not want to go on strike and wanted to resume his duty, he was pre vented from doing so by the other employees or that the employer did not give him proper assistance to resume his duty though he had asked for it.
That was certainly not the situation in the present case in respect of any of the employees and that is not the contention of the employees either.
It is true that in the present case when the employ ees came back to work after their four hours strike, they were not prevented from entering the Bank premises.
But admittedly, their attendance after the four hours strike was useless because there was no work to do during the rest of the hours.
It is for this reason that the Bank had made it clear, in advance, that if they went on strike for the four hours as threatened, they would not be entitled to the wages for the whole day and hence they need not report for work thereafter Short of physically preventing the employ ees from resuming the work which it was unnecessary to do, the Bank had done all hi its power to warn the employees of the consequences of their action and if the employees, in spite of it, chose to enter the Bank 's premises where they had no work to do, and in fact did not 216 do any, they did so of their own choice and not according to the requirement of the service or at the direction of the Bank.
In fact, the direction was to the contrary.
Hence, the later resumption of work by the employees was not in fulfil ment of the contract of service or any obligation under it.
The Bank was therefore not liable to pay either full day 's salary or even the pro rata salary for the hours or work that the employees remained in the Bank premises without doing any work.
It is not a mere presence of the workmen at the place of work but the work that they do according to the terms of the contract which constitutes the fulfilment of the contract of employment and for which they were entitled to be paid.
[222E H; 223A F] 1.2 Although the service regulations do not provide for a situation where employees on a mass scale resort to ab sence from duty for whole day or a part of the day whether during crucial hours or otherwise they do provide for treat ing an absence from duty of an individual employee as a misconduct and for taking appropriate action against him for such absence.
[224D E] 2.1.
When the contract, Standing Orders, or the service rules/ regulations are silent, but enactment such as the payment of Wages Act providing for wage cuts for the absence from duty is applicable to the establishment concerned, the wages can be deducted even under the provisions of such enactment.
[231F] 2.2.
The working class has indisputably earned the right to strike as an industrial action after a long struggle, so much so that the relevant industrial legislation recognises it as their implied right.
However, the legislation also circumscribes this right by prescribing conditions under which alone its exercise may become legal.
Whereas, there fore, a legal strike may not invite disciplinary proceed ings, an illegal strike may do so, it being a misconduct.
However, whether the strike is legal or illegal, the workers are liable to lose wages for the period of strike.
The liability to lose wages does not either make the strike illegal as a weapon or deprive the workers of it.
When workers resort to it, they do so knowing full well its consequences.
During the period of strike the contract of employment continues but the workers withhold their labour.
Consequently, they cannot expect to be paid.
[232C E] 2.3.
The contract, which is this case is monthly, cannot be subdivided into days and hours.
If the contract comes to an end amidst a month by death, resignation or retirement of the employee, he would not be entitled to the proportionate payment for the part of the month 217 he served.
If the employment contract is held indivisible, it will be so for both the parties.
There is no difficulty, inequity or impracticability in construing the contract as divisible into different periods such as days and hours for proportionate reimbursement or deduction of wages, which is normally done in practice.
[232G H; 233A] 2.4.
The contract of employment, Standing Orders or the service rules provide for disciplinary proceedings for the lapse on the part of a particular individual or individuals when the misconduct is disputed.
As things stand today, they do not provide a remedy for mass misconduct which is admit ted or cannot be disputed.
Hence, to drive the management to hold disciplinary proceedings even in such cases is neither necessary nor proper.
The service conditions are not expect ed to visualise and provide for all situations.
When they are silent on unexpected eventualities, the management should be deemed to have the requisite power to deal with them consistent with law and the other service conditions and to the extent it is reasonably necessary to do so.
The pro rata deduction of wages is not an unreasonable exercise of power on such occasions.
Whether on such occasions, the wages are deductable at all and to what extent will, howev er, depend on the facts of each case.
Although the employees may strike only for some hours but there is no work for the rest of the day as in the present case, the employer may be justified in deducting salary for the whole day.
On the other hand, the employees may put in work after the strike hours and the employer may accept it or acquiense in it.
In that case the employer may not be entitled to deduct wages at all or be entitled to deduct only for the hours of strike.
If statutes such as the or the State enactments like the Shops and Establishments Act apply, the employer ,may be justified in deducting wages under their provisions.
Even if they do not apply, nothing prevents the employer from taking guidance from the legisla tive wisdom contained in it to adopt measures on the lines outlined therein, when the contract of employment is silent on the subject.
[233B F] V.T. Khanzode & Ors.
vs Reserve Bank of India & Anr., ; ; Paluru Ramkrishnaiah & Ors. etc.
vs Union of India & Anr.
; , and Senior Superin tendent of Post Office & Ors.
vs lzhar Hussain; , , relied on.
Buckingham and Carnatic Co. Ltd. vs Workers of the Buckingham and Carnatic Co. Ltd., ; ; V. Ganesan vs The State Bank of India & Ors., ; State Bank of India, Canara Bank, Central Bank etc.
& Ors.
vs Ganesan, Jambunathan, Venkatara 218 man, B.V. Kamath, V.K. Krishnamurthy, etc.
& Ors.
, ; Sukumar Bandyopadhyyay & Ors.
vs State of West Bengal & Ors., [1976] IX LIC 1689; Algemene Bank Nederland, N.V. vs Central Government Labour Court, Calcutta & Ors., [1978] II LLJ, 117; V. Ramachandran vs Indian Bank, [1979] I LLJ 122; Dharam Singh Rajput & Ors.
vs Bank of India, Bombay & Ors.
, ; R. Rajamanickam, for himself and on behalf of other Award Staff vs Indian Bank, [1981] II LLJ 367; R.N. Shenoy & Anr. etc.
vs Central Bank of India & Ors.
, [1984] XVII LIC 1493; Prakash Chandra Johari vs Indian Overseas Bank & Anr., [1986] II LLJ 496; Workmen of M/s. Firestone Tyre & Rubber Co. of India (P) Ltd. vs Firestone Tyre & Rubber Co., ; ; Krishnatosh Das Gupta vs Union of India & Ors., ; Sant Ram Sharma vs State of Rajasthan & Anr., ; ; Roshan Lal Tandon vs Union of India, ; ; Secretary of State for Employment vs Associated Society of Locomotive Engineers and Firemen and Ors.
(No. 2), ; Miles vs Wakefield Metropolitan District Council, [1989] I LLJ 335 and Cutter vs Pwell, [1795] 6 TR 320, referred to.
There cannot be two opinions that go slow is a serious misconduct being a covert and a more damaging breach of the contract of employment.
It is an insidious method of undermining discipline and at the same time a crude device to defy the norms of work.
It has been roundly condemned as an industrial action and has not been recognised as a legit imate weapon of the workmen to redress their grievances.
In fact the model standing orders as well as the certified standing orders of most of the industrial establishments define it as a misconduct and provide for disciplinary action for it.
Hence, once it is proved.
those guilty of it have to face the consequences which may include deduction of wages and even dismissal from service.
[237G H; 238A] 3.2.
The proof of go slow, particularly when it is disputed, involves investigation into various aspects such as the nature of the process of production, the stages of production and their relative importance, the role of the workers engaged at each stage of production, the pre produc tion activities and the facilities for production and the activities of the workmen connected therewith and their effect on production, the factors hearing on the average production etc.
The go slow further may be indulged in by an individual workman or only some workmen either in one sec tion or different sections or in one shift or both shifts affecting the output in varying degrees and to different extent depending upon the nature of product and the produc tive process.
Even where it is admitted, go slow may in some case present 219 difficulties in determining the actual or approximate loss, for it may have repercussions on production after the go slow ceases which may be difficult to estimate.
The deduc tion of wages for go slow may, therefore, present difficul ties which may not be easily resoluble.
When, therefore, wages are sought to be deducted for breach of contract on account of go slow, the quantum of deduction may become a bone of contention in most of the cases inevitably leading to an industrial dispute to he adjudicated by an independent machinery statutory or otherwise as the parties may resort to.
The simplistic method of deducting uniform percentage of wages from the wages of all workmen calculated on the basis of the percentage fail in production compared to the normal or average production may not always be equitable.
It is, therefore, necessary that in all cases where the factum of go slow and/or the extent of the loss of production on account of it, is disputed, there should he a proper inquiry on charges which furnish particulars of the go slow and the loss of production on that account.
The rules of natural justice require it, and whether they have been followed or not will depend on the facts of each case.
[238B G] 3.3.
In the instant case, there is a finding recorded by the Industrial Court that there was a go slow resorted to by the workmen resulting in loss of production during the said period.
Since the said finding is not challenged, it is not possible to interfere with it in this appeal.
Though the appellant is justified in deducting wages for the said period, in the facts and circumstances of the case it is directed that it will not deduct more than 5 per cent of the wages of the workmen for the month of July, 1984 when they indulged in go slow tactics.
[239D F] M/s. Bharat Sugar Mills Ltd. vs Shri Jai Singh & Ors., ; T.S. Kelwala & Ors.
vs Bank of India & Ors., and Apar (Pvt) Ltd. vs
S.R. Samant & Ors., [1980] II LLJ 344, referred to.
