On July 19, 1989, the Customs Department seized narcotic drugs from two cars one belonging to the petitioner detenu and the other to his associate.
The statements of the driv ers were recorded under Section 108 of the on the very next day.
Reports of the chemical examination of the seized drugs confirmed that they were narcoting drugs under the prevention of Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs & Psychotropic Substances Act, 1988.
Accordingly, with a view to preventing the petitioner from engaging in abetting and transportation of narcotic drugs the detaining authority passed a detention order under Section 3(1) of the Act on 20th December, 1989 i.e. after about 5 months of seizure of the narcotic drugs.
But the petitioner was arrested and detained on service of the order of detention on 15th Febru ary, 1990.
The petitioner filed a writ petition in this Court challenging the validity of the detention order contending; (1) that it was illegal because 241 (a) there was inordinate delay in serving the detention order and arresting the detenu; (b) it was passed on stale ground i.e. after five months of the seizure of narcotic drugs; and (c) there was long delay in disposing the dete nu 's representation; (2) the non supply of relevant docu ments i.e. bail application and the order made thereon to the detenu seriously prejudiced his right to make effective representation under Article 22(5) of the Constitution; (3) the averments made in the counter affidavit cannot be taken into consideration because it was not sworn by the detaining authority himself and (4) the detention order was vitiated for non application of mind.
Dismissing the writ petition, this Court, HELD: 1.
There must be a 'live and proximate link ' between the grounds of detention and the avowed purpose of detention.
But In appropriate cases the Court can assume that the link is 'snapped ' if there is a long and unex plained delay between the date of the order of detention and the arrest of the detenu.
Where the delay is not only ade quately explained but is found to be the result of the detenu 's recalcitrant or refractory conduct in evading arrest, there is warrant to consider the 'link ' not snapped but strengthened [25 IF G] 2.1 In the instant case, the averments that the Depart ment served two notices one on the petitioner 's mother and another on his brother directing him to appear before the detaining authority have not been denied by the petitioner.
Instead he intentionally absconded and thereby evaded ar rest.
Therefore, it cannot be said that the delay was not explained and the link between the grounds of detention and the avowed purpose of detention has been snapped.
[251H; 252A B] Shafiq Ahmad vs District Magistrate Meerut and Ors., [1989] 4 SCC 556; Bhanwarlal Ganeshmalji vs State of Tamil Nadu & Anr., ; and T.A. Abdul Rahman vs State of Kerala and Ors., ; , relied on.
In the instant case the cars containing brown sugar were impounded on July 19, 1989 and statements of the driv ers were recorded next day.
Reports of the chemical examIna tion of contraband drugs were received on 29th September, 1989, 13th October, 1989 and 16th November, 1989.
The cus toms officials screened all these thIngs and the detaInIng authority after considering all these things passed the order of detention on December 20, 1989.
There fore, it cannot be held that the delay of five months in making the impugned order of detention 242 rendered the detention illegal and bad as it was made on stale ground.
The detention order has been made with promp titude considering the relevant and vital facts proximate to the passing of the impugned order of detention.
[248A C] 3.
It is evident from the record that after receipt of the representation of the petitioner, it was sent to the detaining authority for his comments and immediately after the comments of the detaining authority were received the same were processed and put up before the Minister concerned who rejected the representation after considering the com ments of the detaining authority and the State Government.
It is also evident that the Central Government passed the order after considering the comments of the detaining au thority.
Therefore, the contention that the detention order was passed by the Central Government without considering the comments of the detaining authority and there was long delay in disposing the detenu 's representation affecting the validity of detention is without any substance.
[252C D; E F] 4.
Article 22(5) of the Constitution mandates that all the relevant documents referred to in the grounds of deten tion and which are considered by the detaining authority in coming to his subjective satisfaction for clamping an order of detention are to be supplied to the detenu.
[248F] 4.1 In the instant case the relevant document i.e. the bail application and the order made thereon was not consid ered by the detaining authority in coming to his subjective satisfaction and in making the impugned order of detention.
Therefore, the non furnishing to the detenu of the said document does not affect in any manner whatsoever the dete nu 's right to make an effective representation in compliance with the provisions of Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India.
[248U; 249A] Binod Singh vs District Magistrate, Dhanbad, Bihar & Ors., and Suraj Pal Sahu vs State of Maha rashtra & Ors.
; , , held inapplicable.
In the absence of personal allegation of mala fide or bias made by the detenu against the detaining authority in person, the omission to file affidavit in reply by itself is no ground to sustain the allegation of mala fides or non application of mind.
In the absence of detaining authority, the affidavit must be sworn by some responsible officer who personally dealt with or processed the case in the Secre tariat or submitted it to the Minister.
[253A; D] 243 5.1 In the instant case, the counter affidavit has been filed by the officer who was dealing with the papers relat ing to the particular order of detention and he placed those papers before the Minister concerned.
Therefore, the counter affidavit filed on behalf of the respondents cannot but be considered and there is no allegation of mala fide or malice or extraneous consideration personally against the detaining authority in making the impugned order of detention.
[253G H] Madan Lal Anand vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; ; Mohinuddin vs District Magistrate, Beed and Ors., ; ; Niranjan Singh vs State of Madhya Pradesh, ; ; Habibullah Khan vs State of West Bengal, ; Jagdish Prasad vs State of Bihar, ; and Mohd. Alam vs State off West Bengal; , , relied on 6.
The persons examined under section 108 of the were well known to the petitioner.
The statements of these persons clearly implicate the petitioner who know ing fully that the two cars will be used for the purpose of transportation of prohibited drugs i.e. heroin and for soiling of the same, handed over the keys of the two cars to the driven Therefore, the contention of the petitioner that the detention order was vitiated by non application of mind is devoid of merit.
[247A B; 246F] 7.
Accordingly, the impunged order of detention is quite in accordance with law and the same is valid.
[254A]
