The appellant imported Top Line Tube Winder Endless Belts which were assessed to duty under heading 40.05/16(3) at 40% plus countervailing duty at the rate of 25% under Item 16 A(4) of the .
Thereafter, the appellant made an application for refund of the excess of duty so charged contending that the goods were in fact liable to be classified under heading 59.16/17, and without countervailing duty.
The Assistant Collector rejected the claim by his order dated October 12, 1979 and against it the appellant pre ferred an appeal under Section 128 of the to the Appellate Collector who allowed the appeal holding that the goods were classifiable under heading 59.16/17.
The Government, however, issued a suo motu show cause notice dated November 21, 1981 to the appellant under Sec tion 131(3), asking the appellant to show cause as to why the goods should not be classified under heading 39.07 which attracted duty at 100% ad valorem, and also as to why the order dated May 2, 1981 passed by the Appellate Collector should not be annulled.
Against the aforesaid show cause, the appellant pre ferred an appeal to the Customs Excise and Gold Control (Appellate) Tribunal, contending that the show cause notice was barred by limitation under sub section (5) of Section 131 read with Section 28 of the Act, which was six months from the date of short levy, and in any case six months from the date of the Appellate order.
97 The Tribunal dismissed the appeal holding that the notice was in time, and that the assessment proposed to be made under heading 39.07 was proper and set aside the order of the Appellate Collector allowing the revision.
In the appeal to this Court, the question for considera tion was: whether the Central Government violated the bar of limitation while exercising suo motu revisional powers under Section 13: of the .
Dismissing the appeal by a 2:1 Majority, this Court, HELD: (Sabyasachi Mukharji, CJ.
and P.B. Sawant, J. Per Sawant, J.) 1.
The provisions of Section 131(5) and therefore the limitation laid down in section 28 of the Act do not apply to the action taken by the government under section 131(3).
[103D] Geep Flashlight Industries Ltd. vs Union of India, ; , followed.
Even if it was held that the limitation as laid down in Section 28 would apply to the initiation of action under Section 131(3), since the appellate order in the instant case, has only allowed the appeal of the appellant declaring him as being entitled to the refund, and no refund has yet been made the action of the Government under section 131(3) is clearly not barred by limitation [102G H] 3.
In the case of erroneous refund, the notice under section 28 of the Act has to be given within six months from the date of 'actual ' refund.
If no refund has in fact been made, limitation cannot be said to arise inasmuch as the 'relevant date ' under section 28 in the case of erroneous refund speaks of the date of refund The Order granting refund is not actual refund.
Admittedly, in the instant case no refund has been made to the appellant under the appellate customs order dated May 2, 1981.
Hence even if it is held that the provisions of subsection (3) of Section 131 are governed by sub section (5) thereof and, therefore, the limitation laid down under section 28 of the Act applied to the action of the Government under section 131(3), the present show cause notice is not barred by limitation [103C D] 4.
It is clear from the provisions of sub section (3) of Section 131 that it does not give power to the Central Government to act suo motu 98 to annul or modify an order passed by the original assessing authority.
On the other hand, the provisions of sub section (5) of Section 131 contemplate proceedings against actions of the original assessing authority which have resulted in either not levying or short levying the goods.
That sub section by implication also covers cases of refunds, when goods are cleared initially under a provisional assessment, and the final assessment shows that the assessee is entitled to a refund of duty charged in excess earlier.
But all the cases whether of non levy, short levy or of refund which are contemplated in sub section (5) are cases arising out of the acts of omissions and commissions of the original assessing authority, and it is when such orders passed by the original assessing authority which are sought to be annulled or modified, that the provision of limitation contained in Section 28 applies.
[103G H; 104A B] 5.
Thus, the situations contemplated by sub section (3) and by sub section (5) of Section 131 are mutually exclusive in that whereas sub section(3) speaks of the annulment or modification of the appellate or revisional orders, sub section (5) speaks of the orders passed by the original assessing authority.
[104B] 6.
Hence, the limitation applies when the Government seeks to annul or modify orders of the original assessing authority under subsection (5) and not when the Government takes action to annul or modify the appellate or revisional orders under sub section (3) [104C] 7.
The above interpretation is also consistent with the provisions of sub sections (1) and (4) of Section 131.
[104D] 8.
The conclusion is inescapable that the limitation prescribed by Section 28 is applicable when under sub sec tion (5) of Section 131 the Government seeks to annul or modify orders other than those passed under Sections 128 and 130.
It is not applicable to the action taken under sub section (3) for annulling or modifying orders passed under Sections 128 and 130.
[104G H] 9.
In the instant case, since the impugned show cause notice is issued to annul/modify the order passed by the Appellate Collector of Customs under Section 128, it is not barred by limitation.
[105A] (Per M.M. Punchhi, J. dissenting) 1(a) Section 28 envisages three kinds of errors in regard to custom duties.
One is non levy.
This means that the goods were not 99 classified to duty whereas they could be.
The second is short levy.
In this could be included a case in which the goods could be classified in one Entry but were erroneously classified under another Entry resulting in short levy of custom duty, or the like.
The third is the case of erroneous refund.
This category springs up in the process of assess ment only where two kinds of error, i.e. non levy or short levy may occur and lead to an erroneous refund.
[108H; 109A] (b) It is clear from section 28 that in case of duty not levied or short levied, the 'relevant date ' is the date on which the concerned officer makes some orders for the clear ance of the goods on payment of duty on framing the final assessment as the case may be.
[109E] Geep Flashlight Industries Ltd. vs Union of India & Ors., ; , referred to.
Since levy is linked to assessment, a case for refund may arise which may be erroneous.
[109A] In the instant case, the Tribunal seems to take the view that sub section (3) of Section 131, if employed, eclipses sub section (5) of Section 131.
It was of the view that when the Central Government on its own motion proposes to annul or modify any order passed under Section 128 or Section 130 then it is not lettered by the time limit specified in Section 28 even though it entertains the opinion that any duty of customs has either not been levied or has been short levied.
This approach appears to wholly erroneous.
[108D E] 3.
There is nothing in the language of sub section (3) to suggest that it over powers or renders otiose sub section (5).
Both the sub sections need not militate against each other, components as they are of the singular power con ferred by the legislature on the Central Government for revision.
[108E] 4.
The harmonious way is, therefore, to read these sub sections would be that the Central Government is empow ered on its own motion to annul or modify any order passed under Section 128 or Section 130, but if it is an order whereby any duty of customs has either not been levied or has been short levied, the Central Government can levy or enhance the duty by giving the person affected by the pro posed order a notice to show cause against it but within the time limit specified in Section 28, which is six months from the date of the order.
[100F G] 100 5.
Merely because the Central Government had the power to suo motu revise the orders of refund passed by the Appel late Collector it does not follow a fortiori that it had the power to revise the orders of short levy at that stage.
[110D] 6.
The orders of levy of duty in the instant case, had two facets.
The duty from the point of view of the appellant had been excessively levied necessitating him to challenge the same and seek refund.
On the other hand, from the point of view of the Revenue, the duty had been short levied giving rise cause to have it levied under proper heading.
It was incumbent on the Central Government to exercise its suo motu power under sub section (3) read with sub section (5) of Section 131 within six months from 6.8.79, the date when the duty was short levied and undeniably the Central Govern ment did not take such timely step even though it had a cause to do so.
The appellant, however, made claim for the refund of the excess duty levied taking shelter under anoth er heading and on its refusal by the Assistant Collector on 12.10.79 had its appeal accepted on 2.5.81 from the Appel late Collector who ordered refund.
The Central Government then got a cause to take suo motu action under Section 131(3) of the to annul or modify the order of the Appellate Collector or the actual refund itself under that order.
It being a case of erroneous refund sub section (3) of Section 131 was attracted and not sub section (5) of Section 131 as at that point of time it was not a case of non levy or short levy, and these two categories of errors could not be equated with the error of erroneous refund inasmuch as these three categories of errors are treated separately in the scheme of things.
[109H; 100A B] 7.
The error committed by the Tribunal, in the instant case, is so patent that it cannot be allowed to go uncor rected as a tolerable error.
The appeal has, therefore, to be allowed The orders of the Tribunal passed in appeal have to be modified so as to revive the order of the original assessment dated 6.8.79 and the order of the Assistant Collector of Customs dated 12.10.79, keeping upset the orders dated 2.5.81 of the Appellate Collector of Customs.
[ 110G H]
