This batch of eighteen appeals by special leave involves a common question of law, regarding the scope and ambit of the word 'retrenchment ' as defined in Section 2(oo) of the Industrial Dispute Act, 1947.
112 One of the appeals is by the workmen against the order of the High Court affirming the award of the Labour Court refusing to interfere with the order of termination of their services by the employer for their trade union activities, while the rest are by the employers/ managements against the orders of High Courts/Industrial Tribunal/ Labour Court setting aside the orders of termination of the services of the illegal for non compliance of the provisions of Section 25F of the Act.
While the employers ' contention is that the word "re trenchment" as defined in Section 2(oo) of the Act means termination of service of a workman only by way of surplus labour for any reason whatsoever, the workmen contend that "retrenchment" means termination of the service of a workman for any reason whatsoever, other than those expressly ex cluded by the definition in Section 2(oo) of the Act.
Disposing of the appeals, this Court, HELD: (1) Definition of 'retrenchment ' in Section 2(oo) means termination by the employer of the service of a work man for any reason whatsoever, otherwise than as a punish ment inflicted by way of disciplinary action and those expressly excluded by the definition.
This is the wider literal interpretation as distinguished from the narrow, natural and contextual interpretation of the word to mean termination by the employer of the service of a workman as surplus labour for any reason whatsoever.
[156C; 131B] B.N. Mutto vs T.K. Nandi, ; ; Jugal Ki shore Saraf vs Raw Cotton Co. Ltd., ; ; Sussex Peerage Case, [1844] II CI & Fin 85:8 ER 1034 (HL); Thompson vs Goold & Co., ; Ealsing L.B.C. vs Race Relations Board, ; Whiteley vs Chappell, [1868] LR 4; Prince Ernest of Hanover vs Attorney General, and Muir vs Keay, 44 MJMC 143, referred to.
(2) Difficulty was created by defining 'retrenchment ' to mean something wider than what it naturally and ordinarily meant.
Such a definition created complexity as the draftsman himself in drafting the other sections using the definition may slip into the ordinary meaning instead of the defined meaning.
However, a judge facing such a problem of interpre tation cannot simply fold his hands and blame the draftsman.
[149A B; F] 113 (3) The definition has used the word 'means '.
When a statute says that a word or phrase shall 'mean ' not merely that it shall 'include ' certain things or acts, "the defini tion is a hard and fast definition, and no other meaning can be assigned to the expression than is put down in defini tion." [150F G] Queen vs Commissioners under the Boiler Explosions Act, 1882, [1891] I QBD 703 and Gough vs Gough, LT II; relied on.
(4) There are apparent incongruities when the definition Clause Section 2(oo) is considered in the context of the main provisions viz. Sections 25F, 25G and 25H but there is room for harmonious construction.
The definitions contained in Section 2 are subject to there being anything repugnant in the subject or context.
[152C D] Vishwamitra Press vs Workers, ; ; Presidency Jute Mills Co. Ltd. vs Presidency Juite Mills Co. Employees Union, [1952] I LLJ 796 (LAT) (Cal); Iron & Steel Mazdoor Union, Kanpur vs J.K. Iron and Steel Co. Ltd., ; Halar Salt and Chemical Works, Jamnagar vs Workmen, ; Prakriti Bhushan Gupta vs Chief Mining Engineer, Railway Board, ; Sudarshan Banerjee vs Mcleod and C. Ltd., ; Srinivasa Enterprises vs Union of India, ; ; Reserve Bank of India vs Peerless Central Finance and Investment Co. Ltd., [1987] 2 SCR I, referred to.
(5) The express exclusion of volitional element in cl.
(a) and (b) of Section 2(oo) namely, voluntary retirement, and retirement on superannuation age implies that those would otherwise have been included.
If such cases were to be included, termination on abandonment of service, on efflux of time and on failure to qualify, though only consequential or resultant would be included as those have not been ex cluded.
Then there appears to be a gap between the first part and the exclusion part.
When such a gap is disclosed, the remedy lies in an amending Act.
The Court has to inter pret a statute and apply it to the facts.
[150C E] Duport Steels vs Sirs, , referred to.
(6) Construing retrenchment in its wider sense, the rights of the employer under the standing orders and under contracts of employment may have been affected by Sections 2(00) and 25F and other relevant sections.
Secondly, it may be said that the rights as such are not affected or taken away but only additional social obligation has been 114 placed on the employer so as to give retrenchment benefit to affected.
workmen perhaps for tiding over immediate finan cial distress.
Seen from this angle, there is implicit a social policy.
So goes the maxim Stat Pro ratione voluntes populi the will of the people stands in place of a reason.
[153E G] (7) In Sundara Money and subsequent cases the Supreme Court has adopted wider liberal meaning rejecting the narrow natural and contextual meaning.
The question of subsequent decisions of the Supreme Court being per incuriam on grounds of failure to apply the earlier law laid down by the Consti tution Bench in Hariprasad Shukla case could arise only if ratio in Sunclara Money and subsequent decisions was in conflict with the ratio in Hariprasad and Anakapalli.
Hari prasad case is not an authority for the proposition that Section 2(oo) only covers cases of discharge of surplus labour and staff.
Sundara Money and subsequent decisions in the line could not be held to be per incuriam in as much as in Hindustan Steel and Santosh Gupta cases the Division Benches of the Supreme Court had referred to Hariprasad case, and rightly held that its ratio did not extend beyond the case of termination on the ground of closure and as such it would not be correct to say that subsequent decision overlooked a binding precedent.
In a fast developing branch of Industrial and Labour Law it may not be always of partic ular importance to rigidly stick to a precedent and a prece dent may need to be departed from if the basis of legisla tion changes.
[143B C; 145E] L. Robert D 'Souza vs Executive Engineer, Southern Rail way and Anr., ; Rajasthan State Electricity Board vs Labour Court, ; Goodlas Nerolac Paints vs Chief Commissioner, Delhi, and The Managing Director, National Garages vs J. Gonsalves, , overruled.
Delhi Cloth and General Mills Ltd. vs Shambhu Nath Mukherjee and Ors.
, ; ; Hindustan Steel Ltd. vs The Presiding Officer, Labour Court; , ; Santosh Gupta vs State Bank of Patiala, ; ; Gammon India Ltd. vs Niranjan Das, ; and Reg vs Home Secretary, Ex P. Khawaja, [1984] AC 74 (HL), relied on.
Pipraich Sugar Mills Ltd. vs Pipraich Sugar Mills Maz door Union, ; Sub Nomine Barsi Light Railway Co. vs K.N. Joglekar, ; Hariprasad Shivshankar Shukla vs A.D. Divikar, [1957] SCR 121; Anaka palla Co operative Agricultural 115 and Industrial Society Ltd. vs Workmen.
[1963] Supp. 1 SCR 730 and Workmen of Subong Tea Estate vs The Outgoing Manage ment of Subong Tea Estate and Anr., ; , dis tinguished.
Employees vs India Reconstitution Corporation Ltd., ; Indian Hume Pipe Co. Ltd. vs Workmen, ; Benett Coleman and Company Ltd. vs Employees, ; Mahan Lal vs Bharat Electronic Ltd., ; and Surendra Kumar Verma vs Central Govern ment Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court, New Delhi; , , referred to.
(8) Article 141 embodies, a rule of law, the doctrine of precedents on which our judicial system is based.
[136H] (9) Per Incuriam means through inadvertance.
A decision can be said generally to be given per incuriam when the Supreme Court has acted in ignorance of its own previous decision or when a High Court has acted in ignorance of a decision of the Supreme Court.
The problem of judgment per incuriam when actually arises, should present no difficulty as the Supreme Court can lay down the law afresh if two or more of its earlier judgments cannot stand together.
Article 141, which embodies as a rule of law, the doctrine of prece dents, was enacted to make the law declared by the Supreme Court itself.
[136G; 138G; 137F] Re Dawson 's Settlement Lloyds Bank Ltd. vs Dawson, and Bengal Immunity Company Ltd. vs State of Bihar, , relied upon (10) The doctrine of ratio decidendi has also to be interpreted in the same line.
To consider the ratio deciden di Court has to ascertain the principle on which the case was decided.
The ratio decidendi of a decision may be nar rowed or widened by the judges before whom it is cited as a precedent.
[139G H] State of Orissa vs Sudhansu Shikhar Misra, ; ; F.A. & AB Ltd. vs Lupton (Inspector of taxes), ; Osborne vs Rowlett.
and Quinn vs Leathem. ; , relied on Griffiths vs J.P. Harrison (Watford) Ltd., ; Finsbury Securities Ltd. vs Inland Revenue Commissioners, , referred to. 116
