The respondent 's truck was seized by the police on 10th December, 1974 for alleged contravention of the provisions of the on the night of 15th March, 1972.
The respondent fried applications before the High Court for quashing the orders of the Judicial Magis trate First Class and the Sessions Judge rejecting his request for the return of the vehicle on furnishing security and also for quashing the order of the Collector and re straining him from proceeding further in pursuance of notice issued by him under Section 6B of the Act for confiscation of the vehicle or directing the District Judicial Magistrate to dispose of his application in accordance with law.
Allowing the applications and directing the return of the vehicle, the High Court held that Section 6A of the Act, as amended by Section 4 of the Amendment Act, 1974 was only prospective and that the Criminal Court had jurisdiction to entertain applications under Section 523 read with 516A of the Criminal Procedure Code, for the return of the vehicle seized by the police pending final decision of the criminal case.
Dismissing the appeal by the State, this Court, HELD: 1.1 The normal rule of construction is that a provision in a statute is prospective but not retrospective.
However, in the case of statutes which are merely declarato ry or which relate to only matters of 264 procedure or of evidence, it may have retrospective effect if there are indications to that effect or the manifest purpose compels one to construe the Act as such.
[265G H] 1.2 The High Court examined Section 4 of the Essential Commodities (Amendment) Act, 1974 alongwith Section 6A of the Principal Act and came to the conclusion that there was no retrospective effect.
Not only that there were no specif ic words to indicate the provisions of retrospective effect, but the positive provisions of sub section (2) of Section 1 were to the effect that the amendment must he deemed to have come into effect on a particular date.
The High Court was, therefore, right in holding that Section 4 of the Amendment Act, 1974 was only prospective and not retrospective.
[266B C] In the instant case, the contravention of the provisions of the Act is alleged to have occured on 15th March, 1972, whereas the vehicle was seized on th December, 1974.
There fore, the provisions of Section 6A of the Essential Commodi ties Act, 1955 as it stood on 15th March, 1972 only were applicable to the present case and Section 4 of the Amend ment Act, 1974 could not he applied as the Act was not in force on the date of offence.
[266D] 2.
Normally, under the Criminal Procedure Code, the Criminal Courts of the country have the jurisdiction and the ouster of the ordinary criminal court in respect of a crime can only he inferred if that is the irresistible conclusion flowing from necessary implication of the new Act.
In view of the language used and in the context in which this lan guage has been used, the High Court was right in coming to the conclusion that the Criminal Court retained jurisdiction and was not completely ousted of the jurisdiction.
[266H; 267A B]
