Under the Explanation added to section 271(1)(c) of the Income Tax Act 1961 by the Finance Act, 1964, the assessee, in a case where the total income returned was less than 80 per cent of the total income assessed, was to he deemed to have concealed the particulars of his income unless he proved that the failure to return the correct income did not arise from any fraud or gross or wilful neglect on his part.
In his return of income for the assessment year 1966 67 the assessee respondent declared certain loss.
The wealth statements called for did not disclose investment in lands.
Later it was found that he had purchased a plot in his son 's name.
In the assessment it was stated that the total consid eration was Rs.80,000 out of which Rs.25,000 was the payment in respect of the portion purchased for his son.
The exami nation of the material and the document revealed that the total consideration was Rs. 1,40,000.
The on money payment made by him on behalf of his son was Rs. 18,750.
Since the assessee could not adduce evidence to prove the nature and source of investment the ITO treated the sum as the undisclosed income and initiated penalty proceedings under section 271(1)(c) of the Act for concealment of income and referred the case to IAC.
The IAC imposed a penalty equal to the income concealed holding that the assessee had not discharged the burden cast upon him by the Explanation.
In appeal, the Tribunal set aside the penalty on the ground that the assessee had at no time given any false or different particulars about this property in his return of income or at any time during the assessment proceedings and, therefore, there could not he any question of his having filed any incorrect particulars; that since the assessee had not stated in the assessment proceedings that he had pur chased the pro 256 perty only for Rs.80,000, and during the examination and accepted that though there were two agreements but the real consideration was Rs. 1,40,000, it could not be said that he had been wilfully negligent or fraudulent in this regard; that as regards concealment, his explanation was that there was some cash available for purchase of the plot, and that no doubt the Income Tax Officer might be justified to say that not only this explanation was not convincing but false the rejection of explanation even on the ground of falsity would not mean that the addition represented the assessee 's income and more so of the concealed income.
It also refused to refer to the High Court the questions of law preferred by the revenue.
In the appeal by the Revenue under section 256(2) of the Act the High Court found that there was no proof to show that the said sum of Rs. 18,750 represented the income of the relevant year and accordingly held that no question of law arose.
Allowing the appeal by special leave, the Court, HELD: 1.
The High Court was in error in not correctly applying the principles of law laid down by this Court in C.I.T. vs Mussadilal Ram Bharose, to the facts of the case.
The decision, therefore, was not sustainable.
[262F] 2.1.
The presumption that could be raised against the assessee under section 271(1)(c) of the Act, as it stood at the relevant time, that he was guilty of fraud or gross or wilful neglect resulting in concealment of income was a rebuttable presumption and if there was cogent material to rebut the evidence that was acceptable, the said presumption would not stand.
1261E; 262B] 2.2.
In the instant case, the falsity of the explanation given by the assessee had been accepted by the Tribunal in as much as it had stated that the Income Tax Officer was justified to say that not only the explanation was not convincing but false because there was no cash available to the assessee for payment of the extra money paid.
Therefore, no explanation was forwarded as to where from the extra money came.
If that was the position and the presumption was further that the assessee was guilty of fraud, then the subsequent presumption followed that he had concealed the income.
[262B D] 2.3.
The presumption thus raised against the assessee that he was guilty of fraud or wilful neglect as a result of which he had concealed the 257 income, would be there.
This presumption could have been rebutted By cogent, reliable and relevant materials.
No such attempt was made in the case.
It could not, therefore, be said that the Tribunal was justified in rejecting the claim.
[262E F] [Statement of the case to be forwarded by the Tribunal within four months and the High Court to dispose of the reference as quickly as possible.] [262G]
