The appellant in the civil appeal was an Assistant Public Prosecutor Grade I in the State of Kerala.
The writ petition under Article 32 of the Constitution has been filed by the Uttar Pradesh Public Prosecutors ' Association con sisting of the membership of Assistant Public Prosecuters, including Prosecuting Officers, senior Prosecuting Officers, Deputy Director of Prosecution serving under the Government of Uttar Pradesh.
In both the cases the controversy raised is that there exists a regular cadre of Prosecuting Officers and as such the State Government is bound to appoint Public Prosecutors and Additional Public Prosecutors only from among the persons constituting such cadre in view of section 24(6) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, as amended by the Criminal Procedure Code (Amendment) Act of 1978.
The appellant 's writ petition filed in the High Court of Kerala was dismissed.
The High Court was of the view that the provisions of sub section (6) of section 24 could have application in respect of States where there was a regular cadre consisting of hierarchy of Prosecuting Officers with the Assistant Public Prosecutor at he lowest rung and having at the top level Additional Public Prosecutors and Public Prosecutors.
The High Court held that there was no regular cadre of Prosecuting Officers in the State of Kerala Com prising therein Public Prosecutors and Additional Public Prosecutors.
The High Court further observed that under the Kerala Government Law Officers (Appointment and Conditions of Service) and Conduct of Cases Rules, 1978 the posts of Public Prosecutors and Additional Public Prosecutors were tenure posts and as such the Assistant Public Prosecutors who were regular hands could not be appointed to the tenure posts.
320 Before this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant/ petitioners that Assistant Public Prosecutors Grade I and Grade II together constituted a cadre of Prose cuting Officers so as to attract the applicability of sub section (6) of section 24 of the Code.
It was urged that in case the meaning to the expression "regular cadre of Prose cuting Officers" under sub section (6) of section 24 was given as to consist of a regular cadre of Prosecuting Offi cers going upto Public Prosecutor at the top, then there was no benefit to such persons by enacting sub sections (6) and (9) in section 24, by the Amending Act of 1978.
It was further urged that there was no bar for appointment of Assistant Public Prosecutors against tenure posts as offi cers on deputation.
The State of U.P. in its counter has brought out the distinction in these two kinds of posts in the manner and terms of their appointment, discharge of duties, emoluments etc.
It was further urged that in Uttar Pradesh there was no regular cadre of Prosecuting Officers within the meaning of section 24(6) of the Code of Criminal Procedure and as such the petitioners were not entitled to appointment as Public Prosecutors or Additional Public Prosecutors.
Dismissing the appeal and the writ petition, this Court, HELD: (1) The intention of introducing sub section (6) and the deeming fiction in sub section (9) was in order to safeguard the promotional rights of Prosecuting Officers in such of the States where there was already in existence a regular cadre consisting of a hierarchy of Prosecuting Officers going to the top level of Additional Public Prose cutors and Public Prosecutors.
[334E F] (2) The Kerala High Court was right in taking the view that the expression "regular cadre of Prosecuting Officers" comprised a service with Assistant Public Prosecutor at the lowest level and Public Prosecutors at the top.
In case a regular cadre of Prosecuting Officers did not go upto Public Prosecutor at the top, the State Government could not be considered as bound to appoint Public Prosecutor or Addi tional Public Prosecutor only from among the persons consti tuting such cadre under the Code of Criminal Procedure for conducting cases in the Sessions Court.
[334G H] (3) It was within the competence of the State Government to keep such posts of Public Prosecutor and Additional Public Prosecutor as tenure posts for some period based on contract and not to make such 321 posts as regular or permanent under any service rule.
In this view of the matter, till such posts were tenure posts, to be filled on contract basis for some period, the Assist ant Public Prosecutors who were members of a regular service could not claim any right to be appointed on such posts under sub section (6) of section 24 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
[33SA C] (4) The contention of the petitioners that Assistant Public Prosecutors can be appointed on such tenure posts on deputation and may return back to their parent service after completion of the period of such tenure posts, was not acceptable.
[335C]
