The petitioner filed a writ petition in the High Court challenging the detention of her husband, Syed Ali Raza Shafiq Mohammed, under section 3(1) of the Prevention of Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Sub stances Act, 1988.
The detenu was then already in jail as he was involved in a case under the Act, and his bail applica tion in that case had been rejected.
3"he Division Bench of the High Court dismissed the writ petition.
Before this Court in the Special Leave Petition it was inter alia contended on behalf of the detenu that: (i) the mere possibility of the detenu 's release on bail was not enough for preventive detention unless there was material to justify the apprehension that his detention would be neces sary in order to prevent him from engaging in illicit traf ficking in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, in case of his release on bail; (ii) the detention orders of Rai Chand Shah and Jai Lal Vora, who were arrested and detained in the same raid, having been struck down by the High Court on the ground that the medical report in respect of the injuries sustained by Rai Chand Shah was placed in a truncated form before the detaining authority, the detention order of the detenu should also be set aside as it suffered from the same vice; (iii) though the declaration was issued under Sec.
10(1) of the Act on 20.1.1989 but the same was served on the detenu on 10.2.1989 after an unexplained delay of 21 days; and (iv) there was in an inordinate and unex plained delay in considering the representations made by the detenu.
On the other hand, it was contended on behalf of the respondents that: (i) it would depend on the facts and circumstances of each case whether a detention order was to be passed or not in case of a person who was already in custody; (ii) the detaining authority could take into ac count the nature of the antecedent activities of the detenu in order to 269 arrive at the conclusion that it was likely that after his release from custody he would indulge in criminal activities and it was necessary to detain him in order to prevent him from engaging in such activities; and (iii) in the present case there was complete awareness in the mind of the detain ing authority that if he was released on bail he was likely to indulge in the criminal activities.
Dismissing the special leave petition, this Court, HELD: (1) The material placed before the detaining authority and the facts mentioned in the grounds of deten tion clearly go to show that the detaining authority was fully aware that the bail application filed by the detenu had been rejected.
The detaining authority was also con scious of the fact that the two other detenus who were arrested and detained in the same raid had already been released on bail.
[277B C] (2) The antecedents of the detenu which were clear from his own statement went to show that he was initiated in drug trafficking in 1984 and employed as a delivery hay on Rs.30 per day and within a short span of four years had himself started buying and selling Narcotic Drugs and amassed huge movable and immovable properties in Bombay.
In the present raid itself hereoin and Mandrax tablets worth Rs. 1,13,42,000 were seized from the ownership and possession of the detenu.
[277C D] (3) The detaining authority after taking into consider ation the material placed before him, arrived at the conclu sion that the detenu being in judicial custody may under the normal law of the land he granted bail and be in a position to continue to pursue his nefarious activities [277E] (4) The detaining authority in these circumstances considered it necessary to invoke the law of preventive detention under the Act to prevent the detenu from indulging in prejudicial activities in future.
In these circumstances, it cannot be said that the order of detention was illegal on the ground that it was passed while the detenu was already in custody [277F] (5) The facts and circumstances of each case have to be taken into consideration in the context of considering the order of detention in the case of a detenu who is already in jail.
[273G] N. Meera Rani vs Government of Tamil Nadu, JT 478; Dharmendra Sugan Chand Chelwat vs Union of India, ; ; Sanjeev Kumar Aggarwal Union of India, JT ; Smt.
Shashi Aggarwal vs State of U.P., JT and Ramesh Yadav vs District Magistrate, Etah, , referred to.
(6) A perusal of the orders of the High Court quashing the detention orders of Rai Chand Shah and Jai Lal Vora shows that the basis for the detention orders were their confessional statements.
The High Court in this regard had observed that the confessional statement of Rai Chand Shah which also formed integral and vital part of the grounds of detention of Jai Lal Vora being product of threats and injuries sustained by him and further his medi cal report having been placed in truncated form before the detaining authority, their detention became invalid.
But, so far as the case of the present detenu is concerned, his detention was based on entirely distinct and separate mate rials including his own confessional statements.
The basis of the grounds of detention of the present detenu is not rounded on the truncated form of medical report of injuries sustained by Rai Chand Shah.
Thus the present detenu cannot take advantage of any orders passed by the High Court de claring detention orders of Rai Chand Shah and Jai Lal Vora as illegal.
[278A E] (7) So far as the provision of Sub Sec.
(3) of Sec.
3 of the Act is concerned, it clearly provides that for the purposes of clause (5) of article 22 of the Constitution, the communication to a person detained in pursuance of a deten tion order of the grounds on which the order has been made shah be made as soon as may he after the detention, but ordinarily not later than five days, and in exceptional circumstances and for reasons to be recorded in writing, not later than fifteen days, from the date of detention.
This provision thus relates to the communication 01 ' the grounds of detention.
[279B C] (8) The principle of five days and fifteen days as provided in Sub section (3) of Section 3 of the Act relating to communication of grounds of detention cannot be applied in respect of declaration issued under Sec.
10(1) of the Act.
[280F] (9) There is no force in the contention that there was an inordinate delay in considering the representations submitted by the detenu.
The High Court has given adequate and detailed reasons in holding that the delay has been explained by the counter affidavit filed by the respondents.
[281A B] 271
