The petitioner was carrying on business as a stockist of Baba Brand Tobacco.
The petitioner 's husband, who was a sub dealer of the product, was living with her at all mate rial times.
A search under section 132 of the Income Tax Act was conducted at their house and valuables and books of account seized.
A notice under rule 112A of the Income Tax Rules read with sub section (5) of section 132 of the Act was served on the petitioner.
The petitioner filed an application in the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution claiming return of account books and other valuables to her.
On the other hand, in the proceedings under Section 132(5) of the Act against the petitioner 's husband, he had claimed that the ornaments belonged to him and that the same could be treated as representing his undisclosed income.
The High Court came to the conclusion that the authori sation for search under section 132(1) of the Act against the petitioner was not in accordance with law and, there fore, the seizure of the assets could not be said to have been in accordance with law.
The High Court however noted that in view of the order made under section 132(5) of the Act against the husband, the valuables could not be ordered to be returned to the petitioner.
Before this Court, it was contended on behalf of the petitioner that if search and seizure were illegal, the items of jewellery were liable to be returned On behalf of the Revenue, it was contended that in a situation where there was a dispute as to who was the owner of the jewellery and ornaments, the decision of the High Court declining to direct their return to the petitioner could not be faulted.
394 Dismissing the special leave petition, the Court, HELD: (1) A dispute as to the ownership of jewellery in question cannot be resolved in proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution in the manner sought for by the peti tioner.
[397F] (2) In the instant controversy the Court is not con cerned whether the proceedings against the husband under section 132(5) of the Act are valid or not, but irrespective of the validity of the proceedings, the evidence or testimo ny wherein the husband has asserted the ornaments and jewel lery to be his, cannot be wiped out and does not become non existent.
The aforesaid being the factual matrix, the High Court was pre eminently justified in declining to direct return of these items of jewellery and other items to the wife.
If that is the position, then it cannot be said that the High Court has committed any error in law which required rectification by this Court under Article 136 of the Constitution.
[397E G] Assainer & Anr.
vs Income Tax Officer, Calicut, ; J.R. Malhotra & Anr.
vs Additional Sessions Judge, Jullunder, ; and Commissioner of Commercial Taxes, Board of Revenue, Madras vs Ramkishnan Shrikishan Jhaver, ; , distinguished.
