S and R were brothers who carried on the business of gold smithery, and a partition took place between them in 1918.
R got 2 houses and land in Survey No. 71.
Later on, one of the sons of R instituted a suit claiming that Survey No. 71 was an ancestral property and that some of the suit properties were purchased by R out of the income, and subsequently the sale proceeds, of the land.
The defendants, viz., the other children of R contended that Survey No. 71 was purchased by S and R with the income they derived from gold smithery and the suit properties except the two houses which were admittedly the ancestral properties, were not the joint family properties in which the plaintiff could claim his share.
The Trial Court decreed the suit in favour of the plain tiff.
On appeal by the defendants, the First Appellate Court reappreciated the evidence, found infirmities in the conclu sions arrived at by the Trial Court and dismissed the suit except to the extent of plaintiff 's share in the two ances tral houses, on the basis of its finding that the other properties were self acquired properties of R. During the pendency of the suit R died.
By virtue of his will the self acquired properties of R went to the defend ants and the plaintiff was left out.
The plaintiff preferred an appeal before the High Court against the order of the First Appellate Court.
The High Court interfered with the said findings of facts and held that since Survey No. 71 had come to the share of R in general partition, it was ancestral property.
it further observed that since the said property was yielding income with the help of which the other properties could have been purchased and since 436 further the gold smithery business was an ancestral busi ness, the properties purchased with the help of such income should be held to be joint family properties.
Aggrieved, the defendants have filed this appeal.
Allow ing the appeal, HELD: 1.
There was, no question of law involved in the second appeal.
Yet the High Court chose to interfere with the finding ignoring the mandatory provisions of Section 100 of the Civil Procedure Code that unless it was satisfied that the case involved substantial question of law it could not entertain it and that before it could entertain it, the Court had to formulate such question.
[440F] 2.1 It was not disputed at any time that the property in Survey No. 71 had all along stood in the name of Supadu and, therefore, the presumption drawn by the First Appellate Court that this showed that in all probability the property was purchased after the death of his father cannot be said to be unreasonable.
There is no evidence brought on record by the plaintiff with regard to the quantum of income from Survey No.71.
In fact, the uncontroverted evidence on record shows that Ramchandra had no implements and bullocks for cultivating the land and the land was always cultivated with the help of the labourers who brought their own implements and bullocks.
This shows that the family derived less than normal income from the said land.
It was admitted by the plaintiff that Ramchandra was a skilled goldsmith and was well known in the locality as such, and was doing his busi ness as goldsmith and earning sufficient income.
[440A D] 2.2 The High Court ignoring the fact that it was not the case of the plaintiff that goldsmithery was an ancestral business and that it was not his case that the suit proper ties were purchased with the help of the income from the said business held that it was so.
What is further, the plaintiff 's case was that the suit properties were purchased with the income from Survey No. 71.
Thus it is obvious that the conclusions which were arrived at by the First Appellate Court were reasonable and legal besides being conclusions of facts.
[440D E]
