A common question of law viz., whether an order of dismissal against an employee, could validly be passed by an authority lower than the appointing authority of the Bank, arises for determination in these three appeals, two by the State Bank of India and the third by an employee.
Respondent, Vijaya Kumar in Civil Appeal 3392 of 1990, was appointed as Probationary Officer by an order of the Executive Committee of the Central Board of the State Bank of India.
He was charge sheeted for gross irregularities and corrupt practices and was dismissed from service by an order passed by the Chief General Manager of the Bank, whereupon, he flied a writ petition before the Andhra Pradesh High Court, challenging the order of dismissal passed against him.
A Division Bench of the High Court heard the writ petition, alongwith writ appeal No. 141 of 1986 (involving a similar point).
The High Court allowed the writ petition.
The State Bank being aggrieved by the said order has filed this appeal after obtaining special leave.
T. Dayakar Rao, respondent in Civil Appeal No. 3393 of 1990 was appointed as a Clerk in the State Bank in October, 1962 and while he was working as a Bank Manager he was chargesheeted for irregularities committed by him during the period from 1.9.1979 to 14.6.80.
He was dismissed under orders of the Chief General Manager being the disciplinary authority.
Mr. Rao flied a writ petition in the High Court and the High Court allowed the writ petition following its decision in writ appeal No. 141 of 1986.
Being aggrieved the State Bank has filed the instant appeal with special leave of the Court.
Civil Appeal No. 3394 of 1990 has been filed ,by an employee A.K. 399 Soundararajan, who was appointed as Technical Officer by the Executive Committee of the Central Board of the Bank.
It was specifically mentioned in the Order of appointment that Shri Soundararajan would be governed by the State Bank of India (Officers & Assistants) Service Rules.
Shri Soundararajan was chargesheeted and dismissed under orders passed by the Chief General Manager Thereupon he filed a writ petition in the High Court challenging his order of dismissal.
Learned Single Judge of the High Court allowed the writ petition.
The Bank filed an appeal before the Division Bench.
The Division Bench in this case took into consideration an amendment made in Regulation 55 by a resolution dated 25.8.1988 made applicable with retrospective effect.
Accord ingly the Division Bench allowed the appeal filed by the Bank, Aggrieved against this order.
Shri Soundararajan has flied Civil Appeal 3394 of 1990 with special leave.
The contention urged by the employees is that the Chief General Manager, being a lower authority than the Executive Committee, he had no competence to pass the order of dis missal whereas the Bank contends that the Chief General Manager had, by virtue of the amendment of Regulation 55(2)(a) made retrospectively, become the appointing author ity of employees in question and as such the orders of dismissal passed by him against the employees long after the amendment are valid.
Allowing the appeals by the State Bank and remanding the two cases to the High Court and directing that the appeal by Soundararajan be listed for final hearing, this Court, HELD: The hallmark of status is the attachment to a legal relationship of rights and duties imposed by the public law and not by mere agreement by the parties.
Emolu ment of the Government servant and his terms of service are governed by statute or statutory rule which may be unilater ally altered by the Government without the consent of the employee.
[411F G] Under Article 311(1) of the Constitution, the words used are "by which he was appointed" In regulation 55(2)(a) there are no such words "by which he was appointed" and in its place the only right guaranteed is that the employee shall not be dismissed by an authority lower than the ap pointing authority.
[410A] Thus the right guaranteed in case of the officers or employees of the State Bank is that the order of dismissal cannot he passed by an 400 authority lower than the appointing authority.
[410B] The right whatsoever conferred on the employees of the State Bank was on the basis of Regulation 55(2)(a) and the Central Board of the Bank was authorised to amend such regulations from any date under Section 50(2)(a) of the Act.
This provision now concludes the controversy if any and clearly provides that the appointing authority shall mean and include the authority who has been designated as such at the time when such order is passed.
[412B; 410H] State of Jammu & Kashmir vs Triloki Nath Khosa & Ors., ; ; Bishun Narain Misra vs The State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors., A.I.R. 1965 Vol.
52 S.C. 1567; Roshan Lal Tandon vs Union of India & Anr. and Kunj Behari vs Union of India & Ors., A.I.R. 1967 S.C. (Vol. 54) 1889, referred to.
