The appellant, an employee of the Municipal Corporation Ahmedabad was holding the post of Laboratory Officer and while he was so holding the post, he by a Notification dated 21.12.1966, issued by the State Government, was appointed as a Public Analyst for the local area within the municipal limits of the Corporation.
The respondent filed a complaint before the Magistrate for offences punishable under Sections 465, 468 and 20 1.
I.P.C. alleged to have been committed by the appellant while exercising his functions as a Public Analyst.
The appellant moved the High Court under Section 482, for quashing the criminal proceedings sought to be initiated against him by the said complaint.
His principle contention was that he being a public servant removable from office only by the State Government, the magistrate could not take cognizance of the alleged offences and that previ ous sanction of the State Government as contemplated under section 197, Cr.
P.C. was necessary.
The High Court rejected the contention of the appellant and dismissed the petition.
He has filed this appeal after obtaining special leave from the Court.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: The privilege or immunity from prosecution without sanction extends only when the accused is a public servant of the kind mentioned in Section 197, Cr.
He must be a public servant as defined in Section 21 of the Indian Penal Code and not removable from his office save by or with the sanction of the State Government or the Central Government as the case may be.
The offence must also be one committed by the accused while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty.
Section 197, Cr.
P.C. clearly intends to draw a line between public servants and to pro vide that only in the case of the higher ranks should the sanction of the Government to their prosecution be neces sary.
[513C D, H] 512 The words "removable from office" occurring in Section 197 signify removal from the office one is holding.
[514B] In the instant case, the appellant was not holding any public office in connection with the affairs of the State.
The State Government had merely entrusted him with the functions of a Public Analyst which could be granted and taken by an administrative Act.
It was on account of his being employed by the Municipal Corporation that he was appointed as a Public Analyst in the cadre against any post.
The Prevention of Food Adulteration Act also does not con tain any deeming provision to treat the Public Analyst as a public servant.
[514D E] The appellant is not therefore a public servant remova ble only by the State Government.
[514G]
