The plaintiff/appellant is the second son of late Raja Padam Singh, the ex ruler of Bushahr State in Himachal Pradesh.
The erstwhile Ruler of Bushahr had sought the aid of the British Government in the management of his forests with a view to preserving, conserving and protecting the same from large scale illicit and indiscriminate cutting of trees.
Pursuant to this request, an agreement of lease dated 20th June, 1864 was executed between the said Raja and the British Government.
The terms of this agreement were revised in 1877 and again 1928.
Before the expiry of its extended term, another agreement of lease was executed between Raja Padam Singh and the Government of Punjab on 25th September, 1942 superseding all previous agreements.
By clause (III) of this agreement the Raja granted to the Punjab Government the entire and sole control of the forests of Bushahr excepting those reserved for his use under clause (II) thereof.
The Raja was to receive in lieu thereof an annual payment of Rs.1 lakh, and further payment of the whole net surplus on the working of the forests included in the lease.
Raja Padam Singh executed a document on 28th November, 1942 whereby be bestowed upon the plaintiff and his mother land admeasuring about 1720 acres, both measured and unmeas ured.
The original document, called the Patta, was admitted ly lost during the minority of the appellant.
The patta had, however, been referred to in the subsequent two grants executed by the Raja on 11th March 1943 and lOth December 1946.
After the execution of the first grant or patta the 470 plaintiff 's father had made an Order No. 5158 directing corresponding mutation changes.
The mutation entry, besides mentioning the area of 263.4 bighas, also speaks of 'part of uncultivated 'Jagir '.
Subsequently, in September, 1959, the plaintiff 's forests were notified as 'private Forests ' under section 4 of the Himachal Pradesh Private Forests Act, 1954.
But in July, 1960 the State Government annulled the notifi cations on the ground that they were erroneously issued and that the lands in fact belonged to the Himachal Pradesh Administration.
The plaintiff filed a suit on 18th November, 1964 for a declaration his proprietary rights in about 1720 acres of forest land, both measured and unmeasured.
The learned Single Judge substantially decreed the suit.
The learned single Judge held that (i) the plaintiff 's father, who in internal matters had sovereign powers, had bestowed the lands in dispute as a perpetual and uncondi tional grant on the plaintiff; (ii) the mere fact that in the mutation entry the areas was shown to be 263.4 bighas did not imply that the grant was limited to that much land only; (iii) in the State of Bushahr only cultivated land was generally measured and forest lands remained unmeasured, and, therefore, the area of only revenue yielding cultivated land was mentioned in the mutation entry; (iv) the evidence, considered as a whole, fully established that the grant was not rependiated but was given effect to by the Political Agent, Simla, as well as by the revenue authorities of Bushahr State and was also recognised by the Dominion of India at the time of the State 's merger; (v) even assuming that the lands in dispute formed part of forests leased to the Government of Punjab, the Raja was not precluded from making the grant and the grants made in favour of the plain tiff were perfectly legal and valid; (vi) after the lease was terminated on 11th April, 1949, the Himachal Pradesh Administration treated the plaintiff as the owner and per mitted him various acts as owner and person in possession; (vii) notifications were issued under Section 4 of the Himachal Pradesh Act, 1954 declaring the disputed land as private forests; and (viii) the notification issued under section 29 of the had no application to such lands.
The Division Bench, allowing the State appeal, inter alia took the view that after the execution of the lease deed dated 25th September, 1942 in favour of the Government of Punjab, the Raja had no surviving or subsisting right in the forest lands in question which he could transfer by way of a grant; at the most the grant made by the erstwhile ruler could take effect in respect of revenue yielding lands only, admeasuring 471 about 263.5 bighas, and not in respect of the forest lands; and that the notification under section 29 of the was validly issued and so long as it held the field, no notification could be issued under section 4 of the Himachal Pradesh Private Forests Act, 1954.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: (1) The plaintiff 's father had a surviving and subsisting right in the forest lands which the subject matter of the lease dated 25th September, 1942 and was competent to grant the same to the plaintiff or anyone else, albeit subject to the terms of the lease.
[486C] (2) The paramount object of the lease was to conserve the forests of Bushahr State.
By concluding the lease agree ment with the Punjab Government, the Raja did not convey all his rights, title and interest in the leased forest lands to the Government.
All that he did was to transfer the control and management of the forests to the Punjab Government with a view to preserving and conserving the forests.
He however retained his proprietary interest in the forest lands.
Had it been the intention of the Raja to divest himself of all his interests in the forest lands, there was no need to provide the duration of the lease on the expiry whereof (unless the renewal clause was invoked) the Raja would have a right of re entry.
[485G H; 486A] (3) The lease provided that in addition to the two half yearly installments of Rs.50,000 each, the Raja was to receive payment of "whole net surplus" on the working of the forests included in the lease.
This was consistent only with the position that the Raja retained his proprietary inter ests in the forest lands.
[486A B] (4) If the terms of the document are clear and unambigu ous, extrinsic evidence to ascertain the true intention of the parties is inadmissible because section 92 of the Evi dence Act mandates that in such a case the intention must be gathered from the language employed in the document.
But if the language employed is ambiguous and admits of a variety of meanings, it is settled law that the 6th proviso to the section can be invoked which permits tendering of extrinsic evidence as to acts, conduct and surrounding circumstances to enable the Court to ascertain the real intention of the parties.
[491B C] In such a case the subsequent conduct of the parties furnished evidence to clear the blurred area and to ascer tain the true intention of the author of the document.
[491D] 472 Abdulla Ahmed vs Animendra Kissen Mitter, ; , referred to.
Since the words 'part of the uncultivated Jagir ' were ambiguous, extrinsic evidence allunde the grant became necessary to explain the coverage of those words.
[492A] (6) There is intrinsic evidence to show that the grant was not limited to only the revenue yielding area of 263.4 bighas.
If by the grant the Raja intended to grant only the revenue yielding area of 263.4 bighas, there was no need to mention 'and part of uncultivated Jagir ' and these words would be rendered redundant.
The subsequent conduct of the parties lends support to this view.
[488H; 489A] (7) From the various documents placed on record it is quite clear that the disputed forests did not belong to the Government nor did the Government have any proprietary rights therein.
The Government was also not 'entitled ' to the whole or any part of the produce in its own right dehors the lease.
[493C] (8) The word 'entitled ' in the context of section 29 of the must take colour from the preceding words and must be understood to mean that the Government must have an independent claim or right to collect and deal with the same subject to an obligation to account for the same to the owner.
On that account the State was not 'enti tled ' to the forests produce from such private lands.
There fore, the notification issued under section 29 could have uo application to such private forests.
The State Government was, therefore, competent to issue the two notifications under section 4 of the Himachal Pradesh Private Forest Act, 1954 and it was not justified in annulling them on the erroneous premise that the said lands belonged to the State Government.
[493F; 494F G]
