Appointments to various posts in School of Budhist Philosophy, Leh, were governed by the Rules framed by the Board of management in the year 1973.
According to the said rules, the qualifications prescribed for the post of Princi pal as also for the Administrative Officer were identical.
In March 1973, one M.L. Mattoo, Respondent No. 1, who at that time was working as the Administrative Officer of the School was given the additional charge of the post of Prin cipal.
Thereafter the Board of management at its meeting held on 22.8.1978, decided that qualifications prescribed for the post of Principal should be revised, so as to make it obligatory for the Principal to have a thorough academic knowledge of Buddhist Philosophy the primary object of the institution being research and propagation of Budhist phi losophy.
A selection committee was constituted by the Board of management to appoint a suitable person as Principal of the school and one Tashi Paljor, was appointed as Principal.
Being aggrieved by the said appointment, Respondent No. 1, filed a writ petition in the High Court contending that he was removed from the additional charge without affording him an opportunity of being heard and further that he was not considered by the selection committee.
The High Court re jected the first contention but allowed the writ petition on the ground that he was not considered for the post of Prin cipal and thus his right under Article 16 was infringed.
Thereupon the management advertised the post of Principal to be filed by direct recruitment on the basis of the revised qualifications.
Respondent Mattoo challenged the advertise ment by means of a writ petition on the ground that the revised qualifications were not validly prescribed and as such the post of Principal could only be filled in on the basis of the pre revised qualifications.
He based his con tention on the concession made by the counsel for the man agement, when his earlier petition was heard, that the petitioner possessed the requisite qualifications.
According to him the rules have not been amended.
The High Court accepted the contention of Mattoo 516 and allowed the writ petition, quashed the impugned adver tisement and directed the management not to make appointment on the basis of the advertisement in question.
Hence this appeal by the Board of management of the school.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: The Board of management is fully competent to alter or amend the rules in any manner and at any time.
[521E] The qualifications/experience for the post of Principal were validly revised by amending the rules in August 1978.
The advertisement issued on January 5, 1982, was in accord ance with the Rules and the High Court was not justified in quashing the same.
[522B] Since respondent No. 1 does not possess the revised qualifications, he is not eligible to be considered for the said post.
[521F]
