The dispute in these appeals by special leave relates to the inter se seniority of officers in Class 'A ' of the Indian Defence Estate Service.
Class 'A ' of the said service com prised of officers promoted from two different channels viz., Assistant Military Estate Officers and Assistant Military Estate Officers (Technical) of the Military and Cantonment Service Class 'B '.
The manner of selection and appointment of these categories of officers is different.
Whereas Assistant Military Estate Officers were promoted from among the service Class III staff of the military Lands and Cantonments Service; Assistant Military Estate Officers (Technical) were appointed on the recommendations of the Union Public Service Commission, from amongst the officers who were released from Engineering Service of Army after 1962.
There was however no difference in the performance of their duties.
AMEOS were included in Class II of Military Land and Cantonment Service (Class I and II) Rules 1951 for the first time in 1964, by virtue of a notification issued in 1964 and was incorporated in 1951 Rules when it was amended in 1968.
But no such notification was issued in the case of AMEOS (Technical) until 1976; nor any other rule was applied to them.
In other words selections and appointments of AMEOS (Technical) was made without any statutory basis.
To avoid the anomoly, AMEOT were included in Class II of 1951 Rules in 1976.
Thus from this date officers appointed as AMEOT either under the 1968 Rules or prior to it became members of Military Land and Cantonment Service to whom 1951 Rules applied.
But no provision was made for the period of service rendered from 1964 to 1976, which affected their seniority and promotion.
According to the appellant Union, the service rendered during this period has to be deemed as ad hoc.
Respondents being aggrieved filed a Petition before the Central Administrative Tribunal.
The Tribunal allowed the Petition and held that the seniority of AMEOT was to he determined under Rule 11 of 1951 Rules on length of regular service in the cadre and accordingly directed the appellant Union to re determine 605 the seniority of officers.
Hence this appeal by the Union of India.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: Seniority of an employee and its determination depends on service in the cadre to which he belonged or to which he was appointed.
[611B] Effect of Tribunal 's order in the instant case is that it cured the injustice perpetrated due to absence of exer cise of power by the Government under Rule 4(v)(c) of 1951 Rules as it stood amended since 1964.
Substantial justice being one of the guidelines for exercise of power by this Court the order is not liable to interference.
[611F] Justice is alert to differences and sensitive to dis crimination.
It cannot be measured in terms of money.
A Government of a welfare state has gruelling task of being fair and just and so justice oriented in its approach and outlook.
|611H] Mere rectification of mistakes or omissions by Courts and Tribunals should not prompt parties to approach this Court by Special Leave merely for taking a chance or to protect some vested interest except for sake of justice or for laying down law for benefit of Court and its guidance.
AMEOS were granted seniority from the date of appointment in MLC service whereas similar benefit was denied to AMEOT as they were working as ad hoc.
To remove this irritant Tribu nal directed that they shall be deemed to be holding regular posts.
Officers working since 1964 without any flaw could not be treated as ad hoc.
In any case once review DPCs were held it was incumbent on it to include these persons and if necessary to evaluate their services or get it evaluated by appropriate authority to regularise them and then determine seniority.
But ignoring them in 1987 even they had become member of MLC service was arbitrary and unjustified.
[612A D] Col. D.D. Joshi and Ors.
vs Union of India and Ors. ; ; Ranga Reddy and Ors.
vs State of Andhra Pradesh,
