The appellant owned land hearing R.S. Nos. 44/11 and 44/20 in village Thottapuzhasseri in Kerala State.
Respond ent 3, M.M.A. High School moved an application under Sub clauses (a) and (b) of Clause (i) of Section 1 of Chapter 6 of the Land Acquisition Manual before the State 's Education Department praying that the aforesaid land be requisitioned for a public purpose for construction of a playground for the school.
The State authorities after complying with the requirements of the Kerala Land Acquisition Act, 1961, issued a declaration under Section 6 of the Act stating the lands described therein were needed for a public purpose viz. construction of a playground for the school.
The appel lant challenged the validity of the declaration by filing a writ petition before the High Court, contending, that (i) the proposal to acquire the property was mala fide; (ii) that the declaration was bad as no notice was issued to the Education Department as required by Rule 5(b) and (c) of the Kerala Land Acquisition Rules and (iii) that the appellant needed the property for construction of houses for his sons.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition holding that there was no violation of the provisions of Rule 5(b) and (c) of the Rules nor was there any infringement of Rule 6.
Hence this appeal by the appellant by certificate.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: The requisition in the instant case, was not made at the instance of the Government Department but at the instance of the Manager, private school and the Education Department merely has given a note certifying that the purpose of the requisition is a public purpose and that the school agreed to bear the entire costs.
[544C D] It cannot therefore be contended that the requisition has been made by the Education Department or by its officer for acquisition of the land in question.
[541C] 536 The High Court has rightly held that there has been no violation of Rule 5(b) and (c) or 6 of the Rules.
[541F] That it is inappropriate to issue notice to the Education Officer or Departmental Officer who certified about the public purpose as well as readiness of the school authority to pay the entire money for acquisition and failure to issue such a notice to the Departmental Officer would not amount to violation of the principles of natural justice and in fringement of the said Rule 5(b) and (c) of the said Rules.
[541 F G] Lonappan vs Sub Collector, Palghat, AIR 1959 Kerala 343; State of Madras and Ors.
vs Periakkal and Ors., AIR 1974 Madras 383 and State of Mysore and Ors.
vs V.K. Kangan and Ors., ; at 371, referred to.
