The appellants were convicted for offences under sections 302,394 and 34 IPC.
They were alleged to have entered the house of the deceased at midnight and attacked him and his wife, PW 14, with sharp edged weapons.
He sustained fatal injuries and died instantaneously.
His wife was injured.
Their two sons ran to the house of uncle PW 1, at a distance to inform him of the incident.
They had not seen the assail ants.
By the time PW 1 reached the scene the assailants had fled.
He had been in the house the whole night and contacted all the concerned persons.
In the FIR that he lodged at about 10 a.m. the next morning the assailants were not named.
The prosecution case was that the appellants had commit ted the crime on account of enmity.
PW 14, who claimed to be an eye witness, deposed that she had identified the appel lants.
She also stated that she became unconscious and regained consciousness only the next day when the police arrived.
PW 1 supported her version.
The trial court accepted the testimony of PW 14.
The High Court agreed with it.
In this appeal by special leave, it was contended for the appellants that if PW 14 had identified the assailants, it would have been possible for PW 1 to disclose the identi ty of the accused at the time the first information report was lodged, and that the prosecution had introduced the theory of unconsciousness of PW 14 only in an attempt to explain away the lacuna Allowing the appeal, the Court, HELD: 1.
It is not safe to sustain the conviction when there is 573 reasonable doubt regarding the participation of the appel lants in the crime.
The benefit of doubt must necessarily go to them.
The statement of PW 1 at the earliest point of time belies the truth of what he had deposed before the court.
He had been categoric in the FIR that he had made enquiries with the wife and sons of the deceased before proceeding to the police station and asserted that five or six unknown persons had committed the crime.
He had also stated that details could be furnished by the widow and sons of the deceased.
This affirmed that he could not gather any useful information regarding identity of the assailants.
All the same, in cross examination he supported the version of PW 14 that she was lying unconscious when he reached the house at night and she narrated the incident after regaining con sciousness when the police reached there.
It clearly indi cates that an attempt had been made by the prosecution to introduce the case of unconsciousness of PW 14 to explain the infirmity.
[576F; G] 3.
The circumstance that the identity of the assailants was unknown until the police arrived at the scene showed that PW 14 or her children had not identified the assailants at the time of the occurrence.
The courts below have failed to appreciate her evidence in the correct perspective in the light of the clinching evidence.
[576B]
