One Ram Singh was appointed by the appellant company on 10.3.1960.
On 1.11.1970, he addressed a letter of resigna tion to the Manager of the company saying that owing to his family circumstances, it was no longer possible for him to continue in service and that he was compelled to sever his connections with the company.
He made a demand of all his dues.
He wrote another letter two days later that someone should be posted in the section where he was working in order that he may learn the work are: printing of shares, pay sheets and pay registers etc.
The appellant company conveyed the acceptance of the resignation with effect from the 16th November, 1970 and paid all his dues on 22.12.1970.
The amount of gratuity was also paid later.
Ram Singh there after raised an industrial dispute and sought a reference under Section 4K of the U.P. Industrial Dispute Act, 1947.
Initially his demand was not accepted by the State Govern ment but later the State Government accepted his demand on 28.11.1974 whereupon the appellant company filed a writ petition in the High Court challenging the said reference made by the State Government but the High Court dismissed the petition.
The Labour Court thereafter made an award on the reference, in favour of the employee.
It came to the conclusion that the employee 's resignation was not voluntary and therefore his services had been wrongly terminated and accordingly he was directed to be reinstated.
The appellant challenged the validity of the said award under Article 226 of the Constitution before the High Court.
The High Court came to the conclusion that the employee had tendered his resignation voluntarily but it held that termination of the service of the employee fell within the definition of 'r etrenchment ' as contained in Section 2(s) and as the appel lant company had failed to comply with the requirement of Section 6N, the termination of service was invalid.
The High Court accordingly set aside the order of reinstatement passed by 524 the Labour Court and remanded the matter to the Labour Court for a decision on the question whether there was infraction of the provisions of Section 6N. Being aggrieved by that order of the High Court, the appellant company has filed this appeal after obtaining special leave.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: Where a contract of service is determined on the employee exercising his right to quit, such termination cannot be said to be at the instance of the employer to fail within the first part of the definition of retrenchment in Section 2(s) of the U.P. Industrial Disputes Act.
[531H; 532A] A contract of service can be determined by either party to the contract.
If it is determined at the behest of the employer it may amount to retrenchment unless it is by way of punishment for proved misconduct.
But if an employee takes the initiative and exercises his right to put an end to the contract of service and the employer merely assents to it, it cannot be said that the employer has terminated the employment.
In such cases the employer is merely acced ing to the employee 's request, may be even reluctantly.
Here the employee 's role is active while the employer 's role is passive and formal.
The employer cannot force an unwilling employee to work for him.
[531E F] When an employee resigns his office, he formally relin quishes or withdraws from his office.
it implies that he has taken a mental decision to sever his relationship with his employer and thereby put an end to the contract of service.
[533E] In the present case the employee 's request contained in the letter of resignation was accepted by the employer and that brought an end to the contract of service.
[534B] This was a case of 'voluntary retirement ' within the meaning of the first exception to section 2(s) and therefore the question of grant of compensation under section 6N did not arise.
The employee is not entitled to any compensation under section 6N of the State Act.
[534F] The State Bank of India vs
N. Sundara Money; , ; Hindustan Steel Ltd. vs The Presiding Officer, Labour court, Orissa and Ors., ; ; Delhi Cloth and General Mills Ltd. vs Shambhu Nath Mukherji and others; , ; Santosh (Gupta vs State Bank of Patiala, ; ; L. Robert D 'souza vs, Executive Engineer, Southern Railway and Anr., [1982] 1SCC 645 and 525 Corporation of Cochin vs Jalaji and Ors., [1984] 1 LLJ
