The respondent, the proprietor of an estate, derived income from the sale of trees growing in his forests and claimed that it was agricultural income as defined in section 2(1) of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922, and that it was exempt from payment of income tax under section 4(3)(viii).
The Appellate Tribunal found that the evidence to show that there was plantation by the estate authorities was meagre and unsubstantial, that the trees in question must have been of spontaneous growth and that the respondent had failed to establish facts on which he could claim exemption.
On reference, the High Court took the view that though trees in the forest had not been planted by the estate authorities, the latter had performed subsequent operations of a substantial character for the maintenance and improvement of the forest, and that the income was, therefore, agricultural income.
It also held that the onus was on the income tax authorities to prove that the income derived from the sale of trees was not agricultural income and that they had failed to show that the income fell outside the scope of the exemption mentioned in section 4(3)(viii) Of the Act.
Held, that the High Court erred in placing the burden on the income tax authorities to prove that the income sought to be taxed was not agricultural income.
The principle has been well established that where a person claims the benefit of an exemption under the provisions of the Act, he has to establish it.
177 Commissioner of Income tax vs Venkataswamy Naidu, [1956] 291.T.R. 529, followed.
The question whether the trees were of spontaneous growth or were products of plantation was essentially a question of fact and the finding of the Tribunal on this point was binding on the High Court in a reference under section 66(1) of the Act.
Held, further, that the income received by the respondent by the sale of trees in his forests was not agricultural income as the trees had not been planted by him, and that it was immaterial that he had maintained a large establishment for the purpose of preserving the forests and assisting in the growth of the trees.
The Commissioner of Income tax, West Bengal, Calcutta vs Raja Benoy Kumar Sahas Roy; , , explained and followed.
