The appellant was charged with the murder of a co worker at the factory in which they were working.
The Trial Court discarded the testimony of eye witnesses and other circum stances and acquitted the appellant, by giving him the benefit of doubt.
On appeal, the High Court accepted the testimony of the eyewitnesses and convicted the appellant under Section 302 IPC and sentenced him to undergo life imprisonment.
This appeal is against the High Court 's judgment.
Allowing the appeal in part, HELD: 1.
The High Court had interfered with the order of acquittal for cogent reasons and that the conclusion of the High Court that the appellant has caused the death of the deceased, by stabbing with a knife in the manner alleged by the prosecution is unassailable.
The approach by the trial court was clearly wrong and the finding is perverse.
The testimony of the two independent eye witnesses had not been properly appreciated.
Their presence at the scene could not at all be doubted in the light of what P.W. 3 has deposed.
They are probable witnesses and there had not been any infirmity in their evidence.
[608F G] 2.
However, the offence is not murder punishable under Section 302 IPC, and that the act of the appellant as proved would fail only under Section 304 Part II, IPC.
The appel lant had admitted that there had been an altercation between the two and the deceased received the injury in the course of a scuffle.
The evidence clearly established that the whole incident was a sudden development and that the appel lant had acted at the spur of the moment and without any pre meditation.
607 There had been no ill will or enmity between the two.
A casual remark made by the appellant provoked the deceased and the altercation ensued which culminated in the stabbing with knife.
The appellant used the knife only once and did not act in any cruel manner.
It was in the sudden quarrel in heat of passion that the appellant inflicted the injury on the deceased without any intention to cause death but having knowledge that such act was likely to cause the death of the deceased.
[609B D] 3.
The conviction is altered to one under Section 304, Part II, IPC.
Appellant had already undergone imprisonment for over one year.
He had been released on bail by order of this Court.
The appellant, a young man who had been at large for over nearly 12 years, cannot be committed to prison for any further period at this stage.
[609E] 4.
To meet the ends of justice, it is directed that the appellant should pay a fine of Rs.50,000 in addition to the term of imprisonment he has already suffered.
This amount would be paid to the father of the deceased and other legal heirs.
In case of default in payment of fine, the appellant should undergo further imprisonment for six months.
[609F G]
