Disciplinary proceedings were initiated against the appellant for wilful contravention of Rules 3(1)(i) and 3(1)(iii) of the Central Civil Services (Conduct) Rules.
1964 by absenting himself from duty without authorisation and in not reporting to duty at New Delhi office on transfer from London office.
Pending proceedings, he was allowed to retire voluntarily but was put on notice that the discipli nary proceedings would be continued under rule 9 of the Civil Services Pension Rules, 1972.
Thereafter, on comple tion of the enquiry, the President of India in consultation with the Union Public Service Commission, decided to with hold the entire gratuity and pension otherwise admissible to the appellant, on permanent basis, as a measure of punish ment.
The appellant 's writ petition challenging the legality of the order was dismissed by the High Court, in limine.
In the appeal by special leave, before this Court, on behalf of the appellant it was contended that since the appellant had been allowed to retire voluntarily, the pro ceedings stood abated, and the authorities were devoid of jurisdiction to impose the penalty of withholding gratuity and pension as a measure of punishment, and that for award ing the said punishment the appellant must be found to have committed grave misconduct or negligence within the meaning of Rule 8(5), Explanation (b).
698 Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
Rule 9(2) of the Central Civil Services (Pen sion) Rules, 1972 provided that the departmental proceedings if instituted while the Government servant was in service, whether before his retirement or during his re employment, should, after the final retirement of the Government serv ant, be deemed to be proceedings under the rule and should be continued and concluded by the authority by which they were commenced in the same manner as if the Government servant had continued in service.
[701A B] In the instant case, merely because the appellant was allowed to retire, the Government is not lacking jurisdic tion or power to continue the proceedings already initiated to the logical conclusion thereto.
The only inhibition is that where the departmental proceedings are instituted by an authority subordinate to the President, that authority should submit a report recording its findings to the Presi dent.
That has been done, and the President passed the order under challenge.
Therefore, the proceedings are valid in law and are not abated consequent to voluntary retirement of the appellant and the order was passed by the competent authori ty, i.e. the President of India.
[701B D] 2.1 Public employee holding a civil post or office under the State has a legitimate right to earn his pension at the evening of his life after retirement be it on superannuation or voluntary retirement.
It is not a bounty of the State.
Equally too of gratuity, a statutory right, earned by him Article 41 of the Constitution accords right to assistance at the old age of sickness or disablement.
Therefore, when a Government employee is sought to be deprived of his pension ary right which he had earned while rendering services under the State, such a deprivation must be in accordance with law.
[701F G; 702D] D.S. Nakara & Ors.
vs Union of India, ; , relied on.
2.2 Under Rule 9(1) of the Central Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1972, the President has reserved to himself the right to withhold pension in whole or in part, whether permanently or for a specified period, or he can recover from pension of the whole or part of any pecuniary loss caused by the Government employee to the Government subject to the minimum.
However, the exercise of the power is hedged with a condition precedent that a finding should be recorded either in departmental enquiry or judicial proceedings that the pensioner com 699 mitted grave misconduct or negligence in the discharge of his duty while in office, as defined in Rule 8(5), Explana tion (b), which is an inclusive definition, i.e. the scope is wide of mark, dependent on the facts or circumstances in a given case.
In the absence of such a finding, the Presi dent is without authority of law to impose penalty or with holding pension as a measure of punishment either in whole or in part, permanently or for a specified period.
[702G H; 704B; 703E F] In the instant case, the Inquiry Officer found that though the appellant derelicted his duty to report to duty, at New Delhi on transfer from London, it was not wilful for the reason that he could not move due to his wife 's illness and he recommended to sympathetically consider the case of the appellant and the President accepted this finding, but decided to withhold gratuity and payment of pension perma nently, in consultation with the Union Public Service Com mission.
[703G H; 704A] The employee 's right to pension is a statutory right.
The measure of deprivation therefore, must be correlative to or commensurate with the gravity of the grave misconduct or irregularity as it offends the right to assistance at the evening of his life as assured under Article 41 of the Constitution.
The right to gratuity is also a statutory right.
The appellant was not charged with nor was given an opportunity that his gratuity would be withheld as a measure of punishment.
There is no provision of law under which the President is empowered to withhold gratuity as well, after his retirement as a measure of punishment.
Therefore, the order to withhold the gratuity as a measure of penalty is illegal and devoid of jurisdiction.
Since there is no find ing that appellant did commit grave misconduct as charged for, the exercise of the power is clearly illegal and in excess of jurisdiction as the condition precedent, grave misconduct, was not proved.
[704D G]
