The President of India made a reference under Article 317(1) of the Constitution to this Court for inquiry and report on the conduct of the respondent, a Member of the Punjab State Public Service Commission.
In a letter addressed to the Governor of the State, with a copy to the Chief Minister, the Chairman of the Punjab State Public Service Commission complained that on 24.11.1982, while she was proceeding to her office from the Committee Room, along with the respondent and three other members.
after interviewing candidates for certain appoint ments, the respondent, without any provocation, gave a full blooded hard slap across her face, when she was discussing with him regarding his absence on previous days.
The other three members, who were just behind her, also addressed a joint letter to the Governor about the incident.
Since the Governor was not available in the State, the Chairman and the three members reported the matter to the Chief Minister, and handed over the letters to him.
The Chief Minister forwarded the complaint to the Government of India and directed the Chief Secretary to take necessary action in the matter.
The Chief Secretary recorded the statements of the members.
Thereafter, the respondent received a charge sheet from the Chief Secretary asking for his reply.
Besides taking several objections, the respondent denied the version of the Chairman and claimed that during the course of the discussions, when the Chairman lost her temper and was going to attack her with a raised hand, he caught her hand to avoid attack and insult.
The other three members generally supported the Chairman 's allegations.
After considering the reply of the respondent and the statements 578 of the three other members, the President of India made the Reference.
This Court directed notice to be served on all the five members of the Commission and they ,filed their sworn state ments.
Affidavits were also filed by several other persons who claimed to have knowledge of the incident or of its background.
Overruling the objections of the respondent that since the incident, if assumed to be true, may lead to his indict ment of having committed a criminal act or in any event an act which may expose him to civil action, the Reference should not have been made by the President without fully satisfying himself (by getting the matter investigated) that a prima facie case was made out and that this Court should not make an enquiry into allegations involving disputed facts as that may prejudice a future action in the ordinary civil 'or criminal court, this Court directed the District and Session Judge, Delhi to nominate an Additional District and Session Judge for the purpose of recording evidence and transmitting the same to this Court.
Accordingly, the evi dence which was led before the Additional District and Sessions Judge was forwarded to this Court.
It was contended on behalf of the respondent that the Reference must be treated to have become infructuous and need not be answered because the respondent 's tenure had already expired and he could not be removed from his office and it was futile to examine the evidence recorded in the case in pursuance of the order of this Court and to record a finding on the correctness or otherwise of the allegations made against him, that the period of six years had been rigidly fixed making it clear that the period should not be extended and the member, on the expiration of his term would be ineligible for reappointment and that the principle as applicable to the Government servants in the disciplinary proceedings should be made applicable to the members of the Public Service Commission also.
It was also contended that the evidence of complainant and other witnesses relied upon by her were not fully consistent and that their case had been developing from stage to stage which indicated its unreliable nature, and that several important documents were not filed in the proceeding by the State and Public Service Commission in spite of repeated requests, which had preju diced the respondent.
Answering the Reference, this Court, HELD: 1.1 The conduct of a Member of the Public Service 579 Commission has been considered important enough to be di rectly dealt with by the Constitution itself.
The efficiency and purity of administration are greatly dependent on the right choice of the candidates to be entrusted with official duty; and to ensure that suitable persons, in whom the public may have full faith are selected, it was considered necessary to have a body with members of integrity, sinceri ty and practical wisdom capable of commanding the confidence of the people for examining the merits of the candidates and make available to the appointing authorities their conclu sion.
Taking into account the possibility of their being subject to pressure, they were given special protection by the Constitution under Article 317 providing that they except in cases covered by Clause (3) can be removed from their office only by an order of the President on the ground of misbehaviour after an inquiry by the Supreme Court in this regard.
The fact that the apex Court of the country was entrusted with such a duty indicates the great importance which has been attached to the office of the Member of the Commission.
Under clause (2) of Article 317, authority to suspend the Chairman or Member of the State Commission pending an inquiry by the Supreme Court has been vested with the Governor.
Hence, the conduct of a Member of the Commis sion under scrutiny of this Court in a reference made by the President cannot be ignored on account of the tenure being over.
[585B E] 1.2 The Regulations flamed under Article 318 by the Governor do not and cannot deal with removal and suspension of a Member of the Commission since they are exclusively covered by Article 317.
The Constitution, while dealing with the removal of a Member of the Commission does not provide for extending the term of a Member pending enquiry into his conduct.
The issue, therefore, must be treated as a live one even after the expiry of a Member 's tenure.
The President of India has requested the Court to investigate into the con duct of a Member and this Court ought to convey its conclu sions rather than refuse to answer the question.
[583F G; 586A B] 1.3 The case of a government servant is, subject to the special provisions, governed by the law of master and serv ant, but the position of Member of the Commission is differ ent.
The latter holds a constitutional post and is governed by the special provisions dealing with different aspects of his office as envisaged by Articles 315 to 323 of Chapter II of part XIV of the Constitution.
The reference will have to be answered on the merits of the case with reference to the complaint and the respondent 's defence.
[586D E] 580 R.T. Rangachari vs Secretary of State, AIR 1937 P.C. 27; State of Assam and Others vs Padma Ram Sarah, AIR 1965 SC 473; Dinesh Chandra Sangma vs State of Assam and Others, ; ; B.J. Shefat vs State of Gujarat and Oth ers; , and C.L. Verma vs State of Madhya Pradesh and another, J.T. , distinguished.
2.1 There is no dispute that some incident did take place on 24.11.1982 in the Public Service Commission build ing.
The respondent was absent earlier which led to some discussion between the complainant Chairman and the respond ent.
According to the Chairman 's evidence, she received a hard slap across her face, although she was talking to the respondent politely.
Her statement that the respondent had slapped her without any provocation and that she was talking to him politely cannot be accepted.
The version of the respondent with respect of the manner in which she was asking for his explanation may be correct.
She was used to her arrogant ways and authoritarian manner while talking even with her colleagues, and hence the statement of the respondent that she was assuming a bossy posture and was insisting on an on the spot oral explanation from him may be correct.
[583F; 582D; 601D E] The evidence on record does indicate that the Chairman was attempting to exercise her power in an authoritarian manner and lost her patience even with her colleagues if she was not readily obeyed and on more than one occasion in the past she got annoyed with the other Members and attempted to get them removed from the Commission.
However, the other three Members of the Commission have pledged their oath in support of the allegation that the respondent had slapped the Chairman.
The circumstances in which the things proceed ed also corroborated their version.
Over and above all this, the statements made by the respondent himself go to support to a great extent the complainant 's case of physical as sault.
[598F G; 599F G] All the three Members of the Commission are unanimous and emphatic in stating that the respondent did slap the Chairman hard on her face.
They also say that this was without provocation, which means that there was no physical provocation on the part of the Chairman.
The three witnesses were cross examined at great length and were subjected to a very large number of searching questions.
There is no mate rial coming out of the same on the basis of which they can be discredited.
Though it was not a completely unprovoked situation in which respondent had hit the Chairman, his statement that the provocation was not limited to a verbal duel and extended to the Chairman raising her hand 581 as if to assault him, justifying him to slap her cannot be accepted as correct.
The Chairman did not attack or intimi date respondent with physical violence and the respondent losing his self control at the arrogance of the Chairman in her talk with him, slapped her.
[601F G; 603A B; D] 2.2 Persons occupying high public offices should main tain irreproachable behaviour.
A certain minimum standard of code of conduct is expected of them.
What may be excusable for an uneducated young man cannot be tolerated if a Member of a Public Service Commission is involved.
Besides, the respondent and the Chairman were not thrashing out a person al matter or a private dispute.
They were discussing a question involving their office and this in broad day light in the open corroder of the Commission 's building.
Whatever the provocation offered by the Chairman, the respondent was not justified in losing his cool to the extent of indulging in physical violence.
That the violence should have been directed against a lady makes his conduct all the more reprehensible.
The respondent miserably failed in maintain ing the standard of conduct expected of a Member of the Commission and thereby brought great disrepute to his of fice.
Hence the respondent 's conduct amounted to misbeha viour within the meaning of Article 317(1) of the Coustitu tion and it rendered him liable to be removed from his office of the Member of the Punjab Public Service Commis sion.
[604G H; 605A B] 3.
The refusal to produce the documents prayed for by the respondent has not prejudiced him since he was not entitled to those documents.
