The petitioner joined as a primary teacher in 1952 in an aided recognised school.
She was making contribution towards compulsory provident fund.
In 1975, the Delhi Administra tion, in consultation with the Accountant General, Central Revenue, issued a notification under Rule 126 of the Delhi School Education Rules, 1973, laying down detailed procedure for disbursement of pension and gratuity as also accounting of General Provident Fund in respect of the employees of aided schools.
The petitioner opted for the aforesaid scheme in 1976, which was duly counter signed by the Education Officer.
After the petitioner retired in 1977, she made a number of representations to the authorities concerned for payment of pension and gratuity.
She got a reply in 1987 that her case had been referred to the Government for policy deci sion.
Ultimately, Delhi Administration promulgated the pension scheme in the primary aided schools on and effective from 6th December, 1988.
The petitioner in her Writ Petition before this Court relied on the scheme announced by the Delhi Administration and the option exercised by her.
She claimed that to deprive her of the pension and gratuity under the said scheme was without any justification.
On behalf of the respondents it was contended that the scheme was brought into force only in 1988 by the said notification whereby the modalities for grant in aid to the local authorities were finalised and since the petitioner retired from service in 1977, she was not entitled to pen sion prior to the said notification.
Allowing the Writ Petition, this Court, HELD: 1.
The school in which the petitioner was working was an 754 aided school within the meaning of section 2(d) of the Delhi Education Act and its employees were entitled to the bene fits conferred by the notification dated 17th October, 1975.
[757B C] 2.
Since the Central Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1972 would apply to the petitioner as contemplated by noti fication dated 17th October, 1975, she is obviously entitled to get pension with effect from the date on which she ceased to be borne on the establishment.
of the school in which she was working consequent upon reaching the age of superannua tion.
[757F G] 3.
The said notification having been issued by the competent authority and the petitioner, who was an existing employee of an aided school on the date of the issue of the said notification, having opted for the pension and gratuity within the stipulated period in the prescribed proforma which was duly countersigned by the Education Officer, she obviously became entitled to the benefits conferred by the said notification.
This is so all the more in view of the fact that the notification dated 17th October, 1975 did not contemplate finalisation of the modalities about contribu tion towards pension fund as a condition precedent to the entitlement of the benefits under the said notification.
The finalisation of the said modalities was a matter of details among the authorities concerned and could have no bearing on the entitlement to the benefits of the notification dated 17th October, 1975.
Such finalisation could not even defer the date of the entitlement.
[758A C] 4.
The respondents are directed to pay to the petitioner pension admissible to her in pursuance of the notification dated 17th October, 1975 with effect from the date of her retirement and also to pay to her the other retirement benefits.
They are further directed to finalise the requi site formalities in this behalf within three mouths and to issue payment orders immediately thereafter.
[758H; 759A B]
