The accused petitioners were charged under section 302 and 307 read with Sections 147, 148 and 149 of the Indian Penal Code and Section 37 of the Bombay Police Act, 1951.
Subsequently they were also charged under section 3 of the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act.
They moved the Designated Court for grant of bail contending that the provisions of the 1987 Act were wrongly and mali ciously invoked and the Designated Court held that section 3 of the Act was inapplicable.
The State of Maharashtra has preferred an appeal to this Court against the said order of the Designated Court.
Since the accused were directed to approach the regular court, they moved bail applications before the Sessions Judge, Ahmadnagar which were rejected.
Thereafter, they approached the High Court and during the pendency of their bail applications before the High Court, the prosecution submitted a charge sheet against them in the Designated Court under section 3 of the 1987 Act.
Conse quently the High Court rejected their bail applications and the accused again approached the Designated Court for bail.
The Designated Court again held that the material 634 placed before it and the statement recorded by the Investi gating Officer did not disclose the commission of an offence under section 3 of the Act.
Accordingly, it discharged the accused under section 227 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and transferred the case to court of Sessions for trial of other offences under the Penal Code and the Bombay Police Act.
Against this order of the Designated Court, two appeals have been filed in this Court; one by the deceased 's father and the other by the State.
After transfer of their case to the regular court.
the accused persons approached the High Court for bail which was rejected.
The accused persons have filed a Special Leave Petition in this Court against the High Court 's order refusing the bail.
Dismissing the appeals and disposing of the petition, this Court.
HELD: 1.
A mere statement by the accused persons to the effect that the show of violence would create terror or fear in the minds of the people and none would dare to oppose them cannot constitute an offence under section 3(1) of the Act.
That may indeed be the fail out of the violent act but that cannot be said to be the intention of the perpetrators of the crime.
[646H; 647A] 1.1 While invoking a criminal statute, such as the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act,1987, the prosecution is duty bound to show from the record of the case and the documents collected in the course of investiga tion that facts emerging therefrom prima facie constitute an offence within the letter of the law.
[644F] 1.2 In the instant case it is clear from the statement of the accused persons that their intention was to liquidate rivals and thereby achieve the objective of gaining suprema cy in the underworld.
The consequence of such violence is bound to cause panic and fear but the intention of commit ting the crime cannot be said to be to strike terror in the people or any section of the people.
Therefore, the Desig nated Court was fully justified in taking the view that this was a case of inter gang rivalry only and that the material placed on record and the documents relied on did not prima facie disclose the commission of the offence punishable under section 3(1) of the Act.
[647D E] 2.
Section 12(1) of the Terrorist and Disruptive Activi ties (Prevention) Act, 1987 empowers the Designated Court to try any offence punishable under any other statute along with the offence punishable under the Act if the former is connected with the latter.
That, however, does not mean that even when the Designated Court comes to the con 635 clusion that there exists no sufficient ground for framing a charge against the accused under Section 3(1) of the Act it must proceed to try the accused for the commission of of fences under other statutes.
Thai would tantamount to usurp ing jurisdiction.
Section 18, therefore, in terms provides that where after taking cognizance of any offence the Desig nated Court is of the opinion that the offence is not tri able by it, it shall, notwithstanding that it has no juris diction to try such offence, transfer the case for the trial of such offence to any Court having jurisdiction under the Code, Therefore, when the Designated Court came to the conclusion that there was no prima facie evidence to frame a charge under section 3(1) of the Act, it was justified in transferring the case to the Court of Sessions, which alone had jurisdiction under the Code.
The course adopted by the Designated Court in transferring the case to the Sessions Court for trial of offences under other statutes is clearly in keeping with section 18 of the Act.
[647F H; 648A C] 3.
Statutes which impose a term of imprisonment for what is a criminal offence under the law must be strictly con strued.
[644C] Usmanbhai Dawoodbhai Memon & Ors., vs State of Gujrat, ; referred to.
3.1 When a statute provides special or enhanced punish ments as compared to the punishments prescribed for similar offences under the ordinary penal laws of the country, a higher responsibility and duty is cast on the Judge to make sure there exists prima facie evidence for supporting the charge levelled by the prosecution.
Therefore.
when a law visits a person with serious penal consequences extra care must be taken to ensure that those whom the legislature did not intend cover by the express language of the statute are not roped in by stretching the language of the law.
But that does not mean that the judicial officer called upon to decide whether or not a case for flaming a charge under the Act is made out should adopt a negative attitude.
He should frame a charge if the prosecution shows that the material placed on record and the documents relied on give rise to a strong suspicion of the accused having committed the crime alleged against him.
[644G H; 645A] 4.
The Court while considering whether to discharge the accused or to frame a charge against him i.e. at the stage of sections 227 228 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 is required to evaluate the material and documents on record with a view to finding out if the facts emerging therefrom taken at their face.
value disclose the existence of all the ingredients constituting the alleged offence.
Since the Trial Court is 636 at the stage of deciding whether or not there exists suffi cient grounds for framing the charge, its enquiry must necessarily be limited to deciding if the facts emerging from the record and documents constitute the offence with which the accused is charged.
At that stage it may sift the evidence for that limited purpose but it is not required to marshal the evidence with a view to separating the grain from the chaff.
All that it is called upon to consider is whether there is sufficient ground to frame the charge and for this limited purpose it must weigh the material on record as well as the documents relied on by tile prosecu tion.
[643E; 641F G] State of Bihar vs Ramesh Singh, ; ; Union of India vs Prafulla Kumar Samal & Anr., ; and Supdt. & Remembrancer of Legal Affairs, West Bengal vs Anil Kumar Bhunja & Ors., ; , referred to.
