A commercial vessel which arrived at Paradip Port was rummaged by the Customs Officers and contraband goods worth more than Rs.1,40,000 were recovered.
The officers also detained the vessel by issue of a notice to the Master of the vessel with a copy to the second respondent, the Deputy Conservator of Paradip Port Trust.
At the instant of the second respondent and another, the vessel was shifted to the reads far away from the port in the high sea.
This resulted in the interruption of the rummaging operation and the vessel being left unguarded for about 38 hours, during which period it was alleged that the contraband goods disappeared from the vessel.
The second respondent was asked to show cause as to why he should not be proceeded against and why penalty should not he imposed on him, under Sections 117 and 151 of the .
In his reply, the second respondent took the plea that the Customs and Central Excise Authorities had no jurisdiction to initiate proceedings against him and that section 151 of the Act was not attracted.
Rejecting his plea, the Collector imposed a penalty of Rs.1,000 under section 117 of the Act.
The said order of the Collector was challenged in the High Court by way of writ petitions.
The High Court allowed the writ petitions and quashed the penalty.
This appeal, by special leave, is against the orders of the High Court quashing the penalty, On behalf of the appellant it was contended that Section 133 706 creates an offence and also prescribes a penalty, and though the section s referable to Court in so far as prosecution and punishment is concerned for the offence, there would be no bar to deal with that offence under section 117 of the Act.
It was also contended that there would be no double jeopardy if in an appropriate case one has been prosecuted and punished under the sections in Chapter XVI of the Act and also sub jected to penalty under the provisions other than those in Chapter XVI if the Act for offences including those in Chapter XVI of the Act.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: 1.
Where the same Act or event constitutes an offence ruder Chapter XVI and at the same time constitutes a contravention or abetment of contravention of any of the provisions of the Act or failure 0 perform any duty pre scribed under the Act or amounts to noncompliance with any of the provisions of the Act, there will be possibility of prosecution and punishment under Chapter XVI of the Act and any other provision of law and the same time confiscation and penalty under Chapter XIV of the Act.
[710G H] 2.
In the instant case, the vessel could, therefore, lawfully be detained, rummaged and the goods suspected seized.
There may be cope for holding that there was inten tional obstruction on the part of he second respondent if the allegations are proved.
Where there was an order for seizure it would amount to obstruction under section 186 IPC if the goods were not allowed to be removed.
Obstruction is not confined to physical obstruction and it includes anything which makes it more difficult for the police or public servant to carry out their duties.
[711B; F] Santosh Kumar vs State. ; and Hinchliffe vs sheldon, [1955] 1 WLR 1207, referred to.
In the Collector 's order, though there was discussion of offence under section 133 and failure to perform duty under section 151, the order itself was passed ex facie under the provi sions of section 117 of the Act.
There is no discussion in the High Court 's order on this aspect of the matter and here is no indication as to whether this was urged or not before the High Court.
Further, since the second respondent is not represented before his Court, the said order is set aside and the cases remanded to the High Court for fresh disposal in accordance with law in the light of the observations made hereinabove after giving opportunities to the parties or making their submissions on the basis of the evidence al ready on record.
[711H; 712A B]
