The Petitioner, representing a Social Organisation, has written a letter alleging environment pollution in some villages and the adjoining Sarnath Temple.
The letter was treated as Writ Petition under Article 32 of the Constitu tion of India.
It was alleged that the smoke and dust emit ted from the Chimneys of Respondent No. 3, viz., an oil Mill and a refinery plant in the area, and the effluents dis charged by the plants has been causing serious environmental pollution in the thickly populated area, leading to epidemic diseases.
It was further alleged that even the flora was badly affected by pollution.
Petitioner prayed for direc tions to check the pollution.
On behalf of Respondent No. 3, it was contended that it had complied with the provisions of Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 and the and there was no com plaint whatsoever.
It was further stated that the petitioner was an anti social element and his only aim was to blackmail and extract money from people like Respondent No. 3, and that a criminal case has already been filed against him, for such activities.
Dismissing the writ petition, HELD: 1.
Article 32 is a great and salutary safeguard for preservation of fundamental rights of the citizens.
Every citizen has a fundamental right to have the enjoyment of quality of life and living as contemplated by Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
Anything which 740 endangers or impairs by conduct of anybody either in viola tion or in derogation of laws, that quality of life and living by the people is entitled to be taken recourse of Article 32 of the Constitution.
But this can only be done by any person interested genuinely in the protection of the society on behalf of the society or community.
This weapon as a safeguard must be utilised and invoked by the Court with great deal of circumspection and caution.
Where it appears that this is only a cloak to "feed fat ancient grudge" and enemity, this should not only be refused but strongly discouraged.
While it is the duty of this Court to enforce fundamental rights, it is also the duty of this Court to ensure that this weapon under Article 32 should not be misused or permitted to be misused creating a bottleneck in the superior Court preventing other genuine violation of fundamental rights being considered by the Court.
That would be an act or a conduct which will defeat the very purpose of preservation of fundamental rights.
[743B E] Bandhu Mukti Morchay.
Union of lndia & Ors.; , , referred to.
This petition is legally devoid of any merit or principles of public interest and public protection.
There was no fundamental right violation or could be violative if the allegations of the so called champions on behalf of the society are scrutinised.
[743G] 2.2.
Prima facie the provisions of the relevant Act, namely, the Air Pollution Control Act have been complied with and there is no conduct which is attributable to re spondent No. 3 herein leading to pollution of air or ecolog ical imbalances calling for interference by this Court.
The orders passed by the Pollution Control Board also indicate that there were no instances of any violation.
There was no complaint from anybody apart from the petitioner, or any authority as to the non compliance of any statute by Re spondent No. 3.
[743A B; 742G]
