The appellant and 14 others, including respondent No. 1 applied for grant of a stage carriage permit.
The R.T.A. rejected the applications of respondent No. 1 and some others on the only ground that each of them had been granted one other permit in the same sitting, and granted the permit to the appellant for a period of three years.
On appeal by respondent No. 1 and some others, the State Transport Appel late Tribunal, set aside the R.T.A. 's order and granted the permit in favour of respondent No. 1.
The appellant and another unsuccessful applicant filed two civil revision petitions.
The High Court, by an interim order, stayed the Tribunal 's order and directed that the appellant as well as respondent No. 1 be allowed to operate on the route, but ultimately dismissed both the revision petitions.
The appellant filed a special leave petition before this Court.
By virtue of this Court 's interim order, the appel lant and respondent No. 1 were continuing to operate on the route throughout; as a result, though the permit granted for three years expired long back, both the claimants had been operating on the route all these years.
On behalf of the parties common request was made for remanding the matter to the R.T.A. for fresh decision on merits and for a direction to allow both the parties to ply their stage carriages on the route on the ground that there was necessity for two permits on the route.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.1 The grant of a permit is to be made by the R.T.A. primarily with reference to the object of serving the interests of the general public and other relevant factors.
It cannot be treated as a dispute relating to grant of a permit between the rival claimants only.
It is not in the nature of a lis for adjudication of conflicting interests of 803 private individuals alone.
That apart, under Section 47(3) of the , the R.T.A. is first re quired to determine the number of stage carriages for the route and then to grant permits according to that determina tion made earlier.
Grant of any permit in excess thereof was not permissible without first making a fresh determination and increasing the number, if necessary.
[807E G] 1.2 Therefore, an order allowing two claimants, to ply their stage carriages on a single route on the basis of agreement between them that there is necessity for two permits cannot be made unless the grant of a permit to both the rival claimants would be within the limit fixed by the R.T.A. at the relevant time.
The grant of a permit is not a matter which can be decided merely on the basis of an agree ment between the two rival claimants who alone out of sever al claimants remain in the lis at this stage.
[807H & F] M. Chinnaswamy vs M/s. Dhandayuthanpani Roadways (P) Ltd., ; Civil Appeal No. 1133 of 1970 decid ed on 9.12.1981 and Civil Appeal No. 136 of 1980 decided on 13.7.1990, distinguished.
1.3 The fact that the claimants had the benefit of plying their stage carriages for several years on the basis of interim orders of the Court or other authorities long after the period of the permit had expired, is not a valid reason for perpetuating that act and confining the grant only to the litigants before the court when claimants for the permit were many and are likely to be many in case the question of grant at this point of time is decided afresh.
Admittedly, the appellants for permit before the R.T.A. were many more and when the matter is to be considered afresh by the R.T.A. everyone of them is entitled to a fresh consider ation of his claim on merits.
[808B D] 1.4 The grant of permit by the R.T.A. to the appellant refusing to consider the claim of respondent No. 1 and some other applicants on merits solely on the ground that they had been granted one other permit in the same sitting is clearly untenable.
The grant of a permit for another route to the respondent No. 1 and some others could only be a relevant circumstance, while assessing the comparative merits of all the applicants, but by itself it could not be decisive or sufficient to refuse consideration of their claim.
The orders of the R.T.A. the Tribunal and the High Court are set aside and the matter remanded to the R.T.A. for a fresh consideration and decision of the claim of all the applicants on merits in accordance with law.
[805C D; 808F1 804 [The Court vacated the interim order permitting the appellant and respondent No. 1 to ply their stage carriages on the route and directed the R.T.A. to make arrangement for operation of the route till the matter is decided afresh, to avoid inconvenience to the traveling public.] [808F G]
