The Petitioner was detained under section 3(1) of the Gujarat Prevention of Anti Social Activities Act, 1985.
The grounds were served within time and referred to 3 crimes registered in various police stations, on the allegation that the petitioner and his associates armed with deadly weapons committed offences punishable under sections 307,451,143, 147 and 148 IPC, and section 25(1) of the Arms Act.
The grounds also referred to 8 crimes under the provi sions of the Prohibition Act where he was described as a bootlegger.
Earlier detention under the Act and release by the High Court were also mentioned.
It was specifically mentioned that in one of the three cases, the petitioner was remanded to judicial custody and since there were chances of his being released, the detention was ordered to prevent him from acting prejudicially to the maintainance of public order.
In this Writ Petition, the Petitioner has challenged the validity of the detention order passed by the Commissioner of Police.
It was contended on behalf of the petitioner that the detaining authority has not applied his mind inasmuch as relevant material has not been taken into account and there were absolutely no grounds warranting detention.
This Court allowed the Petition on.
7.8.1990 for reasons to be given later.
Giving reasons for allowing the Writ Petition, HELD: 1.
A person is said to be a habitual criminal who by force 928 of habit or inward disposition is accustomed to commit crimes.
It implies commission of such crimes repeatedly or persistently and prima facie there should be a continuity in the commission of those offences.
[931C D] Vijay Narain Singh vs State of Bihar and Ors., and Rashidmiya @ Chhava Ahmedmiya Shaik vs Police Commissioner, Ahmedabad and Anr., 1, relied on.
Unless there is material to show that the detenu committed any one of the acts mentioned in the definition, he can not come within the meaning of 'Bootlegger '.
Though in the grounds there is a reference to 8 crimes under the provisions of the Prohibition Act, the detenu, does not figure in any one of these cases.
There is no material whatsoever of his involvement in any manner in any of these prohibition cases.
Therefore, he can not be said to be a bootlegger.
[930F G] 3.
Admittedly, the detenu was acquitted in two of the three criminal cases against him.
The third case, viz., Crime No. 96/90 was pending investigation and the detenu was granted bail.
this is the only case pending against him, and the main allegation was that he, out of sudden excitement, fired the revolver and as a result of which one Mehbub Khan received injury on his leg and again he fired a shot into the air and that he and his associates were moving around in a jeep threatening the people in the area.
But in the order passed by the learned Sessions Judge on 13.3.90 while releasing the petitioner on bail, it is noted that the said Mehbub Khan had no fire arm injury at all and as a matter of fact, the public prosecutor conceded the same.
The learned Sessions Judge has also noted that no medical evi dence is produced to prove that any one was injured during the alleged occurrence.
If such is the only crime pending in which the detenu is alleged to have participated in, it can by no stretch of imagination be said that he comes within the meaning of 'dangerous person ' and the conclusions drawn by the detaining authority are bereft of sufficient material as required under Section 2(c) of the Act.
This betrays non application of mind by the detaining authority.
Conse quently, the grounds on which the detention order is passed.
are irrelevant and non existing.
[932B E]
