The appellants/petitioners were tenants in the premises belonging to the respondent Banks/Life Insurance Corporation of India.
Their tenancy had expired or had been terminated by the respondents and eviction proceedings initiated against them under the provisions of the .
Writ peti tions under Article 226 were filled by the appellants in the High Court challenging the orders of eviction passed against them, which were dismissed; hence these appeals.
The writ petitioners moved this Court directly under Article 32 of the Constitution against the notices of termination of tenancy issued to them.
The Public Premises Act of 1971 was preceded by two enactments the Government Premises (Eviction) Act 1950, and the Public Premises (eviction of unauthorised occupants) Act, 1958 which were declared unconstitutional by different High Courts.
Jagu Singh vs M. Shaukat Ali, ; Satish Chander & Anr.
vs Delhi Improvement Trust, AIR 1958 Punjab 1; Brigade Commander, Meerut Sub Area vs Ganga Pra sad, ; P.L. Mehar etc.
vs D.R. Khanna, etc., AIR 1971 Delhi 1 and Northern India Caterers Private Ltd. vs State of Punjab & Anr.
, ; 650 This led to the enactment of the Public Premises Act in 1971.
The validity of this act was upheld by this Court in Hari Singh vs The Military Estate Officer, ; Before this Court, the contentions were advanced by the parties mainly on two questions (i) whether the provisions of the Public Premises Act were applicable to the Premises belonging to a nationalised bank; and (ii) whether the provisions of the Public Premises Act override the provi sions of the Delhi Rent Control Act.
In regard to the applicability of the Public Premises act, it was inter alia contended that the premises belonging to a nationalised bank or insurance company did not fall within the ambit of the definition of 'Public Premises ' contained in Section 2(e) of the Public Premises Act for the reason that the nationalised bank was not a company as defined in Section 3 of the and it was also not a corporation established by or under a Central Act.
On the other hand, it was contended that the respond ents being nationalised bank, was a corporation established by a Central Act, viz., the Bank Nationalisation Act, and the premises belonging to a nationalised bank were 'public premises ' under section 2(e)(2)(ii) of the Public Premises Act.
In regard to the second question, each side claimed that the enactment relied upon by it was a special statute and the other enactment was general, and also invoked the not obstante clause contained in the enactment relied upon.
In this connection, it was argued on behalf of the respondents that the Public Premises Act having been enacted by Parlia ment in exercise of legislative power under Article 246(1) of the Constitution in respect of matters enumerated in the Union List would ipso facto override the provisions of the Rent Control Act enacted in exercise of the legislative powers under Article 246(4) in respect of matters enumerated in the concurrent list.
Dismissing the appeals and the writ petition, this Court, HELD: (1) The provisions of the Public Premises Act, to the extent they cover premises failing within the ambit of the Rent Control Act, override the provisions of the Rent Control Act, and a person in unauthorised occupation of public premises under Section 2(e) of the Act cannot invoke the protection of the Rent Control Act.
[694D E] (2) After the second world war there has been develop ment of a new pattern of public corporation in England as an instrument of plan 651 ning in the mixed economy.
The general characteristics of such a public corporation is that it is normally created by a special statute; it has no shares and no share holders, either private or public, and its share holder, in the symbolic sense, is the nation represented through Government and Parliament; and it has the legal status of a corporate body with independent legal personality.
There has been a similar growth of this type of public corporation in other.
countries.
This trend is also evident in our country.
since Independence and a number of such public corporations have been constituted by Acts of Parliament.
[668A C] (3) The expression 'Corporation ' in Section 2(e)(2)(ii) of the Public Premises Act would include public corporations of the new pattern constituted under the Central Acts where in the entire paid up capital vests in the Central Govern ment.
[670G] S.S. Dhanoa vs Municipal Corporation, Delhi, ; , distinguished.
(4) In order to constitute a corporation it is not necessary that there should be shareholders or members and that in the new pattern of public corporation that has developed there are no shareholders or members.
[671G] Bank of New South Wales & Ors.
vs The Common wealth, ; and R.C. Cooper vs Union of India, ; , referred to.
Oriental Bank of Commerce vs Delhi Development Authori ty, , overruled.
(5) Provisions of the Banks Nationalisation Act show that the nationalised Bank has been constituted as a dis tinct juristic person by the Act and it is owned by the Central Government.
They further indicate that the nationa lised bank has all the attributes of the new pattern of public corporation.
[667B] (6) The object of the legislation in enlarging the definition of 'public premises ' in Section 2(e) of the Public Premises Act is to make available the machinery of the Act for evicting unauthorised occupants not only from the premises belonging to the Central Government but also from premises belonging to Companies, Corporation and statu tory bodies in which the Central Government has a substan tial interest.
[670D E] 652 (7) Under Section 2(e)(2)(i) premises belonging to a company incorporated under the , in which not less than fifty one percent of the paid up capital is held by the Central Government, are to be treated as public enterprises.
It could not be the intention of Parliament that premises belonging to public corporations whose entire paid up capital vests in the Central Government and who are the instrumentalities of State would be excluded from the ambit of the definition of 'public premises '.
[670E G] (8) Keeping in view the provisions of the Banks Nation alisation Act the nationalised bank is a corporation estab lished by a Central Act and it is owned and controlled by the Central Government.
The premises belonging to a nationa lised bank are public premises under Section 2(e)(2)(ii) of the Public Premises Act.
[671 H; 672A] (9) There is no warrant for confining the scope of the definition of 'public premises ' contained in section 2(e) to premises used for residential purposes only and to exclude premises used for commercial purposes from its ambit.
[672D] Hari Singh vs Military Estate Officer, ; , referred to.
(10) No distinction can be made between premises used for residential purposes and premises used for commercial purposes in the matter of eviction of unauthorised occupants of public premises and the consideration which necessitate providing a speedy machinery for eviction of persons in unauthorised occupation of public premises apply equally to both the types of public premises.
[673B C] (11) The definition of the expression 'unauthorised occupation ' contained in Section 2(g) of the Public Premises Act is in two parts.
The second part of the definition is inclusive in nature and expressly covers continuance in occupation by any person of the public premises after the authority (whether by way of grant or any other mode of transfer) under which he was allowed to occupy the premises has expired or has been determined for any reason whatsoev er.
The words "whether by way of grant or any other mode of transfer" in this part of the definition are wide in ampli tude and would cover a lease because lease is a mode of transfer under the Transfer of Property Act.
[673F; G H; 674B] Brigadier K.K. Verma vs Union of India, AIR 1954 Bom 358, distinguished.
653 Lallu Yeshwant Singh vs Rao Jagdish Singh & Ors., ; , and Express Newspapers Pvt. Ltd. & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, [1985] Suppl.
3 SCR 302, referred to.
(12) It is true that there is no requirement in the Public Premises Act that the Estate Officer must be a person well versed in law.
But, that, by itself, cannot be a ground for excluding from the ambit of the said Act premises in unauthorised occupation of persons who obtained possession of the said premises under a lease when the Public Premises Act and the Rules framed thereunder provide for a right of appeal of the District Judge against an order of the Estate Officer.
which shows that the final order that is passed is by a judicial officer.
[675F H] Maganlal Chhagganlal (P) Ltd. vs Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay & Ors., ; , referred to.
(13) As regards rent control legislations enacted by the State legislatures, the position is well settled that such legislation fail within the ambit of entries 6, 7 and 13 of List III of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution.
[682E] Indu Bhushan Bose vs Rama Sundari Devi & Anr.
, ; ; V. Dhanpal Chettiar 's vs Yesodai Ammal, ; ; Jai Singh Jairam Tyagi Etc.
vs Mamanchand Ratilal Agarwal & Ors., ; ; Accountant and Secretari al Services Pvt. Ltd. & Anr.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; , referred to.
(14) The Rent Control Act has been enacted by Parliament in relation to the Union Territory of Delhi in exercise of the legislative power conferred under Article 246(4) of the Constitution which empowers Parliament to make laws with respect to any matter for any part of the territory of India not included in a State notwithstanding that such matter is a matter enumerated in the State List.
[682G] (15) The Public Premises Act deals with Government property as well as property belonging to other legal enti ties mentioned in clauses (2) and (3) of Section 2(e) of the Public Premises Act.
In so far as it relates to eviction of unauthorised occupants from premises belonging to or taken on lease or requisitioned by or on behalf of the Central Government, the Public Premises Act would fail within entry 32 of List I being law with respect to a property of the Union.
The property belonging to the various legal entities mentioned in clauses (2) and (3) of Section 2(e) of the Public Premises Act cannot be regarded as property of 654 the Union and the Public Premises Act cannot be held to have been enacted under entry 32 of List I in respect of the said properties.
In so far as it deals with a lessee or licensee of premises other than premises belonging to the Central Govt; the Public Premises Act has been enacted in exercising the legislative power in respect of matters enumerated in the concurrent list.
[682H; 683A C] (16) Both the statutes, viz. the Public Premises Act and the Rent Control Act, have been enacted by the same legisla ture, Parliament, in exercise of the legislative powers in respect of the matters enumerated in the Concurrent List.
[684C] Accountant and Secretarial Services Pvt. Ltd. vs Union of India And Ors., ; ; Smt.
Saiyada Mossarrat vs Hindustan Steel Ltd.; , and L.S. Nair vs Hindustan Steel Ltd., AIR 1980 MP.
106, referred to.
(17) The Rent Control Act makes a departure from the general law regulating the relationship of landlord and tenant contained in the Transfer of Property Act inasmuch as it makes provision for determination of standard rent, it specifies the grounds on which a landlord can seek the eviction of a tenant, it prescribes the forum for adjudica tion of disputes between landlords and tenants and the procedure which has to be followed in such proceedings.
The Rent Control Act can, therefore, be said to be a special statute regulating the relationship of landlord and tenant in the Union Territory of Delhi.
[686D F] (18) The Public Premises Act is also a special statute relating to eviction of unauthorised occupants from public premises.
[689E] Jain Ink Manufacturing Company vs Life Insurance Corpo ration of India & Anr., ; , referred to.
(19) Both the enactments, namely, the Rent Control Act and the Public Premises Act, are special statutes in rela tion to the matters dealt with therein.
Therefore, the exception contained in the principle that a subsequent general law cannot derogate from an earlier special law cannot be invoked and in accordance with the principle that the later laws abrogate earlier contrary laws, the Public Premises Act must prevail over the Rent Control Act.
[686H; 687A] J.K. Cotton Spinning & Weaving Mills Co. Ltd. vs The State of Uttar Pradesh, ; ; U.P. State Elec tricity Board vs Hari 655 Shankar Jain; , and Life Insurance Corpora tion vs D.J. Bahadur; , , referred to.
(20) In the case of inconsistency between the provisions of two enactments, both of which can be regarded as Special in nature.
the conflict has to be resolved by reference to the purpose and policy underlying the two enactments and the clear intendment conveyed by the language of the relevant provisions therein.
[688G] Shri Ram Narain vs The Simla Banking and Industrial Co. Ltd.; , ; Kumaon Motor Owners ' Union Ltd. vs The State of Uttar Pradesh, ; and Sarwan Singh vs Kasturi Lal; , , referred to.
(21) Keeping in view the object and purpose underlying both the enactments viz., the Rent Control Act and the Public Premises Act, the provisions of the Public Premises have to be construed as overriding the provisions contained in the Rent Control Act.
[690H] The Parliament was aware of the non obstante clauses contained in Section 14 and 22 and the provisions contained in Sections 50 and 54 of the Rent Control Act when it enact ed the Public Premises Act containing a specific provision in Section 15 barring jurisdiction of all courts (which would include the Rent Controller under the Rent Control Act).
This indicates that Parliament intended that the provisions of the Public Premises Act would prevail over the provisions of the Rent Control Act inspite of the above mentioned provisions contained in the Rent Control Act.
[691A B] (23) The scope of the provisions of the Public Premises Act cannot be cut down on the basis of an apprehension that the corporations may be induced to earn profits by purchas ing property in possession of tenants at a low price and after buying such property evict the tenants after terminat ing their tenancy and thereafter sell the said property at a much higher value.
Every activity of a public authority especially in the background of the assumption on which such authority enjoys immunity from the rigours of the Rent Act, must be informed by reason and guided by the public inter est.
[693F; E G] M/s Dwarkadas Marfatia and Sons vs Board of Trustees of the Port of Bombay, ; , referred to.
