A Selection Committee consisting of five Members was constituted to recommend names for appointment to the post of Reader in 'Linguistics ' in the Department of Hindi of the University of Lucknow.
The Selection Committee after inter viewing the candidates recommended the name of the appellant while respondent No. 1 was placed in the second position.
Respondent No. 1 filed a writ petition in the High Court challenging the recommendations of the Selection Committee on the ground that the Selection Committee was not legally constituted because three experts on the Committee were experts in Hindi Literature and not Linguistic experts.
The High Court allowed the petition and inter alia held that under Statute 171 of the University, the Chancellor was required to nominate experts out of the panel of experts in the subject of 'Linguistics ', which was a separate subject of study in the University; that the nomination of experts out of the panel drawn from the subject of Hindi suffered from a serious legal infirmity; and that Explanation II to sub section (5) of Section 31 of the U.P. State Universities Act, 1973 was wholly inapplicable to the instant case.
Before this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that in view of the fact that a Reader in 'Lin guistics ' was to be appointed in the Department of Hindi as such experts in Hindi Language and Literature were also qualified to act as experts for the selection of Reader in 'Linguistics '.
Respondent No. 1, while supporting the judgment Of the High Court, submitted that Linguistics was a separate sub ject of study for M.A. Part I and Part II and merely because the post of Reader in Linguistics was in the Department of Hindi, it would not make any difference and the experts of Hindi Language and Literature could not be 728 appointed as experts in the Selection Committee for the selection of Reader in Linguistics.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: (1) The prospectus of the University makes it abundantly clear that separate courses of study are pre scribed for M.A. Part I or Part II in respect of Hindi on the one hand and Linguistics on the other.
[734B] (2) The subject of Hindi Language and Literature and the subject of Linguistics are entirely separate subjects of study.
This is clearly borne out from Explanation I to sub section (5)(a) of section 31 of the Universities Act.
[733H; 734A] (3) Explanation I lays down in a clear manner that for the purpose of this sub section, a branch of subject in which a separate course of study is prescribed for a post graduate degree, or for Part I or Part II thereof, shall be deemed to be a separate subject of study.
[734A] (4) It is an admitted position that separate Panels of Experts were drawn for the subjects of Hindi and Linguis tics.
[732E] (5) In the instant case, the advertisement no where provided that one Reader in Linguistics in the Department of Hindi was to be selected as common to more than one subject of study.
Merely because the post of Reader in Linguistics was required in the Department, it cannot be held that such Reader in Linguistics was to teach the subject of Linguis tics as well as the subject of Hindi Language and Litera ture.
[734G H] (6) Explanation II to sub section (5) of section 31 of the Universities Act can only apply in a case where one common teacher is to be selected for more than one subject of study and in that contingency it provides that the expert may belong to either of such subjects of study.
[735A B]
