Gaya Sugar Mills Ltd. went into liquidation and the sugar factory owned by it was leased out to the appellant by the liquidator with the permission of the Court on December 6, 1954, to be worked in terms of the lease which provided, inter alia, that the lessee would neither be liable for any of the liabilities of the company, or of the liquidator or the outgoing lessees nor bound to engage any of their employees or those working from before except those specifically mentioned in the lease.
On December 2, 1954, i.e. four days before the appellant came into possession of the sugar factory, the Bihar Government issued a notification referring a dispute between the managements of certain specified sugar factories, including Gaya Sugar Mills Ltd., and their workmen represented by their Unions, for adjudication to the Industrial Tribunal constituted by the respondent No. i. No notice was given to the appellant and proceedings against it were all exparte.
Complaints, however, were made before the Industrial Tribunal by two batches of workmen against the appellant under section 33A of the Industrial Disputes Act alleging in one case that they had been discharged and in the other that the conditions of their service had been changed by the appellant without first obtaining the permission of the Tribunal under section 33 Of the Act.
It was asserted on behalf of the appellant that there was no breach of the terms of the lease and no contravention of section 33 Of the Act.
After unsuccessfully moving the High Court under articles 226 and 227 Of the Constitution for a writ of certiorari quashing the said proceedings, the appellant came up to this Court by special leave and it was contended on its behalf that (1) no leave of the Court having been obtained under section 171 Of the Indian Companies Act by the State Government before it made the reference under section 10(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act, the reference was bad in law and that (2) the word 'employer ' in sections 33 and 33A of the Industrial Disputes Act meant only such employer as was actually concerned with the industrial dispute which was the subject matter of the reference and the appellant having come into possession of the Mills after the reference, could not be an employer within the meaning of those sections.
255 Held, that the terms of the notification properly construed clearly showed that what was sought to be made a party to the reference was not the company itself but its management at the date of the reference and, therefore, no question of leave of the court under section 171 Of the Indian Companies Act could arise.
The word 'employer ' occurring in sections 33 and 33A of the Industrial Disputes Act meant the identical employer concerned with the industrial dispute, which was the subject matter of the adjudication, and could not include an employer who merely happened to discharge or punish or alter the conditions of service of workmen unless such employer could be shown to be a mere nominee or bentamiday of the former or fell within the category of his heirs, successors or assigns within the meaning Of section 18(3)(c) of the Act.
Since, in the instant case, the appellant satisfied none of these tests, it was not bound to seek the permission of the Tribunal under section 33 Of the Act and the proceedings under section 33A of the Act against it must be quashed.
