For the academic year 1989 90, the appellant College had 8 seats in the post graduate course in Obsterics and Gyne cology.
Of these, six were reserved for institutional candi dates, and two for external candidates.
The Principal filled up all the eight seats by admitting institutional candidates without considering the case of any external candidate.
One of the external candidates approached the High Court by way of a Writ Petition.
The High Court set aside the admission of two .institutional candidates who were admitted against the quota for external candidates, and directed the Princi pal to consider the case of the petitioner and other exter nal candidates who were eligible for admission to the 'open ' 25% seats on merits, in accordance with law.
Aggrieved, the Principal and the two institutional candidates whose admis sion was set aside by the High Court, have preferred these appeals, by special leave.
Disposing of the appeals, HELD 1.
The appellant College, took the view that since no All India candidates were available on the basis postu lated in the Residency Scheme it would be appropriate to throw open the entire 100% to institutional candidates.
It is not suggested that this proposal was actuated by any mala fides.
In that the State claims that this course of action has been approved by the decision of the High Court in a case before it.
It may be that this is not the only view possible and that it is also possible to take the view that the college should have advertised these posts and filled them up by external candidates on the basis of merit.
If this be so, such advertisement cannot be confined to persons who are residents of U.P. as was envisaged by the notifica tion dated 26th April, 1986.
That notification been issued at a time when the 875 concept of All India reservation for 25% of the seats had not been adumbrated by this Court.
Even if it is assumed that the High Court was right in saying that external candi dates were eligible for admission, that eligibility cannot be restricted only to those who had already applied but should be thrown open to all external candidates fulfilling the qualifications.
This process cannot be completed within two weeks, as directed by the High Court.
To call for appli cations from all external candidates and select them, either on the basis of an examination or otherwise, will be a very lengthy and time consuming process.
The State Government and the college cannot be faulted for having decided to fill up the vacancies by offering these seats also to institutional candidates.
This is a decision taken only for a transitional period, because, from 1990 onwards, admissions will be regulated on the basis of an All India examination, and such an examination is conducted by the All India Institute of Medical Sciences every year for all medical colleges in India.
The decision taken by the State Government and the college was a practical one to tide over a transitional difficulty and there is no justification to upset the same on the basis of a solitary application from an external candidate.
[881A F] 2.
On a proper interpretation of Para 5 of the Residency Scheme the eligibility for admission of institutional candi dates is not confirmed to those who were on house jobs as on 22.8.89 but would also extend to these institutional candi dates who have been in house jobs since 1.8.87.
The result of these two judgments read together will be that the entire 100% of the institutional seats should be filled up from out of all such applicants, subject to their fulfilling any other qualifications and requirements that may be in force.
Earlier, the admission of the six candidates to 75% of the seats as well as the admission of the two candidates to 25% of the seats had been made by excluding institutional candi dates who had completed their house jobs between 1.8.87 and 22.8.89.
This will need to be reviewed now.
The entire process of admission will now have to be redone in the light of these decisions.
The selection of the two institutional candidates in question will be valid only if they come through successfully on merits on such reconsideration.
The High Court was right in holding that their admissions should be set aside.
The admission be redone in the light of the observations in these two judgments.
[882B E] Dr. Harihar Prasad Singh & Ors.
vs Principal, Moti Lal Nehru Medical College & Ors.
, [1990] 3 SCR 895 referred to.
