The respondent University issued an employment notice inviting applications for the posts of Professors, Readers and Lecturers in different subjects.
The notice mentioned the number of reservations category wise, but not subject wise.
Including the petitioners, a number of candidates belonging to both reserved and non reserved categories applied.
Selection Committees were constituted which recom mended 47 candidates for 53 posts; weightage was given to candidates belonging to the reserved category.
Thereafter the Executive Council constituted a sub Committee to decide which posts should be reserved.
On its recommendations and on consideration of the backlog of reservations, the Execu tive Council decided to set apart 17 posts and gave perma nent appointments only to 30 candidates.
It also decided that in respect of the 17 posts reserved, temporary appoint ments would be made pending the availability of suitable candidates from the reserved category.
On receipt of some representations expressing grievances against the employment notice as also the procedure followed in making the appointments, the Chancellor appointed a one man Committee to in 884 quire into the matter.
The Committee submitted its report which was accepted by the Chancellor.
Meanwhile, a batch of writ petitions was filed in the High Court challenging the employment notice on the ground that the non obtaining of the recommendation from the Board of University Teaching and Research before issuing the employment notice was bad in law in view of the provisions of Section 32(2)(iii) of the Act.
The High Court quashed the employment notice and set aside the appointments made to the posts.
It also restrained the University from making any appointment without obtaining the recommendations as afore said.
Taking into consideration the report of the one man committee and the decision of the High Court, the Chancellor directed the Vice Chancellor to terminate the services of all the appointees including the appellants.
Accordingly, the Vice Chancellor issued orders of termination of the services of the appellants and other similarly appointed.
Although the services were thus terminated, the Vice Chancellor on the same day issued another order in exercise of his emergency powers under Section 11(4) of the Act and appointed all the appellants and others to the same posts protecting their pay and allowances and making it clear to the appointments were temporary.
However the matter went before a Full Bench since one Division Bench took the view that post wise reservation was not necessary, and another Division Bench differed from it.
The Full Bench held that general reservations were in breach of the provisions of the Act and against reservation policy and hence illegal.
It also held that since the appointments were not in accordance with law from the beginning, the termination of the appellants ' services was legal.
Aggrieved, the appellants have preferred the present appeal against the decision of the Full Bench.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
The employment notice dated July 27, 1984 was bad in law since it had failed to notify the reservations of the posts subject wise and had mentioned only the total number of reserved posts without indicating the particular posts so reserved subject wise.
[893G] 2.
The word "post" used in section 57(4)(a) of the Nagpur University Act, 1974 has a relation to the faculty, disci pline, or the subject for 885 which it is created.
When therefore, reservations are re quired to be made "in posts", the reservations have to be postwise, i.e., subjectwise.
The mere announcement of the number of reserved posts is no better than inviting applica tions for posts without mentioning the subjects for which the posts are advertised.
When, therefore, Section 57(4)(a) requires that the advertisement or the employment notice would indicate the number of reserved posts, if any, it implies that the employment notice cannot be vague and has to indicate the specific post, i.e. the subject in which the post is vacant and for which the applications are invited from the candidates belonging to the reserved classes.
A nonindication of the post in this manner itself defeats the purpose for which the applications are invited from the reserved category candidates and consequently negates the object of the reservation policy.
That this is also the intention of the legislature is made clear by Section 57(4)(d) which requires the selection committee to interview and adjudge the merits of each candidate and recommend him or her for appointment to "the general posts" and "the reserved posts", if any, advertised.
[891H; 892A C] 3.1 It is common knowledge that the vacancies in posts in different subjects occur from time to time according to the exigencies of the circumstances and they arise unequally in different posts.
There may not be vacancies in one or some posts whereas there may be a large number of vacancies in other posts.
In such circumstances, it is not possible to comply with the minimum reservation percentage of 34 visa vis each post.
It is for this reason that the Government Resolution dated 30.3.81 states that although minimum per centage of reserved posts may not be i"filed in one or some posts, it will be enough if in that year it is filled in, taking into consideration that total number of appointments in all the posts.
This, however, does not absolve the ap pointing authority from advertising in advance the vacancies in each post and the number of posts in such vacancies meant for the reserved category, and inviting applications from candidates belonging to the reserved and unreserved catego ries with a clear statement in that behalf.
In fact, the overall minimum percentage has to be kept in mind, as stated in the Resolution, at the time of issuing the employment notice or the advertisement as the case may be.
[892H; 893A C] 3.2 However, the course to be adopted would depend upon the unit of reservations, the period over which the backlog is to be carried, the number of appointments already made in the relevant posts, the availability of candidates from the reserved category etc.
[893F] Dr. Raj Kumar vs Gulbarga University, I.L.R. , referred to.
886 4.
In the instant case, there is nothing on record to show that the method of giving weightage to the candidates was not followed in respect of reserved category candidates even if they had not applied for the post in the reserved seats.
There is also nothing on record to show whether any candidate belonging to the reserved category had applied for a particular post in a reserved seat, without the prior knowledge that the post was reserved.
It is, therefore, difficult to understand as to how the selection committees proceeded to give weightage to the candidates without know ing whether they had applied for reserved or nonreserved seats.
What is more objectionable in the procedure was that its Executive Council proceeded to classify the posts in different subjects between reserved and non reserved posts after the lists of selected candidates were received from different selection committee.
This method was open to an obvious objection since it gave a scope to eliminate unwant ed selected candidates at that stage.
[891A D] 5.
When the court decides that the interpretation of a particular provision as given earlier was not legal it in effect declares that the law as it stood from the beginning was as per its decision, and that it was never the law otherwise.
This being the case, since the Full Bench and now this Court has taken the view that the interpretation placed on the provisions of law by the Division Bench in Bhakre 's case was erroneous, it will have to be held that the ap pointments made by the University on March 30, 1985 pursuant to that decision were not according to law.
Hence, the termination of the services of the appellants was in compli ance with the provisions of section 57(5) of the Act.
[894B D] 6.
Since the services of the appellants are to be termi nated in view of the change in the position of law and not on account of the demerits or misdemeanour of individual candidates, it is not necessary to hear the individuals before their services are terminated.
The rule of audi alterem partem does not apply in such cass, and therefore, there is no breach of the principles of natural justice.
[894D E] 7.
It seems, some of the appellants had resigned from their earlier jobs and joined the University.
Some of them have become overaged for making any fresh application, while others will have no chance either because the posts as per the new advertisements of 1987 are reserved or non reserved and they belong to the other category.
It is recommended on compassionate grounds that the University may take into consideration the relevant facts pertaining to each of the appellants, and if it is possible, accommodate them without transgressing the law and the claim of other eligible candi dates.
[894F G] 887
