The three appellant companies claimed their respective right to the slurry that escaped from their washery plant/pond and got deposited in the Bokaro and Damodar River beds, as also in certain Raiyati land.
The State Government did not accept their plea and leased out the right to remove the said slurry to the respondent on payment of royalty.
The first two appellants filed Writ Petitions before the Patna High Court challenging the State Government 's action in leasing out the right to the Respondent 's for removing the slurry.
The third company instituted criminal proceedings against the contractors, who in turn filed Writ Petitions before the Calcutta High Court for quashing the criminal proceedings and for a direction permitting them to collect slurry under the lease granted by the State Government.
745 The Full Bench of the Patna High Court dismissed the Writ Petitions and held that slurry was neither coal nor mineral; it was an industrial waste of coal mine which was not regulated by the provisions of the Act.
It also held that collection of slurry did not involve any mining opera tions and the settlement made by the State Government in favour of the respondents was not a mining lease and so the State Government was not under any legal obligation to obtain previous sanction of the Central Government under the .
It further held that after the slurry escaped into the river bed or to some other land, it ceased to belong to the appel lants and the State Government was entitled to execute the lease for collection of the slurry.
The Writ Petitions filed by the Contractors before the Calcutta High Court were dismissed by a Single Judge who held that the third appellnat company was the owner of the slurry and the State Government had no authority to grant any lease to the respondent contractorS for removal of the same.
On appeal by the contractors the Division ' Bench held that the lease granted by the State of Bihar in favour of the contractors was not a mining lease and the provisions of the Mines and ' Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act, were not applicable to the grant of lease.
On the question of appellants ' claim to the property rights for collecting slurry, the Bench held that the slurry deposited on the appellants ' land, belonged to them and the respondents had nO right.
to collect the same but if the slurry settled down on other 's land the respondents have right to remove the same.
Against the above decisions of the two High Courts, the appellant companies have preferred the present appeals.
On behalf of the appellants, it was inter alia contended that the slurry/sludge was in substance coal, a mineral specified in the First schedule to the Act; that the State Government had no authority in law to grant any lease to the respondents for the collection, removal Or ' lifting of the slurry coal deposited in the river bed or on any Raiyati land without obtaining the sanction of the Central Govern ment under Section 5 of the Act; that the deposit of the slurry in the river bed and the land was by natural process of flow of water discharged from the washeries; that there was no law made by the State Legislature authorising the State Government to interfere with the appellants ' property right by way of executive orders; that slurry discharged from the washeries of the appellants ' coal mines constituted waste and effluent of coal mines, its disposal was exclu sively within the legislative compe 746 tence of the Parliament; and that in view of the Parlia ment 's declaration under Section 2 read with Sections 13 and 18 of the Act, the State Government was denuded of all its legislative competence to make any law with regard to dis posal of waste or effluent discharge of coal mines.
and hence the State Government had no executive power to deal with the same.
The main contentions on behalf of the respondents were that once the slurry escaped from the washery plants of the appellant it ceased to belong to them and as it polluted the river water and affected the fertility of Raiyati land the State Government was justified in providing for its collec tion and removal to prevent pollution; that the appellants could not have any right in the goods which they abandoned; that the washeries do not form integral part of the mining operations, and therefore the slurry could not be treated as a waste of coal mine.
Alternatively it was contended that even if slurry was a waste of coal mine the State Government was competent to provide for its collection and removal as the Central Government had failed to make any rule under Section 18 of the Act regulating the disposal of the slurry.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
Slurry is a descriptive expression, it may be cement slurry or coal slurry, depending upon the character or quality of the mixture of mineral in the liquid form.
There is no doubt that in the instant cases, slurry is coal slurry, as admittedly small particles of coal escape from the washery plant alongwith water.
After it overflows the storage pond the slurry flows into the river and is deposit ed on the river bed, which is later on collected and used as fuel after it is formed into briquettes.
The deposit which is collected from the river bed continues to be carbonaceous in character having all the elements of coal.
Thus, the slurry is coal in liquid form, and slurry coal deposited in the river bed or lands in substance as well as in its char acter continues to be coal.
[757F; 758C D] Kesari MaI Jain vs State of Bihar, AIR 1985 Patna 114, ap proved.
Websters New 20th Century Dictionary; Encyclopaedia Britannica, referred to.
The definition of "mining operation" and "mine" are very wide.
The expression "mining of mineral" in the defini tion of "mining operation" under Section 3(d) of the Mines and Minerals (Regulation & 747 Development) Act, 1957 is spacious enough to comprehend every activity by which a mineral is extracted or obtained from the earth irrespective of whether such activity is carried out on the surface or in the bowels of the earth.
It is not a requirement of the definition of "mining operation", that the activity for winning the mineral must necessarily be an underground activity.
The essence of 'mining operation ' is that it must be an activity for win ning a mineral whether under the surface or winning the surface of earth.
The slurry which is deposited on the river bed is not dumped there artificially by any human agency instead coal particles are carried to the river bed by the flow of water through natural process.
Therefore the view taken by the High Court that the slurry which is deposited in the river bed is dumped by the appellants by artificial process is incorrect.
Once the coal particles are carried away by the water which is discharged from the washery and the same are settled in the river bed, any operation for the extraction of lifting of the coal particles from the river bed would involve winning operations within the meaning of Section 3(d) of the Act.
However.
in the instant cases, it is not necessary to express any final opinion on this ques tion.
[759D G] Tarkeshwar Sio Thakur Jiu vs B.D. Dey & Co. & Ors., ; relied on.
Bhagwan Das vs State of U. P. & Ors.
, ; , referred 3.
The State Legislature is competent to enact law for the regulation of mines and mineral development under Entry 23 of State List but this power is subject to the declara tion which may be made by Parliament by law as envisaged by Entry 54 of Union List.
Thus the legislative competence of the State Legislature to make law on the topic of mines and minerals is subject to Parliamentary Legislation.
The Par liament has enacted the .
By Section 2 of the Act the Parlia ment has declared that it is expedient in public interest that the Union should take under its control the regulation of mines and the development of minerals to the extent provided in the Act.
In view of Parliamentary declaration as made in section 2 of the Act, the State Legislature is denuded of its legislative power to make any law with re spect to the regulation of mines and mineral development to the extent as provided by the Act.
[760G H; 761A] 4.1 An analysis of the provisions of the Act makes the extent of 748 Parliamentary declaration clear that the disposal and dis charge of sludge or slurry emanating or coming from the washery of a coal mine is exclusively within the legislative power of Parliament.
The Act further provides that the Central Government has exclusive power to frame any rule either under Section 13(2)(0) or under the amended Section 18(2)(k) of the Act regulating disposal of slurry.
The effect of the Parliamentary declaration as contained in the Act is that the matters referred to in the declaration, stand abstracted from List II and these become matters of legislation in List I of the Seventh Schedule.
As a result of the declaration made by the Parliament, under Section 2 of the Act.
the State Legislature is denuded of its legisla tive power with respect to the regulation of mines and minerals development and the entire legislative field has been taken over by Parliament.
[763C E] 4.2 The Central Government has not framed any rule either under Section 13 or under Section 18 of the Act.
Prior to the Amending Act 37 of 1986 Section 13(2)(0) con ferred power on the Central Government to frame rules for the purpose of granting prospecting licences and mining leases including the disposal of discharge of any tailings, slime or other waste products.
Sub clause (0) of Section 13(2) was transposed into Section 18(2) as sub clause (k) by the Amending Act 37 of 1986.
Section 18 (1) confers general power on the Central Government to frame rules and to take all such steps as may be necessary for the conservation and development of minerals in India.
Section 18(2) does not affect or restrict the generality or width of legislative power under Section 18(I) as the matters specified in var ious sub clauses of Section 18(2) are illustrative in na ture.
Even in the absence of sub section (2) or its various sub clauses, the Central Government was invested with the power of subordinate legislation in respect of any matter which could reasonably be connected with the purpose of "conservation and development of minerals" by Section 18(1) of the Act.
Power to frame rules, regulating the discharge or disposal of slime or slurry emanating from a coal mine including its collection from the river bed or from Raiyati land after its escape from the washery of the coal mines.
would clearly fall within the expression "conservation of mineral".
Slurry admittedly contain coal particles, its collection from land or river is reasonably connected with the 'conservation of mineral '.
Section 18(2)(k) which ex pressly confers power on the Central Government to regulate disposal or discharge of waste of a mine makes the Parlia mentary declaration apparent that the State Legislature is not competent to regulate waste discharge of a coal mine.
Mere absence of any rule framed by the Central Government under Sections 13 or 18 of the Act with regard to the dis posal of slime or waste of a coal mine does not 749 confer legislative competence on the State Legislature to make any law or rule.
Once a particular topic of legislation is covered by the Parliamentary declaration, the State Legislature is denuded of its power to make any law or rule in respect of that topic or subject matter and the absence of Rules would not confer legislative competence on the State.
[764A G] 4.3 Since Section 18 of the Act covers the field with respect to disposal of waste of a mine.
there is no scope for the contention that until rules are framed the State Legislature has power to make law or rules on the subject.
Once the competent legislature with a superior efficacy expressly or impliedly evinces its legislative intent to cover the entire field on a topic.
the enactments of the other legislature whether passed before or after would be overborne.
Mere absence of rules framed by the Central Government.
does not confer power on the State Legislature to make law on the subject.
Since the legislative field with regard to the framing of rules relating to the disposal of slime and waste of coal mine is fully covered by Section 18.
the State Legislature is denuded of its power of making any law with regard to those mailers.
[765B C] Baijnath Kedia vs State of Bihar & Ors. ; Hingir Rampur Coal Co. Ltd. & Ors.
vs State of Orissa & Ors.
, ; ; State of Orissa vs M.A. Tulloch & Co., ; and State of Tamil Nadu vs Hind Stone, ; relied on.
The executive power of the State Government is co extensive with the legislative power of the State Legisla ture.
If the State Legislature has power to enact laws on a matter enumerated in the State List or in the concurrent list the State has executive power to deal with those mat ters subject to other provisions of the Constitution.
If a subject matter fails within the legislative competence of State Legislature.
the exercise of executive power by the State Government is not confined, as even in the absence of a law being made, the State Government is competent to deal with the subject matter in exercise of its executive power.
In the absence of any law, the State Government or its officers in exercise of executive authority cannot infringe citizens rights merely because the State Legislature has power to make laws with regard to subject, in respect of which the executive power is exercised.
No doubt under Entry 23 of List 1I, the State Legislature has power to make law but that power is subject to Entry 54 of List 1 with respect to the regulation and development of mines and minerals.
Since State Legislature 's power to make law with respect to the matter enumerated in Entry 23 of List II has been taken away by the Parliamentary declaration, the State Government ceased to have any executive power in the matter relating 750 to regulation of mines and mineral development.
Moreover, the proviso to Article 162 itself contains limitation on the exercise of the executive power of the State.
If Parliament and the State Legislature both have power to make law in a matter, the executive power of the State shall be subject to the law made by the Parliament or restricted by the execu tive power of the Union expressly conferred on it by the Constitution or any law made by Parliament.
Since Parliament has made the law as contemplated by Entry 54 of List I and the law so made confers exclusive power on the Central Government to frame rules regulating the disposal of waste or industrial effluent of a mine, the State Legislature has, therefore no power either to make law under Entry 23 of List II or to exercise executive power to regulate the disposal of slurry, a waste effluent discharge of a coal mine.
[765F H; 766A F] Rai Sahib Ram Jawaya Kapur & Ors.
vs State of Punjab, and State of M.P. & Anr.
vs Thakur Bharat Singh, ; , referred to.
It is apparent that the State of Bihar itself has been treating the 'slurry deposits ' as mineral and on that assumption it has been executing leases conferring rights on the respondents to collect the same on payment of royalty.
Hence it is not open to the State of Bihar and the lessees to contend that slurry is not coal or mineral within the meaning of the Act.
[767F] 7.
The inclusive definition of 'mine ' as contained in Section 2 of the Act is wide enough to include any premises belonging to a mine where any ancillary process is carried on for preparing the minerals or coke for sale.
The washery, wherein the process of washing coal is carried on, for the purpose of preparing the coal for.
sale is an integral part of a mine as it involves ancillary process.
Washery is included within the definition of mine under the .
Any waste discharge from the washery carrying small particles of coal in the form of slurry is the waste slime arising from operations carried out in a mine.
Moreover, it is not open to the respondents to contend that slurry is not a waste discharged from the washeries of coal mines, since they have all along pleaded that slurry is a waste dis charged from the washery of the appellants ' coal mines.
[768C; D E] 8.
The slurry which escapes from the appellants ' wash eries is mineral and its regulation is within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Central Government.
In view of the Parliamentary declaration made by Section 2 of the Act and having regard to Section 18 of the Act, the State 751 Government has no authority in law to make any settlement or grant any lease to any person for the collection of slurry deposits either from the river bed or other land.
The im pugned settlements made in favour of the respondents by the State Government are illegal and the respondent lessees have no right nor title to collect the slurry deposits and they are restrained from lifting or collecting the same from the land in dispute.
[771H; 772A] [This Court directed that the money deposited pursuant to the interim orders passed by the High Court and this Court will be paid to the successful party.
[771C]
