The respondents instituted a civil suit challenging the election of the office bearers ' of the appellant Society and asked for rendition of accounts.
The appellant Society contested the suit on the ground that in view of Sections 23 and 25 of the the suit was barred.
The courts below having held that the suit was not barred, the defendant Society filed appeal in this Court.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
A litigant having a grievance of a civil nature has, independently of any statute, a right to institute a suit in the civil court unless its cognizance is either expressly or impliedly barred.
The exclusion of jurisdiction of the civil court is not to be readily inferred and such exclusion must be either express or implied.
[973A B] K.S. Venkataraman & Company vs State of Madras, ; ; Ganga Bai vs Vijay Kumar and Ors., ; ; Dhula Bhai and Ors.
vs The State of Madhya Pradesh and Ors., ; ; referred.
Raleigh Investment Company Limited vs The Governor General in Council, [1947] L.R. 74 I.A. 50; cited.
The provisions of Section 23 of the Societies Regis tration Act, 1860 are confined to audit and have nothing to do with the relief of rendition of accounts.
[976B] 972 3.
Section 25 deals with disputes regarding challenge to the eviction of office bearers.
The maintainability of dispute within the purview of that Section is hedged with conditions and unless such requirement is fulfilled, a statutory dispute would not be maintainable.
[976B] 3.1 In the instant case the action in the Civil Court is by some of the members who perhaps would not satisfy the requirement laid down in Section 25.
It cannot be said that Section 25 having provided the pre conditions on the satis faction of which a dispute within the purview of that Sec tion would be maintainable before the Registrar takes away the right of Members of the Society to claim relief other wise outside the purview of Section 25 on the basis of their right to seek remedy for their grievance.
It is not the appellant 's contention that the relief claimed is not one which would come within the ambit of Section 9 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
Therefore, the bar of Section 25 is not applicable to the facts of the case, and the conclusion reached in the Courts below is correct and the suit is maintainable.
[976C E]
