One 'S ' lodged a First Information Report alleging that the appellants and two others were pelting stones at the house of informant, thereby causing damage to it and injur ing three women who were sitting at the chowk of the house.
After completing investigation the police framed charges under sections 147, 323, 325, 335 and 427 IPC and forwarded the charge sheet to the Judicial Magistrate under section 173 Cr.
P.C. Taking cognizance and after hearing the argu ments, the Judicial Magistrate discharged appellants 4 and 5 of all the charges and ordered that appellants 1, 2 and 3 be charged only under section 427 IPC.
Later, the Assistant Public Prosecutor submitted an application to the Magistrate under Section 2 16 Cr.
P.C. signed by one of the Prosecution Witnesses, for amending the charge claiming that a prima facie case under sections 147, 325 and 336 IPC was made out.
After hearing the parties, the Magistrate allowed the said application.
This order was challenged before the High Court by way of Revision Peti tions.
The Petitions were dismissed by the High Court, holding that it was not a case of reviewing the order of discharge passed by the Magistrate, but was a case of taking cognizance of the offence on the basis of evidence recorded by the Magistrate himself, which was not prohibited in law.
It was also held that under section 319 Cr.
P.C. the Magis trate was fully competent to take cognizance of the offences on the basis of evidence recorded by him though for the same offences order of discharge was passed by him earlier.
Aggrieved at the aforesaid order of the High Court, the appellants have preferred these appeals, by special leave.
On behalf of the appellants it was contended that the Magis trate 810 committed error of jurisdiction in passing the subsequent order and that he could not have revised his own order discharging the appellants.
It was also contended that section 319 Cr.
P.C. was applicable only to a person not being the accused, and so the accused could not have been discharged.
The Respondent State contended that the Magistrate found enough materials for taking cognizance and framing charges under sections 147, 323, 325 and 336 IPC and he had juris diction to do so under section 319 Cr.
P.C. irrespective of the application under section 216 Cr.
P.C. filed by the Assistant Public Prosecutor.
Allowing the appeals, HELD: 1.1.
Under Section 216 Cr. P.C., 'and to any charge ' means the addition of a new charge.
An alteration of a charge means changing or variation of an existing charge or making of a different charge.
Addition to and alteration of a charge or charges implies one or more existing charge or charges.
When the appellants 4 and 5 were discharged of all the charges and no charge existed against them, natural ly an application under section 216 Cr.
P.C. was not maintainable in their case.
The Magistrate therefore while disposing of the application under section 216 Cr.
P.C. only had no jurisdic tion to frame charges against the appellants 4 and 5.
In his order the Magistrate did not say that he was proceeding suo motu against them though he said that section 319 Cr.
P.C. was also clear in this connection.
[815B D] 1.2.
As regards appellants 1, 2 and 3, they were already accused in the case.
Section 216 Cr.
P.C. envisages the accused and the additions to and alterations of charge may be done at any time before record was satisfied that charges ought also to be framed under the other sections with which they were charged in the charge sheet.
That was also the prayer in the Assistant Public Prosecutor 's application.
However, the Magistrate invoked his jurisdiction under section 319 Cr.
P.C. [815E F] 2.
The provisions of section 319 had to be read in consonance with the provisions of section 398 of the Code.
Once a person is found to have been the accused in the case he goes out of the reach of section 319.
Whether he can be dealt with under any other provisions of the Code is a different question.
In the case of the accused who has been discharged under the rele vant provisions of the Code, the nature of finality to such order 811 and the resultant protection ' of the persons discharged subject to revision under s, 398 of the Code may not be lost sight of.
This should be so because the complainant 's desire for vengeance has to be tempered with.
[824E F] Chandra Deo Singh vs Prokash Chandra Bose & Anr., ; ; Joginder Singh & Anr.
vs State of Punjab and Anr.
, ; ; Municipal Corporation of Delhi vs Ram Kishan Rohtagi & Ors., ; ; Dr. S.S. Khanna vs Chief Secretary, Patna & Ors., ; ; relied on.
State vs Gangaram Kalite, AIR 1965 Assam and Nagaland 91 approved.
Saraswatiben vs Thakurlal Himmatlal & Anr., AIR 1967 Gujarat 263: Amarjit Singh @ Amba vs The State of Punjab, Punjab Law Reporter Vols.
85 (1983) p. 324, disapproved.
General view of the Criminal Law of England by James Stephen, p. 99 referred to. 3.
The Assistant Public Prosecutor 's application under section 216, in so far as the appellants 1 to 3 were concerned, could be dealt with under section 216.
Appellants 3 & 5 could be dealt with neither under section 216 nor under section 319.
The order of the Magistrate as well as that of the High Court in so far as the appellants 4 and 5 are concerned, are set aside.
[824G H]
