In 1957, the appellant let out a plot of land to Re spondent No. 1 at an annual rent of Rs. 170.
Respondent No. 1 constructed a building on the plot of land in 1968, with the consent of the appellant.
After the insertion in 1976 of Section 29 A in the U.P. Urban Buildings (Regulation of Letting, Rent and Eviction) Act, 1972, appellant filed an application before the delegated authority under the Act for fixation of appropriate rent for the said land under Section 29 A(5) of the Act.
The application was dismissed by the authority on the ground that Section 29 A(5) was applicable only to those cases in which there was no agreed rent and since the parties, by mutual agreement, have accepted the annual rent at Rs. 170 there was no question of refixation of the rent.
Aggrieved, the appellant filed a Writ Petition in the High Court, which was dismissed.
The appellant has preferred this appeal, by special leave, against the said order of the High Court.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: 1.
The words "such rent as may be mutually agreed upon between the parties" in sub section (4) of Section 29 A of the U.P. Urban Buildings (Regulation of Letting, Rent and Eviction) Act, 1972 envisage an agreement with regard to rent entered by the landlord and tenant after the coming into force of Section 29 A. An agreement prior to the com mencement of Section 29 A would not preclude determination of rent under sub section (5) of Section 29 A.
Generally, the words 'may be ' are much oftener used with reference to the future than the 966 past or present.
In sub section (4) of Section 29 A the words 'may be ' are preceded by the word 'as ' and are allowed by the words 'mutually agreed upon ' which indicate that the words are used with reference to the future.
The provisions of sub section (7) which give overriding effect to the provisions of section 29 A over an existing contract also lend support to this construction.
The High Court was not correct in holding the view that there could be no enhance ment of the rent under subsection (5) of Section 29 A in view of the agreement between the appellant and the tenant that the tenant shall pay rent at the rate of Rs. 170 per annum.
[970A D] Trilok Chand vs Rent Control and Eviction Officer & Anr., ; approved.
Brown vs Batchelor, ; referred to.
Stroud 's Judicial Dictionary,, 5th Edn.
p. 1575; re|erred to.
The Judgment and order of the High Court dated Febru ary 19, 1990 as well as the order dated April 14, 1978 passed by the Delegated Authority are set aside and the matter is remanded to the Delegated Authority for considera tion of the application submitted by the appellant |or fixation of rent under Section 29 A of the Act in accordance with law.
[970E F]
