The respondent a statutory body corporate constituted under the Bombay Port Trust Act, 1879 a 'State Act ' who had appointed an Assistant Estate Manager as their power of attorney holder to lease out its property from time to time, terminate the leases and to lay action for ejectment, etc.; leased out the suit property to the appellant.
826 The appellant was served with a notice under Section 106 read with Section 111(h) of the terminating the tenancy in terms of the covenants of lease and directing delivery of possession of the demised property giving one month 's time from 22nd January 1975.
The notice was served on the tenants on January 28, 1975 and became effective from 28th February, 1975.
In the meanwhile, the Major Port Trust Act, 1963, a 'Central Act ' was made applicable to the Bombay Port Trust by operation of Section 133(2A) thereof with effect from February 1, 1975.
After the expiry of one month from the suit notice an ejectment application was filed under Section 41 of the Bombay as amended under the Maharashtra 1963 Amendment Act, and a direction was sought for delivery of possession.
After the Maharashtra Amendment Act 19 of 1976 came into force suits were laid against the three other tenants of the demised property.
The respondent pleaded in the said suit that it was a successor ininterest of the Port Trust Board under the State Act, and was entitled to eject the tenants and to take possession of the demised portions.
The appellant contended in his written statement that the suit was not maintainable since the State Act ceased to be operative with effect from February 1, 1975, the quit notice issued under Section 106 read with Section 111(h) of the became ineffective and without determining the tenancy afresh the suit was not validly laid.
It was further submit ted that the respondent had promised that on deposit of a certain amount which the appellant tenant did, he would be given to lease a portion in the reconstructed building, and consequently the respondent was estopped by promissory estoppel to have the tenant ejected.
One suit was dismissed on the ground that the tenancy was not duly determined as per law, while the other suits were decreed.
No appellate forum had been prescribed under the Maha rashtra Amendment Act of 1963 but a substantive suit on the original side provided was available, but such a right to appeal was incorporated by the Maharashtra Amendment Act, 19 of 1976.
The appellant filed a writ petition in the High Court under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution and the other tenants filed regular appeals to a Bench of two Judges of the Small Causes Court, which were pending.
827 In the writ petition of the appellant petitioner challenged the vires of sections 2,3 and 4 of the Maharashtra Amending Act, 1963 introducing Section 42(A) in Chapter VII of the and deleting Sections 45 to 47 from the Principal Act and of amendment of SectiOn 49 thereof; as well as Section 46(2) of the as amended by the Maharashtra Amendment Act of 1976 as offending Article 14 of tile Constitution.
When the matter came up before the Single Judge of the High Court it was referred to the Division Bench, which upheld the constitutional validity of the said sections and remitted the matter to the Single Judge for disposal on merits.
The Single Judge considered the matter and negatived the two points raised by the appellant petitioner regarding validity of the notice terminating tile tenancy, and also the plea of promissory estoppel, and dismissed the writ petition.
The appellant appealed to this Court by special leave under Article 136.
It was contended on behalf of the appel lant that the quit notice issued under Section 106 read with Section III(h) of the was invalid and that by issue of the said notice no right accrued to the respondents and that the termination of tenancy became operative only on expiry of one month given thereunder i.e. February 28, 1975, by which date the State Act became inop erative, as from February 1, 1975 the Central Act had come into force; that termination of tenancy was an act inter vivos by operation of Section 106 read with Section III(h) of the , and that under Section 109, the respondent not being a living person, was not entitled to the benefit of the quit notice as its operation was not saved by Section 2(d) and Section 5 of the said Act.
It was also contended that the respondents were estopped from ejecting the appellant and other tenants who were similarly situated on the principle of promissory estoppel, as the Estate Manager of the respondent in his letter dated April 3, 1972 directed the tenant to deposit Rs. 11,000 for grant of tenancy after reconstruction of the flats therein and placing reliance thereon the tenants having deposited the amount demanded from them and acted upon the promise to their detriment, the respondents shall be declared to be estopped from ejecting the tenants from the demised respec tive portions leased out to them.
The appeal was contested on behalf of the respondents by contending that when right, title, and interest in immovable property stood transferred by operation of law, the spirit behind Section 109 of the 828 will apply; and the successor in interest would be entitled to the rights of the predecessor and that as the Estate Manager had no authority to give a promise, and that even assuming that he had such a power, it was a conditional one, namely, approval by the Board, and that the Board having resolved to reject the claim, and on reconstruction decided to allot to its own employees out of administrative necessity, the principle of promissory estop pel cannot be applied.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
When right, title and interest in immovable property stand transferred by operation of law, the spirit behind Section 109 of the per force would apply and successor ininterest would be entitled to the rights of the predecessor.
This is what the Single Judge of the High Court has held and the view is approved as correct.
The notice terminating the tenancy of Vasantkumar would enure to the benefit of the respondent and it could be availed of by the respondent to lay the suit for ejectment.
[836H; 837A B] N.P.K. Raman Menon vs Collector of Malabar, AIR 1924 Madras 908; Trimbak Damodhar Raipurkar vs Assaram Hiraman Patil & Ors., [1962] Suppl.
1 SCR 700; Hitkarini Sabha vs The Corporation of City of Jabalpur & Anr., and Lower vs Sorrell, [ 1963] 1 Queen 's Bench Division 959, referred to.
Gurumurthappa vs Chickmunisamappa, AIR , over ruled.
Halsbury 's Laws of England, 4th Edition, Vol.
27, p. 193; Hill and Redman in Law of Landlord and Tenant, 17th Edition Vol.
I, p. 488, p. 405; Mulla Transfer of Property Act, 6th Edition, p. 676 and Chitaley 's , 4th Edn.
1969, Vol.
III, Note 35, referred to.
2(i) The functionaries under both the State Act and the Central Act are the same.
The notice was issued by the Assistant Estate Manager by virtue of his official function as power of attorney agent on behalf of the respondent The Board of Trustees have the right to terminate the lease under Section 26 of the State Act and these rights stood transferred and vested under Section 29(1) of the Central Act.
Therefore the termination of tenancy and laying the action for ejectment are integrally connected with their official capacity.
There is a reasonable connection between the impugned acts and officials duty.
Thereby, they are the acts done under the Central Act.
[839C E] 829 2(ii) The notice under Section 106 and Section III(h) of the is an act done or purported to have been done in the official capacity as Power of Attorney holder/Assistant Estate Manager on behalf of the respondent, Board of Trustees; the right to lay the suit on expiry of one month 's period prescribed in the notice, namely, on or after February 28, 1975 had accrued to the respondent.
It is an act done or purported to have been done under the Central Act in exercise of the official function.
The right to lay the suit on determination of the tenancy by notice dated January 20, 1975 under the State Act is a transfer of inter est by operation of Section 29(1) of the Central Act, to the respondent under Section 109 of the .
Thereby the quit notice is valid.
The suit laid, pursu ant thereto, is valid and legal.
Accordingly order of eject ment passed by the Small Cause Court is perfectly legal and unassailable.
[840B E] Commissioner for the Court of Calcutta vs Abdul Rahim Osman & Co.; Trustees of Port of Bombay vs The Premier Automobiles Ltd. & Anr., ; , referred to.
3(i) The doctrine of promissory estoppel is now well established one in the field of administrative law.
This principle has been evolved by equity to avoid injustice.
It is neither in the realm of contract nor in the realm of estoppel.
Its object is to interpose equity shorn of its form to mitigate the rigour of strict law.
This doctrine would be displaced in a case where equity would not require that the Government should be held bound by the promise made by it.
But the Government must be able to show that in view of the facts as have been transpired, public interest would not be prejudiced.
Where the Government is required to carry out the promise the Court would have to balance, the public interest in the Government 's carrying out the promise made to the citizens, which helps citizens to act upon and alter ' his position and the public interest likely to suffer if the promises were required to be carried out by the Government and determine which way the equity lies.
[841B; 842G H; 843A] 3(ii) The doctrine of promissory estoppel would equally apply to a private individual as well as a public body like a Municipal Council.
It cannot be applied in the teeth of an obligation or liability imposed by law.
It cannot be invoked to compel the Government to do an act prohibited by law.
There may be no promissory estoppel against exercise of legislative functions.
[843B C] 3(iii) Promissory estoppel cannot be used for compelling the 830 Government or a public authority to carry out a representa tion or promise which is prohibited by law or which was devoid of the authority or power of the officer of the Government or the public authority to make.
It being an equitable doctrine it must yield place to the equity, if larger public interest so requires and if it can be shown by the Government or public authority, for having regard to the facts as they have transpired that it would be inequitable to hold the Government or public authority to the promise or representation made by it.
[844B D] 3(iv) Promissory estoppel should not be extended, though it may be rounded on an express or implied promise stemmed from the conduct or representation by an officer of the State or public authority when it was obtained to play fraud on the Constitution and the enforcement would defeat or tend to defeat the Constitutional goals.
[844D] Union of India vs Indo Afgan Agencies, ; ; Century Spinning and Manufacturing Co. Ltd. vs Ulhasnagar Municipal Council, [1970] 3 SCR 854; Motilal Padampat Sugar Mills vs State of Uttar Pradesh, ; ; Jeet Ram vs State of Haryana, ; ; Union of India vs Godfrey Philips India Ltd., [1985] Supp.
3 SCR 123 at 144; State of Bihar vs Usha Martin Industries Ltd., [1987] 65 STC 430 and Asstt.
Commissioner of Commercial Taxes, Dharwar vs Dharmendra Trading Co. etc.
; , , referred to.
Before making the public authority responsible for act of its subordinate, it must be established that the subordinate officer did in fact make the representation and as a fact, is competent to make a binding promise on behalf of the public authority or the Government, ultra vires acts do not bind the authority and insistence to abide by the said ultra vires promise would amount to putting premium and legitimacy to ultra vires acts of subordinate officers.
[847D E] Howell vs Falmouth Boat Construction Co. Ltd, and Attorney General for Ceylon vs
A.D. Silva, , referred to.
The letter dated April 3, 1972 written by the Estate Manager is a conditional one, namely, that on fulfilling certain conditions indicated in that letter he would make recommendation to the Board for grant of lease, condition precedent being that the tenant would deposit the required sum of about Rs. 11,000 and odd with the respondent.
Un doubtedly, the tenants completed that part of the obliga tion.
Thereafter it was placed before the Board, who by resolution dated 831 September 10, 1974, considered.
,it, but was rejected on the ground that after reconstruction the building would be required by its staff.
[845C E] 6.
The Estate Manager is merely an intermediary to collect the material between the respondent Port Trust and its tenants and to place the material for consideration to the Board.
Thereby the Estate Manager is not clothed with any authority much less even ostensible authority to create a promise so as to bind the respondent, that the respondent would allot the rooms on reconstruction to the tenants.
The promise of him is an ultra vires act, though conditional and, therefore.
it does not bind the respondent.
Though the executive necessity has not been satisfactorily established, the doctrine of promissory estoppel cannot be extended in favour of the appellant and other tenants.
[847E G] 7.
When a constitutional question has been raised and does arise for consideration, unless there is a fulldressed argument addressed by either side before this Court no satisfactory resolution could be made.
Mere paraphrasing the judgment of the High Court in particular when it relates to the local laws is no proper decision making.
[849A B]
