The land in plots Nos.
6385 and 6386 had been in posses sion of Ram Dayal as mortgagee under Baijnath who was the original tenant.
Respondents No. 1 3 are the descendants of Ram Dayal.
They made an application under section 9 of U.P. Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1954 before the Consolidation Officer claiming tenancy rights on the basis of the deed dated July 30, 1945, stating that their names had been recorded in Khatauni of 1359 Fasli.
They are in cultivatory possession and have become adhivasis and subsequently sir dars.
They further contended that the appellants have no right of possession over the land and their names have been wrongly entered in the Khatauni No. 1353 Fasli.
The respond ents prayed for entering their names as sirdars.
This application was allowed by the Consolidation Offi cer vide order dated July 23, 1967.
The Settlement Officer (Consolidation) reversed the order and the Deputy Director of Consolidation dismissed the revision filed by the re spondents.
Subsequently the respondents filed a writ petition in the High Court.
The High Court allowed the same and quashed the orders of the appellate and the revisional authorities, and maintained the order of the Consolidation Officer in its judgment dated 3rd October, 1972.
The appellants filed a special leave on 30th November, 1972 against the judgment of the High Court dated 3rd Octo ber, 1972 under letters patent.
It was not maintainable in view of the U.P. Courts (Abolition of Letters Patent Appeal Amendment) Ordinance, 1972 which came into force on 30th June, 1972.
Thus Writ Petition finally culminated in favour of the respondents by High Court order dated 3rd October, 1972.
958 The appellants instead of challenging the order of the High Court by way of filing any Special Leave Petition before this Court, initiated fresh proceedings by moving an application on 6th July, 1973 before the Settlement Officer (Consolidation) which was rejected on 30th October, 1974.
A revision was filed against the said order before the Deputy Director of Consolidation which was also rejected on 21st July, 1975.
Thereafter the appellants moved the High Court again, and the Writ Petition filed by them was dismissed by its order dated 18th September, 1975.
Since the subject matter had been finally decided by the High Court judgment of 3rd October, 1972 so to start pro ceedings afresh was not in good faith as none of the author ities of the Settlement or Consolidation could have any right or jurisdiction to set aside the order of the High Court.
The second judgment of the High Court dated 18th September, 1975 was challenged in C.A. No. 1003 of 1976 in this Court.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, HELD: Both the appeals had been filed after the expiry of the period of limitation.
The appellants had applied for condonation of delay on the ground that they had been prose cuting the prior proceedings in good faith and on legal advice so the period of more than three years be excluded in computing the period of limitation under section 14 ' of the .
The Respondents filed counter to the application and opposed the same.
[961D E] Special leave was granted by this Court on 2nd Septem ber, 1976 subject to the rights of the respondents to argue the question of limitation and applicability of section 14 of the at the hearing of the appeals.
[961F] The appellants as to the question of limitation submit ted that the delay of 1198 days had occurred unwillingly though they had been prosecuting with due diligence before the appellate authorities but there is no proper affidavit either of the appellants or the Counsel in support of the application for condonation of delay.
There is also no other material to indicate that the appellants had exercised due diligence in working out their remedies and sought proper advice in the matter.
There was no right of appeal against the judgment of the High Court as it quashed the orders of the appellant and the revisional authorities so the proceed ings instituted by the party by restoring to the lower authorities for fresh decision are not legal or valid.
Hence the appeals are liable to be dismissed as time barred.
[961G H; 962A B] 959 Even on merits, the appellants cannot succeed.
Admitted ly the original tenant was Baijnath but was dispossessed in execution decree obtained by the landlord in 1944.
Thereaf ter the land was mortgaged in favour of Ram Dayal and the mortgagee obtained the decree against the landlord.
The respondents subsequently entered into an agreement setting the claims under the decree and granting patta in favour of the Respondents in deed dated 30th July, 1945.
These facts have been accepted by the Consolidation Officer and the deed and title were found to be in favour of the,respondents.
The tenancy in favour of Baijnath was subsisting when the deed of 23rd November, 1943 was executed.
The creation of a tenancy during the subsistence of the earlier one could not confer any right and even before the deed of 2nd August, 1945 patta was already granted in favour of the respondents.
[962D G] Even the contention of the appellants that they have a case under section 43 of the Transfer of Property Act, which embodies the rule of estoppel by deed, is not applicable because the transfer under the deed of 23rd November, 1943 became inoperative because the settlement was invalid on account of the subsisting lease in respect of the Land and the landlord could not super impose a second lease in re spect of the tenanted property, so no interest could be created in favour of the appellants under that document of 2nd August, 1945 and therefore, there is no question of feeding the estoppel.
[963E G]
