Section 14(1) of the provides that where a duty of customs is chargeable on any goods by refer ence to their value, the value of such goods shall be deemed to be the price at which such or like goods are ordinarily sold or offered for sale.
for delivery at the time and place of importation.
in the course of international trade.
The appellant company, a small scale manufacturer of plain paper copiers.
had submitted.
alongwith their applica tion for approval of the phased manufacturing programme, the quotations received by them from their foreign collaborators based in Hongkong in respect of the various components and obtained a licenee in this regard for Rs.4,94,500.
Subse quently, they imported three consignments of components and consumables in SKD/CKD form from suppliers at Hongkong and another consignment from Singapore.
The total value declared under the four bills of entry was Rs.99,612.
The Collector of Customs found that the invoices submit ted by the company were undervalued and determined the price of goods at Rs.7,15,485 with reference to the quotations, for the purposes of section 14(1) of the Act.
He thus held that there was a misdeclaration of value to the tune of Rs.6,15,873, that the duty payable thereon would be Rs.10,96,228.20 and that the entire goods were liable to confiscation under section 111(m) of the Act.
He also held that the goods imported were fully finished copiers in SKD/CKI) form and as such there was a misdeclaration that the import ed goods were only parts of the copiers, that description of most of the items in the invoices had been deliberately manipulated to suit the description in the licence, that fully assembled copiers were not permissible to be imported and this was a clear violation of the Act and the terms of the licence.
In the alternative he held that even if all the parts contained in SKD/CKD packs were 29 viewed individually, none of the items was covered by the licence.
He further held that the value of the parts import ed for the purposes of section 14(1) of the Act would be Rs.5,63,332, whereas the importers were permitted to import goods worth Rs.4,94,500, that there was thus an excess of Rs.68,832 and as such the goods were liable to confiscation under section 111(d) of the Act.
Consequently, he directed con fiscation of the entire goods with an option to the company to pay Rs.3 lakhs in lieu thereof and also Rs.2 lakhs in personal penalties.
The Customs, Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal dismissed their appeals.
In these appeals under section 130(e) of the Act, it was contended for the appellants that the quotations had indi cated prices at Hongkong and not the place of importation, that at the time of submitting the application for grant of licence the prices were quoted for fixing the upper limit of the value of the licence, that when the actual purchase transactions were entered into the company negotiated for the price and having regard to the quantum of purchase and the prospects of future sales the company was given 25 per cent discount by the suppliers, and that in the absence of any other material on record the invoice price alone could form the basis of valuation of the imported goods.
For the respondents, it was contended that the prices quoted by the collaborators were based on the prices given by the manufac turers.
and there was no question of supplying the compo nents on a lesser price than given by the manufacturers themselves, that the goods imported were not components of plain paper copiers as declared, that the cartons in fact comprised of all the parts required for full and complete assembly of 14 copiers, that the company in importing them in the guise of separate components and accessories had not only violated the terms and conditions of the licence but also committed a complete fraud, that in the circumstances the adjudicating authority was fully justified in placing reliance on the prices mentioned in the quotations.
Dismissing the appeals under section 130(e) of the Act, the Court, HELD: 1.1 According to section 14(1) of the for purposes of assessment the value of the imported goods is to be deemed to be the price at which such or like goods are ordinarily sold, or offered for sale, for delivery at the time and place of importation, in the course of interna tional trade, where the seller and the buyer have no inter est in the business of each other and the price is the sole consideration for the sale or offer for sale.
[36G H] 1.2 In the instant case the appellant company itself had produced 30 a copy of the quotations received by them from their collab orators at Hongkong in respect of the copiers and other items imported, alongwith their application for approval of their phased manufacturing programme.
They, therefore.
could not dispute the correctness of the prices mentioned in the said quotations.
Not only that, they have also failed to produce any other material on record to show that the value mentioned in the invoices was the correct market value of the goods imported at the relevant time.
The adjudicating authority in these circumstances was perfectly justified in taking the prices mentioned in the quotations as a basis for determining the correct value of the imported goods.
[37A C] 2.1 The goods covered by the three bills of entry dated 3rd February, 1987 had been shipped from Hongkong on the same day i.e. on 21st January, 1987.
The entire goods had arrived on the same day and by the same flight on 30th January, 1987.
These goods had been supplied by the same supplier.
They comprised of ten numbers copiers in SKD/CKD condition, accessories, spares, consumables and excess items.
The goods covered by the 4th bill of entry were four numbers copiers in SKD/CKD condition and consumables.
If assembled together these would constitute full and complete copiers.
The licenee produced was valid for certain compo nents and was not valid for fully assembled copiers.
The appellant company was thus doing indirectly what they were not permitted to do directly under the licence.
[37H; 38A B] Girdbari Lal Bansi Dhar vs Union of India, ; referred to.
Union of India vs Tarachand Gupta & Bros., ; distinguished.
2.2 The intention and purpose of the import policy was to give incentive and encouragement to the new entrepreneurs establishing small scale industries and in the first phase to import 62% of the components of the copiers and the balance of 38% was to be manufactured by them indigenously.
This percentage of 62% was to be reduced in the subsequent years.
The import policy was not meant for such entrepre neurs who instead of importing 62% of the components, im ported 100% of the components of a fully finished and com plete goods manufactured by a foreign country.
Fully fin ished plain paper copiers were the end product of the im porters and hence could not be imported by them.
The device a, looted by the company in the instant case was thus a complete fraud on the import policy itself.
[37D F] 31 2.3 The order confiscating the goods and imposing fine was, therefore, rightly made.
