In Dr. Pradeep Jain vs Union of India, ; the Court had laid down a scheme of admission to medical colleges in graduate and post graduate courses.
By its order dated September 1987 in a miscellaneous petition the Court made certain specific directions for the sake of bringing about uniformity in post graduate medical teaching and allowed a five year period upto 1992 for doing so.
In 6 of the said order it also fixed a uniform schedule for inviting applications for holding the selection examination, declara tion of the result, and admission of students to the post graduate courses.
11 was laid down therein that the courses of study shall commence in every institution throughout the country from May 2 every year.
The said time frame was intended to be brought into force from the year 1988, The Union of India, the Medical Council of India, the State Governments, Universities, medical institutions and all other authorities involved were required to give full effect to the orders and directions.
copy of the order was communi cated forthwith to the Chief Secretary every State and Union Territory for compliance.
In State of Bihar vs San jay Kumar, AIR 1990 SC 749 dealing with the lapse on the part of the State of Bihar in the matter of compliance with the directions of 1987 the Court had expressed the hope and trust that everyone con cerned would comply with the time frame strictly in future and held out a serious threat of punishment against the defaulting authorities.
In the instant interlocutory application the respondents sought grant of time to the State of Uttar Pradesh for implementing the reader dated September 25, 1987 and com mence the session for post graduate education from 2nd May, 1990 in all the seven medical colleges run by 136 it, and to hold the competitive examination for admitting the postgraduate students for the year 1990 through the University of Lucknow.
Their stand was that there was scope for confusion relating to the directions and non compliance was relatable to a bona fide mistake.
Disposing of the application, the Court, HELD: 1.
The directions of the Court are not intended to be brushed aside and overlooked or ignored.
Meticulous compliance is the only way to respond to them.
[141G] 2.1 In the instant case, two distinct sets of directions were made by the Court one in regard to requirement of change of the regulations and rules and the procedural aspects of the scheme, and the other for regulating admis sion and commencement of teaching.
There was no scope for confusion relating to them.
[140C D] 2.2 It was the obligation of the State of Uttar Pradesh in terms of the orders of 1987 and 1989 to initiate action for admission in appropriate time so as to allow the com mencement of the course for the year 1990 with effect from May 2, 1990.
The respondents ' stand that the entrance exami nation for the remaining seats (besides 25% controlled by the AllMS) was to be conducted by the University of Lucknow on 27th May, 1990 itself was contrary to the scheme.
[140E F] 2.3 Where the direction is clear and arising out of default of compliance, a further direction is made clarify ing the position and warning defaulting parties of serious consequences, there was no scope for any justification for continued default.
In failing to take notice of the Court 's directions the State Government and its officers have exhib ited a conduct of non cooperation and callousness.
In fact, their performance was nothing short of contumacy.
It is but appropriate, therefore, to impose exemplary costs against the State of Uttar Pradesh as also the Principal of each of the seven medical colleges.
[140D; G H] The State of U.P. shall pay costs of Rs.20,000 while each of the Principals of the seven medical colleges shall pay Rs.500 by way of the costs which shall be recovered personally from their salary, and they would not be entitled to reimbursement of the same from the State exchequer.
[141A] 3.
The State of U.P. to hold the selection examination stipulated by it for May 27, 1990, by 30th of September, 1990 and the University 137 of Lucknow is authorised to conduct it.
The result of the examination should be published within one week, that is, by 8th of October, 1990 and admissions should be completed on or before 26th of October 1990 and classes shall commence on 1st of November, 1990.
The classes shall be deemed to have commenced from 2nd May, 1990, and each of the medical col leges shall undertake to provide additional teaching to compensate the students for the days lost.
[141D E] 4.
A warning is administered to everyone associated with the scheme for implementing the directions contained in the main judgment and the subsequent orders that a future de fault by anyone in any part of the country shall be serious ly viewed and drastically dealt with.
[141F]
