Certain land belonging to the respondent was compulsorily acquired by the Government for a maternity hospital.
Most of the land consisted of building sites but there was a building on a small portion of the land and a portion was low lying land.
The Special Land Acquisition Officer held on the basis of the value of sites previously sold by the respondent, that the market value of the land was Rs. 10/ per sq. yard and awarded a sum of Rs. 1,41,169/ to the respondent as compensation.
He did not give any compensation for the low lying land or for the building.
Against this award the respondent raised an objection and a reference was made to the District judge.
The District judge accepted the rate of Rs. 10/ per sq. yard as fair, reduced the amount of deductions for providing electric installations by Rs. 10,000/ and allowed a sum of Rs. 10,000/ for the low lying area at the rate of Rs. 3/ per sq.
yard, thereby increasing the amount of compensation by Rs. 20,000/ .
Not being satisfied the respondent appealed to the High Court.
The High Court held that the rate of compensation for the land except the low lying portion, should be Rs. 13/8/ per sq yard and for the low lying portion it should be Rs. 8/8/ per sqyard.
It further awarded a sum of Rs. 7,000/ for the building.
In arriving at the figure of Rs. 13/8/ the High Court took into account only four sale transactions which had been made by the respondent at the rates of Rs. 12, I5, 14 and 7/8/ per sq. yard but did not take into consideration two other transactions which had been made by the respondent at the rates of Rs. 6/8/ and Rs. 10 per sq. yard.
It calculated the average of the four transactions to be Rs. 12/2/per sq. yard and then took a second average between Rs. 15/ , 405 which was the maximum price obtained by the respondent and RS.
12/2/ and arrived at the figure of Rs. 13/8/ .
The High Court was also influenced by considerations such as the purpose for which the land was acquired.
, the report of certain medical authorities as to the unsuitability of the land for the maternity hospital and the delay in putting the land to the use for which it was acquired.
Held, that with regard to the valuation of the land, other than the low lying portion, the High Court misdirected itself by taking into account extraneous considerations and had committed an error of principle in arriving at the figure of Rs. 13/8/ by adopting a wrong method of ascertaining the market value.
The High Court ought to have taken the average of all the six sale transactions and arrived at the proper valuation of Rs. 11/. per sq. yard.
There was no justification for ignoring two of the sale transactions or for taking a second average.
With respect to the compensation for the low lying land and the building there was no error of principle or otherwise in the findings of the High Court and no interference was called for.
