The respondent Corporation prepared a panel for the post of Insurance Inspector, for filling up the direct recruit quota, on the basis of written test and interview.
In the absence of prescribed marks for the interview 40% was made as basic limit for selection.
The unsuccessful candidates challenged their rejection before the Central Administrative Tribunal contending that the selection based on 40% marks in the interview was unjus tified.
Petitions were also filed by the successful candi dates seeking directions to the respondent Corporation to issue appointments pursuant to the panel prepared.
The tribunal directed that a fresh select list be pre pared for filling up the remaining vacancies on the basis of the total marks obtained in the written examination and interview, in disregard of the qualifying marks of the interview.
Hence this appeal.
The successful candidates also filed a Writ Petition contending that they were entitled to appointment order since there was no indication of the expiry of the panel.
Allowing the appeal in part and disposing of the matter, this Court, 120 HELD: 1.
Interview has its own place in the matter of the selection process and the choice of the candidate.
Once this is recognised, it would be appropriate to require every candidate to pass the interview test and for that purpose there should be a basic limit provided.
In the absence of any prescription of qualifying marks for the interview test the prescription of 40% as applicable for the written exami nation seems to be reasonable.
[123C D] Rajesh Sood & Or3 '.
vs Director General, Employees State Insurance Corporation & Anr., decided on August 7, 1985, approved.
50% of the vacancies existing upto 31st December, 1989, relatable to the one third quota should be filled up out of the penal after giving credit to appointments already made.
The remaining vacancies should be filled up by holding of a fresh recruitment examination.
The scheme intended for recruitment should be on the basis of an examination com prising of written test and interview.
In the oral examina tion the pass mark shall be 40% and 40% pass marks shall be insisted separately for the written as also the oral test for qualifying in the selection.
[123B; D E]
