The petitioner sought admission to a medical college in the State of Maharashtra on the footing that she belonged to the Scheduled Tribe of Mahadeo Koli and submitted several caste certificates, including her father 's Secondary School Leaving Certificate.
The Scrutiny Committee, the expert body for determining such claims, rejected her claim on the basis of entries made in 1945 in the register of the Municipal Primary School, where her father had his primary education, which showed that the caste of the petitioner 's father was recorded as 'Son Koli '.
This decision was upheld by the Additional Commissioner for Tribal Development.
The High Court summarily dismissed the petitioner 's writ petition.
In the Special Leave Petition before this Court, on behalf of the petitioner it was contended that the High Court was in error in rejecting the Writ Petition summarily and that the Scrutiny Committee had proceeded on an entirely erroneous basis as the real basis of the petitioner 's claim was that Son Kolis were a section of the Schedule Tribe of Mahadeo Koli.
Dismissing the Special Leave Petition, this Court, HELD: Entry 29 of the list of Scheduled Tribes in the State of Maharashtra, appearing in Para 9 of the shows that 'Koli Mahadeo ' is a Scheduled Tribe recognised in Maharashtra.
In the list of Backward Classes issued by the State, Kolis are recognised as belonging to "other backward classes".
Son Kolis are shown as belonging to other backward classes in the list of other backward classes.
These docu ments nowhere support the claim that Son Kolis are a section of Scheduled Tribe of Mahadeo Koli.
Though Kolis are de scribed as a tribe in the publication entitled "Transactions of the Bombay Geog 2 raphical Society from 1836 to 1838", a perusal of the rele vant observations shows that no distinction has been drawn in the said publication between castes and tribes.
[2D F] Admittedly, Mahadeo Koli is a Scheduled Tribe whereas Son Koli is a caste.
The Scrutiny Committee cannot be fault ed for placing great reliance on the entries in the register of the primary school where the petitioner 's father took his primary education, as at the time when these entries were made there was no reason why he should have made a wrong statement about the caste or tribe to which he belonged.
These entries were made in 1945, when there was no special advantage which the Scheduled Tribe of Mahadeo Koli enjoyed over the members of the caste of Son Koli.
The certificates relied upon by the petitioner have been rejected by the Scrutiny Committee primarily because these certificates were inconsistent with the entries in the said register of the Primary School relating to the petitioner 's father to which the Committee attached great probative value, as it was of the view that they were made at a time when no question of making any manipulation arose.
The reasons given by the Scrutiny Committee for the rejection cannot be said to be irrelevant or perverse.
There is no complaint that the rules of fair play have not been observed by the Scrutiny Commit tee.
[4A E]
