The appellant Bank instituted a departmental inquiry against one of its employees, a clerk in one of its branch es.
The departmental inquiry was held for four acts of misconduct and the inquiry officer came to the conclusion that two of the charges were fully proved, while one charge was proved to a limited extent, and the fourth charge was not established.
On the basis of the report of the inquiry officer, the competent authority decided to dismiss the employee from service, and issued a notice to him under paragraph 521(10)(a) of the Award of the All India Industri al Tribunal popularly known as the Shastri Award, requiring him to show cause as to why the said punishment should not be imposed on him.
He was also given a hearing as required by the said provision, and thereafter an order was passed to the effect: that the established charges viz. uttering indecent words, threatening the agent, and failure to do the work allotted are quite serious and would warrant dismissal, though he may not be dismissed, in view of the extenuating circumstances, but that at the same time it would not be desirable to retain him in the Bank 's service, and that as such, "he be discharged on payment of one month 's pay and allowances in lieu of notice.
In terms of para 521(10)(c) of the Shastri Award this would not amount to disciplinary action." An industrial dispute was raised by the first respond ent Uuion, and it was referred to the Central Government Labour Court, for adjudication and by its award the Labour Court upheld the order of dismissal.
12 The first respondent Union preferred a writ petition to the High Court and raised several contentions, but the High Court confined its decision only to one point, viz. whether the termination of the service was retrenchment, and whether it was made in accordance with the provisions of Section 25F of the ; held that the termina tion of the service of the second respondent was retrench ment within the meaning of section 2(00), and was made in breach of the statutory provision contained in Section 25F in as much as no retrenchment compensation was paid to the employee, and set aside, the order of termination of serv ice.
In the appeal by the Bank to this Court, the question for consideration was: whether the order of termination of service served on the employee, amounts to punishment or not.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
It is not possible to sustain the view taken by the High Court since it proceeds on too literal an interpre tation of the provisions of paragraphs 521(5)(e) and 521(10)(c) of the Award and ignoring their context.
[17B] 2.
The termination of service of the employee in the instant case under paragraph 521(10)(c) of the Award is as a result of the disciplinary proceedings, and is punitive.
It is, therefore, not "retrenchment" within the meaning of Section 2(00) of the .
Hence, there was no question of complying with the provisions of Section 25F of the Act.
The decision of the High Court has, therefore, to be set aside.
[25G H; 26A] 3.
It is clear from the context in which sub clause (e) of sub para (5) occurs that the entire expression, namely, "have his misconduct condoned and he merely discharged" has nothing but penal implications, and the measure mentioned therein is a sequal to the disciplinary action taken for one of the gross misconducts mentioned in sub para (4).
It is not possible to arrive at any other conclusion on a reading of the sub paragraph as a whole.
The discharge spoken of there is nothing but a punishment for a gross misconduct.
This is so not only because it is enumerated as one of the punishments along with others but also because firstly there is a provision of simple discharge elsewhere in paragraph 522 of the Award.
and when the Award intended to provide for it, it has done so in sub paras (2)(c), (2)(d) and (3).
[20G H; 21A B] 13 4.
Sub paras (9) and (10) of paragraph 521 lay down the procedure for taking disciplinary action as well as for awarding punishment following such action.
Sub paras (9), 10(a), 10(b) would indicate that discharge under sub paras (2)(c), (3), (5) and (10)(c) is also a punishment, for when the employee is discharged under the said provisions after the inquiry, under the provisions of sub paras (9) and (10), there is no provision made for treating either the whole or part of the period of suspension during the inquiry, as on duty.
[21D & G H] 5.
In view of the fact that sub clause (a) requires that a hearing should be given to the employee against the pro posed punishment, the authority is enjoined under sub clause (c) to take into account the gravity of the mis conduct, the previous record of the employee and any other aggravating or extenuating circumstances that may exist and may be brought on record "while awarding punishment by way of disciplinary action".
The sub clause then provides for discharge with or without notice or on payment of a month 's pay and allow ances, in lieu of notice.
The punishment of discharge is to be awarded in two circumstances.
The first circumstance is when there are sufficiently extenuating circumstances but the mis conduct is of a "gross" type.
The second circum stance is when the charge is such that the Bank does not for some reason or other think it expedient to retain the em ployee any longer in service but the evidence is insuffi cient to prove the charge.
[22D E] 6.
Read with sub para (5)(e), the provisions of sub clause (c) of sub para (10) become more clear that if a mis conduct is not of a "gross" type, it may be merely condoned without any further action.
But when it is of "gross" type, the authority has no option but to condone and to proceed to discharge the employee.
The expressions used both in sub para (5)(e) and sub para 10(c) in that respect are identical.
Similar is the action contemplated for the second circumstance referred to in sub para 10(c), namely when the charge though unsustainable for want of evidence is such that it is considered inexpedient to retain the employ ee in service.
[23D E] 7.
Since in the context, such a discharge is by way of punishment, the relevant provisions give a discretionary power to the authority to convert, what would otherwise be a dismissal into a mere discharge.
This is for the benefit of the employee.
It protects him from the banefull consequences of dismissal.
At the same time, it relieves the management of the burden of retaining him in service when it has become inexpedient to do so.
Thus the provision of such discharge works to the advantage of both.
At the same time, it cannot be gainsaid that the said 14 discharge is as a result of the disciplinary proceeding.
Although in form it may not, and in the peculiar circum stances, it is intended that it should not look like a disciplinary action, it cannot be denied that it flows from and is a result of the disciplinary proceedings.
To make clear, however, that the action, though spawned by the disciplinary proceedings should not prejudice the employee, the last sentence viz: "Discharge in such cases shall not be deemed to amount to disciplinary action", has been added by way of abundant precaution.
[23F H; 24A] 8.
That this is not a discharge simpliciter or a simple termination of service becomes clear when it is compared both with the provisions of para 522(1), and with those of sub paras (2)(c), (2)(d) and (3) of paragraph 521 itself.
The distinction between discharge contemplated under para graph 521(10)(c) and discharge simpliciter or simple termi nation of employment under the other provisions is clear enough.
This will also show that the two belong to different categories and are not the same.
While the former is intend ed to be punitive, the latter is not.
As is further clear from the provisions of paragraphs 521(2)(c), (2)(d) and (3), the discharge contemplated there, as against simple termina tion, is in proceedings under "sub paragraphs (9) and (10) infra relating to discharge".
In other words, it is as a result of a disciplinary proceeding.
[24B; 25C D] 9.
To construe the discharge under paragraphs 521(5)(e) and 521(10)(c) as a simple discharge not flowing from disci plinary proceedings will deprive an employee of a valuable advantage, viz. that of challenging the legality and propri ety of the disciplinary action taken against him, whatever the form of the order, by showing that he was either not guilty of any misconduct or that the misconduct was not of a "gross" type or that the punishment meted out to him by way of discharge was not warranted in the circumstances etc.
It is not, therefore, in the interests of the employees to construe the provisions as the High Court has done.
The predominant object of the Award is to protect the interests of the employees.
[25E F] 10.
Remanding the matter to the High Court for deciding the other contentions raised in the writ petition, is not advisable for various reasons.
The misconducts complained of against the employee are of 1966.
He was charge sheeted in January 1968 and removed from service on April 9, 1970.
The Court proceedings have been pending for more than about 23 years.
In the meanwhile, the respondent No. 2 who was a clerk on the date he was charge sheeted, has become a lawyer and has been practicing as such.
Further, the mis conducts, which are held 15 proved by the Labour Court are of "gross" type within the meaning of paragraph 521(4) of the Award.
The Labour Court is the final fact finding forum.
The High Court while setting aside the order of the Labour Court has granted reinstatement in service and back wages and pursuant to the said order, the employee has already received an amount of Rs.93,000.
The effect of decision would be to set aside not only the order of reinstatement but also of the back wages which would require the employee to refund the said amount.
Even though the employee was prepared to refund the amount and to contest the petition on other grounds, at present, the employee is in his fifties.
Taking into consideration all these facts the interests of justice would be served if the order of the High Court is set aside and the order of the Labour Court is restored without requiring the employee to refund the amount he has already received.
[26E G; 27C E]
