The Appellant was officiating as a Major though he held a substantive rank of Captain as a permanent Commissioned Officer of the army when on December 27, 1974 he took over as the Officer Commanding 38 Coy.
A.S.C. (Sup) Type 'A ' attached to the Military Hospital, Jhansi.
In August, 1975 the Appellant went to attend a training course and returned in the first week of November.
In his absence Captain G.C. Chhabra was commanding the unit of the appellant and he submitted a Contingent Bill dated September 25, 1975 for Rs.16,280 for winter liveries of the depot civilian chowki dars and sweepers.
The said Bill was returned by the Con troller of Defence Accounts (CDA) with certain objections.
Thereupon the appellant submitted a fresh contingent Bill dated December 25, 1975 for a sum of Rs.7,029.57.
In view of the wide difference in the two Contingent Bills, the CDA reported the matter to the Headquarters for investigation and a Court Enquiry blamed the appellant for certain lapses.
After considering the said report of the Court of En quiry the General Officer Commanding, M.P., Bihar and Orissa recommended that 'severe displeasure ' (to be recorded) of the General Officer Commanding in Chief of the Central Command be awarded to the appellant.
The General Officer Commanding in Chief Central Command, however.
did not agree with the said opinion and by order dated August 26, 1977 directed that disciplinary action be taken against the appellant for the lapses.
Pursuant to the said order a charge sheet dated July 20, 1978 containing three charges was served on the appellant and it was directed that he be tried by General Court Mar tial.
The first charge was, doing of a thing with intent to defraud under section 52(f) of the Act.
The second charge was alternative to the first charge i.e. commit 45 ting an act prejudicial to good order and military disci pline under section 63 of the Act and the third charge was also in respect of offence under section 63 of the Act. 'the appellant pleaded not guilty to the charges.
The General Court Martial on November 29, 1978 found him guilty of first and third charge and awarded the sentence of dis missal from service.
Thereupon the appellant submitted petition dated December 18, 1978 to the Chief of Army Staff praying that the findings of the General Court Martial be not confirmed.
The Chief of the Army Staff by his order dated May 11, 1979 confirmed the findings and sentence of the General Court Martial.
The appellant thereafter submit ted a post confirmation petition under section 164(2) of the Act.
This was rejected by the Central Government by order dated May 6, 1980.
Thereupon the appellant filed a writ petition in the High Court of Delhi which was dismissed in limine.
Hence this appeal by special leave directed to be heard by the Constitution Bench for the reason that it involves the question as to whether it was incumbent for the Chief of the Army Staff, while confirming the findings and sentence of the General Court Martial and for the Central Government while rejecting the post confirmation petition of the appellant to record their reasons for the orders passed by them.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: The requirement that reasons be recorded should govern the decisions of an administrative authority exercis ing quasi judicial functions irrespective of the fact wheth er the decision is subject to appeal, revision or judicial review.
It may, however, be added that it is not required that the reasons should be as elaborate as in the decision of a Court of law.
The extent and nature of the reasons would depend on particular facts and circumstances.
What is necessary is that the reasons are clear and explicit so as to indicate that the authority has given due consideration to the points in controversy.
[62H; 63A B] The need for recording of reasons is greater in a case where the order is passed at the original stage.
The appel late or revisional authority, if it affirms such an order, need not give separate reasons if the appellate or revision al authority agrees with the reasons contained in the order under challenge.
[63B] Except in cases where the requirement has been dispensed with expressly or by necessary implication, an administra tive authority exercising judicial or quasi judicial func tions is required to record ' the reasons for its decision.
[65B] 46 The provisions contained in the and the Army Rules, 1954 negative a requirement to give reasons for its findings and sentence by a Court Martial and reasons are not required to be recorded in cases where the Court Martial makes a recommendation to mercy.
Similarly, reasons are not required to be recorded for an order passed by the confirm ing authority confirming the findings and sentence recorded by the Court Martial as well as for the order passed by the Central Government dismissing the post confirmation peti tion.
[70E F] Sub section (1) of section 164 of the enables a person aggrieved by an order passed by a Court Martial to present a petition against the same.
The expression "order" under sub section (1) does not include a finding or sentence of the Court Martial and in so far as the finding and sen tence of the Court Martial is concerned the only remedy that is available to a person aggrieved by the same is under sub section (2) of section 164 of the and the said remedy can be invoked only after the finding or sentence has been confirmed by the confirming authority and not before the confirmation of the same.
[72B; D E] Though a person aggrieved by the finding or sentence of a Court Martial has no right to make a representation before the confirmation of the same by the confirming authority, but in case such a representation is made by a person ag grieved by the finding or sentence of a Court Martial it is expected that the confirming authority shall give due con sideration to the same while confirming the finding and sentence of the Court Martial.
[72H; 73A] Som Datt Datta vs Union of India & Ors., [1969] 2 S.C.R. 177; Bhagat Raja vs The Union of India & Ors., ; ; Mahabir Prasad Santosh Kumar vs State of U.P. & Ors., ; ; Woolcombers of India Ltd. vs Woolcombers Workers Union & Ant., [1974] I S.C.R. 503; Siemens Engineering & Manufacturing Co. of India Ltd. vs Union of India & Anr., ; Phelps Dodge Corporation vs National Labour Relations Board, [1940] 85 Law Edn. 1271 at p. 1284; Securities and Exchange Commis sion vs Chenery Corporation; , at p. 636; John T. Dunlop vs Waiter Bachewski, ; 377; Regina vs Gaming Board for Great Britain, Exparte Benaim & Khaida, ; at p. 431; Mc Innes vs Onslow Fane & Anr., at p. 1531; Breen vs Amalgamated Engineering Union & Ors., ; Alexander Machinery (Dudley) Ltd. vs Crabtree, [1974] I.C.R. 120; Regina vs Immigration Appeal Tribunal Ex Parte Khan (Mahmud), ; Pure Spring Co. Ltd. vs Minister of National Revenue, 47 at p. 539; Re R.D.R. Construction Ltd. & Rent Review Commission, 168; Re Yar mouth Housing Ltd. & Rent Review Commission, ; Osmond vs Public Service Board of New South Wales, ; Public Service Board of New South Wales vs Osmond, ; M/s. Harinagar Sugar Mills Ltd. vs Shyam Sundar Jhunjhunwala & Ors., ; ; Madhya Pradesh Industries Ltd. vs Union of India & Ors., ; ; Tranvancore Rayon Ltd. vs Union of India; , ; Tarachand Khatri vs Municipal Corporation of Delhi & Ors., [1977] 2 S.C.R. 198; Raipur Development Authority & Ors.
vs M/s. Chokhamal Con tractors & Ors., [1989] 2 S.C.C. 721; A.K. Kraipak & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; R. vs Deputy Industrial Injuries Commissioner ex P. Moore, [1965] 1 Q.B. 456 and Mahon vs Air New Zealand Ltd., , referred to.
