The appellant was awarded a contract for constructing approaches to certain Bridge structure.
As per the agree ment, he was required to do hard rock cutting to the extent of 7,54,530 cft.
and the rate fixed was Rs.129 per thousand cft.
plus 2%.
Actually the appellant was required to perform hard rock cutting to the extent of 18,18,704 cft.
For the additional work, the appellant claimed payment at the rate of Rs.200 per thousand cft.
He also claimed certain other sums under other heads.
Dispute in respect of 4 heads was referred to arbitration.
The arbitrator in his award disal lowed two claims and allowed the other two claims, one of which was in respect of the additional work of hard rock cutting, and awarded a sum of Rs.52,800 under this head.
The arbitrator filed the award in the High Court.
After consid ering the objections filed by the respondent a Single Judge of the High Court ordered that the award be made a rule of the Court.
The respondent filed an appeal against the said order and the Division Bench set aside, ex parte, the claim for higher remuneration at the rate of Rs.200 per thousand cft.
Aggrieved, the appellant has preferred an appeal, by ' special leave.
The other appeal, also by special leave, is against the High Court 's rejection of the prayer for setting aside the ex parte judgment.
Allowing the former appeal and disposing of the latter one, HELD: 1.
As regards the award of an arbitrator under the Act, the law is well settled that the arbitrator 's adjudica tion is generally considered binding between the parties for he is a tribunal selected by the parties and the power of the court to set aside the award is restricted to cases set out In section 30 of the Act.
It is, however, not open to the 77 Court to speculate, where no reasons are given by the arbi trator, as to what impelled the arbitrator to arrive at his conclusion.
But the jurisdiction of the arbitrator is limit ed by the reference and if the arbitrator has assumed juris diction not possessed by him, the award to the extent to which it is beyond the arbitrator 's jurisdiction would be invalid and liable to be set aside.
An arbitrator or umpire is under no obligation to give reasons in support of the decision reached by him unless under the arbitration agree ment or the deed of submission he is required to give such reasons.
If the arbitrator or umpire chooses to give reasons in support of his decision it is open to the Court to set aside the award if it finds that an error of law has been committed by him on the face of the record.
An award can neither be permitted nor set aside merely on the ground that it does not contain reasons in support of the conclusion or decisions reached in it except where the arbitration agree ment or the deed of submission requires him to give reasons.
[82H; 83A E] Jivarajbhai Ujamshi Sheth and Others vs Chintamanrao Balaji and Others, ; ; Raipur Development Authority and Others vs M/s Chokhamal Contractor and Others, [1989] 2 SCC 721, relied on.
2.1 In the instant case the arbitration agreement or the deed of submission did not require the arbitrator to give reasons and, therefore, the award cannot be questioned on the ground of an error on the face of the award.
The Divi sion Bench of the High Court set aside the award in respect of the claim relating to payment for additional work of hard rock cutting on the ground that in making the award the arbitrator exceeded his jurisdiction by allowing a rate to the contractor in excess of the agreed rate for the job of hard rock cutting against the terms and conditions in clause 12 of the agreement.
[83F G] 2.2 Under clause 12 of the agreement, the Engineer in charge was empowered to make any additions to the original specifications that may appear to him to be necessary or advisable during the progress of the work and the contractor was bound to carry out the work in accordance with any instructions given to him in writing signed by the Engineer in charge.
[85B C] 2.3 It has to be inferred from the terms of the contract whether this power to order extras, although apparently unlimited, is in fact limited to ordering extras upto a certain value and in such a case, extras ordered in excess of that amount may be outside the terms of the contract.
78 Parkinson (Sir Lindsay) & Co. Ltd. vs Commissioners of His Majesty 's Works and Public Buildings, , referred to.
Hudson 's Building and Engineering Contracts, 8th Edn.
294, 296, referred to.
In some awards given by the arbitrators in the Cen tral Public Works Department of the Government of India the variation of the tendered quantities under the variation clause in the contract has been restricted to 10% beyond which the contractor was entitled to claim as extras and awards have been accepted and implemented by the Government.
It appears that the standard form of contract of the Central Public Works Department has been amended and now it specifi cally permits for a limit of variation called "deviation limit" upto a maximum of 20% and upto such limit the con tractor has to carry out the work stipulated in the contract and for the work in excess of that limit at the rates to be determined in accordance with clause 12 A under which the Engineer in Charge can revise the rates having regard to the prevailing market rates.
[88D F] Gajaria 's Law relating to Building and Engineering Contracts in India, 3rd Edn., pages 410 412, referred to.
In the instant case, the Executive Engineer, the Superintending Engineer and the Additional Chief Engineer have expressed the view that the additional work under the terms of the contract may be confined to 20% and the appel lant may be paid at the rates prescribed in the contract for 20% of the additional work and for the extra quantity of additional work he may be paid remuneration at the increased rate taking into account the increased costs in execution of the said work on account of the peculiar nature of the work while considering the claim of the appellant the arbitrator was required to consider the terms of the contract and to construe the same.
It was, therefore, permissible for the arbitrator to consider whether clause 12 of the contract enables the Engineer in charge to require the appellant to execute additional work without any limit, or a reasonable limit should be placed on the quantity of the additional work, which the appellant may be required to execute at the rate stipulated for the main work under the contract.
For that purpose the arbitrator could take into consideration the practice prevalent in the Central Public Works Depart ment in this regard as well as the correspondence between the appellant and the authorities recommending payment of remuneration at the increased rate for the additional work in excess of 20% of the quantity stipulated in the contract.
79 The appellant was claiming increased rate of Rs.200 per 1000 cft.
for the entire quantity of additional work.
The arbi trator did not accept the said claim of the appellant in full and has partly allowed the said claim by awarding Rs.52,800 which means that the arbitrator has awarded the increased rate only for a part of the additional work of hard rock cutting which the appellant was required to exe cute.
The arbitrator was entitled to do so on the construc tion placed by him on clause 12 of the contract and, there fore, it cannot be said that in awarding the sum of Rs.52,800 for the additional work the arbitrator has exceed ed his jurisdiction and the award is vitiated by an error of jurisdiction.
[88G H; 89A E] 5.
The judgment of the Division Bench of the High Court setting aside the award of the arbitrator with regard to the claim relating to payment for additional work of hard rock cutting is set aside and the order passed by the Single Judge upholding the award of the arbitrator in this regard is restored.
[89F] 6.
Since the judgment of the Division Bench of the High Court is set aside the appeal against the order rejecting the prayer for setting aside the ex parte judgment, does not survive.
