Under the scheme of amalgamation and order of the High Court under Sections 391 and 394 of the on 28.9.1962 one Indian Sugar Company was amalgamated with the appellant assessee company.
The transferor company had been allowed expenditure to the extent of Rs.58,734.
The appellant transferee company claimed exemption on the amount of Rs.58,735 from income tax for the assessment year of 1965 66 on the ground that the amalgamated transferee compa ny was not liable to pay tax under Section 41(1) of the Income tax Act, as the expenditure had been allowed to the erstwhile transferor company.
The claim was disallowed by the Income Tax Officer.
The transferee appellant company 's appeal was also rejected by the Appellate Assistant Commis sioner.
The appellant company preferred appeal before the Income Tax Tribunal which was allowed on the ground that after amalgamation, the transferor company 's identity was lost and it was no longer in existence and the transferee company was a different entity.
When the question was referred to the High Court, it answered the reference in favour of the Revenue, holding that on amalgamation of the two companies, neither of them ceased to exist, instead both the companies continued their entities in a blended form and the amalgamated company was a successor in interest of the amalgamating company.
333 The Appellant Company 's application under Section 291 of the Income Tax Act read with Section 109, Code of Civil Procedure was dismissed by the High Court.
Hence the present appeal.
Allowing the appeal of the assessee Appellant company, this Court, HELD: 1.
Section 41(1) has been enacted for charging tax on profits made by an assessee, but it applies to the asses see to whom the trading liability may have been allowed in the previous year.
If the assessee to whom the trading liability may have been allowed as a business expenditure in the previous year ceases to be in existence or if the asses see is changed on account of the death of the earlier asses sees the income received in the year subsequent to the previous year or the accounting year cannot be treated as income received by the assessee.
[146C E] 2.
In order to attract the provisions of Section 41(1) for enforcing the tax liability, the identity of the asses see in the previous year and the subsequent year must be the same.
If there is any change in the identity of the assessee there would be no tax liability under the provisions of Section 41.
[146E] 3.
Two companies may join to form a new company, but there may be absorption or blending of one by the other, both amount to amalgamation.
When two companies are merged and are so joined, as to form a third company or one is absorbed into the other or blended with another, the amalga mating company loses its entity.
[147G] 4.
After the amalgamation of two companies the transfer or company ceased to have any entity and the amalgamated company acquired a new status and it was not possible to treat the two companies as partners or jointly liable in respect of their liabilities and assets.
[148E] 5.
The true effect and character of the amalgamation largely depends on the terms of.the scheme of merger.
But there can be no doubt that when two companies amalgamate and merge into one, the transferor company loses its entity as it ceases to have its business.
However, their respective rights or liabilities are determined under the scheme of amalgamation but the corporate entity of the transferor company ceases to exist with effect from the date the amal gamation is made effective.
[148H; 149A B] 334 Commissioner of Income Tax, Madhya Pradesh vs Hukumchand Mohanlal, and M/s. General Radio and Appliances Co. Ltd. & Ors.
vs M.A. Khader (dead) by L.rs., [1986] 2 S.C.C. 656; followed.
Halsbury 's Laws of England, 4th Edition Vol.
7 Para 1539; referred to.
