For the assessment year 1946 47 the appellant, a Hindu undivided family carrying on business, filed a petition before the income tax Officer, under section 25A of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922, claiming that there had been a partition in the family on April 24,1945.
As regards the income assessable under section 23 Of the Act, the appellant 's case regarding six sums aggregating to Rs. 2,30,346 shown in the accounts as the sale proceeds of ornaments, was that at the partition the jewels of the family were sold and that the price realised therefrom was invested in the business.
The Income tax Officer held that the partition was true and that the family had become divided into five groups, but as regards the amount of Rs. 2,30,346 aforesaid he rejected the explanation given by the appellant as to how the amount came to be received and held that the amount was not the proceeds of the family jewels sold but represented concealed profits of the business.
He accordingly included the said amount in the taxable income.
The appellant 's contentions, inter alia, before the Appellate Tribunal were (1) that the order passed under section 25A of the Act by the Income tax Officer must be held to have decided the factum of a partition in the family as well as the 'possession and division of the jewels, as set up by the appellant, and that it was not open to the Department to contend that the amount in question did not represent the value of the family jewels; and (2) that, in any case, there was no evidence to show that the amount represented undisclosed profits.
Held, that when a claim is made under section 25A of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922, the points to be decided by the Incometax Officer are whether there has been a partition in the family, and, if so, what the definite portions are in which the division had been made among the members or groups of members.
The question as to what the income of the family assessable to tax under section 23(3) was, would be foreign to the scope of an enquiry under section 25A, and any finding thereon would not be conclusive in assessment proceedings under section 23.
416 Held, further, that the assessee in the present case having failed to explain satisfactorily the truth of what is a credit in business accounts, the Income tax Officer was entitled to draw the inference that the amount credited represents in reality a receipt of an assessable nature.
