The appellant was accused of burning his sister in law to death.
Accordingly, he was prosecuted for the offence of murder.
The Trial Judge acquitted him by holding (i) that there was no motive for him to cause the murder; (ii) that there were vital contradictions between the statement of the doctors who examined the deceased and that the conviction could not be based on the testimony of doctor before whom the dying declaration was made by the deceased; and (iii) that the investigation was defective because (a) no one from the locality was produced; (b) the nurse and the compounder who took down the injury report on the dictation of the doctor was not examined; and (c) no incriminating material was found at the site.
The State preferred an appeal before the High Court against the acquittal order, which allowed the appeal, set aside the order of acquittal passed by the Trial Court, and convicted the accused under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code and sentenced him to life imprisonment.
Hence this appeal by the accused.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
While caution is the watchword, in appeal against 402 acquittal as the Trial Judge has occasion to watch the demeanour of witnesses, and interference should not be made merely because a different conclusion could have been ar rived, the provisions contained in Sections 378 and 386 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 do not Inhibit any restriction or limitation.
Prudence demands restraint on mere probability or possibility but in perversity or mis reading interference is imperative otherwise existence of power shall be rendered meaningless.
[213H; 214A] 2.
In the instant case, the approach of the Trial Judge apart from being faulty was contrary to the rule and appre ciation of evidence.
Appreciation apart the order of the Trial Judge is vitiated as apart from deciding the case on irrelevant considerations, criticising the doctors without any basis, drawing an inference against the doctor only because she was a lady the most serious error of which he was guilty and which rendered the order infirm which was rightly set aside by the High Court was that he mis read the evidence and indulged in conjectural inference and surmises.
Therefore, the High Court did not exceed its powers in setting aside the order of acquittal.
It did not commit any error in allowing the appeal and recording the conviction under Section 378 read with Section 386(a) of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
[216F; 217E; 220A] 3.
Motive for a murder may or may not be.
But in dowry deaths it is inherent.
In dowry deaths what is required of courts to examine is as to who translated it into action as motive for it is not individual, but of family.
[214H; 215A] 4.
Argument as a matter of law that defective investiga tion should go to discredit prosecution cannot be disputed but on facts of the instant case it is not available.
The High Court was right in not discarding the prosecution evidence due to remissness of investigating officers.
The finding of the High Court that the investigating officer due to remissness failed to preserve the site is correct but it does not in any manner weaken the prosecution case.
Nor any adverse inference could be drawn due to non production of nurse or compounder when the investigating report was writ ten on dictation of the doctor.
[218F H] Chander Kant vs State of Maharashtra, A.I.R. 1974 SC 220, referred to.
Bride burning is a shame of our society.
Poor never resort to it Rich do not need it.
Obviously because it is basically an economic problem of a class which suffers both from ego and complex.
Unfortu 403 nately, the high price rise and ever increasing cost of living coupled with enormous growth of consumer goods effac ing difference between luxury and essential goods appear to be luring even the new generation of youth, of the best service, to be as much part of the dowry menace as their parents and the resultant evils flowing out of it.
How to curb and control this evil? Dowry killing is a crime of its own kind where elimination of daughter in law becomes imme diate necessity if she or her parents are no more able to satiate the greed and avarice of her husband and their family members, to make the boy available, once again in the marriage market.
Eliminate it and much may stand resolved automatically.
Social reformist and legal jurists may evolve a machinery for debarring such a boy from remarriage irre spective of the member of family who committed the crime and in violation penalise the whole family including those who participate in it.
That is social ostracisation is needed to curtail increasing malady of bride burning.
[214E G]
