The appellant purchased certain properties by way of registered sale deeds.
She constructed therein a godown and a two storeyed building with the knowledge and assistance of the respondent, who did not say anything about the common passage and had never expressed his intention to pre empt the sales.
Soon after the construction was over, the respondent sent a notice to the appellant claiming his right to pre empt the sale.
The appellant gave a reply to the notice.
However, respondent filed a suit for preemption in relation to the said properties.
The appellant pleaded that the respondent was estopped from claiming the pre emption.
Principle of waiver was also pleaded.
The Trial Court dis missed the suit of the respondent, and he preferred an appeal before the District Judge which was also dismissed.
Respondent preferred a regular second appeal before the High Court.
The High Court allowed the appeal holding that the principles of estoppel and waiver had no application against the pre emptor to preempt the suit, and set aside the orders of the Courts below.
Aggrieved against the High Court 's order the appellant has preferred this appeal, by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.1 Estoppel is a rule of equity flowing out of fairness striking on behaviour deficient in good faith.
It operates as a check on 350 spurious conduct by preventing the inducer from taking advantage and assailing forfeiture already accomplished.
It is invoked and applied to aid the law in administration of justice.
But for it great many injustice may have been perpetrated.
[162D E] 1.2 Legal approach of the High Court, that no estoppel could arise unless notice under Section 8 of the Rajasthan Pre emption Act was given by the seller and pre emptor should have had occassion to pay or tender price ignores the fallacy that Estoppel need not be specifically provided as it can always be used as a weapon of defence.
[162G H] 2.
There can be no estoppel against statute.
Equity usually follows law.
Therefore, that which is illegal cannot be enforced by resorting to rule of estoppel.
Such an exten sion may be against public policy.
The distinction between validity and illegality or the transaction being void is clear and well known.
The former can be waived by express or implied agreement or conduct.
But not the latter.
[163D & F G] Shalimar Tar Products Ltd. vs H.C. Sharma, ; ; Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States vs Reed, 14 AC 587; Bishan Singh vs Khazan Singh, ; and Radha Kishan vs Shridhar, AIR 1960 SC 1369, referred to.
The provision in the Pre emption Act requiring a vendor to serve notice on persons having right of pre emp tion is condition of validity of transfer, and therefore a pre emptor could waive it.
Failure to serve notice as re quired under the Act does not render the sale made by vendor in favour of vendee ultra vires.
The test to determine the nature of interest, namely, private or public is whether the right which is renunciated is the right of party alone or of the public also in the sense that the general welfare of the society is involved.
If the answer is latter then it may be difficult to put estoppel as a defence.
The Act does not provide that in case no notice is given the transaction shall be void.
The objective is to intimate the pre emptor who may be interested in getting himself substituted.
It does not debar the pre emptor from giving up this right.
Rather in case of its non exercise within two months, may be for financial reasons, the right stands extinguished.
It does not pass on to anyone.
No social disturbance is caused.
It settles in purchaser.
Giving up such right, expressly or impliedly cannot therefore be said to involve any interest of community or public welfare so as to be in mischief of public policy.
[163H; 164A C] Jethmal vs Sajanumal, [1947] Mewar Law Reports 36, over ruled.
351 Atam Prakash vs State of Haryana, ; ; Bishan Singh vs Khazan Singh, ; ; Radha Kishan vs Sridhar, ; ; Naunihal Singh vs Ram Ratan, ILR 39 All. 127; Ram Rathi vs Mt. Dhiraji, [1947] Oudh 81; Gopinath vs R.S. Nand Kishore, AIR 1952 Ajmer 26; Abdul Karim vs Babulal, AIR 1953 Bhopal 26 and Kanshi Ram Sharma vs Lahori Ram, , approved.
Pateshwari Partab Narain Singh vs Sitaram, AIR 1929 PC 259, referred to. 4.
In the instant case, the fact that the respondent knew of the sale deed, assisted the appellant in raising the construction and after the construction was completed in the month of June he gave notice in the month of July for exer cise of the right and filed the suit in January, would itself demonstrate that the conduct of the respondent was inequitable and the courts in this country which are pri marily the courts of equity, justice and good conscience cannot permit the respondent to defeat the right of appel lant and invoke a right which has been called a weak and inequitable right.
[164D E]
