Respondent Nos. 4 to 6 sold their 3/5th share of the ancestral land to the appellant for Rs.14,000, as the ven dors left their village and wanted to settle elsewhere where they purchased 80 kanals of Nehri land.
Respondents Nos. 1 to 3 filed a declaratory suit in the court of Sub Judge, Ludhiana seeking a declaration that the sale of the suit land would not affect their reversionary rights after the death of respondents 4 to 6.
They pleaded that the land was ancestral and according to the custom governing the parties, it could not be alienated; they also asserted that the land was sold without any consideration and legal necessity.
The appellant defendant No. 1, contended that the sale was an act of good management on the part of the alienors, and that the same was not without consideration/the vendors having decided to settle elsewhere.
The trial court held that the sale was an act of prudent management and was not without consideration.
As regards the custom it held that the parties were governed by custom, whereunder ancestral land could not be alienated except for legal necessity or as an act of good management.
The suit was accordingly dismissed and the first appeal preferred against that decision failed.
Respondents 1 to 3 thereafter preferred Regular Second Appeal before the High Court.
The High Court allowed the appeal, set aside the sale holding that it was neither for any legal necessity nor could it be justified as an act of good management.
The suit was accordingly decreed.
Hence this appeal by the appellant defendant No. 1 by special leave.
418 Before this Court the appellant contended that the sale was or was not an act of good management having been a question of fact, the trial court as also the first appel late court having arrived at a concurrent finding that it was an act of good management, the High Court should not have interfered with that finding.
On the other hand the respondents contended that the sale was not an act of good management.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: The custom is that the ancestral immovable proper ty is ordinarily inalienable specially amongst Jats residing in the Central Districts of Punjab, except for necessity and the other permissible reasons.
All alienation as a bona fide act of good management has been treated as one of necessity and hence valid.
[233B] In the instant case, the vendee proved the ingredients of good management and the concurrent finding of the Trial Court and the first appellate court was that the impugned sale was an act of good management, and it was essentially a finding of fact.
[234F] The High Court was, therefore, in error in setting aside the concurrent finding of fact in the facts and circum stances of the case in Second Appeal.
Gujar vs Sham Das, 107 P.R. 1887; Mohammad Chiragh and Ors.
vs Fatta & Ors., AIR 1934 Lahore 452; Abdul Rafi Khan vs
P. Lakshmi Chand and Ors., AIR 1934 Lahore 998; Dial Singh vs Surain Singh, AIR 1937 Lahore 493; Gujjan Singh and Ors.
vs Atma Singh, 1968 PLR Vol.
70 195.
