The appellant, an employee of the respondent Sahkari Bank was put under suspension and served with a chargesheet during the pendency of the reference under section 4K of the U.P.
It was followed by a domestic inquiry leading to his dismissal.
Thereupon he filed a complaint under section 6 F of the Act before the Industrial Tribunal and the same was treated as a dispute referred to it.
The Tribunal found that principles of natural justice had not been followed in the domestic inquiry.
However, proceeding further it asked the management to justify the order of punishment on merits.
The parties led their evi dence and the Tribunal recorded a finding that charges levelled were established.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition challenging the award.
In the appeal by special leave, it was contended for the appellant that after the conclusion reached by the Tribunal that the domestic inquiry held by the employer was illegal, question of justification of the punishment by fresh materi als could arise only if the management had applied for permission to justify the punishment and, in the absence of such a prayer the Tribunal did not have the power to call upon the employer to do so, and that in any event the appel lant was entitled to his salary from the date of his dis missal to the date of the award.
Allowing the appeal in part, the Court, HELD: 1.
By asking the respondent to justify the punish ment by adducing additional evidence the Tribunal merely reminded the employer of his rights.
There was no illegality in the course adopted which could vitiate the award.
[225F] 412 Shankar Chakravarti vs Britannia Biscuit Co., [1979] 3SCR 1165, distinguished.
If the order of punishment passed by the management is declared illegal and the punishment is upheld subsequent ly by a labour tribunal, the date of dismissal cannot relate back to the date of the illegal order of the employer.
[225H] In the instant case, the Tribunal had initially found that the domestic inquiry was vitiated on account of viola tion of principles of natural justice.
The appellant was, therefore, entitled to his salary from the date of his dismissal, to the date of the award.
[225D & H] Gujarat Steel Tubes Ltd. vs Gujarat Steel Tubes Mazdoor Sabha, ; , applied.
