The appellant, while working as Inspector, Food and Supplies, was found to have purchased sub standard wheat and hence chargesheeted for misconduct.
He submitted his expla nation.
Though Rules 8 and 9 of Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 envisage the procedure to conduct an enquiry into the misconduct, the disciplinary authority, only on considering the explanation, found that that the appellant committed a minor misconduct.
According ly, an order was passed for stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect.
Appellant filed a suit for declaration that the said order imposed a major penalty which was ille gal in the absence of an enquiry under Rules 8 and 9.
The Trial Court granted a decree invalidating the said order.
On appeal, the District Court confirmed the decree.
However, on second appeal, the High Court held that the penalty imposed was a minor penalty within the meaning of Rules 5(iv) of the Rules obviating the need to make regular enquiry.
Aggrieved, the appellant has preferred this appeal, by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: 1.
Withholding of increments of pay simpliciter without any hedge over it certainly comes within the meaning of Rule 5(iv) of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules.
But when penalty was imposed withholding two increments i.e. for two years with cumulative effect, it would indisputably mean that the two increments earned by the employee was cut off as a measure of penalty for ever in his upward march of earning higher scale of pay.
In other words the clock is put back to a lower stage in the time scale of pay and on expiry of two years the clock starts working from that stage afresh.
The insi 427 dious effect of the impugned order by necessary implication, is that the appellant employee is reduced in his time scale by two places and it is in perpetuity during the rest of the tenure of his service with a direction that two years ' increments would not be counted in his time scale of pay as a measure of penalty.
Rule 5(iv) does not empower the disciplinary authori ty to impose penalty of withholding increments of pay with cumulative effect except after holding inquiry and following the prescribed procedure.
Then the order would be without jurisdiction or authority of law, and it would be per se void.
Considering from this angle the impugned order would come within the meaning of Rule 5(v) of the Rules, and the imposition of major penalty without enquiry is per se ille gal.
Sarwan Singh vs State of Punjab & Ors., ILR , overruled.
Rules 8 and 9 admittedly envisage, on denial of the charge by the delinquent officer, to conduct an enquiry giving reasonable opportunity to the presenting officer as well as the delinquent officer to lead evidence in support of the charge and in rebuttal thereof, giving adequate opportunity to the delinquent officer to cross examine the witnesses produced by the Department and to examine witness es if intended on his behalf and to place his version; consideration thereof by the enquiry officer, if the disci plinary authority himself is not the enquiry officer.
A report of the enquiry in that behalf is to be placed before the disciplinary authority who then would consider it in the manner prescribed and pass an appropriate order as per the procedure in vogue under the Rules.
The gamut of this proce dure was not gone through.
Therefore, the issuance of the notice and consideration of the explanations not a procedure in accordance with Rules 8 and 9. 4.
The Trial Court rightly granted the decree, and it is restored.
The judgment and the decree of the High Court is vitiated by manifest illegality and is set aside.
At this distance of time it is not expedient to direct an enquiry under Rules 8 and 9 of the Rules.
