The respondents in the Civil Appeal, were working as Lower Division Clerks in the district police offices/units.
Some posts of Lower Division Clerks fell vacant in the Chief Office and it was decided to fill up the same by appointing Lower Division Clerks with good service record from the district police offices.
Accordingly a Memorandum was issued on 21.11.
1968 which expressly stated that the appointees would be put at the bottom of the list of Lower Division Clerks already working in the Chief Office.
The respondents and two others expressed their willingness to join and also to forego their seniority.
Accordingly an order was passed and the respondents joined duty in the Chief Office in 1970 and were placed on probation.
They completed the probation satisfactorily and were confirmed with their seniority counted from the dates they joined Chief Office.
Later, in 1983 they filed a Representation Petition before the State Administrative Tribunal that in view of Memorandum dated 18.1.1969 which stated that the condition regarding taking last rank would not be insisted upon, the respondents were entitled to count their service rendered in the district police offices/units for the purpose of senior ity in the Chief Office.
The Tribunal allowed the petition.
The State has preferred the appeal against the said order.
The petitioners in the Writ Petitions were appointed in the years 1965 to 1967.
Since they did not pass the general examination, a special qualifying examination was held in 1968.
They did not appear at the examination.
Another chance was given in 1974 and the petitioners successfully cleared the same.
By an order dated 17.6.1976, their services were regularised with effect from 1.8.1972.
The petitioners challenged the validity of the order, claiming, that their seniority 483 should be counted from the dates they were appointed.
Allowing the appeal and dismissing the Writ Petitions, HELD: 1.
It has to be appreciated that the cadre of the Chief Office is altogether different from the cadre of the district police offices/ units where the respondents were earlier appointed and they were not liable to be transferred to the Chief Office.
The service conditions at the Chief Office were better, which was presumably the reason for the respondents to give up their claim based upon their past services.
It is true that the differential advantage was not so substantial as to attract every Lower Division Clerk working in the district offices/units, and in that situation the letter dated 21.11.1968 had to be circulated.
However, so far the respondents and the two others were concerned, they found it in their own interest to forego their claim of seniority on the basis of their past services and they did so.
It is significant to note that their letters expressing their willingness to join Chief Office by foregoing their seniority were sent to the Inspector General of Police many months after the issuance of circular dated 18.1.1969 stat ing that the condition of foregoing seniority would not be insisted upon and they were allowed to join the Chief Office on clear understanding that they would not be entitled to count their past services.
It is, therefore, idle to suggest that the respondents can now turn back and repudiate their commitment expressly made many months after the said circu lar.
[297G H; 298A B] 2.
So far the allegation regarding payment of travelling allowance is concerned, if some officers permitted the respondents to draw travelling allowance, this cannot be a ground to hold that it was a case of regular departmental transfer.
Rule 16 of the Andhra Pradesh Ministerial Service Rules cannot, therefore, be held to be applicable in the present case.
[298C E] 3.
The petition before the Tribunal was filed by the respondents after a period of 13 years of their initial appointment in the Chief Office, during which period many orders consistent with the terms of service as indicated in the Memorandum dated 21.11.1968, must have been passed in favour of the other incumbents of the service.
The courts and tribunals should be slow in disturbing the settled affairs in a service for such a long period.
Besides, the respondents, in the application before the Tribunal, did not implead their colleagues who have been prejudicially affect ed by the impugned judgment.
It cannot be assumed that the respondents had no knowledge about them.
Apart from the merits of the case, the petition of the respondents before the Tribunal 484 was fit to be rejected on these grounds.
[298B D] 4.
There is also no merit in the contention that the respondents should not be put below those persons who had not successfully completed their probation in the Chief Office on the date the respondents joined there.
[299E] 5.1 As regards the Writ Petitions, it is significant to note that although the impugned order was passed in 1976, the petitioners did not commence any legal remedy before the year 1984 when they filed the present application directly before this Court after a period of 8 years.
[300C] 5.2 Though a Writ Petition was filed by some of the employees of the Central Office making similar claim of seniority the same was ultimately dismissed by this Court on August 8, 1986.
[300E] M. Nirmala and others vs State of Andhra Pradesh and Others, , referred to.
5.3 The respondent officers had joined the Central Office after qualifying at the general examination held for the purpose, and since the petitioners did not appear at the examination, they cannot be equated with the respondent officers.
The general examinations for recruitment to the Central Office were held in 1964, 1965, 1966, 1967 and 1968, but the petitioners did not choose to avail of the ordinary method for joining the service.
Instead they entered the service by the side door and their department, taking an attitude liberal to them and other similar officers, decided to hold special qualifying examinations.
However, for the purpose of seniority the petitioners were given the advan tage of two years of service rendered by them prior to their successfully completing the special qualifying examination.
Even the standard of the special qualifying examination was not the same as that of the general examination held for recruitment.
[300G H; 301A B]
