Respondent was assessed for the assessment years of 1967 68, 1968 69 and 1969 70 treating her as the head of the HUF.
She contended before the income Tax Officer that under the partition agreement dated 3.7.1958 the Tavazhi was divided, the HUF status of the Tavazhi was disrupted on account of the CIvil Court decree made in a partition suit and the properties were divided into 14 shares and the HUF could not be assessed to income tax.
The Income Tax Officer rejected the claim of the respondent on the ground that since the preliminary decree of the Civil Court, and not become final and no physical or actual partition had taken place; the status of HUF continued for the purpose of Tax.
The Single Judge of the High Court allowed the Writ Petition of the respondent holding that Section 171 of the Income Tax Act does not apply to a case where the division was effected before the commence 474 ment of the accounting period and HUF having received no income during the accounting period it could not be assessed to tax notwithstanding the legal fiction under Section 171.
In appeal the Division Bench held that there was no express provision in Section 171 nor was there any necessary impli cation arising from the provisions of the section that the income of the family after its division must be treated or deemed to be the income of the HUF inspite of disruption of joint status.
The Bench held that HUF is a separate and distinct entity from the members constituting it and if that entity does not receive any income, the members ' income could not he assessed as income of the HUF.
The Division Bench further held that since there had been partition in the family and Tavazhi had ceased to he HUF long before the accounting periods, the provisions of the Act could not he pressed into service for the purpose of taxing the income of the individual members of the family treating them having the status of HUF with the aid of Section 171 of the Act.
The High Court granted certificate to the Revenue under Article 133 of the Constitution.
Hence these appeals.
Allowing the appeal, the Court, HELD: 1.
Under Section 171 a Hindu Family assessed as HUF, is deemed for the purposes of the Act to continue as HUF except where partition is proved to have been effected in accordance with the section.
The section further provides that if any person at the time of making of assessment claims that partition total or partial has taken place among the members of the HUF, the Income Tax Officer is required to make an inquiry after giving notice to all the members of the family, and to record findings on the question of parti tion.
If on inquiry he comes to the finding that there has been partition, individual liability of members is to be computed according to the portion of the joint family property allotted to them.
The definition of partition does not recognise a partition even if it is effected by a decree of court unless there is a physical division of the property and if the property is not capable of being physically divided then there should be division of the property to the extent it is possible otherwise the severance of status will not amount to partition.
In considering the factum of partition for the purposes of assessment it is not permissible to ignore the special meaning assigned to partition under the explanation, even if the partition is effected through a decree of the court.
Ordinarily decree of a Civil Court in a partition suit is good evidence in proof of partition but under Sec tion 171 a legal fiction has 475 been introduced according to which a preliminary decree of partition is not enough, instead there should be actual physical division of the property pursuant to final decree, by metes and bounds.
The Legislature has assigned a special meaning to partition under the aforesaid Explanation with a view to safeguard the interest of the Revenue.
Any assessee claiming partition of HUF must prove the disruption of the status of HUF in accordance with the provisions of Section 171 having special regard to the Explanation.
The assessee must prove that a partition ef fected by agreement or through court 's decree, was followed by actual physical division of the property.
In the absence of such proof partition is not sufficient to disrupt the status of Hindu Undivided Family for the purpose of assess ment of tax.
Under the Hindu Law members of a joint family may agree to partition of the joint family property by private settlement, agreement, arbitration or through court 's de cree.
Members of the family may also agree to share the income from the property according to their respective share.
In all such eventualities joint status of family may be disrupted but such disruption of family status is not recognised by the Legislature for purposes of Income Tax.
Section 171 of the Act and the Explanation to it, prescribes a special meaning to partition which is different from the general principles of Hindu Law.
It contains a deeming provision under which partition of the property of HUF is accepted only if there has been actual physical division of the property, in the absence of any such proof, the HUF shall be deemed to continue for the purpose of assessment of tax.
Any agreement between the members of the joint family effecting partition, or a decree of the Court for partition cannot terminate the status of HUF unless it is shown that the joint family property was physically divided in accord ance with the agreement or decree of the Court.
The respondent for the first time raised the plea of partition and disruption of HUF in the proceedings for the assessment years 1967 68, 1968 69 and 1969 70.
There had been no physical division of the properties by metes and bounds.
The status of HUF had not been disrupted, and the income derived from the properties for the purposes of assessment continued to be impressed with the HUF character.
Parameswaran Nambudiripad vs Inspecting Assistant Com missioner of Agricultural Income tax, ; In specting Assistant Commissioner of Agricultural Income Tax and Sales Tax (Special), Kozhikode vs Poomulli Manekkal Parameswaran Namboodiripad, , distinguished.
476 Kaloomal Tapeshwar Prasad vs
C.I.T., Kanpur, 133 I.T.R. 690, followed.
Sunder Singh Majithia vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Shankar Narayanan vs Income Tax Offi cer, , referred.
