Item 14 E of the First Schedule to the at the relevant time dealt with patent or proprietary medicines not containing alcohol, opium, Indian hemp or other narcotic drugs or narcotics.
Explanation I thereto defined 'patent or proprietary medicines ' to mean any drug or medicinal preparation, in whatever form, for use in the internal or external treatment of, or for the preven tion of ailments In human beings or animals.
Item 68 dealt with all other goods, not elsewhere specified but excluding alcohol, opium, Indian hemp and other narcotic drugs and narcotics.
The Central Government by a notification dated February 28, 1982 exempted certain goods falling under Item 68 from the levy of central excise duty.
Entry at section No. 10 in the schedule annexed thereto read "animal feed including com pound livestock feed".
The said notification was superseded by notification dated November 1, 1982 which also provided the same exemption.
This notification was again amended by notification dated February 15, 1984.
Entry at section No. 10 in the schedule thereto read "animal feed including compound livestock feed, animal feed supplement and animal feed concentrates".
A question arose as to whether Bifuran Supplement, Neftin 50 and Neftin 200 manufactured by the appellant were chargeable to excise duty as patent or proprietary medicines under Item 14 E or could be classified as "animal feed supplement" under Item 68 and exempted from payment of excise duty.
The Assistant Collector of Central Excise held that the said formulations were classifiable under Tariff Item 14 E.
His order was, however, set aside by the Collec tor of Central Excise (Appeals) who held that the said products were animal feed supplements which merited classi fication only under the erstwhile Tariff Item 68 and not under Tariff Item 14 E.
On appeal by the Department, the Tribunal held that the aforesaid three products manufactured by the 443 appellant were patent and 'proprietary medicines as defined in Tariff Item 14 E inasmuch as they have therapeutic and preventive use in respect of the specific ailments in ani mals, that if the products satisfied the requirements of Tariff Item 14 E there was no question of considering their classification under Tariff Item 68 which was a residuary item.
In this appeal under section 35 L of the Act it was stated on behalf of the appellant that since the use of Bifuran Sup plement was to promote growth rate, weight gains and feed conversion efficiency in growers and broilers by keeping coccidiosis away during growing period, it could be regarded as a preventive medicine falling under Tariff Item 14 E.
However, in respect of Neftin 50 and Neftin 200 it was urged that these were manufactured for use as animal feed supple ment and not for use as medicines and, therefore, they should have been classified as animal feed supplement under Tariff Item 68 and exempted from payment of excise duty under notification dated February 15, 1984.
It was further contended that the appellant had been subjected to arbitrary and hostile discrimination as similar products of other manufacturers were being exempted from payment of excise duty under the said notification.
For the respondent it was contended that Neftin 50 contains Furazolidone 5% w/w and Neftin 200 contains Furazolidone 20% w/w, that Furazolidone is used as an aid in the prevention of coccidiosis as well as for treatment of coccidiosis, that Furazolidone is a patent drug and in England it is sold to the public on the prescription of a registered practitioner only that the finding that these two products were patent and proprietary medicines failing under Tariff Item 14 E was essentially a finding of fact based on the materials placed before the excise authorities and the said finding was not normally open to challenge in appeal, that the other manufacturers whose products were exempted were located at different places and were assessable to excise duty by different authorities, and that the relevant notifications have been wrongly applied to those manufacturers by the concerned authorities.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, HELD: 1.
Item 68 of the Excise Tariff was a residuary entry which dealt with all other goods not elsewhere speci fied.
A product which is found to be covered by the other items of the Schedule of the Excise Tariff would be outside the ambit of Item 68.
[260F] Dunlop India Ltd. vs Union of India & Ors., ; and Collector of Central Excise, Kanpur vs Krishna Carbon Paper Co., ; , referred to.
444 2.
What is required for purposes of Item 14 E is that the product must be a preparation for use in the treatment or prevention of ailments in human beings or animals.
Furaz olidone is an antibacterial, antifungal and antiprotozoal compound.
It is used for prevention and treatment of coccid iosis as well as histomoniasis in poultry.
In England it.is a veterinary drug and it can be sold or supplied to the public on a practitioner 's prescription only.
Furazolidone is thus a drug or medicinal preparation used for treatment and prevention of ailments in poultry.
Since Neftin 50 and Neftin 200 contain only Furazolidone, the said products are also drugs or medicinal preparations for use in the treat ment and prevention of ailments in poultry.
They have, therefore, to be regarded as patent and proprietary medi cines chargeable to excise duty under Item No. 14 E. [262E G] Annapurna Carbon Industries Co. vs State of A.P ; , referred to.
The exemption under notification dated November 1, 1982, as amended by notification dated February 15, 1984 was confined in its application to specified goods which fell under Item 68.
The said notification did not grant exemption in respect of a product failing in any other entry 'of the excise tariff.
It could not be construed as transferring a product from an entry other than Item 68 to Item 68.
The insertion of 'animal feed supplement ' in Entry No. 10 in the schedule to the notification dated November 1, 1982 by the notification dated February 15, 1984, would not mean that a product which was liable to payment of excise duty under Item 14 E prior to such insertion would cease to be so liable and would become exempt from such payment of duty by virtue of that notification.
Prior to the notification dated February 15, 1984, the appellant was paying excise duty on Neftin 50 and Neftin 200 as patent and proprietary medicines failing under Item 14 E.
In the absence of any notification granting exemption in respect of products falling under Item 14 E, Neftin 50 and Neftin 200 could not be claimed to be exempt from Central Excise duty as animal feed supplement.
[263F H; 264A B] 4.
It was not the case of the appellant that the same authority had passed orders discriminating between the appellant and other producers of similar products.
Nor it is said that there has been intentional and systematic discrim ination in favour of the producers other than the appellant.
The discrimination complained of arose on account of orders passed by different excise authorities acting quasi judi cially.
Merely because on account of difference in the interpretation of the relevant notifications by the excise authorities in other regions other manufac 445 turers of similar products in those regions were enjoying exemption from payment of such duty the same exemption could not be extended to it.
The appellant could not obtain such an exemption in disregard of the law by invoking the right to equality before the law and equal protection of the laws guaranteed under Article 14 of the Constitution.
[264G H; 265A B] Narain Dass vs The Improvement Dust, Amritsar, & Anr., AIR 1972 S.C. 865, referred to.
Cumberland Coal Co. vs Board of Revision, 76 Law Edn. 147; Iowa Des Moines National Bank vs E.R. Bennett, 76 Law Edn.
265; Vishnudas Hindumal vs State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors., ; and Ramnath Verma vs State of Rajasthan, ; , distinguished.
