What is the true meaning and scope of the expression 'holder in due course ' as defined in Section 9 of the Nego tiable Instruments Act, 1881, was the question that arose for consideration in this appeal.
Consequent upon the pleading of promissory note and other title deeds relating to her property by Defendant No. 5, (mother of Defendants 2 to 4) in favour of the respondent Bank as security, thereby creating an equitable mortgage, the respondent Bank allowed credit facilities like accommo dation by way of Hundi discount, Key loan and cheque pur chases upto a limit of Rs.35,00,000 to Defendant No. 1, a firm consisting of defendants Nos. 2 to 4 as partners.
The first defendant firm had business dealings with the appel lant defendant No. 6.
In course of business it was supplying goods consisting of hill products and used to receive pay ment by way of cheques from defendant No. 6.
Defendant No. 6 issued two cheques drawn on the Union Bank of India, Palgh at, in favour of the first defendant payable to the first defendant firm on order.
The cheques were purchased by the Respondent bank and proceeds thereof were credited by the bank to the account of first defendant, on valid considera tion.
The first defendant withdrew the amount at various dates.
When the respondent bank sent the cheques for collec tion, the Union Bank of India returned the cheques with the endorsement "full cover not received".
Defendants 2 to 5 agreed to pay the amounts to the Bank but could not pay the full amount, with the result the Bank filed a suit for recovery of the balance amount from Defendant No. 6 also who had issued the cheques in question.
At the trial, Defendant No. 6 contended that since the firm (defendant No. 1) did not supply the goods, it could not pay the money in the bank.
According to Defendant No. 6, the appellant, did not admit the purchase of cheques by the respondent bank for valid consideration and hence denied that the bank was 'holder in due course '.
The trial court held that the re spondent bank is a 'holder in due course ' and as such enti tled to enforce the liability against the appellant defend ant No. 6.
543 The trial court also held defendants 2 to 4 personally liable for the plaint claim.
Against the order of the trial court the appellant defendant No. 6 alone appealed to the High Court.
The High Court affirmed the findings of the trial court but modified the decree holding that the immova ble properties mentioned in the schedule to the plaint would first be proceeded against and in case the entire amount of decree is not realised by the sale of those properties, the Bank would proceed against the assets of the firm defendant No. 1 and for the balance, if any, the decreeholder would proceed against the defendants Nos. 2 4 and 6.
Aggrieved by the said order of the High Court, the 6th defendant has preferred this appeal.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: Indian Law is stricter, and is not satisfied merely with the honesty of the person taking the instrument, but requires the person to exercise due diligence, and goes a step further than English Law in scrutinising the causes which go to make up the belief in the mind of the transfer ee.
[359B] In the instant case, the holder namely defendant No. 1 made the necessary endorsements in the two cheques in favour of the plaintiff Bank and the Bank endorsed "payee account credited".
The defendant No. 1 withdrew this amount and there is no dispute about it.
It must also be noted in this context that there is no endorsement on the cheque made by the drawer namely the appellant that cheques are not nego tiable.
In the absence of the cheques being crossed "not negotiable" nothing prevented the plaintiff Bank to purchase the cheques for a valuable consideration and the presumption under Section 118(g) comes to his rescue and there is no material whatsoever to show that the cheques were obtained in any unlawful manner or for any unlawful consideration.
[358E G] In a given case it is left to the court to decide wheth er the negligence on part of the holder is so gross and extraordinary as to presume that he had sufficient cause to believe that such title was defective.
[370A] The court while examining these requirements including valid consideration must also go into the question whether there was a contract express or implied for crediting the proceeds to the account of the bearer before receiving the same.
The enquiry regarding the satisfaction of this re quirement invariably depends upon the facts and cir 544 cumstances in each case.
The words "without having suffi cient cause to believe" have to be understood in this back ground.
[370B C] In the instant case, there is also an implied contract to credit the proceeds of the cheques in favour of defendant No. 1 to his account before actually receiving them.
As a question of fact this aspect is established by the evidence on record.
In such a situation the plaintiff need not make enquiries about the transactions of supply of goods etc.
that were going on between defendants No. 1 and 6.
Even if defendant No. 1 has not supplied the goods in respect of which the cheques in question were issued by defendant No. 6 there was no cause at any rate sufficient cause for the plaintiff to doubt the title of defendant No. 1 nor can it be said that the plaintiff acted negligently.
Viewed from this background it cannot be said that there was sufficient cause to doubt the title nor there is scope to infer gross negligence on the part of the plaintiff.
[370E G] Nelson vs Larhold, ; Baker vs Barclays Bank Ltd., ; Gill vs Cubitt English Reports, 107 Kings ' Bench 806; Durg Shah Mohan Lal Bankers vs Governor General in Council and Others, AIR 1952 Allaha bad 590; Sunderdas Sobhraj, a firm vs Liberty Pictures, a firm, AIR 1956 Bombay 618; A.L. Underwood Ltd. vs Bank of Liverpool and Martins; Same vs Barclays Bank, at page 241, referred to.
Raghavji Vizpal v Narandas Parmanandas Bombay Law Re porter, Vol.
VIII (1906) 921, Overruled.
Chitty on Contracts, 26th Edn.
Paragraphs 2778 & 2781; Chalmers on Bills of Exchange, 13th Edn.
at p. 283; Paratha sarathy on Cheques in Law and Practice, 4th Edn.
p. 74; Halsbury 's Laws of England, 4th Edn.
paragraph 221 page 186 and paragraph 222, referred to.
