The property in the suit belonged to the great grand mother of the plaintiffs and defendant Nos. 5 to 14 who executed a registered will.
According to the terms of the will, her two sons, defendant No. 1 and plaintiffs ' witness No. 2 were to remain in possession of the properties without any power of alienation, to pay the taxes and conduct regu larly certain religions festivals, and their male issues on attaining majority were to get the property in equal por tions and enjoy it absolutely.
The main dispute in the suit was about the share which the plaintiffs are entitled to under the terms of the afore said will.
The plaintiffs claimed that they being the only grand sons of the younger son of the testatrix were entitled to half share in the properties, the remaining half going to the grand sons of defendant No. 1 namely, defendant Nos. 5 to 14.
The suit was contested on behalf of the defendants, who pleaded that the suit properties have to be divided amongst all the 13 great grand sons of the testatrix in equal shares, and that the suit was fit to be dismissed as defendant No. 1 defendent No. 15 had finally partitioned the properties in 1975, and no question of further partition arises.
The maintainability of the suit was also challenged on the ground of minority of the plaintiffs as also on the basis of the rule against perpetuity.
The trial Court rejected the plea based on the rule against perpetuity but having regard to the interest of defendant No. 1, his brother, and defendant No. 15, it held that the alleged partition of 1975 was illegal and not binding on the plaintiffs and that so far as the shares of the plaintiffs and defendant Nos. 5 to 14 are concerned held that the parties would take the properties as per capita.
The suit was however dismissed on the ground that the plain tiffs were still minor.
In the appeal to the High Court by the plaintiffs, the High Court confirmed the findings of the trial court that the 1975 partition was illegal, but held that the division would take place as per stirpes, and taking into account the fact that during the pendency of the appeal, two of the plaintiffs had attained majority, the High Court passed a decree in theft favour for one sixth share each.
So far as the third plaintiff was concerned, it declared his right without passing a decree for partition.
The appellants defendants challenged the decision of the High Court in 508 this Court by special leave, contending that as per the terms of the will the great grand sons of the testatrix have inherited the suit properties as per capita and that the conclusion of the High Court on this aspects was illegal, and that reliance by the High Court, on Boddu Venkatakrishna Rao & Ors.
vs Shrimati Boddu Satyavathi & Ors., ; was inapplicable to the facts of this case.
Allowing the appeal in part, and decreeing the suit in favour of all the plaintiffs, that the share of the three plaintiffs and defendant Nos. 5 to 14 shah be one thirteen each in the suit properties this Court, HELD: 1.
A Court while construing a will should try to ascertain the intention of the testator to be gathered primarily from the language of the document; but while so doing the surrounding circumstances the position of the testator, his family relationship and the probability that he used the words in a particular sense also must be taken into account.
They lend a valuable aid in arriving at the correct construction of the will.
Since these considerations are changing from person to person it is seldom profitable to compare the words of one will with those of another or to try to discover which of the wills upon which the decisions have been given in reported cases.
the disputed will approx imates closely.
Recourse to precedents, therefore, should be confined for the purpose of general principles of construc tion only.
2.There is still another reason as to why the construc tion put on certain expressions in a will should not be applied to a similar expression in the will under question for, a will has to be considered and construed as a whole, and not piecemeal.
It follows that a fair and reasonable construction of the same expression may vary from will to will.
Therefore, in the matter of construction of a will, authorities or precedents are of no help as each will has to be construed in its own terms and in the setting in which the clauses occur.
In the instant case, the High Court has interpreted the crucial part of the will containing the expression 'SAMABHA GAMAGA ADAINTHU ' as directing the plaintiffs on the one hand and the defendants5 to 14 on the other to "share equally out of each branch".
The main reason for the High Court for taking such a view is that the terms of a will which was the subject matter of interpretation in the case of Boddu Venka takrishna Rao & Ors.
vs Shrbnati Boddu Satvavathi & Ors., ; ; were more or less similar.
It has also been assumed that the properties finally descended on the two branches in equal shares and consequently parties be longing to the two branches inherited the properties as per stripes.
While so doing the Court failed to notice that the relevant facts and circumstances of that case were widely different from those in the present case.
The conclusion of the High Court on the construction of the will was therefore not correct.
In the instant case, there is no manner of doubt, and it is not denied by any party that neither the sons nor the grand sons of the testatrix got any life estate 509 in the properties.
It is the agreed case of the parties that as soon as plaintiffs and defendants No. 5 to 14 become major they are entitled to get the property absolutely without waiting for the death of their respective fathers or grandfather.
The will has therefore to be interpreted with out being influenced by the meaning given to the will in the reported case.
The devolution of the property under the will takes place on the plaintiffs and defendants No. 5 to 14 for the first time 'under equal shares '.
Since this is the first occasion for the shares in the property to be defined, the expression 'equal shares ' must refer to the entire proper ties left by the testatrix which will have to be divided equally amongst all the thirteen great grand sons by the testatrix.
In other words they take the properties as per capita.
The third plaintiff has also attained majority during the pendency of the present appeal and has therefore become entitled to a share in the properties.
The suit is decreed in favour of all the plaintiffs their share being one thirteenth each.
Ramachandra Shenoy and Another vs Mrs.Hilda brite and Others; , , relied on.
Boddu Venkatakrishna Rao & Ors.
vs Shrimati Boddu Sat vavathi & Ors.
; , , distinguished.
The plea that disposition under the will was hit by the rule against perpetuity was rightly rejected by the trial court on the ground that the sons of the testatrix as also their respective sons were alive.
