Consequent upon the establishment of Kerala Water Au thority under the Kerala Water Supply and Sewerage Act, 1986, all the functions which were till then carried on by the Public Health Engineering Department (PHED) were trans ferred to the said Authority.
Contemporaneously with that every person working in the PHED became the employee of the Kerala Water Authority by virtue of Section 19(1) of the Act.
Though the said Act was given retrospective operation w.e.f.
1st March 1984, Section 69 thereof came into force from the date of publication of the Act in the Gazettee viz., 4.8.1986; actual effect could be given w.e.f. 30.7. 1988 on which date the necessary notification was issued where by the rule was amended and the Authority came within the purview of the Public Service Commission.
Thus the employees of the Authority fell into four different groups viz., (i) those who were in the employment of PHED before the constitution of the Authority and were transferred to the Authority, (ii) those whom the Authority employed be tween 1st April, 1984 and 4th August 1986, (iii) those who were appointed between 4th August 1986 and 30th July 1988, and (iv) those who were appointed after 30th July 1988.
The Authority it seems terminated the services of various em ployees.
The petitioners apprehending termination of their serv ices by the Authority filed petitions contending inter alia that they were recruited through the Employment Exchange and till the issuance of the notification dated 30.7.1988, amending the concerned PSC rule, there was no question of the Authority consulting the PSC and therefore, appointments made prior to that date could not be termed as irregular or unauthorised and could not be determined on that ground.
It is asserted by them that the High Court refused to grant relief to those employees whose services were threatened and despite favourable orders passed by this Court in cases that came before it, the Authority continued to terminate the services of employees similarly placed treating those 563 orders as having been passed in respect of only those em ployees who were before the Court.
It is, therefore, urged by them that this Court should pass orders laying down guidelines for the regularisation of the services of not only the petitioners but also all others similarly placed so that the low income employees are not required to knock at the doors of different courts for protection against the threatened arbitrary action of the Authority terminating their services.
The Authority has contested the cases on the plea that all the appointments made before or after April 1, 1984 were governed by Rule 9(a)(i) of the Rules till Section 69 came into force w.e.f. 4.8.1986 and 30.7.1988 when it was amended.
Appointments made after 4.8.1986 are clearly sub ject to the requirement of Section 69 of the Act and the Authority cannot act in contravention thereof.
Services of all those who were governed by Rule 9(a)(i) will have to be determinated on the expiry of 180 days.
Allowing the appeals as also writ petitions, this Court, HELD: Interpreting Rule 9(a)(i) consistently with the spirit and philosophy of the Constitution, which it is permissible to do without doing violence to the said rule, it follows that employees who are serving on the establish ment for long spells and have the requisite qualifications for the job, should not be thrown out but their services should be regularised as far as possible.
Since workers belonging to this batch have worked on their posts for reasonably long spells they are entitled to regularisation in service.
[388A B] P.K. Narayani & Ors.
vs State of Kerala and Ors.
, ; Dr. A.K. Jain & Ors.
vs Union of India and Ors.
, ; ; Daily rated Casual Labour employed under P & T Department through Bhartiya Dak Tar Mazdoor Manch vs Union of India and Ors., , referred to.
