The Appellant 's father purchased the house of respondent Nos. 1 and 2 with condition of repurchase by the sellers after five years.
He permitted the respondents to remain in possession but got a rent note executed by Respondent No.3, the first cousin of Respondent No.1.
After the expiry of 5 years when the house was not repurchased by the respondents, the appellant 's father (plaintiff) instituted a suit for arrears of rent and ejectment against Respondent Nos. 1, 2 and 3 (Defendant Nos. 2, 3 and 1) claiming that defendant No. 1 was in arrears of rent and defendant Nos. 2 and 3 were his sub tenants.
The Trial Court decreed the suit for ar rears of rent against defendant No. 1 but dismissed the suit for ejectment against defendant Nos. 2 and 3 holding that they were not sub tenants.
Defendant No. 1 filed an appeal against the decree for arrears of rent.
The Appellate Court dismissed the appeal with an observation that though the rent note was executed by Defendant No. 1, the possession of Defendant Nos. 2 and 3 was on behalf of Defendant No. 1 since they were closely related.
Relying on these observa tions the plaintiff filed a second suit against the defend ants with a change that defendant Nos. 2 and 3 were licen sees of defendant No.1.
The Trial Court decreed the suit for arrears of rent against defendant No. 1 and for ejectment against defendant Nos. 2 and 3.
Both defendant No. 1 sepa rately and defendant Nos. 2 and 3 jointly filed two appeals which were dismissed.
Separate appeals were filed in the High Court which dismissed the appeal of defendant No. 1 and allowed the appeal of defendant Nos. 2 and 3 holding that the findings recorded in appeal arising out of earlier suit that they were licensees did not operate as res judicata.
Accordingly the High Court dismissed the suit for ejectment against defendant Nos. 2 and 3.
Hence this appeal.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, 98 HELD: One of the tests to ascertain if a finding oper ates as res judicata is if the party aggrieved could chal lenge it.
Since the dismissal of appeal or the appellate decree was not against defendants Nos. 2 and 3 they could not challenge it by way of appeal.
Even assuming that de fendant No. 1 could challenge the finding that liability of rent was of defendant Nos. 2 and 3 as they were in posses sion he did not file any written statement in the Trial Court raising any dispute between him. self and defendants Nos. 2 and 3.
There was thus no occasion for the appellate court to make the observation when there was neither plead ing nor evidence.
Therefore, from either point of view the finding could not operate against defendants Nos. 2 and 3 as res judicata.
[100E G] Keshardeo Chamria vs Radha Kissen Chamria, [1953] S.C.R. 154; held in applicable.
