In exercise of the powers conferred by section 12 of the Madhya Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, 1958 the State Govern ment issued a notification dated 23.10.1981 exempting the specified class of dealers who had set up industry in any of the specified districts of Madhya Pradesh and had commenced production after 1st April, 1981 from payment of tax under the said Act for a specified period subject to certain restrictions and conditions.
However, when the assesses approached the Director of Industries for the certificate of exemption, it was denied to them on the ground that the industries run by them were "traditional industries" which were not eligible for exemption.
The assesses went to the court and urged that the con cept of "traditional industries" was one unspecified in the notification, and that the authorities had no jurisdiction to travel outside the terms of the notification and import extraneous considerations to deny the assesses an exemption they were entitled to under the notification.
The State on the other hand, relied on the provisions of the M.P. (Deferment of payment of Tax) Rules, 1983.
notified on 1.9.83 (in particular, rule 13 thereof) and on certain instructions that had been issued by the Government on 12.1.1983 pertaining to the "grant of certificate of eligi bility to new industrial units claiming exemption from or deferment of payment of sales tax".
The assessee 's claim for exemption from sales tax was accepted by the Division Bench of the High Court in the case of G.S. Dhall & Flour Mills and, following it, in the case of Mohd. Ismail.
The Division Bench took the view that these rules and instructions had no relevance to the claim for exemption put forward under the notification of 23.10.1981 and that, in any event, the executive instructions could not override the provisions of the statutory notification.
591 Subsequent to the decision of the Division Bench, the State Government issued a notification on 3.7.1987, intended obviously to overcome the effect of the said decision.
Subsequently, however, a Full Bench of the High Court, in the case of Jagadamba Industries disapproved the view taken by the Division Bench in G.S. Dhall case.
The Full Bench attached importance to the rules and instructions referred to above and relied considerably on his history of the sales tax levy in the State as furnishing proper and necessary background in which the terms of the notification of 23.10.1981 had to be read and interpreted.
The Full Bench, after considering the scheme and in structions of the Government, came to the conclusion that the scope of the exemption notification of 1981 was not intended to be wider than that of the concessions granted earlier, and that the 1981 notification was intended to bring about only a change in the mode of relief to the same categories of industries as were covered by the earlier schemes.
The contention that "instructions" could not override the effect of the statutory notification was repelled by the Full Bench on the ground that the validity and effectiveness of the instructions could be supported by reference to Article 162 of the Constitution as filling up a lack of guidelines in the notification.
The Full Bench considered the 1983 instructions to be conclusive on two grounds on the doctrine of contemporanea exposition and on the principle that executive instructions could always be issued to supplement statutory instruments so as to fill up areas on which the latter were silent.
The State, aggrieved by the judgment of the Division Bench in the two cases, and the assessee by the judgment of the Full Bench in the other case, have filed the appeals and Special Leave Petitions.
Before this Court the parties reiterated their submis sions in support of either of the two judgments.
The main submission on behalf of the State was that, since the 1981 notification did not set out the conditions on which, and the procedure in accordance with which the Director of Industries was to issue the eligibility certificate, the earlier scheme of subsidy/loan and its procedure should be read into the notification for this purpose.
This contention was contested by the assesses inter alia on the ground that the earlier scheme and the exemption now 592 proposed were totally different in their object and scope.
Dismissing the appeals of the State, and allowing the appeals preferred by the assesses, this Court while observ ing that the Division Bench laid down the correct law and not the Full Bench, HELD: (1) The 1981 notification does not expressly, or even by necessary implication, exclude "traditional" indus tries from its scope.
(2) Prima facie, the Director of Industries cannot refuse the exemption on a consideration not specified in the notification.
All the conditions for exemption have to be, and are, set out in the notification itself and all that the Director of Industries has to do is to satisfy himself that those conditions are fulfilled; he cannot travel beyond the terms of the notification.
(3) Even granting that the 1981 policy was to replace the earlier subsidy/loan by an exemption, it does not neces sarily follow that the units intended to be covered by the new scheme were only those that were covered by the earlier scheme and that no wider exemption was contemplated.
(4) No factual foundation has been laid to establish the hypothesis that the exemption conferred in 1981 was to be a mere extension or substitution of the benefits conferred earlier.
(5) The notification does not authorise the Director of Industries to say that, though the applicant fulfill the terms of the notification.
he will not grant the eligibility certificate because,Under the previously prevalent schemes, he could not issue an eligibility certificate to "tradition al industries".
For granting a certificate that the appli cant is eligible for exemption under the notification, the director has to look to the conditions set out in the noti fication and nowhere else.
Changing definition of eligibility for exemption also shows that there was no common or identical group of benefi ciaries intended under the various instructions or notifica tions and that each set of instructions or notification issued from time to time defined only the categories exempt ed from its purview and nothing else.
The exemption list under one was not meant to be carried over into another.
Hans Gordon Dan v .H.H.
Dave, referred to.
593 (7) The 1983 document is not a statutory instrument neither a notification nor a rule framed under the statute.
(8) It is true that the principle of contemporanea exposition is invoked where a statute is ambiguous but is shown to have been clearly and consistently understood and explained by the administrators of the law in a particular manner.
But. to apply the doctrine to widen the ambit of the statutory language would, however, virtually mean that the State can determine the interpretation of a statute by its ipsi dixit.
That, certainly, is not, and cannot be the scope of the doctrine.
The doctrine can be applied to limit the State to its own narrower interpretation to favour of the subject but not to claim its interpretation in its own favour as conclusive.
Varghese vs 1.
T.O.; , and Doypack Sys tems P. Ltd. vs Union of India, ; , referred to.
(9) Executive instructions can supplement a statute or cover areas to which the statute does not extend.
But they cannot run contrary to statutory provisions or whittle down their effect.
(10) There is nothing in the language of the notifica tion to suggest that anything further is needed to enable the Director of Industries to grant the exemption.
Without the guidelines, the requirement for an exemption certificate would not become an "empty formality".
(11) If the statutory notification is construed as permitting the State by rules or executive instructions to prescribe other conditions for exemption, whether new or based on past practice.
it is liable to be struck down on the ground of impermissible delegation of legislative power to the executive.
This, certainly, they cannot do.
(12) The 3/7/87 notification cannot be treated as one merely clarifying an ambiguity in the earlier one and hence capable of being retrospectively; it enacts the rescission of the earlier exemption and, hence, can operate only pro spectively.
It cannot take away the exemption conferred by the earlier notification.
