Respondent 1 is the son of Respondent No. 2.
Including Respondent No. 1 Respondent No. 2 had 4 sons.
Respondent No. 2 owned a sugarcane field adjoining the wheat field of one P. One of the sons of Respondent 2 had burnt sugarcane patties causing damage to the wheat crop of P, against which P protested before the respondents.
The protest was turned down.
Shortly thereafter the respondent and the family members reached the house of P. They were all armed.
Re spondents attacked P and he fell down.
On the way to hospi tal P died.
Most of the accused as well as the family mem bers of P sustained injuries.
On a complaint, F.I.R. was registered.
After investigation, Prosecution filed a case before the Additional Sessions Judge.
Two eye witnesses were produced by the prosecution.
They were relatives of the deceased and there was no independent witness.
The Additional District Judge convicted the respondent for offences under sections 302 IPC and 323, 325 read with 149 IPC.
Both were sentenced to imprisonment for life and a fine Rs.500 each under section 302 IPC.
They were also sentenced to rigorous imprisonment ranging from six months to one year for the other offences.
The other accused were convicted for minor offences and released on probation.
The respondent appealed against the conviction and sentence.
The High Court acquitted the respondents of the major charge under section 302 IPC and recorded the conviction under section 304 Part I reducing the sentence of life imprison ment to the term already undergone, and enhanced the sen tence of fine.
No appeal was preferred by the State.
Howev er, the complaint filed an appeal by special leave.
663 Disposing the appeal, this Court, HELD 1.
There is the evidence of only the interested witnesses who have the tendency to exaggerate and involve even innocent persons.
Most of the accused have sustained injuries and in explaining the same, the prosecution wit nesses have not come forward with a truthful account.
In the melee that ensued on account of the aggressive attitude of the respondents and other members of the family who partici pated and used force against P and his associates.
in all probabilities in the exercise of right of private defence.
However, the circumstances did not warrant the causing of death and the respondents must be deemed to have exceeded their right.
The nature of the injuries indicate that they were sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death and had been inflicted intentionally.
In such circum stances, the act of the respondents squarely fails under section 304 Part I, IPC.
The High Court has not given any cogent or clear reasons for its conclusion and whatever reason has been stated is erroneous.
It is on the basis of the statement given in the course of investigation by a person who was not examined in the case that the High Court has drawn its conclusion.
However.
the conviction under section 304 Part I, IPC is maintained.
The High CoUrt has reduced the sentence to the term of imprisonment already undergone, and enhanced the fine.
The respondents have undergone imprisonment only for a short period of less than six months and, in a grave crime like this, the sentence awarded is rather inadequate.
No particu lar reason has been given by the High Court for awarding such sentence.
The Court in fixing the punishment for any particular crime should take into consideration the nature of the offence, the circumstances in which it was committed, and the degree of deliberation shown by the offender.
The measure of punishment should be proportionate to the gravity of the offence.
The sentence imposed by the High Court appears to be so grossly and entirely inadequate as to involve a failure of justice.
The sentence is enhanced to one of rigorous imprisonment for a period of five years.
