The appellants purchased groundnuts without shell in raw form, and after subjecting them to various processes and treatment, packed them in packets and tins which were then exported.
The goods were charged to duty under item 13 of the Second Schedule to the Indian Tariff Act 1934 and, later, under item 20 of the Second Schedule to the as 'groundnut kernel '.
The appellant however contended that the product exported by it was "processed peanuts", and since the product exported by the assessee, though basically groundnuts, had been so processed and treated that it lost its quality of germination, it could no longer be described as 'groundnut kernel '.
Another argument of the appellant was that groundnut kernel could be said to be of two varieties one an edible variety, and the other a variety used for oil extraction purposes, and that the tariff entry should be confined only to groundnut kernel of the oil yielding variety and not the variety exported by the assessee, which could be more appropriately described as "processed food" rather than as "groundnut kernel".
The appellant 's contentions were rejected by the Collec tor of Customs, on appeal by the Central Board of Excise and Customs and, on further revision, by the Government of India.
Subsequently, the contentions were rejected by a Full Bench of the Customs, Excise & Gold Control Appellate Tribu nal.
Before this Court, the appellants while reiterating the submissions made before the authorities below, contended that the entry in the export tariff should be given a re strictive interpretation and if there was any ambiguity or doubt it should be resolved in favour of the assessee.
It was further submitted that, in matters of export and import, the func 142 tional test was slowly replacing other tests.
On the other hand, it was contended on behalf of the Revenue that: i) the expressions 'groundnut kernel and 'groundnut shell ' used in the export entry were of widest connotation: (ii) there was no justification whatsoever for restricting the meaning of the word 'kernel ' on the basis of the capaci ty to germinate or to yield oil; (iii) the functional test may be attracted where there was a bifurcation or classifi cation as in the entries, but there was no justification to import any such test where the expression.
as in this in stance, was broad and unrestricted; and (iv) groundnut kernel remains groundnut kernel even after roasting and frying and the processing and treatment did not create a different product.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court.
HELD: (1) There is no difficulty or ambiguity in the interpretation of the tariff entry.
Groundnut is a well known commodity which is available both in shell and as kernel.
In this context, 'kernel ' clearly means the grain, seed or the soft matter inside the shell, whatever the use or purpose to which it is put, eating or crushing for oil or sowing.
The tariff entry covers all groundnut and there is no justification for confining it to the germinating or the oil seed variety alone.
[151C D] M/s Health ways Dairy Products Co. vs Union of India & Ors.,[1976] 2 SCC 887, referred to.
(2) Assuming that two different commercial commodities fall under the same entry, there is no reason why the entry should be restricted to only one of them.
It can and should cover both unless one can say that the commodity marketed by the appellant is not 'groundnut kernel '.
[151E] Diwan Chand Chainart Lal 's Case [1977] 39 STC 75, referred to.
Though the raw groundnut kernel has undergone a dry ing, roasting and frying process, its identity as groundnut is not lost.
Even in the market to which it is exported and where it is marketed, it is purchased as groundnuts.
[I51G] (4) The legislature must be presumed to know that, for import purposes, for instance, groundnuts are classified under different headings with differential rates of duty.
Those entries appear not elsewhere 143 but in the First Schedule of the very enactment which sets out the export tariff.
If, in spite of such detailed classi fication elsewhere, the legislature decided to use a wider expression in the Second Schedule.
the intention of the legislature must be given effect to.
[152C D] (5) Once it is realised that both oil seeds and roasted groundnuts exported by the assessee are capable of being described as 'groundnut kernel ', which is what the entry talks of, the various circumstances pointed out that they have different markets, that their end use is different, that one of them has been excepted from the export ban, that their export is done under the auspices of different Export Promotion Councils all fall into place and reveal no incon sistency with.
and have no bearing on, the interpretation to be placed on the entry.
[153B C] Kalaivani Fabrics vs Collector, , Over ruled.
