In the course of consolidation proceedings under the U.P. Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953, questions arose amongst the members of a family regarding the title to certain properties.
Respondent No. 1 filed objections to the original entries in respect of lands in Khata No. 72 and 73 on the basis that he was the son of Chhota, one Of the sons of Teja, the common ancestor.
Similarly, respondents Nos. 2 and 3 filed objections claiming shares in the lands in Khata No. 73 on the ground that the said holding was jointly acquired but was recorded in the name of Nanha in a repre sentative character.
The appellant contested the claims of respondents Nos. 1, 2 and 3.
The objections were considered by the Consolidation Officer, who held that respondent No. 1 was the son of Heera alias Chhota, brother of Nanha, and granted him his share in certain plots of the Khata No. 73.
The appellant as well as respondents Nos. 2 and 3 fried appeals against the said order of the Consolidation Officer.
The Assistant Settlement Officer (Consolidation) allowed the appeal of the appellant and directed that lands in Khata No. 73 will be continued in the name of the appellant alone.
The respondents went in revision against the order of the Assistant Settlement Officer.
The Deputy Director of Consolidation allowed the revision of respondent No. 1 in full in respect of share in Khata No. 72.
As regards plots in Khata No. 73 the Deputy Director held that the name of Nanha was entered only in a representative capacity.
The appellant filed a writ petition in the High Court to challenge the decision of the Deputy Director of Consolida tion which was dismissed in limine.
185 The appellant, thereafter, 'filed the civil suit for a declaration that the order of the Deputy Director of Consol idation was without jurisdiction.
Contesting the suit, respondent No. 1 raised a preliminary objection that the suit was barred by section 49 of the Act.
The Munsiff decid ed the preliminary objection in favour of respondent No. 1.
The Additional District and Sessions Judge in appeal, af firmed the order of the Munsiff.
The second appeal filed by the appellant was dismissed by the High Court in limine.
Before this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellant that the bar of section 49 of the Act was not applicable to the suit of the appellant because the orders passed by the consolidation authorities were without juris diction inasmuch as the consolidation authorities could not decide questions as to title to the lands as well as the question relating to the parentage of respondent No. 1 which the civil courts alone could decide.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: (1) The language used in section 49 of the U.P. Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953 is wide and comprehen sive.
Declaration and adjudication of rights of tenure holders in respect of land lying in the area covered by the notification under section 4(2) of the Act and adjudication of any other right arising out of consolidation proceedings and in regard to which a proceeding could or ought to have been taken under the Act, would cover adjudication of ques tions as to title in respect of the said lands.
Accordingly, the jurisdiction of the civil or revenue courts to entertain any suit or proceeding with respect to rights in such land or with respect to any other matter for which a proceeding could or ought to have been taken under the Act has been taken away.
[189D E; C] Suba Singh vs Mahendra Singh and Others, ; Gorakh Nath Dube vs Hari Narain Singh, , referred to.
(2) In the instant case, respondent No. 1 was claiming an interest in the land lying in the area covered by the notification issued under section 4(2) on the basis that he was the son of Chhota, brother of Nanha, and that the lands were recorded in the name of Nanha in a representative capacity on behalf of himself and his other brothers.
This claim which fell within the ambit of section 5(2) had to be adjudicated by the consolidation authorities under the Act, and the jurisdiction of the Civil Court to entertain the suit in respect of the said 186 matter was expressly barred by section 49 of the Act and the suit of the appellant was rightly dismissed on that ground.
[194C D]
