T.A. Jotindranath Mudaliar, the original lessor, let out his premises viz. two shops and a house adjoining the shops to M/s,Bhoolchand Chandiram, appellant on 4.10.1943 on the terms contained in the letter dated 4.10.1943 whereby the shops were let out on a monthly rent of Rs.430 for two years with the option of sub letting one of the shops and the house adjoining the shops was let out on a monthly rent of Rs.50 for eleven months with the option of sub letting the house also.
The appellant sub let one of the two shops to one 'Arts Palace ' and later w.e.f.
1.4.1948, the appellant inducted another sub tenant M/s. Super Dry Cleaners, appel lant in the other appeal.
Consequent upon a partition in the family of original lessor, the premises in dispute came to the share of Narendranath Mudaliar.
The original lessor including Narendranath Mudaliar after partition continued to realise rent from the tenant of the entire premises till May 1974.
On 28.6.1974, Narendranath Mudaliar sold the property in question to respondent No. 1.
The appellanttenants at torned in favour of respondent No. 1 and paid rent for the premises @ Rs.335 (fair rent fixed) to respondent No. 1.
Respondent No. 1 filed petition on 5.9.1975 for eviction of the appellant on the grounds of sub letting and bona fide need of the landlord under clauses (f) and (h) of the provi so to sub section (1) of Section 21 of the Karnataka Rent Act.
The trial court dismissed the application, but the High Court set aside that order and passed a decree for eviction on both the grounds.
Hence these appeals by the tenant and sub tenant have been filed after obtaining special leave of the Court.
The appellants question the findings of the High Court on both the questions viz. bona fide requirement of the landlord as also sub letting.
252 Respondent No. 1 on the other hand urged that there is no infirmity in the High Court 's decision on both the questions so as to warrant any interference in these appeals.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court, HELD: Landlord 's written consent for sub letting during the period of contractual tenancy cannot be construed as his consent subsisting after the expiry of the contractual tenancy.
[265D] A sub letting by the tenant with the consent in writing of the landlord does not become unlawful on the expiry of the contractual tenancy of the tenant, unless there is any fresh sub letting by the tenant without the written consent of the landlord.
Mere continuance in possession of a sub tenant lawfully inducted does not amount to any fresh or further sub letting.
[265E F] The sub letting in the instant case was after expiry of the contractual tenancy and after the commencement of the Act prohibiting sub letting without the written consent of the landlord when it was made on 1.4.1948.
[265B] Damadilal and Ors.
vs Parashram and Others, [1976] supp.
SCR 645; Dhanapal Chettiar vs Yesodai Ammal ; ; Smt.
Gian Devi Anand vs Jeerart Kumar and Ors., [1985] Supp. 1 SCR 1; L. Mahabir Prasad Verma vs Dr. Surinder Kaur, ; ; M/s. Shalimar Tar Products Ltd. vs H.C. Sharma and Ors.
, ; ; Shantilal Rampuria and Ors.
vs M/s. Vega Trading Corpn.
and Ors., ; ; M/s. Bajaj Auto Ltd. vs Behari Lal Kohli, ; ; Duli Chand (dead) by Lrs. & Ors.
vs Jagmender Dass, ; and Tara Chand and Ant.
vs Ram Prasad, , referred to.
