The appellant Trust prepared a development scheme under the provisions of the Punjab Town Improvement Trust Act, 1922 covering certain lands including that of the respond ents.
Notice inviting objections was published in a dally Newspaper on 9th, 16th and 23rd April, 1976.
It was also published in the Punjab Government Gazette on the 7th, 14th and 21st May, 1976.
The last date for filing objections was 5th May, 1976.
Notices were also served on each person whose land was to be acquired in accordance with Section 36 of the Act.
After completion of the acquisition formalities, noti fication under section 42 of the Act was published on 26th March, 1979.
Respondent No. 2 and others challenged the scheme noti fied under the Act by way of Writ Petitions on the ground that they could not file objections by 5th May, 1976 since the notification was published in the Gazette only thereaf ter.
The High Court allowed the Writ Petitions and quashed the notification sanctioning the scheme.
However, it ob served that the appellant may publish the scheme again either amended or unamended under section 36 of the Act and proceed further in accordance with law.
Against the said order, Letters Patent Appeals were flied, which were dis missed by the Division Bench.
Appellant has preferred these appeals by special leave.
On behalf of the appellant, it was mainly contended that infirmity, if any, stemming form the non consideration of the objections and the sanction of the scheme by the Govern ment in ignorance of the fact stood cured by the provisions of section 42(2) of the Act.
It was also contended that since Respondent No. 2 and others had flied objections in response to individual notices, they are debarred from raising objec tions against the proposed improvement scheme.
228 On behalf of Respondents if was inter alia contended that due to non publication of the scheme in the Government Gazette before the expiry of the period of filing objections against the proposed scheme, the valuable right of the respondents to file objections against the scheme has been done away with, contrary to the mandatory provision con tained in section 36 of the Act.
Allowing the appeals, this Court, HELD: 1.
It is incomprehensible to say that non observ ance of provisions of Section 36 of the Punjab Town Improve ment Trust Act, 1922 by not publishing the notification in the Government Gazette before the expiry of the date for filing the objections renders the publication of the entire development scheme illegal and bad.
[234A] 2.
The legislative intent of provision of section 36 read with section 38 of the Act is to afford reasonable opportunity to the owners and occupiers affected by the proposed scheme to file objections not only against the scheme but also against the acquisition of their lands failing within the scheme and to achieve this purpose not only notifications in the Government gazette and newspaper are to be published but also individual notices on each of the person affected are to be served with details of the plots of land failing within the scheme and proposed to be acquired with a view to giving them adequate opportunity to file objections both against the scheme as well as against the proposed acquisition of their lands.
[233G H] 3.
In the instant case, the development scheme was prepared by the appellant Trust, and was notified in accord ance with the provisions of Section 36 of the Act.
In so far as the publication of the scheme in the newspaper 'Tribune ' in three consecutive weeks in April, 1976 inviting objec tions thereto till 5th May, 1976 is quite in accordance with the provisions of the said section.
The Gazette Notification published in three consecutive weeks was however, made after expiry of the period of filing objections against this scheme.
Admittedly individual notices under section 38 of the said Act were duly served on all the owners and occupi ers of the land falling within the said scheme and purported to be acquired and respondent No. 2 and others admittedly filed objections against the proposed acquisition of their land.
The said objections were duly considered after hearing the respondent No. 2 and others and notice was issued sanc tioning the scheme by the State Government.
In these circum stances, it does not lie in the mouth of respondent No. 2 and others to challenge the scheme on the mere plea that the Gazette Notification was not duly published.
[233C F] 229 Prof. Jodh Singh & Ors.
vs Jullundur Improvement Trust, Jullundur and Ors., , distinguished.
[This Court set aside the decision of the Single Judge as well as that of the Division Bench of the High Court.] [234D]
