The appellants instituted a representative suit in the court of the learned Subordinate Judge against the respond ents inter alia praying for framing a scheme for a public charitable trust.
On the same day, an application was made in the court praying for leave to institute the suit, as required under section 92 of the Civil Procedure Cede.
The Court granted leave without issuing any notice to the re spondents.
Thereupon, the respondents filed an interim application before the Court for revoking the leave granted inter alia on the ground that the respondents had not been given any opportunity to be heard before leave was granted.
The learned Subordinate Judge dismissed the said application on the ground that the grant of leave was an administrative act of the Court and no notice to the respondents was re quired before the grant of such leave.
The respondents preferred a Civil Revision Petition in the High Court which was allowed.
The learned Single Judge took the view that as the leave had been granted without any notice to the respondents, it was void and liable to be set aside.
Before this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellants that if tile court were required to give an opportunity to the defendants to be heard before granting leave under section 92, the grant of leave would entail a great deal of delay and might defeat the ends of justice where some urgent relief was required.
It was also urged that at the time when the court considered whether to grant leave, it was only the averments in the plaint which had to be examined and hence, the presence of the defendant was not necessary.
It was further submitted that if a defendant had a grievance against the grant of leave, he could always make an application to revoke the same and no prejudice would be caused to the defendant by the grant of leave.
267 On behalf of the respondents it was submitted that the court could not decide whether leave should be granted or not without giving an opportunity to the defendants who could point out the reasons why leave should not be granted.
Allowing the appeals and directing the Trial Court to dispose of the application for revocation of leave on merits and in accordance with law, this Court, HELD: (1) A plain reading of section 92 of the Civil Procedure Code indicates that leaves of the court is a pre condition or a condition precedent for the institution of a suit against a public trust for the reliefs set out in the said section, unless all the beneficiaries join in institut ing the suit; if such a suit is instituted without leave it would not be maintainable at all.
[275B C] (2) Having in mind the objectives underlying section 92 and the language thereof, it appears that, as a rule of caution, the court should normally, unless it is impractica ble or inconvenient to do so, give a notice to the proposed defendants before granting leave under section 92 to insti tute a suit.
The desirability of such notice being given to the defendants, however, cannot be regarded as a statutory requirement to be complied with before leave under section 92 can be granted as that would lead to unnecessary delay, and in a given case, could cause considerable loss to the public trust.
[275C E] (3) If a suit is instituted on the basis of such leave granted without notice to the defendants, the suit would not thereby be rendered bad in law or non maintainable.
The grant of leave cannot be regarded as defeating or even seriously prejudicing any right of the proposed defendants because it is always open to them to file an application for revocation of the leave which can be considered on merits and according to law.
[275G] T.N. Shanmugam and Others vs The Periyar Self Respect Propaganda Institution and Others, [1984] II MLJ 440; ; Swami Parmatmanand Saraswati & Anr.
vs Ramji Tripathi & Anr., ; , 795; Charan Singh & Anr.
vs Darshan Singh and Ors.
, ; ; Mahant Pragdasji Guru Bhagwandasji vs Patel Ishwarlal Bhai Narsibhai and Others, ; ; Prithipal Singh vs Magh Singh and Others, AIR 1982 Punjab & Haryana 137; Lachhman Dass Udasi (deceased by L. RS.) and Others vs Ranjit Singh and Others.
AIR 1987 Punjab and Haryana 108; I. V. Mathew vs K.V. 268 Thomas.
AIR 1983 Kerala 5; Mayer Simon Perur vs Advocate General of Kerala, ; Ambrish Kumar Singh vs Raja Abhushan Bran Bramhshan and Others, AIR 1989 All 194 and Gurdwara Prabandhak Committee, Delhi Cantonment and Others vs Amarjit Singh Sabharwal and Others, , referred to.
(4) Although clause (ffa) of section 104(1) of the Code of Civil Procedure provides that an appeal shall lie against the refusal of grant of leave, that cannot lead to the conclusion that it is obligatory on the part of the court to give notice to the proposed defendants before granting leave because an appeal lies only against the refusal and not the grant of leave.
[275H; 276A]
