The age of superannuation for the employees of the private transport company in which the appellant was ini tially employed was 60 years.
When the said company was taken over by the State on August 31, 1955, the notification specifically provided that the existing staff would not be adversely affected with regard to terms and conditions of service.
Again, when the services 01 the staff of the taken over company were transferred to the respondent Corpo ration established under section 3 of the Road Transport Corpora tion Act, 1950, the memorandum dated May 4, 1962 recited the same assurance.
A resolution passed by the Board of Direc tors of the Corporation on the same day also reiterated the said assurance.
Subsequently, when the State Government issued directions on October 29, 1963 to the Corporation under section 34 of the Act the said assurance was embodied therein too.
However, Regulation 59 of the M.P. State Road Transport Corporation Employees Service Regulations, 1964 framed by the Corporation under section 45(2)(c) of the Act provided that the employees of the Corporation were liable to compulsory retirement on the date of their completion of 58 years of age unless specifically permitted to continue.
When the appellant was sought to be retired from service in terms of Regulation 59 of the said Regulations on attain ing the age of 58 years with effect from June 30, 1984 by a notice dated May 25, 1983, he challenged it by a petition under Article 226/227 of the Constitution.
It was dismissed by the High Court on the view that on August 31, 1955 when the appellant became State Government employee his age of superannuation came to be governed by the statutory rules under Article 309 of the Constitution and the age of retire ment of the State servants under the said rules being 58 years the appellant was rightly retired.
329 Allowing the appeal, the Court, HELD: 1.
The appellant was entitled to continue in service upto the age of 60 years.
2.1 When the State Government takes over a private company and gives an assurance that conditions of service of the existing staff would not he adversely affected, it is but fair that the State Government should honour the same.
2.2 In the instant case, the appellant was in service of the company from 1947 to August 30, 1955 in which the age of superannuation of the employees was 60 years.
The company was taken over by the State Government with effect from August 31, 1955 by a notification of the same date which specifically stated that the existing staff of the company would not he adversely affected with regard to their condi tions of service.
The State Service Rules which fixed the age of superannuation at 58 years could not thus he made applicable to the appellant and other employees of the taken over company.
Furthermore, the said assurance was also incorporated in the directions issued by the State Government to the Corporation under section 34 of the Act.
The Corporation could not frame regulations contrary to the said directions and the age of superannuation which the appellant was enjoying under the State Government could not he altered to his disadvantage by the Corporation.
Regulation 59 framed by the Corporation was, therefore, not applicable to the appellant.
The General Manager, Mysore State Road Transport Corpo ration vs Devraj Ors and Anr., , referred to.
Since the appellant had already attained the age of 60 years, he was only entitled to two years emoluments.
The respondents are directed to pay the same to him within three months.
[334B]
