K. bequeathed his properties describing them in five Schedules, A, B, C, D and E.
In respect of the 'E ' schedule properties, he created an endowment stating that after his death it should be managed for construction of his own tomb or samadhi and for performing poojas and ceremonies thereat.
Two of the legatees under the will filed a suit against the third legatee, the manager of the trust, for partition and possession of the E schedule properties as well as for rendition of accounts pertaining to the income from the said properties contending: (i) that under Hindu Law the testator could not have created an endowment of properties for con struction of his own tomb or samadhi for performing poojas and ceremonies thereat; (ii) since the testator had be queathed his properties for "Samadhi Kainkaryam", the Trust was invalid; and that the said properties should be shared by the plaintiffs and the defendant under the residuary clause of the will as if they remained undisposed of by the testator.
The defendant resisted the suit contending that Matam and the Samadhi were constructed for different purposes and it is only at the Matam that the ceremonies and Guru Pooja were performed with feeding the poor and distribution of saffron clothes; and that these acts were distinctly and substantially religious and charitable purposes.
The subordinate judge accepted the plaintiff 's case declaring that the dedication of the 'E ' schedule properties was invalid and accordingly he decreed the suit.
236 On appeal the District Judge dismissed the suit with a direction to the defendant for rendition of accounts of the surplus income from the properties on the ground that dedi cation of properties by the testator was for charitable or religious in nature.
On second appeal a single Judge of the High Court dismissed the suit for partition but affirmed the decree for accounting the surplus income from the properties referable to the Matam and charities by holding (i) that the trust in respect of the properties for construction of samadhi was not valid as it was not recognised under the Hindu Law; (II) but the endowment and directions as to application of the property for construction of Matam and performance of cere monies and pooja were valid since they were religious and charitable in nature.
On further appeal by Letters Patent the Division Bench of the High Court, relying upon the decision of the Privy Council in N. Subramania Pillai vs A. Draviyasundaram Pil lai, AIR 1950 PC 37, held that the entire endowment was invalid under Hindu Law.
Hence this appeal.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
The perpetual dedication of property for construction of a samadhi or a tomb over the mortal remains of an ordinary person and the making of provisions for its maintenance and for performing ceremonies in connection thereto is not recognised as charitable or religions purpose among the Hindus.
But the Samadhi of a Saint stands on a different footing.
Therefore, the provision made by the testator for construction of a Samadhi over his burial place and for its maintenance cannot be regarded as valid.
[242A B Kunhamutty vs T. Ahmad Musaliar & Ors., I.L.R. ; A. Draviyasundaram Pillai vs N. Subramania Pillai, I.L.R. and Veluswami Goundan vs Dandapani, , approved.
Saraswati Ammal vs Rajagopal Ammal, ; and Nagu Reddiar & Ors.
vs Banu Reddiar & Ors., ; , referred to.
It is one of the cardinal principles of construc tion of Wills that wherever it is possible, effect should he given to every bequest of the testator unless it is opposed to law, custom or practice.
If the testator has set apart the property intended for endowment and disclosed his 237 charitable intent in any one of his directions, such direc tion may be extricated leaving aside the directions which are repugnant to the recognised notions of Hindu religion or Hindu Law.
Attempt should be made to give effect to the provisions made for recognised charitable purposes even though the entire scheme of the testator cannot be saved.
[242G H] 2.1 In the instant case the scheduled properties have been endowed for construction of a Samadhi and Matam, and for performing religious rites and charitable acts.
The Samadhi and Matam are constructed in the same survey number but are independent of each other, separated by a distance.
The other provisions in the will relating to performance of annual ceremonies conducting Guru Pooja, feeding the poor and distribution of saffron coloured clothes to medicants are independent and have no connection with the Samadhi.
Consequently, the entire dedication of the Scheduled proper ties will not fail.
[243A B] N. Subramania Pillai vs A. Draviyasundram Pillai, A.I.R. , held inapplicable.
In construing the validity of an endowment created under a Will, the Court cannot be guided merely by the acts of the Manager or the manner in which the executor of the Will has understood the directions of the testator.
The Court is required to examine the dominant intention of the testator and that could be ascertained only by the terms of the Will.
3.1 A trust cannot be rendered invalid on the ground that the directions of the testator are in general terms and that there is no particular mention in the will as to whom Guru Pooja is required to be performed since no particular deity is named in the Will.
It is for the Court to ascertain the presumed intention of the testator and given effect to it.
Therefore where no deity is named in the deed of endow ment, the Court should ascertain the sect to which the donor belonged, the tenets which he held, the doctrines to which he was attached and the deity to which he was devoted and by such means the presumed intention of the testator as to the application of the property should be ascertained.
These are the safe guides.
[244E & F] Veluswami Goundan vs Dandapani, [1946] 1 MLJ 354 AIR 1946 Mad. 485, referred to. 3.2 In the instant case there is no indication in the Will that Guru Pooja should be performed to the testator.
On the other hand the terms 238 in the Will show that the testator was a great devotee of Lord Subramaniaswami.
The evidence also indicates that Guru Pooja is being performed to Lord Subramanya followed by poor feeding and distribution of saffron coloured clothes.
These terms of the will clearly specify the religious or charita ble purposes.
Therefore the endowment with regard to these purposes is upheld.
[244E & G H] 3.3 Annual Shradha or anniversary is a religious rite.
The permanent dedication of properties for performance of annual ceremonies of the testator is equally valid.
[245A] 4.
The Division Bench of the High Court was therefore in error in invalidating the entire endowment.
Accordingly, the judgment of the Division Bench is reversed and the judgment and decree of the Single Judge are restored.
[245B C] 5.
In Hindu system there is no line of demarcation between religion and charity.
On the other hand, charity is regarded as a part of religion.
But what are purely reli gious purposes and what religious purposes will be charita ble must be entirely decided according to Hindu Law and Hindu notions.
[241G H] Hindu Law of Religious & Charitable Trusts, by B.K. Mukherjea, 5th Edn.
p. 11; Mayne 's Hindu Law, 11th Edn.
p. 912, referred to.
