The appellant, a company resident in British India, had a cotton mill.
The cloth manufactured in the mill was sold in British India as well as native States.
For the assess ment years 194546, 194647 and 1947 48, the company was assessed under Section 14(2)(c) of the Income Tax Act, 1922, in respect of certain sums remitted to British India from native States, in addition to the assessment under Section 42(3), deeming 1/3rd of the profit from the sales effected in native States, as having accrued from the manufacturing part of business in British India.
The assessee 's contention that 1/3rd of income having been assessed under Section 42(3), as income deemed to have accrued in British India, no further assessment should be made under Section 14(2)(c) was rejected by the Income Tax Officer, the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal.
The Tribunal also rejected the assessee 's additional contention that if the remittances made to British India in any year exceeded the amount taxed under Section 42(3), then it was only so much of the excess which could be taxed under Section 14(2)(c).
However, it reduced the additions made by the Income Tax Officer and affirmed by the appellate authority, by 1/3rd of such remit tances.
On a reference made under Section 66(1), the High Court confirmed the Tribunal 's decision.
In the appeal before this Court, on behalf of the appel lantassessee R was contended that where there was a mixed fund, as in the instant case, consisting partly of taxed and partly of untaxed monies, any remittance made should he deemed to have been paid out of that 294 part of the money which had suffered tax and that it was the right of the tax payer to attribute the payment to the taxed money so as to obtain the benefit allowed by the law.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court, HELD: 1.1 If there were two funds at the disposal of the assessee one upon which tax had been already levied and another which was liable to be brought to tax a presump tion, in the absence of evidence to the contrary might arise that the remittance made by the assessee in the course of its business was made out of the fund that was already taxed and not out of the fund that remained to be taxed.
[297F] Meyyappa Chettiar vs The Commissioner of Income Tax, , 45, referred to. 1.2 The tax payer is given the right of attribution in the way most favourable to himself.
In the absence of evi dence to the contrary, it is presumed that payments are made out of income.
This abstract principle of attribution is applicable in certain circumstances.
Whether it is applica ble in a particular case depends upon the facts of that case and the provisions of the statute.
It can be adopted only to the extent that it is consistent with the law and facts.
[298E F] Paton (As Penton 's Trustee) vs Commissioners of Inland Revenue, 21 Tax Cases 626 and The Cape Brandy Syndicate vs The Commissioners of Inland Revenue, 12 Tax Cases 359, 366, referred to.
In the instant case, on the facts found the assessee did not have two funds, but only one fund composed of taxed and non taxed amounts.
As one third of this amount had already been taxed under section 42(3) of the Act, 1/3rd of the remittances to British India in a particular year was held to be exempted from levy.
The Tribunal having excluded 1/3rd of the remittances to British India from taxation during a particular year, the High Court was justified in refusing to grant any further relief to the assessee.
[297G; 299B]
