The appellant assessee carried on the business of mining gypsum.
The predecessor in interest of the assessee acquired a lease from the Maharaja of one of the erstwhile princely State on September 29, 1948 for mining of gypsum for a period of 20 years over an area of 4.27 square miles in the State.
The lease was liable to be renewed after the expiry of 20 years.
By a deed of assignment dated December 11, 1948 the rights under the lease were assigned to the assessee company, in which the State Government owned 45% shares.
The assessee entered into an agreement with a Government of India Public Undertaking for the supply of gypsum of minimum of 83.5% quality.
Under the lease, the assessee was conferred the liberties and powers to enter upon the entire leased land and to search for win, work, get, raise, convert and carry away the gypsum for its own benefits in the most economic convenient and beneficial manner and to treat the same by calcination and other processes.
The lease agreement consisted of several parts and each part contained several clauses.
Clause 3 of part Iii prescribed restrictions on mining operation within 100 yards from any railway, reser voir, canal or other public works.
This clause had been incorporated in the lease to protect the railway track and railway station which was situated within the area demised to the lessee.
The assessee exclusively carried on the mining of gypsum in the entire area demised to it.
The Railway Authorities extended the railway area by laying down fresh track, pro viding for railway siding and further constructed quarters in the leased area without the permission of the assessee.
The assessee company filed a civil suit for ejecting the railways from the encroached area but it failed in the suit.
314 As the assessee company on research and survey found that under the railway area a high quality of gypsum was available, which was required as raw material by the Public Sector Company, all the parties (Public Sector Company, the Railway Board and the assessee company) negotiated the matter, the Railway Board agreeing to shift the railway station, track and yards to an alternative area offered by the assessee, the parties equally bearing the cost of the shifting.
Under the aforesaid agreement, the assessee company paid a sum of Rs.3 lakhs as its share towards the cost of shift ing of the Railway Station and other constructions, and claimed deduction of the said sum for the assessment year 1964 65.
The Income Tax Officer rejected the assessee 's claim on the ground that it was a capital expenditure.
The order was confirmed on appeal by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner.
On appeal by the assessee, the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal held that the payment of Rs.3 lakhs by the assessee company was not a capital expenditure, but a revenue expend iture.
The Tribunal referred the question to the High Court under section 256 of the Income Tax Act, 1961, on an appli cation by the revenue, which held that since on payment of Rs.3 lakhs to the Railways the assessee acquired a new asset which was attributable to capital of enduring nature, the sum of Rs.3 lakhs was a capital expenditure and it could not be a revenue expenditure.
In the appeal to this Court on the question whether the payment of Rs.3 lakhs to the Northern Railway was a revenue expenditure and was a deduction allowable under the Income Tax Act, 1961.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1(a) Where the assessee has an existing right to carry on a business, any expenditure made by it during the course of business for the purpose of removal of any re striction or obstruction or disability would be on revenue account, provided the expenditure does not acquire any capital asset.
[326A] (b) Payments made for removal of restriction, obstruc tion or disability may result in acquiring benefits to the business, but that by itself would not acquire any capital asset.
[326B] Gotan Lime Syndicate vs C.I.T., Rajasthan & Delhi, ; M.A. Jabbar vs C.I.T., Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad, [1968] 315 2 SCR 413 and Commissioner of Inland Revenue vs Carron Company, [1966 69] 45 Tax Cases 18, referred.
Empire Jute Company vs C. I. T., ; , affirmed.
In the instant case, the assessee have been granted mining lease in respect of 4.27 square miles under which he had right to sink, dig, drive, quarry and extract mineral i.e. the gypsum and in that process he had right to dig the surface of the entire area leased out to him.
The payment of Rs.3 lakhs was not made by the assessee for the grant of permission to carry on mining operations within the railway area, instead the payment was made towards the cost of removing the construction which obstructed the mining opera tions.
On the payment made to the Railway Authorities the assessee did not acquire any fresh right to any mineral nor he acquired any capital asset instead, the payment was made by it for shifting the Railway Station and track which operated as hindrance and obstruction to the business of mining in a profitable manner.
[326C E] 2.
There may be circumstances where expenditure, even if incurred for obtaining advantage of enduring benefit would not amount to acquisition of asset.
The facts of each case have to be borne in mind in considering the question having regard to the nature of business, its requirement and the nature of the advantage in commercial sense.
[326F G] 3(a) The test for considering the expenditure for the purposes of bringing into existence an asset or an advantage for the enduring benefit of a trade is not always true and conclusive.
[327B] 3(b) In considering the cases of mining business the nature of the lease the purpose for which expenditure is made, its relation to the carrying on of the business in a profitable manner should be considered.
[326H] In the instant case, existence of Railway Station, yard and buildings on the surface of the demised land operated as an obstruction to the assessee 's business of mining.
The Railway Authorities agreed to shift the Railway establish ment to facilitate the assessee to carry on his business in a profitable manner and for that purpose the assessee paid a sum of Rs.3 lakhs.
The payment made by the assessee was for removal of disability and obstacle and it did not bring into existence any advantage of an enduring nature.
There was therefore.
no acquisition of any capital asset.
[326H; 327A] 316 British Insulated and Helsby.
Cables Ltd. vs Atherton, , explained.
Assam Bengal Cement Co. Ltd. vs The Commissioner of Income Tax, West Bengal, , referred to.
R.B. Seth Moolchand Suganchand vs Commissioner of Income Tax, New Delhi, , distinguished.
The Tribunal rightly allowed the expenditure on revenue account.
The High Court failed to appreciate the true nature of the expenditure.
It committed an error in interfering with the findings recorded by the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal.
[327B C]
