The appellant company, a member of Cooperative Society, respondent No. 2, was having its office premises in a build ing owned by respondent No. 2.
It entered into an agreement to sell the said premises to respondent No. 1, a non member subject to the approval of the Cooperative Society.
The Cooperative Society declined to grant permission for trans fer of the premises.
Respondent No. 1 filed a dispute against the appellant and respondent No. 2 Cooperative Society in the Cooperative Court under section 91 of the Maharashtra Cooperative Societies Act, 1960 praying for a decree of specific performance of the contract and a direc tion to the Cooperative Society to approve the said agree ment.
The Cooperative Court dismissed the dispute for want of jurisdiction.
On appeal by respondent No. 1, the Maharashtra Cooperative Appellate Court set aside the order of the Cooperative Court.
Against the order of the Cooperative Appellate Court, the appellant filed a writ petition in the High Court which was dismissed by holding that the dispute was governed by Section 91 of the Act.
In the appeal to this Court against the Judgment of the High Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellant that the dispute between the parties was not governed by Section 91 since it was neither a dispute "touching the business of the society" nor was it a dispute between a person claiming through a member against the society.
467 Allowing the appeal and setting aside the judgment of the High Court, this Court, HELD: 1.
Before a dispute can be referred to a Coopera tive Court under the provision of section 91(1) of the said Act it is not only essential that the dispute should be of a kind described in sub section (1) of section 91 but it is also essential that the parties to the said dispute must belong to any of the categories specified in clauses (a) to (e) of subsection (1) of the said section.
[473B] 2.
In the instant case the main claim of Respondent No. 1 a nonmember, was for a decree for specific performance of the agreement.
The prayer for an order that respondent No. 2 Society should be directed to give their approval to the said agreement was merely an ancillary prayer made with a view to complete the relief of specific performance.
The main claim to have the agreement specifically performed cannot be said to be a claim made by a person (non member) against the Society.
The claim against the society cannot be said to be made through a member, the appellant, because it is only when a decree for performance of the said agreement is passed against the appellant, that it could be contended that the other relief namely, for an order directing re spondent No. 2 to approve the said agreement is claimed against the society through a member.
Consequently, the dispute cannot be said to fall within the scope of section 91(1)(b) of the Act.
Therefore, the High Court committed an error in coming to the conclusion that both the parties to the dispute belonged to the categories covered under section 91(1)(b) of the Act.
[473E H; 474A] Deccan Merchants Cooperative Bank Ltd. vs M/s Dalichand Jugraj Jain and Ors., [1969] 1 S.C.R. 887; M/s Leong and Anr.
vs Smt.
Jinabhai G. Gulrajami and Ors., A.I.R. 1981 Bom.
244 and Sanwarmal Kejriwal vs Vishwa Cooperative Hous ing Society Ltd. and Ors., [1990] 2 SCC 288, distinguished.
O.N. Bhatnagar vs Smt.
Rukibai Narsindas & Ors., ; , referred to.
