The appellants are the tenants and the respondents are the landholders in respect of the tenanted agricultural lands of the hitherto inam estates.
After the coming into force of the Andhra Pradesh (Andhra Area) Estates (Abolition and Conversion into Ryotwari) Act, 1948.
the inam estates were abolished, the land stood vested in the Government free of all encumbrances, and the pre existing rights, title and interest of erstwhile landholders ceased except to claim ryotwari patta.
The respondents landholders claimed that the lands, in question, were either under their personal cultivation or they intended to resume those for private cultivation, and as such those were their private lands and they were enti tled to ryotwari pattas.
The appellants tenants on the contrary claimed that those lands were neither under the personal cultivation of the landholders nor the landlords intended to resume those for personal cultivation, but were in possession of the tenants who were entitled to ryotwari pattas after the abolition of the estates.
The Settlement Officer, after making inquiry under section 15 of the Estates Abolition Act, held that the landholders failed to establish that they were personally cultivating the lands or that they intended to resume the lands for personal cultivation, and as such rejected their claims.
The landholders ' appeals to the Estates Abolition Tribu nal were allowed.
The Tribunal held that the landholders were entitled to the grant of ryotwari pattas as the lands were private lands within the meaning of section 3 (10)(b)(i) of the Andhra Pradesh (Andhra Area) Estates Land Act, 1908 and that the tenants were not entitled to ryotwari pattas in respect of the same.
394 The appellants tenants moved writ petitions before the High Court.
The learned Single Judge observed that it was common ground before the Subordinate Tribunal, as well as before him, that the nature of the lands at the inception, whether ryoti or private, was not known; that the burden of establishing that the lands were private lands was on the landholders; and that it was also common ground before him that apart from the fact that there were occasional changes of tenants, and the lands were sometimes leased under short term leases, there were no other circumstances indi cating that the landholders intended to resume cultivation of the lands.
The learned Single Judge held that after the pronouncement of this Court in Chidambaram Chettiar vs Santhanaramaswamy Odayar, the decision of the Full Bench of the Madras High Court in Periannan vs Amman Kovil, AIR 1952 Mad. 323 (F.B.) could no longer be considered good law, and further that the decision in Jag deesam Pillai vs Kuppammal, ILR and in Perish Priest of Narayar vs Thingaraja Swami Devasthanam, App.
176 178 and 493 of 1946, once more held the field.
It was also observed that since in all the cases the only mode of proof attempted by the landholders was the grant of short term leases and change of tenants and rent, it must be held that the lands were not established to be private lands and that no attempt was made to prove personal cultivation or any intention to resume personal cultivation.
The Division Bench, in writ appeals filed by the land holders, held that, in the first place, the observations of this Court in Chidambaram 's case were in accord with the rule in Periannan 's case, and secondly, even if some of the dicta in the judgment of this Court in Chidambaram suggested a contrary principle, the effect of the entire observations did not support the contention that Periannan 's case had been impliedly overruled by this Court.
Before this Court, it was inter alia contended on behalf of the appellants tenants (i) that the learned Single Judge having found as fact that the landholders had failed to establish that the lands were their private lands as these were neither under their personal cultivation nor they were intended to be resumed for personal cultivation, and applying the rule in Chidambaram 's case, the learned Single Judge having held that the lands were not private lands, the Division Bench erred in holding to the contrary; (ii) that the learned Single Judge correctly held that Perriannan 's case was no longer good law as in Chidambaram Chettiar vs Santhanaramaswamy Odayar, it was held that the definition of private land in section 3(10) of the Estate Land Act of 1908 read as a whole indicated clearly that the ordinary test for private land was the 395 test of retention by the landholder for his own personal use and cultivation by him or under his personal supervision, though they might be let on short leases; (iii) that it was not the intention or the scheme of the Act to treat as private those lands with reference to which the only pecul iarity was the fact that the landholder owned both the varams in the land and had been letting them out on short leases; and (iv) that the Division Bench erred in holding that Periannan 's tests were still applicable.
On the other hand, it was contended that the correct tests for determining what was private land had been laid down in Periannan 's case, which were not different from those of Chidambaram 's case, and the Division Bench correct ly applied those tests to find that the lands were private lands of the landholders.
Allowing the appeals, setting aside the judgment of the Division Bench, and restoring that of the learned Single Judge, this Court, HELD: (1) To find out whether a village was designated as inam village or not, prima facie the revenue accounts of the Government which were there at the time of the Inam Abolition Act came into force had to be looked into.
If it was so shown, no further proof was necessary.
Only when the entries in the revenue accounts were ambiguous, and it was not possible to come to a definite conclusion, it might be necessary to consider other relevant evidence which was admissible under the Evidence Act.
[406H; 407A B] (2) An interpretation of the words "private land" and "ryoti land" had to be made in consonance with the legisla tive purpose, provisions and scheme of the enactment.
Inter pretare at Concordare leges legibus, est optimus interpre tundi modus.
To interpret and in such a way as to harmonize laws with laws in the best mode of interpretation.
[410E] (3) The Estate Abolition Act accepted the definitions of occupancy right and ryoti as in the Estates Land Act, 1908.
The above provisions conferred permanent, heritable and transferable right of occupancy on the Tenant.
This right stemmed from the will of the legislature and involved an element of social engineering through law star pro rationa voluntas populi: the will of the people stands in place of reason.
The right of the landholder to keep his private land to himself has therefore to be interpreted in its proper perspective.
Statuta pro publico late interpretaur.
Statute made for the public good ought to be liberally construed.
[425E F] 396 (4) The concept of past or present intention of the landholder to resume personal cultivation of land let out to a tenant and still in possession of the tenant has to be strictly construed against the landlord and liberally in favour of the tenant.
[425E] The learned Single Judge in the instant case rightly observed that the legislature did not use the word domain or home farm land without attaching to them a meaning, and it was reasonable to suppose that they would attach to those words the meaning which would be given to them in ordinary English, namely, to connote land appurtenant to the mansion of the lord of the manor kept by the lord for his personal use and cultivated under his personal supervision is dis tinct from land let to tenant to be farmed without any control from the lord of the manor other than such control as incident to the lease.
To that extent, the propositions of the learned Judges in Periannan 's case can no longer be held to be good law in view of this Court 's decisions in Chidambaram 's case and Venkataswami 's case, and the decision in Zamindar of Challapali vs Rajalapati/Jagadesan Pillai vs Kuppamal, and in Parish Priest of Karayar Perish vs Thiapa rajaswami Devasthanam mast be held to have been correctly decided.
[421C E] Zamindar of Chellapalli vs Rajalapato Somayya, 39 Mad. 341; Jagadeesam Pillai vs Kuppamal, ILR ; Parish Priest of Karayar Parish vs Thiagarajaswami Devastha nam, App.
176 178 & 493 of 1946; Chidambaram Chettiar vs Santhanaramaswamy Odayar, ; ; Yerlagadda Malikarjuna Prasad Nayudu vs Somayya, ILR PC; P. Venkataswami
D.S. Ramireddy, ; Suryanara yana vs Patanna, , referred to.
Periannan vs Amman Kovil, AIR 1952 Mad.
323 F.B. partly overruled.
(6) In the instant case the pattas and the muchilkas are not claimed to have shown anything to establish the lands to be private lands.
Only the facts of occasional change of tenants and rents have been shown.
[431B]
