Respondent No. 1 is a firm dealing in medicines and respondents 2 and 3 are its managing parnter and pharmacist.
In contravention of the provisions of Drugs (Price Control) Order 1979, para 21 read with para 18 they charged from a Nursing Assitant of the Medical College Hospital, Kottayam, Rs. 90 in excess of the maximum retail price fixed for the sale of 15 tablets of Largactil of 100 mg each and 60p in excess for 100 tablets of Hipnotex of 5mg each.
According to the prosecution this act of their 's being in contravention of the provisions of the Order, was punishable under Section 7 of the and accordingly prosecution was initiated against the respondents.
The trial court found the respondents guilty and convicted them and sentenced respondent No. 1 firm to a fine of Rs. 2.000 and respondents 2 and 3 to three months simple imprisonment.
On appeal, the High Court of Kerala acquitted them taking the view that none of the aforesaid two medicines, namely Largactil and Hipnotex were 'formulations ' as defined in Section 2(f) of the Drugs (Price Control) Order 1979 and as such the sale of these drugs at higher rates than the prescribed was not punishable under paras 21 read with para 18 of the order.
The appellants have thus filed this appeal after obtaining special leave.
The question for decision in the present case relates to the correctness of the construction made by the High Court of the provisions of the 'Order '.
Partly allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: A bulk drug is one which may be capable of use by itself or as an ingredient in any formulation.
[69G] Formulation is a medicine which may comprise even of one bulk 66 drug by itself or more than one bulk drug.
The definition of 'Formulation ' is very wide and includes even one bulk drug where that one bulk drug by itself is treated as a medicine.
[70B] The provisions of para 21 which in terms are meant to control sale prices of formulations specified in the Third Schedule as also the other provisions of the Order which in terms may be of limited application are specifically made applicable to all formulations as defined in the Order except only paragraphs 10 to 14 which have been expressly excluded.
It is by virtue of para 18 that the prohibition contained in para 21 has been made applicable to formulations not specified in the Third Schedule.
[70G H] The High Court misconstrued the provisions of the Drugs (Price Control) Order 1979.
The Court rejected that construction and held that the allegations in the present case, if proved, would amount to a contravention of para 21 read with para 18 of the 'Order ' which is punishable under Section 7 of the .
The Court however did not interfere with the acquittal of the respondents.
[72B C]
