The appellant company a licensee under the central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 and during the relevant period namely 1st September, 1961 to 26th September, 1963 carried on the business of manufacturing different types of glass wares which were excisable goods under the Act.
The appellant used to present A.R.I. forms accompanied with price lists of the goods and after paying excise duties calculated on the basis of the price lists used to remove the goods.
The office of the appellant was searched by the Excise Authorities on 26th September, 1963 and several documents, books and papers were seized, and as a consequence thereof it transpired that the appellants were maintaining two sets of bills.
The bills of one set were those on the basis of which the appellant used to pay excise duty before clearance of the goods and those of the other were such which were never issued to the dealers.
In these two sets of bills, the rate of discount was differently shown.
A notice dated 26th March, 1968 was served on the appellant by the Assistant Collector stating that it appeared that during the relevant period the appellant had not paid excise duty on the goods at the prices at which they were sold, but duty was paid at lower rates and requiring it to show cause as to why duty on the prices at which the good were actually sold, as found on scrutiny of sale vouchers/sale documents should not be recovered under Rule 10A of the Central Excise Rules, 1944.
In reply the appellant asserted that it was the provision of Rule 10 and not Rule 10A which was attracted to the facts and consequently the initiation of proceedings was barred by time.
This plea did not find favour with the Excise Authorities, and the appellant was required to pay the additional duty of Rs. 1.41 lakhs.
The aforesaid order was challenged by the appellant before the 44 High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution and a Single Judge accepted the contention of the appellant the Rule 10 and not Rule 10A of the Rules was applicable and on this view quashed the order dated 26th August, 1968 The respondents preferred and appeal to the Division Bench which has reversed the order of the Single Judge, on the finding that it was a case falling Rule 10A and dismissed the writ petition.
In the appeal to this Court it was contended that the single Judge was right in taking the view that the case fell within the purview of Rule 10 of the Rules and that the Division Bench committed an error in reversing the Judgment, while the Revenue contested the appeal urging that on the facts found by the division Bench, and indeed on the case set up by the appellant itself no exception could be taken to the finding of the Division Bench that it was Rule 10A and not Rule 10 which was attracted to the facts of the case.
Dismissing the Appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
The question as to whether Rule 10 or Rule 10A was applicable has to be determined in the background of the procedure which was followed.
The legal position is that Rule 10A does not apply where the case is covered by Rule 10 of the Rules.
[48E] N.B. Sanjana vs Elphinstone Mills, ; relied on.
Simply because Rule 9B of the Rules, was conceded not to have been taken recourse to by the respondents so that provisional assessment could be said to have come into existence in its statutory sense as contemplated by the said rule when duty was paid at the time of clearance of the goods, the conclusion was not inescapable, that a final assessment had came into being at that time.
[49A B] 3.
In view of the procedure adopted by the appellant it was apparently a case where duty was calculated on the basis of price lists supplied by the appellant to facilitate the clearance of the goods and the correct amount of duty payable was yet to be determined after subsequent verification, and appellant was under an obligation to pay, on the basis of the bond executed by them, the difference of the amount of the duty paid at the time of clearance of the goods and the amount found payable after subsequent varification.
[49B C] 4.
The Division Bench of the High Court has found that there was no assessment as is understood in the eye of law, but only a mechanical settlement or adjustment of duties on the basis of the sale prices filed by the appellant had been made and at best, it was a case of incomplete assessment which the Excise Authorities were entitle to complete under Rule 10A.[49D] Assistant Collector of Central Excise, Calcutta Division vs National Tobacco Co. of India Ltd., ; , referred to.
The instant case therefore falls within the purview of Rule 10A and not Rule 10 of the Rules.
