The suit land was taken under Government management as it was lying fallow for two consecutive years.
The Mamlatdar, appointed as a Manager thereof under Section 45, of the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1948, after assuming management, leased out the said land to the appellant for a period of 10 years by an agreement of lease dated 7.12.1951.
The period of lease expired on 6.12.1961.
However, the management of the land was terminated by Government by the Assistant Collector 's order dated 27.7.63 and possession thereof was ordered to be restored to the respondent landlord.
The appellant filed a Civil Suit against the respondent contending that he was paying rent to the Mamlatdar during the period 7.12.1961 to 27.7.1963 and thus continued to be a tenant in respect of the land.
The Civil Judge made a reference to the Mamlatdar, who held that the appellant continued to be tenant.
The respondent 's appeal to the Assistant Collector having failed, a revision application was moved before the Revenue Tribunal wherein the question arose whether the appellant 's tenancy was subsisting on 27.7.1963, the date of termination of the management.
The Tribunal held that the appellant could not continue as tenant on the termination of the management, since the land was taken under the Government management under Section 88(1) of the Act.
82 The High Court in the Application under Article 227 of the Constitution of India having upheld this finding of the Tribunal, the appellant filed Special Leave petition to this Court.
The appellant contended that having continued payment of rent to the Mamlatdar even after expiry of the lease till the termination of management, he continued to be a tenant which the landlord could not avoid on resumption of the land, while the respondent submitted that the appellant could by no means continue to be a tenant after the expiry of lease, and that no fresh lease was granted to him after the management was terminated.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
On the finding of the courts below that after the expiry of the lease, no fresh lease was granted by the Manager, the appellant 's claim to have continued as the tenant even after expiry of the lease on 6.12.1961 and till 27.7.1963, the date of termination, by paying rent for the period to the Mamlatdar would be of no avail, in the absence of fresh lease after expiry of the 10 years lease on 6.12.1961.
This would be so because the Act does not envisage the Government as a landholder but only as Manager.
While delivering back the land into the possession of the landholder, it could not be burdened with any tenancy created or resulting while under management.
Besides, there could be no privacy between the landlord and the erstwhile tenant under Government in the matter of tenancy.
Between the appellant and the respondent landlord, therefore, no question of the former continuing as tenant of the latter could arise after the land was reverted to the landholder.
[86B D] 2.
The appellant could not have been a deemed tenant either under Section 4 or 4B of the Act inasmuch as Section 88 of the Act grants exemption inter alia to lands held on lease from the Government.[86E]
