The wife of appellant 's brother was found aflame in the early hours of 11.6.1975 in the kitchen of her husband 's house.
She was taken to hospital and admitted to Burns ward where the doctor in charge (PW 5) examined her and while taking her case history enquired of the injured as to what happened, to which she replied, "my nanad (sister in law) burnt me".
She had suffered 90% of burns.
The nurse (PW 4) was instructed to give treatment.
Later another doctor (PW 2) attended on her.
When he asked her as to how she had received the burns, she told him that her husband 's sister had burnt her.
In reply to his further query, she named the appellant as her tormentor.
He made a note of this information by the victim on the police `yadi ' which was sent to him to ascertain if the victim was in a fit condition to make a dying declaration.
As her condition deteriorated, the victim was not in a position to make any statement to the police.
The investigation culminated in the appellant being charged under section 302, I.P.C. for causing the murder of her brother 's wife by pouring kerosene on her person and setting her aflame.
On trial, the Sessions Court held that the deceased had not the requisite mental condition so as to make an acceptable dying declaration, and that her husband was very much near the cot, and hence possibility of tutoring the deceased could not be ruled out.
Giving the benefit of doubt it acquitted the appellant.
89 In the State 's appeal against acquittal, a Division Bench of the High Court re appreciated the prosecution evidence and after closely examining the reasons given by the Sessions court, held them thoroughly untenable and not supported by the evidence on record.
It set aside the order of acquittal, convicted the accused of murder and sentenced her to imprisonment for life.
The appellant accused appealed to this Court challenging in aforesaid conviction and sentence on the ground that the High Court erred in law in holding the view taken by the trial court as less probable.
It was contended that the deceased having suffered 90% of burns and her general condition being poor, she was not in a fit mental state to make the dying declaration; that the dying declarations were not in question and answer form; and that the possibility of tutoring the deceased could not be ruled out.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
A dying declaration is admissible in evidence on the principle of necessity and can form the basis for conviction if it is found to be reliable.
While it is in the nature of an exception to the general rule forbidding hearsay evidence, it is admitted on the premiss that ordinarily a dying person will not falsely implicate an innocent person in the commission of a serious crime.
It is this premiss which is considered strong enough to set off the need that the maker of the statement should state so on oath and be cross examined by the person who is sought to be implicated.
[94H; 95A B] 2.1 Being an independent piece of evidence like any other piece of evidence Neither extra strong nor weak a dying declaration can be acted upon without corroboration if it is found to be otherwise true and reliable, and in order to form the sole basis for conviction without the need for independent corroboration it must be shown that the person making it had the opportunity of indentifying the person implicated and is thoroughly reliable and free from blemish.[95d; 95B] 2.2 If it is found that the maker of the statement was in a fit state of mind and had voluntarily made the statement on the basis of personal knowledge without being influenced by others and the court on strict scrutiny finds it to be reliable, there is no rule of law or even of prudence that such a reliable piece of evidence cannot be acted upon unless it is corroborated.
[95C] 3.1 In the instant case, since the incident occurred in the early hours of the day, there was possibility of a family member being involved; and as the incident took place in broad day light, there could be no doubt that the deceased had an opportunity to see her tormentor.
The deceased told the doctor (PW 5) that her `nanad ' had set her on fire.
Since the appellant was the only sister of her husband, there remained no doubt about the identity of the `nanad ' (husband 's sister or sister in law).
Doubt, if any, was removed by another doctor 's evidence (PW 2) to whom she disclosed the name of the appellant.
[95D, 94D, 95F G] 3.2 The mere fact that the deceased had suffered 90% burns and her general condition was poor, was no reason to discard the testimony of both the medical men when they said that she was in a fit state of mind and was able to make the dying declarations in question.
Both the doctors were conscious of her condition and would not have attached any importance to her statement if they had any doubt about her mental capacity.
Besides the oral evidence of the two medical men, there were contemporaneous documents showing that the deceased made the statements in question.
[96E; 95G; 94G] Suresh vs State of M.P., , relied on.
3.3 The doctors (PW 2 and PW 5) merely questioned the victim for the limited purpose of recording the case history.
Having regard to her condition, they could not have questioned her in detail.
In the circumstances, the fact of the statements being cryptic was understandable; and the failure on their part to record her statements in question and answer form could in no manner affect the probative value to be attached to their evidence.
[97A B; 96G] Bankey lal vs State of U.P., , relied on and Rabi Chandra Padhan & Ors.
vs State of Orissa, , held inapplicable.
Being conscious of the fact that while dealing with an acquittal appeal, the court should give due weight to the views of the trial court on the question of credibility of the prosecution evidence and should not lightly interfere with its appreciation, the High Court carefully scrutinised the evidence, particularly in regard to the two oral dying declarations, and rightly concluded that there was no possibility of tutoring nor was the deceased mentally unfit to make the said dying declarations.
[93C E] 91 Balak Ram & Anr.
vs State of U.P., ; and Lallubhai vs State of Gujrat, , referred to.
