The appellant was appointed an Sub Inspector, food & Supplies by respondent No. 2 on 13.4.1975 on ad hoc basis against service man quota; the post being purely temporary liable to be terminated without notice and without assigning any reasons or on arrival of a regular candidate.
The appellant continued in service on that post till November 17, 1980, when his services were terminated.
Prior to the termination of his services he was placed under suspension on April 15, 1980 in view of the criminal proceedings under Section 420, IPC pending against him and before the culmination of criminal proceedings, his services were terminated by order dated November 17, 1980, as aforesaid.
Criminal case against the appellant was decided on October 21, 1981 wherein he was acquitted of the charge.
The appellant on receiving the order of termination of his services filed Civil Suit 453 of 1981 in the court of Senior Sub Judge, narnaul praying for a declaration that the orders of suspension as also termination were illegal, wrong, arbitrary and without jurisdiction and that the appellant was entitled to reinstatement and regularisation of his service under the Government notification dated 1.1.1980 issued by the Chief Secretary to the Government of Haryana authorising regularisation of such ad hoc employees who held the Class III posts for a minimum period of two years.
According to the appellant his case was covered by the said notification and as such he was entitled to all the benefits of service.
The Senior Sub Judge held that as the appellant was acquitted of the offence, the authorities should have revoked the suspension order and have paid the pay for the period for which the appellant remained under suspension and thus allowed to the appellant all the benefits.
An appeal was taken by the respondents to the Addl.
District Judge who affirmed the order of the trial court holding that no enquiry was conducted before termination of the service of the appellant.
Against the order of the Addl.
District Judge, the respondents preferred an appeal 74 before the High Court and the High Court allowed the appeal holding that the appellant was not entitled to be regularised automatically unless he fulfilled all the conditions given in the notification.
It was also held that the case of the appellant was considered for regularisation by the Department but the same was not found suitable; the services of the appellant were terminated in accordance with the terms of his appointment.
The appellant has filed this appeal against that order in this court after obtaining special leave.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: The order of suspension made by the respondent No. 2 is admittedly on the sole ground that criminal proceeding was pending against the appellant.
The order of termination had been made illegally during the pendency of the order of suspension and also during the pendency of the criminal proceeding which ultimately ended with the acquittal of the appellant.
The settle position in law is that the appellant who was suspended on the ground of pendency of criminal proceeding against him, on being acquitted of the criminal charge is entitled to be reinstated in service.
His acquittal from the criminal charge does not debar the disciplinary authorities to initiate disciplinary proceedings and after giving an opportunity of hearing to the appellant pass an order of termination on the basis of the terms and conditions of the order of his appointment.
[78C E] As the appellant whose name was sent through Employment Exchange and who was appointed and has completed two years service on 31.12.1979, he is entitled to be considered for regularisation in the post of Sub Inspector, Food and Supplies.
[78E] Smt.
Rajinder Kaur vs State of Punjab and Anr.
, ; ; Anoop Jaiswal vs Government of India, ; ; Hardeep Singh vs State of Haryana and Ors.,[1987] 4 S.L.R. 576, referred to.
