The respondent was appointed on 18.2.1977 as an Assistant Auditor under the Local Funds Audit Examiner of State of U.P. on ad hoc temporary basis for the term fixed in the order of his appointment and his services were liable to be terminated at any time without assigning any reason.
After his initial appointment, his services were extended from time to time till 28.2.1981.
He was awarded an adverse entry in his character roll for the year 1977 78 both regarding his conduct as also his work.
The respondent alongwith one Rajendra Prasad Pandey, another Sub Auditor, were deputed to audit the accounts of Raja Raghbar Dayal Inter College, Sitapur in respect of the year 1979 80.
It is alleged that while auditing the account, they acted in excess of their authority in as much as they audited the 'Boys Fund Accounts ', issued audit note and also irregularly demanded and collected Rs. 2,000 as audit fee, and issued receipt under their signature.
On complaint a preliminary enquiry was held and the allegations were found to be correct.
After the preliminary inquiry report, the respondent was relieved from his duties from Sitapur and directed to join his duty at Allahabad.
Whereupon the respondent proceeded on leave and did not join his duty at Allahabad.
The respondent 's services were therefore terminated by order dated 23.9.1980 and by another order services of Pandey were also terminated.
Both of them filed writ petitions in the High Court contending that their termination orders were illegal having been passed in violation of Article 311 of the Constitution.
Whereas the writ petition filed by Pandey was dismissed, the one filed by the respondent was allowed.
The High Court held that since juniors to the respondent were retained in service while the respondent 's services were terminated, the order of termination was discriminatory in nature.
The High Court further held that the order of termination was founded on an adverse entry awarded to the respondent hence it was not in good faith; the punishment awarded to the respondent was not proportionate to the alleged offence.
Against the 30 said order, the State of U.P. filed a appeal after obtaining special leave.
The question involved for consideration is whether the order terminating the services of the respondent is vitiated in law? Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: Holding of preliminary inquiry does not affect the nature of the termination order.
[42C) In the instant case the respondent was a temporary Government Servant and there was adverse regarding his work which was reflected in the adverse remarks made for the year 1977 78.
The competent authority held a preliminary inquiry in regard to the allegations of improper conduct in carrying out unauthorised audit of Boys Fund of educational institution.
On result of the preliminary inquiry no charges were framed against the respondent, no officer was appointed for holding the departmental inquiry instead the competent authority chose to terminate the respondent 's services in exercise of its powers under the terms of contract a well as under the relevant rules applicable to a temporary Government servant.
[42A C] The principle 'last come first go ' is applicable to a case where on account of reduction of work or shrinkage of cadre, retrenchment takes place and the services of employees are terminated on account of retrenchment.
But this principle is not applicable to a case where the services of a temporary employee are terminated on the assessment of his work and suitability in accordance with term and conditions of his service.
On the admitted set of facts, the order of termination in the instant case, could not be rendered illegal or unjustified on the ground of juniors being retained in service.
The view taken by the High Court is not sustainable in law.
[33D H] Appeal allowed, High Court order set aside as it interfered with order of termination in a casual manner.
[42D] Parshotam Lal Dhingra vs Union of India.
[1958] S.C.R. 828; The State of Orissa & Anr.
vs Ram Narayan Das, ; ; R.C. Lacy vs The State of Bihar & Ors., C.A.No 590/62 decided on 23.10.1963; Champaklal Chimanlal Shah vs The Union of India, [1964] AIR S.C.449; A.G. Benjamin vs Union of India, C.A. No. 1341/66 decided on 13.12.1966; Shamsher Singh & Anr.
vs State of Punjab, [1975] 1 S.C.R. 814; State of Punjab & Anr.
vs Shri Sukh Raj Bahadur, [1968] 3 S.C.R. 31 234; R.K. Misra vs U.P. State Handloom Corporation, , referred to.
Nepal Singh vs State of U.P. & Ors., [1985] 1 S.C.C. 56; Ishwar Chand Jain vs High Court of Punjab & Haryana & Anr., ; distinguished.
