The appellant issued a notice calling upon the respondent who was a dealer in tobacco to show cause why duty should not be demanded under Rule 160 of the Central Excise Rules, 1944 on the tobacco removed from his warehouse and not accounted for, and further to show cause why penalty should not be imposed for infraction of the Rules.
The respondent sent a detailed reply, and after hearing him the appellant came to the conclusion that the respondent had evaded payment of duty.
Thereupon the appellant issued a demand notice for the duty payable and further imposed a penalty.
The respondent filed a writ petition in the High Court challenging the order of the appellant.
The learned Single Judge allowed the petition taking the view that the appellant 's action was time barred because under section 40(2) of the no suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings could be instituted for anything done or ordered to be done under the law after the expiration of six months from the accrual of the cause of action.
The Division Bench dismissed the appellant 's appeal.
Before this Court it was inter alia contended on behalf of the appellant that the expression `other legal proceeding ' is preceded by particular words of a certain genus, i.e., `suit ' and `prosecution ', indicating reference to proceedings taken in courts only, and, therefore, the wide words must be limited to things ejusdem generis and must take colour from the preceding words and receive a limited meaning to exclude proceedings of the type in question.
Allowing the appeal of the Revenue, this Court, HELD: (1) The rule of ejusdem generis is generally invoked where 127 the scope and ambit of the general words which follow certain specific words (which have some common characteristic and constitute a genus) is required to be determined.[131G] (2) The cardinal rule of interpretation is to allow the general words to take their natural wide meaning unless the language of the statute gives a different indication or such meaning is likely to lead to absurd results in which case their meaning can be restricted by the application of the rule of ejusdem generis and they may be required to fall in line with the specific things designated by the proceding words.
But unless there is a genus which can be comprehended from the preceding words, there can be question of invoking this rule.
Nor can this rule have any application where the general words precede specific words [132B C] (3) The wide expression `other legal proceeding ' must be read ejusdem generis with the preceding words `suit ' and `prosecution ' as they constitute a genus.
[133H] (4)`Suit ' or `prosecution ' are those judicial or legal proceedings which are lodged in a court of law and not before any executive authority, even if a statutory one.
[132E F] (5) The penalty and adjudication proceedings in the instant case did not fall within the expression `other legal proceeding ' employed in section 40(2) of the Act, as it stood prior to its amendment by Art.22 of the 1973, and therefore, the said proceedings were not subject to the limitation prescribed by the said sub section.
[ 133H; 134A] Public Prosecutor, Madras vs R. Raju & Anr.
; , ; Universal Cables Ltd. vs union of India, [1977] E.L.T. (J92); Amar Chandra vs Excise Collector, Tripura, ; ; C.C. Industries & Ors.
vs H.N. Ray & Anr., , referred to.
