The respondent in the appeal, a Mounted Constable in the Border Security Force, was charged for an offence under section 31(b) of the for extracting a sum of money from a person without proper authority.
A charge sheet was issued, evidence in support of the same was recorded, and thereafter a Summary Security Force Court as provided under the Act was constituted and the respondent was put on trial.
During the recording of evidence, the respondent was given an opportunity to cross examine prosecution witnesses, but he declined, pleaded guilty and prayed for a lenient view to be taken.
The Summary Security Force Court passed an order sentencing him to rigorous imprisonment for one year civil prison and also to be dismissed from service.
Aggrieved by the aforesaid order, the respondent preferred a petition under section 117(2) of the Act to the Director General, B.S.F., who after going through the petition and the records of the case, rejected the same as devoid of any merit.
The respondent thereupon filed a petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution before the High Court urging that there was violation of the principles of natural justice since he had not been heard before disposing of his petition.
The High Court allowed the writ petition, and directed fresh hearing of the petition of the respondent, after giving him an opportunity of being heard.
The Union of India appealed to this Court against the decision of the High Court contending that section 117(2) of the Act does not provide for 183 a personal hearing.
The appeal was contested by the respondent contending that as the ` does not expressly exclude a personal hearing and that an employee cannot be condemned without observing the principles of natural justice.
On the question: whether a personal hearing is required before disposing of a petition under s.117(2) of the against an order of the Summary Security Force Court, Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
The doctrine of principles of natural justice and audi alteram partem are part of Article 14 of the Construction.
Although principles of natural justice apply to administrative orders affecting the rights of citizen yet it is also clear that in cases of special enactments, like Army Act, all the principles of natural justice cannot be imported.
The same ratio applies to a petition under section 117(2) of the also.
[187A B; 191G] 1.2 Chapter XIII consisting of Rules 167 to 169 of the Border Security Force Rules deals with petitions filed under s.117 of the .
Even in them there is nothing to indicate that a hearing has to be given disposal of a petition.
[191G H] Maneka Gandhi vs Union of India, [1978] 2 SCR 621; Som Datt Datta vs Union of India & Ors., [1969] 2SCR 177; Union of India vs Jyoti Prakash Mitter,[1971] 1 SCC 396; Captain Harish Uppal vs Union of Inida and Others, ; ; Shri S.N. Mukherjee vs Union of India, JT 1990 (3) 630 and Union of India vs Col. J.N. Sinha and Anr.
,[1971], 1 SCR 791, relied on.
Lt. Col.
K.N.S. Sidhu vs The Union of India and Others, All India Service Law Journal 1977 page 721, referred to.
2.1 Under section 117(2) of the , the person aggrieved is only entitled to file a petition but the disposal of such a petition does not attract principles of natural justice.
[192A] 2.2 The authority disposing of the petition under section 117(2) is not a court, and every order passed administratively cannot be subjected to the rigours of principles of natural justice.
[192B] 3.
In the instant case, the respondent had been tried by observing 184 the due process of law, and the verdict of the Summary Security Force Court was confirmed and it was only a post confirmation petition that was filed under s.117(2) of the .
The order was passed by an authority and not by a court and every order passed administratively could not be subjected to the rigours of principles of natural justice.
[192A B]
