When cloth control was introduced in Rewa State, 25 cloth dealers of Budhar, including the thirteen appellants, formed themselves into an Association to collect the quota of cloth to be allotted to them and to sell it on profit.
The Association functioned through a President and a pioneer worker; they kept accounts and distributed profits.
After cloth had been decontrolled and the work of the Association had come to an end, the appellants filed a suit against the first respondent for rendition of accounts for a portion of the period that he had been President of the Association and for realisation of the amount found due with interest.
The suit was decreed by the trial Court but was, on appeal, dismissed by the judicial Commissioner.
In appeal before the Supreme Court, the first respondent raised, for the first time, a preliminary objection that the suit was not maintainable as the Association consisting of more than 20 persons was not registered as required by section 4(2) Of the Rewa State Companies Act, 1935, and that consequently the members of the Association had no remedy against each other in respect of its dealings and transactions.
The appellants objected to the raising of the new plea and contended that, nevertheless, the suit was maintainable Held, that the suit was not maintainable.
In view of section 4(2) of the Act the Association was illegal.
The reliefs claimed for rendition of accounts in enforcement of the illegal contract of partnership necessarily implied recognition by the Court that the Association existed of which accounts were to be taken.
The Court could not assist the plaintiffs in obtaining their share of the profits made by the illegal Association.
U.Sein Po vs U. Phyu, Rang.
540, not applicable.
Held further, that the new point ought to be allowed to be raised.
The question was a pure question of law and did not require the investigation of any facts.
The objection rested on the provisions of a public statute which no court could exclude from its consideration.
Surajmull Nargoremull vs Triton Insurance Company Ltd., (1924) L.R. 52 I.A. 126; Sri Sri Shiba Prasad Singh vs Maharaja Srish Chandra Nandi, (1949) L.R. 76 I.A. 244, followed.
The analogy of section 69(3)(a) of the , did not apply, an under that Act an unregistered firm was 97 770 not illegal.
Besides, the suit was not one for accounts of a dissolved firm but of an illegal Association which was in existence id at the relevant time.
