Respondent Landlady started an eviction proceeding under Section 13(1)(c) of the Bombay Rent Act against the petitioner tenant, running a shop, selling sweet meats and farsen on the tenanted premises, as he was convicted twice under the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act.
Accepting claim of the land lady the High Court ordered eviction.
Tenant contending that "convicted of using the premises" in Section 13(1)(c) be limited to offences involving the user of the premises that the provision does not cover non residential premises, filed the Special Leave Petition.
Dismissing the petition, this Court, HELD: 1.
Section 13(1)(c) covers both residential as well as non residential premises.
If clause (c) is not applicable to business premises, there is no other similar provision in the Bombay Rent Act relating to the business premises.
The consequence would be that the tenant in business premises could use the premises for committing any offence or he could commit nuisance and annoyance to the adjoining or neighbouring occupiers and yet claim that he is not liable to be evicted on that grounds.
Whereas, the tenant of residential premises would not be able to commit such offence without the penalty of eviction.
Such an interpretation would render the Section vulnerable to attack under Article 14 of the Constitution.
[155D G].
153 2.
The expression "convicted of using the premises:" cannot be given too liberal construction so as to cover every case of conviction of the tenant.[156B] 3.
Section 13(1)(c) was not intended to be a moral code of conduct for the tenant.
For each and every offence committed at the premises, the tenant cannot be exposed to the risk of eviction.
The crime may be forced upon the tenant at the premises by third parties.
There may be casual or incidental crimes.
There may be technical offences connected with the trade or licence to trade.
There may be crimes where use of the premises has nothing to do except being the scene of the offence.
All such cases cannot satisfy the requirements of Section 13(1)(c).
[157A B] 4.
The tenant must take advantage of his tenancy of the premises and of the opportunity they afford for permitting the crime.
Only such crimes could fall within the scope of Section 13(1)(c).
There need not be continuous for repeated user of the premises for committing such crimes.
[157B C] [In the instant case, the tenant used the premises for carrying out illegal sale of adulterated food along with his usual business in sweet meats and farsen.
He used the premises deliberately and taken advantage of his tenancy for committing the offences in the course of his trade.
He can be evicted under Section 13(1)(c).] [157C D] section Schneiders and Sons Ltd. vs Abrahams,
