The appellant wife and the respondent husband filed a petition under section 13 B of the for divorce by mutual consent in the District Court and their statements were recorded.
Subsequently, the appellant filed an application in the Court for dismissal of the petition stating that she was not willing to be a party to the petition and that her statement was obtained under threat and pressure of husband.
The District Judge dismissed the petition but on appeal the High Court reversed the order of the District Judge and granted a decree of divorce by holding that the consent to a petition for divorce by mutual consent cannot be unilaterally withdrawn and such a withdrawal would not take away the jurisdiction of the Court, if the consent was otherwise free; and since the wife 's consent was without any force, fraud or undue influence she was bound by the consent.
Hence this appeal by the wife.
Allowing the appeal and setting aside the decree of divorce, this Court, HELD: 1.
An analysis of Section 13 B makes it apparent that the filing of the petition under section 13 B(l) with mutual consent does not authorise the Court to make a decree for divorce.
The parties are required to make a joint motion under sub section (2) which should not be earlier than six months after the date of presentation of the petition 275 and not later than 18 months after the said date.
This motion enables the court to proceed with the case in order to satisfy itself about the genuineness of the averments in the petition and also to find out whether the consent was not obtained by force, fraud or undue influence.
The Court may make such inquiry as it thinks fit including the hearing or examination of the parties for the purpose of satisfying itself whether the averments in the petition are true.
If the Court is satisfied that the consent of the parties was not obtained by force, fraud or undue influence and they have mutually agreed that the marriage should be dissolved, it must pass a decree of divorce.
[280D, 279C D] 2.
The period of waiting from 6 to 18 months referred to in section 13 B(2) is intended to give time and opportunity to the parties to reflect on their move and seek advice from relations and friends.
In this transitional period one of the parties may have a second thought and change the mind not to proceed with the petition i.e. it may not be a party to the joint motion under sub section (2).
This sub section requires the court to hear the Parties which means both the parties, But the section does not provide that if there is a change of mind it should not be by one Party alone, but by both.
Therefore, if one of the parties at that stage withdraws its consent the Court cannot pass a decree of divorce by mutual consent.
If the Court is held to have the power to make a decree solely based on the initial petition it negates the whole idea of mutuality and consent for divorce.
Mutua consent to the divorce is a sine qua non for passing a decree for divorce under section 13 B. Mutual consent should continue till the divorce decree is Passed.
it is a positive requirement for the Court to Pass a decree of divorce.
[280D, 281A.B] K.I. Mohanan vs Jeejabai, A.I.R. 1988 Ker. 28; Harcharan Kaur vs Nachhattar Singh, A.I.R. 1988 P & H. 27 and Santosh Kumari vs Virendra Kumar, A.I.R. ; approved.
Jayashree Ramesh Londhe vs Ramesh Bhikaji Londhe, A.I.R. 1984 Bom.
302; Smt.
Chander Kanta vs Hans Kumar and Anr., A.I.R. 1989 De. 4 73; and Meena Dutta vs Anirudh Dutta, 1984 11 DMC 388 (MP); overruled.
Halsbury Laws of England, 4th Edn.
13 para 645; Rayden on Divorce, 12 Edn Vol 1 p. 291 and Beales vs Beales, ; referred to.
Section 13 B of the is in para materia with 276 Section 28 of the .
Sub Section (1) of section 13 B requires that the petition for divorce by mutual consent must be presented to the Court jointly by both the parties.
There are three other requirements in sub section (1).
Firstly, it is necessary that immediately preceding the presentation of the petition the parties must have been living separately for a period of one year or more.
The expression 'living separately ' connotes not living like husband and wife.
It has no reference to the place of living.
The parties may live under the same roof by force of circumstances, and yet they may not be living as husband and wife.
The parties may be living in different houses and yet they could live as husband and wife.
What seems to be necessary is that they have no desire to perform marital obligations and with that mental attitude they have been living separately for a period of one year immediately preceding the presentation of the petition.
The second requirement is that they 'have not been able to live together ' which indicates the concept of broken down marriage and it would not be possible to reconcile themselves.
The third requirement is that they have mutually agreed that the marriage should be dissolved.
[278E H, 279A B]
