The Ziarat Shareef of Hazrat Baba Ibrahim, a holy place of worship, in the Rakhbahu area of Jammu City was granted certain land to the Ziarat by the State Government vide two orders dated September 22, 1955 and November 29, 1958.
The Ziarat was being managed by the 1st appellant and his brothers, since the death of their father in 1963.
The Committee of Muslim Wakf, incorporated under the Jammu and Kashmir Muslim Wakf Act, which came into force in 1959, file a suit for restraining them from alienating, raising construction or recovering the rent from the Wakf land in dispute vested in the Ziarat, on the allegation that the appellants defendants were treating the lands granted to the Ziarat, as their personal property and mismanaging and also alienating the same.
Resisting the suit, the appellants, defendants contended, inter alia, that notwithstanding the use of the word "Ziarat" in the two Government orders the transfer of the land in dispute was in their father 's favour in his personal capacity, in lieu of his possessory right over about 400/500 kanals of land which was taken over by the Government, and not in the form of any dedication, and as such the land was not the property of the Ziarat but their father 's absolute property, and had devolved upon them by succession and, therefore, they had the right to deal with the property in any manner they liked.
The trial court dismissed the suit, holding that the two grants were in fact made in favour of defendants ' father and not the Ziarat.
254 The first appellate court upheld the trial court 's findings.
However, in second appeal, the High Court held that from the recitals of the two orders of the Government of 1955 and 1958 it was clear that the two grants were in favour of the Ziarat.
Hence, the appellants defendants filed the appeal, by special leave before this Court contending that the High Court had erred in upsetting the findings of the courts below, based on appreciation of the evidence that, as a fact, the appellants defendants were the owners of the property, the subject matter of the Government grants.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, HELD: 1.1 The two orders of the Government dated September 22, 1955 and November 29, 1958 are absolutely clear and unambiguous and can admit one and only one interpretation that the Government intended to grant the land to the Ziarat alone and not to the appellants defendants in their personal capacity.
In fact the names of the appellants defendants or their ancestors are not even mentioned in the two orders.
The order of 1955 specifically stated that the lands in Rakhbahu surrounding the Ziarat Shareef of Baba Ibrahim Shah be granted to the said Ziarat permanently.
The later order of 1958 also says the same thing.
It is nowhere mentioned in any of those orders that the land was given not to the Ziarat but to the father of the appellants defendants, who was Majawar of the Ziarat, either in his personal capacity or in lieu of compensation for his personal lands acquired by the Government.
[259A, B C] 1.2 A manager or a trustee in possession of a religious shrine cannot be allowed to assert a hostile title unless he formally surrenders possession to the lawful authority.
[260B] In the instant case, there was no justification for the appellants defendants to cast their covetous eyes on the property of the Ziarat, taking advantage of their possession over the same, which was as managers or trustees and assert a hostile title to it.
Even if they were in possession of the lands, it would have to be referable to a lawful title and cannot be treated to be adverse to the Ziarat.
In other words, the possession would be for.
the benefit of the Ziarat.
[259H, 260A, E] 1.3 In the face of clear and unambiguous terms of the Government orders, it was not permissible for the appellants defendants to adduce evidence to show that the grant was made to them and not to the 255 Ziarat.
The question was of interpretation of two Government orders, which was essentially a question of law.
[260G] In the circumstances, the High Court was not in error in upsetting the findings of the courts below.
[260F]
