The appellant No.1 Maharani was married to a Maharaja in 1960 and the daughter appellant no.2 was born of the wedlock in 1964.
The relationship between the husband and the wife thereafter ceased to be cordial and the appellant started living in Bombay and the Maharaja within his estate in Madhya Pradesh.
It is the case of the respondent No.1 that the Maharaja decided to remarry without legally separating from the appellant.
The respondent who is a relation of the Maharaja 's mother, respondent No.2,was misled both by the Maharaja and his mother, respondent No.2 was misled both by the Maharaja and his mother in believing that the first marriage of the Maharaja had been dissolved and under that belief she married the Maharaja had been dissolved and under that belief she married the Maharaja and several issues were born of this wedlock.
In 1974 when the Maharaja died, on application for grant of Letters of Administration was filed by the appellant Maharani, and the respondent No.1 applied for probate on the basis of an alleged will.
This will was denied by the appellants.
These proceedings are still pending.
Respondent No.1 filed an application under Section 11 of the for declaring her marriage as nullity, and the Maharaja 's mother was impleaded as the sole respondent.
The appellants intervened and were impleaded as parties.
The maintainability of the aforesaid application was challenged by the appellants on the ground that the marriage could not be declared 194 a nullity after the death of the Maharaja but both the trial court and the High Court have rejected this plea.
In the appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellants that having regard to the very special relationship between husband and wife,a marriage cannot be dissolved or declared to be a nullity unless both of them are parties thereto.
The martial status of a person sands on a much higher footing than other positions one may hold in the society and cannot be allowed to be challenged lightly,and that the marriage of a person, therefore, cannot be declared as nullity after his death when he does no have an opportunity to contest.
Reliance was placed upon the language of Section 11 of the .
On behalf of the respondent, it was pointed out that having regard to the language of Section 16 of the as it it stood before its amendment in 1976,he children born of the respondent would not have been entitled to the benefit of the section in absence of a decree declaring the marriage of their parents as nullity, and this was precisely the reason that the respondent had to commence the present litigation On the question: whether a petition under Section 11 of the for declaring the marriage of the petitioner as a nullity is maintainable after the death of the petitioner 's spouse.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1 .An application under Section11 of the before its amendment in 1976, was maintainable at the instance of a party to the marriage even after the death of the other spouse.[201B].
In the instant case, the proceeding was started in 1974 that is, before the amendment was made in the Hindu Marriage Act,1955.
Section II did not contain the words "against the other party".
At that time all that was required was that the application had to be filed by a party to the marriage under challenge.
On the plain language of the section as it stood then,it could not be claimed that in absence of the other spouse as a party to the proceedings, the same would not be maintainable.[197F] 3.Under the general law a child for being legitimate has to be 195 born in lawful wedlock and if the marriage is void or declared to be so by the Court, it will necessarily have the effect ofbastardising the child born of the parties to such a marriage.[199F] 4.
By enacting Section 5(i) of the the legislature abolished polygamy, which had always remained permissible and prevalent among the Hindus in the past.
The Act was bringing about a very significant departure in this regard; and taking into account the possibility of violation of the law in numerous cases at least for sometime to come special provisions were included under Section 16 of the Act with the object of protecting the legitimacy of the children.[199G] 5.
The benefit of Section 16 was confined to only such cases where a decree of nullity was granted under Section 11 or section 12.
It did not extend to other cases.
in 1976 section 11 was amended by inserting the words "against the otherparty" and alongwith the same section 16 was amended.[200D] 6.
By the amendment in section 11, in so far the cases where marriage can be declared as nullity, the application of the rule protectingthe legitimacy was widened.
If that had notbeen,the children born of such marriages would have been deprived of the advantage on the death of either of the parents.
By the simultaneous amendment of the two sections it can safely be deducted that the Parliament did not hold identical views as expressed by the law Commission in its59th Report.[200F G] 7.
The intention of the legislature in enacting section 16 was to protect the legitimacy of the children who would have been legitimate if the Act had not been passed in 1955.[200H] 8.
There is no reason to interpret section 11 in a manner which would narrow down its field.
With respect to the nature of the proceedings, what the court has to do in an application under section 11 is not to bring about any change in the marital status of the parties.
The effectof granting a decree of nullity is to discover the flow in the marriage at the time of its performance and accordingly to grant a decree declaring it tobe void.
[201A B] Butterfield vs Butterfield; I.L.R.(Vol.50) Calcutta 153 and Stanhope vs Stanhope, , and Law Commission of India 59th Report Chapter 6, para 6.1A referred to.
196 9.It is not correct to suggest that one uniform rule shall apply for deciding the maintainability of all proceedings involving issues relating to marital status.
The question will be dependent upon on the nature of the action and law governing the same.
The provisions of the relevant statue relating to a question will be very material.[198H 199A] Rayden and Jackson 's Law and Practice in Divorce and Family Matters, (15th Edn.).
p.650, referred to.
