The appellants and Writ Petitioners are serving the Time Keeping Department of the Naval Dockyard, Bombay under the control of the Western Naval Command.
With a view to removing the stagnation in the cadre of Time Keepers for lack of promotion avenues, the Government of India, Ministry of Defence, by its letter dated 14.9.1966 addressed to the Chief Naval Staff conveyed the sanction of the President to the merger of the Time Keepers Cadre with the Clerical Cadre in all Naval establishments.
Consequent to this merger the Jr. Time Keepers were to be re designated as Lower Division Clerks and Sr.
Time Keepers as Upper Division Clerks.
A few days thereafter the office of the Rear Admiral, Western Naval Command, issued a letter dated 5.12.1966 which reads as under: ". . . . . . . 2.
This merger is intended only to give promotion to the Time Keepers along with the LDC/UDC.
Their duties, terms and conditions 220 of Services will remain the same and their hours of work will also continue to be 45 in a week.
Consequent upon the issue of this order and in order to distinguish them from the UDC/LDC and UDC(s)/LDC(s) the suffix "T" will be added after their designation.
As per their conditions of service the employees serving in the Time keeping Department were entitled to the benefit of over time and productivity linked bonus but those belonging to the clerical cadre working in the Administrative Offices of the Dockyard were not entitled to these benefits.
One Thoppil Ramakrishnan on being transferred in August 1980 as UDC(T) in the Spare Parts Distribution Centre, challenged his transfer by a Writ Petition in the High Court of Bombay wherein he contended that as he was initially appointed Jr. Time Keeper and promoted as UDC(T) in 1967 he belonged to a special cadre and could not be transferred to the general cadre as that would entail loss of benefit of over time and bonus.
The High Court treating the letter dated 5th December, 1966 as merely clarificatory, held that there was no complete merger of the two cadres and on the statement of the counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner will not claim the benefit of promotion in the clerical cadre, allowed the writ petition quashing the transfer order.
Realising the situation created by its letter of 5th December, 1966 the western Naval Command cancelled the said letter and consequently inter se transfer became possible.
Thereafter, some employees in the Time Keeping Department were transfered by orders dated 17.4.1985 and 5.10.1985.
The affected employees filed a Writ Petitions in the High Court which were later transfered to the Central Administrative Tribunal.
The Tribunal came to the conclusion that after the cancellation of the Order dated 5.12.1966, the field was held by the Presidential Order dated 14.9.1966, that under the merger Scheme envisaged by the said order the employees in the Time Keeping Department no longer belonged to a separate Cadre and as such the Authorities were entitled to transfer them to other ministerial branches.
The Petitions were accordingly dismissed by a common judgment dated 9th October, 1989.
This judgment is assailed by the concerned employees in the appeals before this court.
One Writ Petition has also been filed by some other 221 employees apprehending similar transfers.
Allowing the appeals partly insofar as they relate to five employees who belonged to the separate cadre of the Time Keeping Department at the date of issuance of the Presidential Order and dismissing the same in respect of the remaining appellants and also dismissing the Writ Petition, this Court, HELD: The letter of 14th September, 1966 clearly refers to the Presidential sanction "to the merger of the cadre of Time Keepers with the clerical cadre in all Naval establishments".
Consequent on this merger, the Junior Time Keepers were to be redesignated as Lower Division Clerks and the Senior Time Keepers as Upper Division Clerks.
There is nothing in this letter to convey that they were to retain their identity as Time Keepers.[227E] The subsequent order of 5th December, 1966 issued by the Western Naval Command could not alter this Presidential Order.
If that subsequent order was found to be inconsistent with the Presidential Order, it had to ignored for the simple reason that the Officers of the Naval establishment were not competent to alter, very or modify a Presidential Order.
[228B] It is difficult to understand how those who entered the Time Keeping Department after the merger order, can refuse to go on transfer on the plea that they would suffer a financial loss.
They can have no right to the post in the Time Keeping Department.
So long as they are there and are discharging the functions of the Time Keeper, they would be entitled to the special benefit of over time and bonus but on that plea they cannot contend that they are not transferable to the ministerial posts.
We have, therefore, no hesitation in concludingthat those who joined the Time Keeping Department after the Presidential Order became effective, have no right to continue in that department merely because their transfer would entail economic loss since they are governed by the merger scheme which had become operative before their entry in that department.
They were borne on the common cadre and were never members of the original Time Keepers Cadre.
[229G 230B] So far as those Time Keepers who were serving in the Time Keeping Department on and before the date of implementation of the Presidential Order and who continue to serve in the same department are concerned, the department should give them an option if they are proposed to be transferred outside that department or the depart 222 ment should undertake to make good the economic loss which they are likely to suffer on transfer.
[230F G] The State of Kerala vs M.K. Krishnan Nair & Ors., , referred to.
