The Mysore Silkworm Seed and Cocoon (Regulation of Production, Supply and Distribution) Act, 1959 provided for the regulation of production, supply and distribution of silk worm seed and cocoon in the State of Mysore.
The said Act was amended in 1969 and 1979.
The 1979 amendments imposed restrictions on the production, distribution and sale of silk yarn, and were analogous to the restrictions imposed earlier in respect of silk worm seeds and cocoons.
The appellants filed Writ Petitions before the High Court challenging the validity of the provisions of the Act on several grounds, Including lack of legislative competence since the Central Silk Boards Act, 1948 has already been passed by the Parliament The High Court negatived the contentions and dismissed the Writ Petitions.
The present appeals challenged the correctness of the said judgment.
The Writ Petitions filed directly in this Court also challenged the validity of the Provisions of the said Act.
The main contention raised in these matters was that the Provisions of the Act lack legislative competence after the enactment by Parliament of the Central Silk Boards Act, 1948 which contained a declaration contemplated under Entry 52 of List I in the Seventh 306 Schedule to the Constitution of India, taking the Silk industry within the purview of Parliamentary legislation.
Dismissing the matters, this Court, HELD: 1.
Legislation in regard to raw materials would be permissible under Entry 27 of List II, notwithstanding a declaration of the industry under Entry 52, to be one within the purview of parliamentary legislation.
The process of manufacture or production can be legislated on by States under Entry 24 of List II so long as the industry is not a controlled industry within the meaning of Entry 7 or Entry 52 of List 1.
So far as the distribution of the products of the industry is concerned, the State Legislature would be quite competent to legislate under Entry 27 of List II.
However, when the industry is also a controlled industry, legislation in regard to the products of the industry would be permissible by both the Central and the State Legislatures by virtue of Entry 33 of List III.
[314A C] Calcutta Gas Co. (P) Ltd. vs State, [1962] Supp.
3 S.C.R. 1, relied on 2.
It is true that the Central Silk Boards Act purpots to control the raw silk industry in the territory of India.
But the control of the industry vested in Parliament was only restricted to the aspect of production and manufacture of silk yarn or silk.
It did not obviously take in the earlier stages of the industry, namely, the supply of raw materials.
Even in regard to the silk industry, the reeling, production, development and distribution of silkworm seeds and cocoons was regulated by the Mysore Silkworm Seed and Cocoon (Regulation of Production, Supply and Distribution) Act, 1959.
These items can perhaps be legitimately described as the raw materials of the silk industry.
The control being vested in Parliament under Entry 52, of silk industry, did not affect the control over the raw materials.
That is perhaps the reason why the industry did not challenge the provisions of the Act, when it was originally enacted, on the ground that is now being put forward.
The present legislation, as a result of the amendments, controls the supply and distribution of the goods produced by the industry.
Though the production and manufacture of raw silk cannot be legislated upon by the State Legislature in view of the provisions of the Central Act and the declaration in section 2 thereof, that declaration and Entry 52 do not in any way limit the powers of the State Legislature to legislate in respect of the goods produced by the silk industry.
To interpret Entry 52 otherwise would render Entry 33 in List III of the Seventh Schedule 307 to the Constitution otiose and meaningless.
In this view of the matter the limitation contained in Entry 52 does not affect the validity of the present legislation.
[314H; 315A F] I.T.C. Ltd. & Ors.
vs State of Karnataka & Ors.
, [1985] (supp.) S.C.C. 476, distinguished.
The State legislation would be quite valid unless it is repugnant to the provisions of a Central legislation on the subject.
A perusal Of the Central Act makes it clear that the pith and substance of the legislation is the constitution of a silk Board for research into the scientific, technological and economic aspects of the industry.
It does not have anything to do with the aspects covered by Entry 33 in List III.
There is, therefore, no infirmity in the State Legislation.
[315G H]
