The Lift Irrigation Corporation Ltd. had three categories of services, namely, Mechanical, Electrical and Composite unit of Mechanical Electrical when it was carved out of the Government organisation.
Subsequently, due to administrative exigency, the Corporation decided to reorganise its set up and classify the employees into two categories ' namely, Electrical and Mechanical by amalgamating the composite Electrical and Mechanical Engineering diploma holders either in Electrical or Mechanical wing, and invited objections to the scheme.
It also called for options from persons holding only the composite diploma, namely, Mechanical and Electrical Engineering Supervisors.
On consideration of options received, the Corporation prepared two gradation lists in the order of seniority from the respective dates of appointment to the posts and higher scale of pay held by respective Persons and fitted them in the respective lists as per options.
Respondent No. 1, a diploma holder in Electrical Engineering, who 342 was working as Sub Assistant Engineer (Electrical) in Government service, and had been drawn on deputation to the Corporation along with Respondents No. 6 and 7, appellants in third appeal, holders of double diploma in Mechanical and Electrical Engineering, and working as Mechanical Supervisors, along with others, had not filed any objection to the scheme, but questioned before the High Court the gradation of Respondents No. 6 and 7 and others in the Electrical Wing.
The High Court quashed the gradation lists and directed the Government and the Corporation to treat Respondent No. 1 and the other respondents as belonging to two cadres of Sub Assistant Engineer (Electrical) and (Mechanical) respectively.
The Corporation, the State Government and the aggrieved employees filed separate appeals, by special leave, contending that the Corporation had the power to amalgamate the three sections into two, due to administrative exigency and to prepare seniority lists from respective dates of employees ' initial appointment, etc.
Respondent No. 1 contended that his seniority as No. 2 in the Electrical Wing could not be disturbed by taking Mechanical Supervisors into the Electrical Wing offending his right to promotion enshrined under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Allowing the appeals, this Court, HELD: 1. 1 The Government or the Corporation, due to administrative exigencies, is entitled to and has power to reorganise the existing cadres or amalgamate some or carve out separate cadres.
The decision to amalgamate the existing cadres by reorganising them into two cadres being a policy decision, taken on administrative exigencies, is not open to judicial review unless it is mala fide, arbitrary or bereft of any discernible principle.
[345E, G] 1.2 On account of amalgamation into two cadres by absorbing the personnel working in the composite cadre, namely, Electrical Mechanical in either Electrical or Mechanical cadre, and their adjustment, the order of seniority of the employees working in Electrical or Mechanical cadres is likely to be reviewed.
When the persons in the composite Electrical Mechanical cadre opted to the Electrical cadre, they were entitled to be considered for their fitment in the cadre as per the seniority from the date of their initial appointment vis a vis their scale of pay.
This was the procedure adopted by the Corporation in fixing the 343 inter se seniority.
The procedure adopted is just, fair and reasonable and benificial to all the employees without affecting their scales of pay or losing the seniority from the date of initial appointment.
[345G H, 346A B] Undoubtedly, in this process, the first respondent lost some place in seniority which is consequential to amalgamation.
He has not been deprived of his right to be considered for promotion; only his chances of promotion have been receded.
1.3 There is no fundamental right to promotion.
An employee has only right to be considered when it arises, in accordance with the relevant rules.
[346C] 1.4 In the circumstances, the High Court was not right in holding that the gradation list prepared by the Corporation was in violation of Respondent No. 1 's right to equality enshrined in Article 14 read with Article 16 of the Constitution, and that he was unjustly denied of the same.
[346D]
