The appellants are manufacturers of Polyester fibre yarn.
They obtained a contract from the Imperial Chemical Industries, Singapore for the supply of the said yarn and the said concern had agreed to supply to the appellants free of cost the di methyl terephthalate (DMT) D required for the manufacture of Polyester staple fibre yarn.
The DMT was required to be converted into polyester fibre, blended with viscose indigenously and shipped to a customer of the ICI in Sri Lanka.
The appellant assessees obtained customs clearance permits for import of 392 tons of DMT and also of 178 tons of viscose stable fibre.
The appellants also obtained permission to convert the imported DMT into polyester fibre under customs bond.
The appellants imported the DMT and paid the customs duty in respect thereof Section 75 of the empowers the Central Government to allow the drawback of the duties of customs chargeable under the Act on any imported materials of a class or description in the manufacture of such goods in accordance with and subject to the rules under sub section (2).
There is an identical provision in section 37 of the Central Excises & Salt Act, 1944 enabling grant of draw back of the excise duty paid in relation to such manufacture.
The Central Government framed the Customs and Central Excise Duties Drawback Rules 1971 enabling drawback being availed of in relation to customs as well as in relation to duties of central excise.
Schedule II to the notification listed the items the export of which entities an assessee to avail of the drawback facility.
DMT as such was not included in the notification in respect of which drawback could have been availed of by the assessees.
The assessee therefore made an application to the Ministry of Finance on 23.3.1977 requesting that since it had paid customs duty on DMT, it was entitled to its drawback, more 289 particularly when its request for the manufacture of the polyester fibre under customs bond had been declined by the customs authorities.
The application filed by the appellants was rejected bY the Central Government on 12.3.1978, though on a representation made by the Members of the Association of manufacturers of Polyester staple fabric a notification had been issued on 2.8.76 under Section 25 of the Customs Act B exempting DMT from Customs duty.
The appellant thereupon filed writ petition in the Delhi High Court which was dismissed by the High Court.
Hence these appeals.
Dismissing the appeals, but recommending to the Central Government to consider the case of the appellants on equitable grounds whether the relief could be granted to it, this Court, HELD: Though Section 75 of the and Section 37 of the Central Excises & Salt Act 1944 empower the Government to provide for the repayment of the customs and excise duties paid by individual manufacturers also, the rules as framed (rule 3 in particular) provide only for a refund of the 'average amount of duty paid on materials, of any particular class or description of goods used for the manufacture of export goods of that class or description by manufacturers generally, except to the extent prescribed under rule 7.
[30OA B].
The rules do not envisage a refund of an amount arithmeticaly equal to the customs duty or central excise duty which may have been actually paid by an individual importer cum manufacturer.
If that had been the statutory intendment, it would have been simple to provide that in all cases where imported raw materials are fully used in the manufacturers of goods which are exported, the assessee would be entitled to a draw back of the customs or excise duties paid by him for the import or on the manufacture.
[300C] There is no controversy that, in this case, the goods exported fall under item 25.
R was sought to be contended that the goods fall under sub item 2501, but this is clearly untenable.
Sub item 2501 represents a residuary category which will not be attracted to the goods which clearly fall under sub item 2502.
The notification prescribes different amounts of drawback under this item depending on the composition of the yarn and the nature of its contents.
It specifies an amount of Rs.43.15 per kg.
as the relief by way of drawback available against the goods with which we are concerned which fall under clause (b) of item 2502.
[30OH 301B] 290 The High Court was right in concluding that the rate of drawback in respect of the goods in question was fixed after taking into consideration the aspect of the customs duty payable in respect of DMT and that a conscious decision was taken that no relief in this respect should be granted as DMT was available in the country itself.
It cannot therefore, be said that this is a case where the fixation is contrary to the terms of rule 3, and that the assessee 's application for determination of a rate in his case should be taken as an application under rule 6.
[303B) Rule 6 is also inapplicable for the reason that an application under rule 6 should be made before the export of the manufacturer 's goods which does not seem to be the case here.
[303C]
