The Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 was amended by Act 57 of 1988 which introduced Sections 14B to 14D to the Act carving out thereby classified landlords from the general class of landlords with specified rights to recover immediate possession of the premises let out by them if these are required for their own residence.
The released or retired persons from armed forces or the dependents of the member of armed forces killed in action are covered by Section 14B, the retired employees of the Central Government and of the Delhi Administration are covered by Section 14C, and the landlords who are widows are covered by Section 14D.
These classified landlords are also given the benefit of summary trial under Chapter IIIA by introducing Sections 14B to 14D in Sub section (1) of Section 25B, but there are no corresponding amendments to sub sections (2) to (5) of Section 25B.
The two petitioners, who are tenants, were in occupation of the premises belonging to two Army Officers (respondent landlords).
In the 365 action for eviction brought by the landlords on the ground that they needed the premises for their occupation, the tenants sought leave to contest the application which the Rent Controller being not satisfied with the facts disclosed by the tenants in their affidavits denied.
The Rent Controller accepted the case of the landlords and ordered eviction of the tenants.
The two tenants challenged the eviction orders by filing separate revision petitions in the High Court.
They also challenged the validity of Section 14B of the Act before the High Court by means of two separate writ petitions under Article 226 of the Constitution.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition and the revision petition filed by one of the tenants who being aggrieved moved this Court by way of special Leave Petition Nos.
7146 Court following its decision in the first case dismissed the writ petition filed by him, though the revision petition filed by him was still pending.
The tenant challenged the decision of the High Court by preferring Special Leave Petition No. 7364 of 1990 to this Court.
It was contended on behalf of the petitioners that the tenant 's right to contest the application for eviction on the grounds specified in Section 14(l)(e) cannot be denied even as against the classified landlords falling under Sections 14B to 14D.
The tenant is entitled to leave to contest the application by disclosing such facts in the affidavit as would disentitle the landlord from obtaining an order of eviction under Section 14(l)(e).
This is because of retention of sub section (5) of Section 25B without any amendment and absence of amendment to Section 25C(2).
It was also contended that sub sections (4) and (5) of Section 25B are a composite scheme and since that scheme has been left untouched the tenant 's right thereunder cannot be denied.
It was further contended that sub section (6) of Section 14 is attracted to applications under Sections 14B to 14D.
Dismissing the Petitions, the Court, HELD: 1.
Section 14B is a special provision made by the legislature conferring certain rights to persons belonging to Armed Forces to recover from their tenants immediate possession of the premises for their occupation.
[369E] 2.1 The Tenant cannot claim right to contest an application for eviction on the grounds specified in Section 14(l)(e) against the classified landlords falling under Sections 14B to 14D. Acceptance of such a claim would practically obliterate the purpose and object of classification of landlords under Sections 14B to 14D who are carved out from 366 the general landlords; indeed it would render the whole exercise of creating special classes of landlords with specified rights to recover immediate of the premises let out by them nugatory.
[371H 372C] 2.2 The remedy under Section 14(l)(e) is available only to landlords in general or the landlords who are not classified landlords under Sections 14B to 14D.
The classified landlords have been conferred with certain rights which are different from and independent of the rights under Section 14(l)(e).
[372E F] 2.3 Sections 14B to 14D are markedly different from Section 14(1)(e).[375E F] 3.1 The argument that the absence of amendments to sub sections (4) and (5) of Section 25B preserves the tenant 's right to contest the application of even a classified landlord on the grounds specified under Section 14(l)(e) is not sustainable.
Sub section (4) of Section 25B provides that the tenant has to obtain leave from the Controller "as hereinafter provided", which in the contest means as provided under sub section (5).
This is the only sub section under which the Controller could give leave to the tenant to contest the application if the affidavit filed by the tenant discloses such facts as would disentitle the landlord from obtaining an order for the recovery of possession of the premises.
[376G, F] 3.2 The form specified in the Third Schedule refers only to application filed under Section 14(l)(e) or Section 14A.
Therefore, when an application is filed under Section 14B, a copy of the application should be sent to the tenant by making necessary amendment to the prescribed form and omitting the other references which are not relevant and the summons should state that the application is filed under Section 14B and not under Section 14(l)(e) or 14A. Likewise if the applications are under Sections 14C to 14D, the summons should state accordingly.
That would indicate the scope of defence of the tenant for obtaining leave referred to in sub section (5) of Section 25B. [377G 378A] 3.3 Under sub section (5), the tenant could contest the application by obtaining leave with reference to the particular claim in the application of the landlord depending upon whether it is under Sections 14A, 14B, 14C or 14D or under Section 14(l)(e).
[378B] The tenant cannot be allowed to take up defence under Section 14(l)(e) as against an application under Section 14B. There cannot be 367 any defence unconnected with or unrelated to the claim or right of the plaintiff or applicant.
That would be against our jurisprudence and would be a mechanical interpretation of the enactment defeating its purpose.
The courts have always adopted a purposive approach to the interpretation of statutes.
[378C D] 3.4 Section 14B and other allied provisions ought to receive a purposeful construction and sub section (5) of Section 25B should be so construed as to implement the object and purpose of Sections 14B to 14D.
It is the duty of the Court to give effect to the intention of the legislature as expressed in Sections 148 to 14D. [378E] 4.
The tenant is entitled to raise all relevant contentions as against the claim of the classified landlords.
The fact that there is no reference to the word bona fide requirement in Sections 14B to 14D do not absolve the landlord from proving that the requirement is bona fide or the tenant from showing that it is not bona fide.
In fact every claim for eviction against a tenant must be a bona fide one.
There is also enough indication in support of this construction from the title of section 25B which states "special procedure for the disposal of applications for eviction on the ground of bonafide requirement".
[378H 379B] 5.
Section 14B and other allied provisions refer to the premises let out and not acquired by transfer.
One may become an owner of the premises by transfer but the tenant in occupation of the transferred property cannot be evicted by resorting to Sections 14B to 14D.
If the transferee wants to evict the tenant he must take action only under Section 14(l)(e).
Equally Sub section (7) of Section 14 has no application to eviction under Sections 14B to 14D, nor the amended provisions under Section 25C(2).
But that does not mean that the tenants covered under Sections 14B to 14D are not entitled to any time for surrendering possession of the premises.
It is always left to the Controller who is a quasi judicial authority to exercise his discretion having regard to the facts and circumstances of each case and grant a reasonable time to the tenant.
[379E G] 6.
The Controller 's power to give leave to contest the application filed under Section 14(l)(e) or Section 14A is cribbed by the condition that the 'affidavit filed by the tenant discloses such facts as would disentitle the landlord from obtaining an order for the recovery of possession of the premises on the ground specified ' in the respective sections.
Therefore, if an application is filed under Section 14B or 14C or 14D, the tenant 's right to contest the application is narrowed down 368 and is restricted to the parameters of the respective Sections.
He cannot widen the scope of his defence by relying upon Section 14(l)(e).
Subsection (5) of Section 25B is self contained and Order 37 Rule 3 CPC has no part to play there.
[38OB C] Busching Schmitz Private Ltd. vs P.T. Menghani & Anr.,[1977] 2 SCC 835, affirmed and reiterated.
Precision Steel & Engineering Works and Anr.
vs Prem Deva Niranjan Deva Tayal, , harmonised.
The landlord in SLP No. 11425/90 is living in a rented house and is paying a rent of Rs.2,000 p.m. and requires the premises for himself and the members of his family.
The landlord cannot be denied possession of his own premises under section 14B when he is residing in a rented premises.
[38OD E] 8.
The contention that the concerned landlord has taken voluntary retirement long earlier and has become a part of the Society just like any other landlord and Section 14B was not intended to confer such landlord the special right to recover immediate possession of the premises is not maintainable because Section 14B(l) states that the persons who have already retired may within one year from the date of their release or retirement from such Armed Forces or, within a period of one year from the date of introduction of Section 14B, whichever is later, apply to the controller for recovering the immediate possession of their premises.
That is the legislative wisdom.
[38OF G] 9.
True it is not permissible to read words in a statute which are not there, but "where the alternative lies between either supplying by implication words which appear to have been accidentally omitted, or adopting a construction which deprives certain existing words of all meanings, it is permissible to supply the words".
Having regard to the context in which a provision appears and, the object of the statute in which the said provision is enacted, the court should construe it in a harmonious way to make it meaningful.
An attempt must always be made so to reconcile the relevant provisions as to advance the remedy intended by the statute.
[378E G] Craies Statute Law, 7th Edition, P. 109; Hameedia Hardware Stores V. B. Mohan Lal Sowcar, ; at 524 25, and Sirajul Haq Khan & Ors.
vs The Sunni Central Board of Waqf, [1959].1 SCR 1287 at 1299, relied upon.
