The respondent filed a suit for declaration and possession of certain properties left by her deceased husband L.
The appellant contested the suit on the grounds that L had adopted him as his son six months before his death In addition to the oral evidence of adoption the appellant alleged that he performed the obsequies of L as such adopted son, that on the thirteenth day after the death of L he was taken by the respondent in her lap, that he entered into possession of the estate of L, that the 699 respondent performed his marriage and that he was recognised as the adopted son of L even by the respondent.
The appellant further pleaded that the respondent was estopped from challenging his adoption by her representations in previous legal proceedings and in documents and on account of the fact that the appellant had by this adoption lost his share of the properties in his natural family.
The respondent denied both the adoption and the treatment of acceptance of the appellant as the adopted son of L.
The trial Court dismissed the suit holding the adoption proved.
On appeal the High Court held the adoption was not proved and decreed the suit.
Both Courts held that the respondent was not estopped from challenging the adoption.
Held, that the High Court.
had correctly held that the adoption of the appellant by L had not been established.
As an adoption results in changing the course of succession, the evidence to support it should be such that it should be free from all suspicion of fraud and so consistent and probable as to leave no occasion for doubting its truth.
Held further, that the.
respondent was not estopped from disputing the adoption.
The correct rule of estopped applicable in the case of adoption is that it does not confer status; it only shuts the mouths of certain persons if they try to deny the adoption.
But where both parties are conversant with the true state of facts the doctrine of estopped has no application.
Admissions made by a party are not conclusive, and unless they constitute estopped, the maker is at liberty to prove that they were mistaken or were untrue.
Presumptions arising from the conduct of a party cannot sustain an adoption even though it might have been acquiesced in by all concerned when the evidence shows that the adoption did not take place.
Mohori Bibi vs Dhurmdas Ghosh, (1902) 30 I.A. 114, relied upon.
