Clause 9 of the promotion policy of the Appellant Bank provides that an officer in respect of whom disciplinary action is in process will be permitted to take Part in the promotion process, subject to the condition that his promotion will be withheld until the officer is exonerated from the charges and in case such an officer is exonerated from the charges, the promotion shall take effect from the date on which it would have been otherwise effective but for the disciplinary action.
Respondent 1, a Bank Manager, was Promoted from Scale II to Scale Ill under the aforesaid clause while disciplinary proceedings were contemplated against him.
Later he was also interviewed for promotion from Scale IlI to Scale IV.
thereafter the appellant Bank charge sheeted him and initiated a departmental inquiry against him.
He challenged the legality of the bank 's action by filing a declartory suit contending that in view of the promotion granted to him, the appellant Bank must be deemed to have condoned the earner misconduct and subsequent to his promotion it was not open to the Bank to take any action against himn.
The Trial Court allowed the suit and restraied the appellant bank from Proceeding with the inquiry by holding the charge sheet illegal.
The order of the trial court was affirmed by the first appellate court and the second appeal filed by the bank was also dismissed by the High Court.
In appeal to this court, it was contended on behalf of the bank that the grant of promotion to the appellant under clause 9 cannot be regarded in law as condonation of pre promotion misconduct.
On behalf of the respondent, it was contended that even if the continuation of 474 disciplinary proceedings was valid, it was not a ground for holding up of his promotion from Scale Ill to Scale IV because on the date of interview no charge sheet was served on him.
Allowing the appeal and setting aside the order of the High Court, this Court, HELD: 1.
The mere fact that disciplinary proceedings are contemplated or under consideration against an employee does not constitute a good ground for not considering the employee concerned for promotion if he is in the zone of consideration nor would it constitute a good ground for denying the promotion if the employee is considered otherwise fit for promotion.
Clause 9 of the Promotion Policy of the Bank gives rise to the implication that the disciplinary action is in process or initiated, the officer concerned, against whom allegations of misconduct might be made, can neither be excluded from consideration for promotion if he is entitled to be considered for promotion otherwise nor can the promotion be denied to him.
In these circumstances, when the promotion from Scale II to Scale III was granted to respondent, there could be no question of condonation of the earlier acts of misconduct by reason of this promotion because in law and in view of clause 9 of the Promotion policy appellant had no option but to consider respondent for promotion and if he was otherwise found fit for promotion to promote him.
Hence the charge sheet submitted against respondent and the disciplinary proceedings pursuant to the said charge sheet cannot be said to be bad in law and cannot be interfered with on the ground of condonation.
Therefore, the courts below were in error in holding that the earlier alleged acts of misconduct of respondent had been condoned by the appellant and basing their conclusions thereon.
[476G H; 477F H; 488A] L.W. Middleton vs Horry Play Fair, AIR 1925 Cal. 87; District Council, Amraoti through Secretary vs Vithal Vinayak Bapat, AER 1941 Nagpur 125 and Audhraj Singh vs State of Madhya Pradesh, AIR.
M.P. 284; held inapplicable.
In view of the fact that the appellant bank has agreed that without creating a precedent it will grant promotion to respondent from Scale Ill to Scale IV, if the departmental promotion Committee finds him fit for promotion and that this promotion will be granted from the date on which he would have been promoted but for the departmentl inquiry being contemplated against him, it is unnecessary to express any opinion on the submission that since on the date of selection for promotion from Scale III to Scale IV, no charge sheet was served on the 475 respondent it was not open to the bank to hold back the respondent 's promotion from Scale IH to Scale IV.
[479C D]
