Nawab Salar Jung III expired on March 2, 1949 leaving behind him no issue but a vast estate.
Several persons came forward to be his heirs.
One of the claimants, Sajjid Yar Jung, did not have the wherewithal to establish his claim to a share in the estate.
He approached the plaintiff for financial help.
An agreement was executed between them according to which Sajjid Yar Jung agreed to return all amounts to be advanced by the plaintiff and in addition to give him one anna share in the amount that would be received by Sajjid Yar Jung from the estate.
Sajjid Yar Jung borrowed a total sum of Rs 75,000 under the agreement.
The dispute was ultimately settled in the Civil Court by compromise between the various claimants.
According to the plaintiff, the amount due to Sajjid Yar Jung was about Rs.60 Lakhs and hence the plaintiff claimed Rs.3 lakh as one anna share in addition to the sum advanced, i.e. Rs.75,000.
The plaintiff filed the present suit for the recovery of the total amount.
The City Civil Court inter alia found that the agreement was opposed to public policy as the object of the agreement was that the plaintiff should wield his influence with Central and State Ministers to have the Nawab recognised as the heir to the estate in return for his being given one anna share in the amount to be received by the Nawab.
The Court, therefore, held that the agreement in question was not enforceable, and even the amounts actually advanced could not be recovered by the plaintiff.
In the appeal, the Division Bench of the High Court held that the agreement was one whole agreement and hence the plaintiff was not entitled to recover even the amount of Rs.75,000 which was actually advanced.
The Division Bench also held that the agreement was public policy.
328 This Court granted special leave only in respect of the said amount of Rs.75,000.
Before this Court it was contended on behalf of the plaintiff that (i) the amount of Rs.75,000 could be separated from the other agreement or could be treated differently; (ii) if the champertous nature of the agreement was ignored which it was legitimate to do so in this country, there was no other ground of public policy on which the agreement could be struck down; (iii) assuming that the agreement was a champertous one, it was neither immoral nor against public policy, and even de hors the agreement, the appellant was entitled to the said advance of Rs.75,000 under section 70 of the Indian Contract Act.
It was further urged that both the City Civil Court as well as the High Court had created a new head of public policy to declare the agreement as void, although according to the relevant statutory provisions as well as the decisions of the court, the agreement was not void.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: Per Sawant, J. (1) It is apparent on the face of the record that the advance and the share in the estate were parts of the same contract one as a consideration for the other.
The two stand together and none can stand without the other.
[333F] (2) A contract which has a tendency to injure public interests or public welfare is one against public policy.
[337D] (3) What constitutes an injury to public interests or welfare would depend upon the times and climes.
The social milieu in which the contract is sought to be enforced would decide the factum, the nature and the degree of the injury.
It is contrary to the concept of pubic policy to contend that it is immutable, since it must vary with the varying needs of the society.
What those needs are would depend upon the consensus value judgments of the enlightened section of the society.
These values may sometimes get incorporated in the legislation, but sometimes they may not.
[337E] (4) The legislature often fails to keep pace with the changing needs and values nor is it realistic to expect that it will have provided for all contingencies and eventualities.
[337E F] 329 (5) It is not only necessary but obligatory on the courts to step in to fill the lacluna.
When courts perform this function undoubtedly they legislate judicially.
But that is a kind of legislation which stands implicitly delegated to them to further the object of the legislation and to promote the goals of the society.
[337F] (6) So long as the courts keep themselves tethered to the ethos of the society and do not travel off its course, so long as they attempt to furnish the felt necessities of the time and do not refurbish them.
their role in this respect has to be welcomed.
[337G] Ghurelal Parakh vs Mahadeodas Maiya & Ors., [1959] Suppl.
2 S.C.R. 406; Richardson vs Mellish, ; ; In re Mirams, , referred to.
(7) All courts are at one time or the other felt the need to bridge the gap between what is and what is intended to be.
The courts cannot in such circumstances shirk from their duty and refuse to fill the gap.
In performing this duty they do not foist upon the society their value judgments.
They respect and accept the prevailling values, and do what is expected of them.
[338D] (8) The courts will fail in their duty if they do not rise to the occasion but approve helplessly of an interpretation of a statute or a document or an action of an individual which is certain to subvert the societal goals and endanger the public good.
[338E] (9) The contract in the present case had been entered into with the obvious purpose of influencing the authorities to procure a verdict in favour of the late Nawab and was obviously a "carrier" contract.
To enforce such a contract although its tendencies to injure public weal are manifest is not only to abdicate one 's public duty but to assist in the promotion of a pernicious practice of procuring decisions by influencing authorities when they should abide by the law.
To strike down such contracts is not to invent a new head of public policy but to give effect to its true implications.
[338F G] In the matter of Mr. 'G ', a Senior Advocate of the Supreme Court, , referred to.
(10) A democratic society is founded on the rule of law and any practice which seeks to subvert or circumvent the law at its very root.
When the Court discountenances such practice, it only safeguards 330 the foundation of the society.
Even assuming that the Court finds a new head of public policy to strike down such practice, its activism is not only warranted but desired.
[338G H] Per Fathima Beevi, J. (1) There is no doubt that the contract relating to the payment of the amount is not severable from the agreement to promote the cause of Sajjid Yar Jung by wielding the influence the plaintiff had.
[339G] (2) Every agreement of which the object or consideration is unlawful is void.
The consideration or object of an agreement is unlawful when the court regards it as opposed to public policy.
[339G] (3) Public Policy is a principle of judicial interpretation founded on the current needs of the community.
The law relating to public policy cannot remain immutable.
It must change with passage of time.
[339H 340A] (4) A bargain whereby one party is to assist another in recovering property and is to share in the proceeds of the action and such assistance is by using the influence with the administration irrespective of the fact that the persons intended to be influenced are not amenable to such influence is against protection and promotion of public welfare.
It is opposed to public policy.
[340B]
