Appellant 's land was acquired by the Agra Town improvement Trust under the provisions of the U.P. Town Improvement Act, 1919.
For the land acquired, the appellant was paid a paltry sum.
No solatium was awarded as none was awardable under the Act.
[391B].
The appellant sought a reference before the Nagar Mahapalika Tribunal.
The Tribunal raised the compensation to Rs.1,45,839 and also awarded interest at the rate of 4 1/2 percent.
Still dissatisfied, the appellant moved the High Court in appeal.
The Nagarpalika also filed a cross appeal against enhancement.
The High Court allowed the appeal of the appellant and further enhanced the compensation by Rs.48,613 and the rate of interest to 6 percent.
On the amount of Rs.48,613 solatium at the rate of 15% was awarded by the High Court.
No solatium was however awarded on the slim Of Rs. 1,45,839 awarded by the Tribunal, on the ground that the appellant had not made a grouse or laid any claim to it in his grounds of appeal.
The High Court negatived the contention of the appellant that his claim to solatium was not based on any demand at his instance but it was rather a statutory duty of the Court to grant it.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: (1) Solatium, as the word goes, is "money comfort" quantified by the statute, and given as a conciliatory measure for the Compulsory acquisition of the land of the citizen, by a welfare state such as ours.
[392D E] 390 (2) The importance of the award of solatium cannot be undermined by any procedural brocades.
It follows automatically the market value of the land acquired, as a shadow would to a man.
It springs up spontaneously as a part of the statutory growth on the determination and emergence of market value of the land acquired.
That it falls to be awarded by the Court "in every case" leaves no discretion with the court in not awarding it in some cases and awarding in others.
[393A B] Om Prakash vs State of Uttar Pradesh, [19741 2 S.C.C. 731, referred to.
(3) Solatium in the scheme of section 23(2) of the Land Acquisition Act is part of the compensation and sections 28 and 34 of the said Act Provide for payment of interest on the amount of compensation.
[394H 395A] Periyar & Pareekanni Rubbers Ltd. vs State of Kerala, ; , referred to.
(4) Solatium being part of compensation must fetch statutory interest from the date of dispossession of the land owner tin date of payment.
[395D] Dr. Shamlal Narula V. Commissioner of Income Tax Punjab, ; , referred to.
