The respondent plaintiff instituted a suit against the appellant defendant for declaration of title and possession of the suit properties on the basis of a sale deed dated February 10, 1964 executed in his favour by Mrs. T.
The appellant defendant also asserted his title and possession under an earlier deed dated February 14, 1959 executed by Mrs. T in his favour.
The respondent contended that the deed of 1959 in favour of the defendant was sham and without any consideration.
The Trial Court decreed the suit and the decree was confirmed in appeal.
The High Court set aside the decree and remanded the case to the first appellate court stating that the burden to prove that the 1959 deed was sham was on the plaintiff.
After the remand, the first appellate court considered the evidence adduced by both sides and upheld the plaintiff 's title and confirmed the decree of the trial court.
The second appeal filed against the judgment was dismissed in limine by the High Court.
In defendant 's appeal to this court it was contended that inspite of specific direction by the High Court in the order of remand that the burden to prove that 1959 deed was sham was on the plaintiff, no fresh evidence was tendered by the plaintiff to discharge the burden and the appellate court proceeded to examine the evidence tendered by the defendant and rejected the same; hence the appellate court committed an error in disposing the appeal which gave rise to a substantial question of law and the High Court failed to exercise its jurisdiction under Section 100 CPC in dismissing the second appeal in limine.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court HELD: 1.
It is always open to the defendant not to lead any evidence where the onus is upon the plaintiff but after having gone into 545 evidence, he cannot ask the court not to look at and act on it.
The question of burden of proof at the end of case when both parties have tendered evidence is not of any great importance and the court has to come to a decision on a consideration of all materials.
[515H; 516A] 2.
In the suit based on title the burden was undoubtedly on the plaintiff to prove such title.
When the plaintiff assailed the earlier deed executed by his vendor in respect of the same land it was for him to establish that it was a Farzi Kebala and sham transaction unsupported by consideration.
But in examining the question whether the plaintiff had succeeded in proving the negative fact it was open to the court to consider the entire evidence on record when both the parties have tendered evidence and no part of the evidence could be left out.
The plaintiff proceeded on the basis that the deed executed by his vendor in 1959 was sham unsupported by consideration and it never came into operation thereby pleading the necessary facts in support of his title.
Evidence was tendered to prove what has alleged.
To counter the claim, the defendants have asserted that the consideration was paid under the deed and counter evidence was tendered.
The entire evidence was fully apprecited by the Appellate Court and the findings recorded.
Thus the Appellate Court recorded definite findings on a clear analysis of the entire evidence and the findings are fully supported by the evidence on record.
Therefore, no error had been committed by the learned Judge in his approach.
[597C D; 599B C]
