The second respondent was a tenant copartnership co operative Housing Society and father of the first respondent was its tenant co partner member.
By an application dated 10.6.1969 he sought permission of the society to temporarily induct the appellant into his flat.
On the same date the appellant applied to the said Society for its nominal membership stating that he intended to take the flat for temporary use and occupation, that he would not claim any right of permanent nature and that on receipt of notice he would vacate the flat.
By an agreement of leave and licence dated 11.6.1969, the father of respondent No. 1 (licensor)gave use of the flat with its furniture and fittings to the appellant (licensee) on Rs. 1,000 per month as compensation for use and occupation for a period of 11 months with a facility of renewal of the agreement for two such further periods.
The Managing Committee of the Society, by its Resolution dated 13.6.1969.
I granted the permission.
593 The licensor by letter dated 22.1.1972 purported to terminate the licence w.e.f. 10.3.1972, and asked the appellant to vacate the flat, but the latter declined to do so.
On receiving intimation from the licensor, the Society, by its letter dated 22.2.1972, required the appellant to vacate the flat and deliver its possession to the licenser before the stipulated date, but in vain.
Instead, the appellant on 13.3.1972 applied to the Court of Small Causes, Bombay for fixation of standard rent of flat.
In April 1972 the licensor and the Society raised a dispute under section 91 of the Maharashtra Co operative Societies Act, 1960 to recover possession from the appellant,who in turn filed a suit in the Court of Small Causes, Bombay for declaration that he was tenant of the flat.
He also filed an interim application for stay of the dispute proceeding till disposal of his application for fixation of standard rent, which was rejected and his writ petition against the said order was also dismissed by the High Court on 7.9.1977.
The Co operative Court, Bombay dismissed the dispute proceeding holding that the appellant was a licensee and not a tenant but the society was an idle party which acted in collusion with the licensor to evict the appellant.
On appeal by the licenser and the Society, the Maharashtra State Co operative Appellate Court set aside the order of the Co operative Court, against which the appellant filed a writ petition before the High Court contending that the agreement, though style as a leave and licence, was a lease; that section 91 of the Maharashtra Co operative Societies Act was not attracted and could not have been invoked by the respondents; and that section 91 itself was ultra vires article 14 of the Constitution to the extent it tried to reach non members of co operative societies.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition.
Hence the present appeal by special leave.
By Maharashtra Act 17 of 1973, sections 5(4A), and 15 A were introduced in the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates (Control) Act, 1947,to confer the status and protection of a tenant on a licensee, who, on the first day of Feb. 1973, had a subsisting agreement and was on that date in occupation of any premises or part thereof, which was not less than a room, as a licensee.
On the question whether:(1) the agreement dated 11.6.1969 was one of leave and licence or if lease, and if it was so, whether the 594 occupant was entitled to benefit of section 15 A of the Rent Act; and (2) the matter was one touching the business of the society so as to attract s.19 of the Maharashtra co operative Societies Act within the jurisdiction of Co operative Courts.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court HELD: 1.1 By mere use of the word lease or licence the correct categorisation of an instrument under law cannot be affected.
Whether a particular grant amounts to lease or a licence, depends on its substance.
If a document gives only a right to use the property in a particular way or under certain terms while it remains in possession and control of the owner thereof, it will be a licence.
If there is a transfer of interest in law and exclusive possession is given to the grantee or where the ingredients of a lease are present and the licensee is, according to law, a tenant, then it is a lease and he ought to be given benefit of the Rent Act.
[602B E] 1.2 In determining whether the agreement was a lease or licence, the test of exclusive possession, though of significance, is not decisive and exclusive possession itself will not amount to creation of interest nor would it militate against the concept of a licence, if the circumstances negative any intention to create a tenancy.
[602G, E F] 1.3 The intention of the parties in making the agreement is determinative of the question whether it was a lease or licence.
The intention has to be gathered from the terms of the agreement construed in the context of the surrounding, antecedent and consequent circumstances.
The crucial test would be what the parties intended.
If in fact it was intended to create an interest in the property it would be a lease, if it did not, it would be a licence Interest for this purpose means a right to have the advantage accruing from the premises or a right in the nature of property in the premises but less than title.
[603H, 602F H] 2.
In the instant case, it is clear from the tenor of the agreement that the intention of the parties was to create only a licence and not a lease.
Positively it speaks of a licence for the use of the flat and negatively that the licensee would not claim any tenancy or subtenancy.
What was given to the licensee was the use of the flat with furniture, fittings etc., which could not be said to have created any interest in the flat though in effect the use continued for a stipulated period of time.
[602A C] 595 Board of Revenue etc.
vs A.M. Ansari etc.
; , ; Tarkeshwar Sio Thakur Jiu vs Dar Dass Dey & Co. & Ors., ; , relied on; Sohan Lal Naraindas vs Laxmidas, Raghunath Gadit , followed.
Antoniades vs Villiers and Anr., [1988] (3) All.
E.R. 1058; N.E. Railway vs Hastings, , Isaac vs Hotel De Paris, Ltd. , Booker vs Palmer referred to.
3.1 Section 15A read with section 5(11)(bb) of the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates (Control) Act, 1947, makes the tenant one of status rather than of contract.
Intention to create a licence as defined in the Act if the other requirements fulfilled, would, therefore, be enough to confer that status from the specified date.
Section 15A required that the occupant must be in occupation of the premises as a licensee as defined in s.5(4A) on the first day of Feb. 1973.
If he be such a licensee, the non obstante clause of s.15A(1) gives him the status and protection of a tenant in spite of there being anything to the contrary in any other law or in any contract.
Even as against the express terms of the subsisting contract licence, a person in occupation of any premises or part thereof, which is not less than a room, as a licensee, shall, in view of these provision, be deemed to have become a tenant on the first day of Feb. 1973, and would enjoy the benefits of section 15A.
But if he was not a licensee under a subsisting agreement on the 1st of Feb. 1973, then he did not get the advantage of the amending provision of the Rent Act.
[608E F, 610AB] 3.2 The sine qua non for the applicability of section 15A of the Rent Act was that a licensee must be in occupation as on Feb.1, 1973, under a subsisting licence.
A person continuing in possession after termination, withdrawal or revocation of the licence is a trespasser or a person who has no semblance of any right to continue in occupation of the premises.
Such a person by no stretch of imagination could be called a licensee.
[612B C, 610C] 4.
The appellant would, otherwise, be included in the definition of licensee under section 5(4A) of the Rent Act, but as he had no subsisting licence, the same having stood terminated by notice on 10.3.1972, the licence as defined by the Rent Act itself would not apply to appellant 's case, and he was nothing but a rank trespasser not entitled to the protection of section 15A of the Rent Act and could not, therefore, plead the bar of section 28(1) thereof.[608A, 609A, 612C D] 596 D.H. Maniar and Ors.
vs Waman Laxman Kudav, ; , O.N. Bhatnagar vs Smt.
Rukibai Narsindas & Others, ; , relied on.
Chandavarkar Sita Ratna Rao vs Ashalata section Guram; , , referred to.
Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd. & Anr.
vs Shyam Cooperative Housing Society & Ors, ; , distinguished.
The matter of eviction of the appellant was a dispute touching the business of the society as envisaged by s.91 of the Maharashtra Co operative Societies Act and the Co operative Courts rightly exercised jurisdiction.[611B; 613B] Smt.
Krishna Rajpal Bhatia and Ors.
vs Miss Leela H. Advani & Ors., ; , relied on.
Deccan Merchants Cooperative Bank Ltd. vs M/S Dalichand Jugraj Jain & Ors., [1969] 1 SCR 887 referred to.
Since the appellant was involved in a dispute touching the business of the society of which he was a nominal member, his contention that section 91 of the Maharashtra Co operative Societies Act to the extent it tries to reach persons who are not members is ultra vires article 14 of the Constitution, was not tenable.
[613C D]
