The appellant was the Master of the Merchant ship, M.V. Eamaco, when it sank in the high seas nearly 232 nautical miles away from India.
The appellant was holder of a Master 's certificate issued by the Director General of Shipping, Calcutta.
The ship was owned by a Singapore company and was flying Panamian flag.
The first respondent filed a complaint in the Court of 14th Metropolitan Magistrate, Egmore, Madras against the appellant for initiation of enquiry proceedings under section 363 of the Merchant Shiping Act, 1958 complaining about the negligence of the appellant while he was the Master of the ship and further stating that the shipping casualty had occurred due to sheer negligence and gross in competence of the Master when he failed to launch the life boats and life crafts which resulted in loss of the ship, the cargo and valuable lives of sailors.
The appellant filed a Criminal Miscellaneous Petition in the High Court under section 482 of the Cr.
P.C. stating that the proceedings were by an abuse of process of the court and the Court had no jurisdiction to proceed with the complaint against the appellant when there was no negligence on his part.
The High Court rejected the petition and held that the Shipping Act was applicable to the instant case and the action of the petitioner amounted to sheer negligence and called for investigation and inquiry under the Act.
The appellant has appealed to this Court.
In this court it was inter alia contended on behalf of the appellant that (i) the negligence complained of having occurred in respect of a foreign ship, flying foreign flag, at a place 232 natuical miles away from India, and as such, outside the territorial waters of India, the Act was 743 not applicable; (ii) even if the Act was applicable it would not amount to a shipping casualty as envisaged in part XII of the Act; and (iii) even assuming that Chapter XII applied the complaint could not have been filed by the appellant in the court of the 14th Metropolitan Magistrate, Egmore under Section 363 of the Act.
On behalf of the respondent it was contended that the shipping casualty having occurred within the territorial waters of India which extended up to 200 nautical miles, the Act would be applicable.
It was further submitted that the certificate of competentence issued under the provisions of Part VI of the Act was a valuable certificate and if the holder of such a certificate of competency was alleged to have committed misconduct or acts of incompetency there was no reason why an inquiry into that misconduct or incompetency could not be orderd by the Central Government to a court competent to exercise jurisdiction under section 361 of the Act.
Allowing the appeal, setting aside the judgment of the High Court, and quashing the complaint and the proceedings against the appellants, this Court.
HELD: (1) The ship was not a ship owned wholly by persons each of whom was a citizen of India or by a company satisfying the description under clause (b) or (c) of sub section (2) of Section 2 of the Act.
The ship being a Panamanian ship registered in Panama would come within the purview of the Act only while it was within India including its territorial waters.
[749C D] (2) By a notification of the Government of India dated 15th January, 1977 the exclusive economic zone of India had been extended upto a distance of 200 nautical miles into the sea from the shore and other maritime zones, under the 40th Constitution Amendement Act, 1976.
[750H 751A] (3) The concepts of territorial waters, continental shelf and exclusive economic zone are different concepts and the proclamation of exclusive economic zone to the limit of 200 nautical miles into the sea from the shore baseline would in no way extend the limit of territorial waters which extends to 12 nautical miles measured from the appropriate baseline.
[751B] (4) Admittedly the ship at the time of the casualty was at a place beyond the territorial waters of India and even the exclusive economic zone of India.
If this be the position, the ship would not be covered by the provisions of section 2 of the Act and consequently the provisions of 744 the Act would not apply to the instant casualty.
[751C] (5) The Act itself having not been applicable, Chapter XII being a part of the Act will also not be applicable.
[751D] (6) What is envisaged under section 361 is a formal investigation into a shiping casualty and not a preliminary inquiry.
Similarly section 262 does not envisage inquiring into any charge of incompetency or misconduct otherwise than in the course of the formal investigation into a shipping casualty.
[753H 754B] (7) Prima facie, the complaint does not disclose the ingredients required under section 363 of the Act.
It nowhere mentions that it was a transmission of the statement of a case to the court by the Central Government; it also nowhere mentions that the reason to believe had been founded otherwise than in the course of a formal investigation into the shipping casualty.
On the other hand in para 2 it says that the complainant is the Principal Officer who is competent person appointed under the Act to complain about the negligence of the accused.
There is however no doubt that he is not so empowered under section 363.
[757G,E F] (8) The High Court correctly observed that section 363 enabled the Central Government to transmit a case to the court which had jurisdiction under section 361 to make an inquiry against master, mate or engineer into the charges for incompetency or misconduct otherwise than in the course of formal investigation into shipping casualties, but the High Court failed to notice that the complainant himself had no power under section 363.
[758C D]
