The Appellant Assessee, a partnership firm was engaged mainly, in Malaya, in money lending business since 1949 and incidental to this business was also doing the business of sale and purchase of house properties, gardens and estates.
It was reconstituted under a deed dated 26.3.1960.
The firm was dissolved on 13.3.1961 and closed its accounts with effect from that date.
In its income tax return filed on 10.4.1962 for the assessment year 1961 62 it had filed a profit and loss account wherein amount of $.1,01,248 equivalent of Rs.1,58,057 was shown as "difference on revaluation of the estates, gardens and house properties" on the dissolution of the firm.
In the memo of adjustment for income tax purposes this amount was deducted as being not assessable either as revenue or capital.
The Income Tax Officer issued notice under section 23(2) of the Act on that very day and completed the assessment also on the same day after making a petty addition of Rs.2088 paid as property tax in Malaya.
When for the subsequent year 1962 63, the assessee filed its return showing nil income stating in the forwarding letter that the Firm had been dissolved on 13.3.1961, the I.T.O. wrote to the assessee that the revaluation difference of Rs.1,58,057 should have been brought to tax in the previous year.
The assessee replied that no profit or loss could be assessed on a revaluation of assets, that the assessee was gradually winding up its business in Malaya, the surplus would be only capital 625 gains and that revalutation had been at the market price prevalent since 1954 and thus no capital gains were chargeable to tax.
Not satisfied, the I.T.O. issued a notice under section 148 read with Section 147(b) of the Income Tax Act, 1961.
The assessee filed objections.
Overruling all the objections, the Income Tax Officer completed reassessment of the assessee Firm adding back the sum of Rs. 1,58,057 to the previously assessed income.
Having failed right upto the High Court, the assessee came in appeal before this Court.
Dismissing the appeal, affirming the decision of the High Court, this Court.
HELD: (1) The proceedings u/s 147(b) were validly initiated.
The facts of this case squarely fall within the scope of propositions (2) and (4) enunciated in Kalyanji Mavji 's case.
Proposition (2) may be briefly summarised as permitting action even on a "mere change of opinion".
This is what has been doubted in the IENS case.
But, even leaving this out of consideration, there can be no doubt that the present case is squarely covered by proposition (4) set out in Kalyanji 's case.
This proposition clearly envisages a formation of opinion by the Income Tax Officer on the basis of material already on record provided the formation of such opinion is consequent on "information" in the shape of some light thrown on aspects of facts or law which the Income Tax Officer had not earlier been conscious of.
[636G 637B] The difference between the situations envisaged in propositions (2) and (4) of Kalyanji Mavji is this, that proposition (4) refers to a case where the Income Tax Officer initiates reassessment proceedings in the light of "information" obtained by him by an investigation into material already on record or by research into the law applicable thereto which has brought out an angle or aspect that had been missed earlier.
Proposition (2) no doubt covers this situation also but it is so widely expressed as to include also cases in which the Income Tax Officer, having considered all the facts and law, arrives at a particular conclusion, but reinitiates proceedings because, on a reappraisal of the same material which had been considered earlier and in the light of the same legal aspects to which his attention had been drawn earlier, he comes to a conclusion that an item of income which he had earlier consciously left out from the earlier assessment should have been brought to tax.
[637F H] It is true that the return was filed and the assessment was completed on the same date.
Nevertheless, it is opposed to normal human 626 conduct than an officer would complete the assessment without looking at the material placed before him.
It is not as if the assessment record contained a large number of documents or the case raised complicated issues rendering it probable that the Income Tax Officer had missed these facts.
It is a case where there is only one contention raised before the Income Tax Officer and it is, we think, impossible to hold that the Income Tax Officer did not at all look at the return filed by the assessee or the statements accompanying it.
The more reasonable view to take would, in our opinion, be that the Income Tax Officer looked at the facts and accepted the assessee 's contention that the surplus was not taxable.
But, in doing so, he obviously missed to take note of the law laid down in Ramachari which there is nothing to show, had been brought to his notice.
when he subsequently became aware of the decision, he initiated proceedings under section 147(b).
The material which constituted information and on the basis of which the assessment was reopened was the decision in Ramachari.
this material was not considered at the time of the original assessment.
Though it was a decision of 1961 and the Income Tax Officer could have known of it had he been diligent, the obvious fact is that he was not aware of the existence of that decision then and, when he came to know about it, he rightly initiated proceedings for reassessment.
[639E 640B] The material on which the Income Tax Officer has taken action is a judicial decision.
This had been pronounced just a few months earlier to the original assessment and it is not difficult see that the Income Tax Officer must have missed it or else he could not have completed the assessment as he did.
Indeed it has not been suggested that he was aware of it and yet chose not to apply it.
It is therefore, much easier to see that the initiation of reassement proceedings here is based on definite material not considered at the time of the original assessment.
[640D E] (2) The stock in trade of a firm at the time of its disolution, has to be assessed at a fair value.
there can be no manner of doubt that, in taking accounts for purposes of dissolution, the firm and the partners, being commercial men, would value the assets only on a real basis and not at cost or at their other value appearing in the books.
The real rights of the partners cannot be mutually adjusted on any other basis.
This is what happened in Ramachari.
Indeed, this is exactly what the partners in this case have done and, having done so, it is untenable for them to contend that the valuation should be on some other basis.
Once this principle is applied and the stock in trade is valued at market price, the surplus, if any, has to get reflected as the profits of the firm 627 and has to be charged to tax.
The view taken by the High Court has held the field for about thirty years now and we see no reason to disagree even if a different view was possible.
[642B D, 647E,648A C] Popular Automobiles vs Commissioner of Income Tax, ; Sunil Siddharthbhai vs Commissioner of Income Tax, ; Pupular Workshops vs Commissioner of Income Tax ; Malabar Fisheries Co. vs Commissioner of Income Tax, ; Indian & Eastern Newspaper Society vs Commissioner of Income Tax, ; Kalyanji Mavji & Co. vs Commissioner of Income Tax, [1976] 102 I.T.R. 287; M/s A.L.A. Firm vs The Commissioner of Income Tax, Madras ; Commissioner of Income Tax vs Hind Construction Ltd., ; Commissioner of Income Tax vs Birla Gwalior (P) Ltd., ; Anandji Haridas & Co. (P) Ltd. vs S.P. Kushare, Sales Tax Officer, [1968] 21 S.T.C. 326; Commissioner of Income Tax vs Dewas Cine Corporation, ; Ramachari & Co. vs Commissioner of Income Tax, ; Maharaj Kumar Kamal Singh vs Income Tax Officer, S.C.; Commissioner of Income Tax vs A Raman & Co., S.C.; Salem Provident Fund Society Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income Tax, ; Commissioner of Income Tax vs Rathinasabapathy Mudaliar, ; Addanki Narayanappa vs Bhaskara Krishnappa, ; ; Commissioner of Income Tax vs Bankey Lal Vaidya ; Kikabhai Premchand vs Commissioner of Income Tax, [1953] 24 I.T.R. 506 (S.C.); Commissioner of Income tax vs K.A.R.K. Firm, ; Chainrup Sampathram vs Commissioner of Income Tax, ; Commissioner of Income Tax vs M/s. Shoorji Vallabhadas & Co., , Commissioner of Income Tax vs Krishnaswamy Muldaliar, ; Commissioner of Income Tax vs Ahmedabad New Cotton Mills Co. Ltd., [1930] L.R. 57 I.A. 21; Muhammad Hussain Sahib vs Abdul Gaffor Sahib, reffered to.
