On 23.12.1976 at about 1 p.m. when Bali (deceased) along with PWs 1 and 5 was in his field, the four appellants each armed with a Lathi, along with Braham Singh armed with a 'Ballam ', came there.
On the exhortation of Chandroo, all other appellants and Braham Singh attacked Bali with their respective weapons and caused injuries to him.
While PW 3 tried to save her husband, she too was injured.
When PW 1 along with PWs 3 and 4 rushed to the scene of occurrence, the assailants took to their heels.
Injured Bali was removed to the hospital.
He succumbed to his injuries on the same day at about 7.45 p.m.
It seems that there was trained relationship between the appellants and the deceased for a considerable length of time over grazing of cattle, resulting in damage to the standing crops.
On account of this, there was simmering feeling between the parties.
Added to that, there were certain criminal prosecutions between the parties, pending for over a period of two years.
The four appellants along with Braham Singh (since acquitted by the Trial Court) took their trial.
The Trial Court found the four appellants guilty of offences under section 302 read with section 34 and under section 323 read with section 34 IPC and sentenced them to undergo imprisonment for life and to six months ' rigorous imprisonment respectively.
The 5th accused, Braham Singh, was acquitted.
On appeal, the High Court held that the prosecution had not made out a case punishable under section 302 read with section 34 IPC but only under section 304, Part II, IPC read with section 34 IPC.
The High Court sentenced each of them to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of five years.
The conviction of all the appellants under section 323 read with 149 IPC was altered into one under section 323 read with 34 IPC and the sentence of six months ' rigorous imprisonment was retained.
686 Before this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellants that since both the courts below had overlooked the glaring infirmities and ignored the material evidence supporting the defence theory as well as the manifest errors appearing in the evidence, this Court would be justified in interfering with the concurrent findings of both the courts.
According to the learned counsel, the prosecution had shifted the scene of occurrence, changed the time of occurrence, unduly delayed the registration of the case and put forth a false explanation for its tardiness both in the matter of registration and investigation of the case.
Allowing the appeals by setting aside the convictions and the sentence imposed by the High Court, this Court, HELD: (1) Under Article 136, Interference by the Supreme Court will be called for even with the findings of fact given by the High Court, if the High Court has acted perversely or otherwise improperly.
[690F] The State of Madras vs A. Vaidyanatha Iyer, ; ; Himachal Pradesh Administration vs Shri Om Prakash, ; Balak Ram vs State of U.P., ; ; Arunachalam vs P.S.R. Sadhananthan, ; State of U.P. Hamit Singh & Ors., ; State of U.P. vs Pheru Singh & Ors., [1989] Suppl.
1 S.C.C. 288, referred to.
(2) The evidence adduced by the prosecution falls short of the test of reliability and acceptability and as such it is highly unsafe to act upon it.
[697H] (3) A thorough and scrupulous examination of the facts and the circumstances of the case leads to an irresistible and inescapable conclusion that the prosecution has miserably failed to establish the charges leveled against these appellants by producing cogent, reliable and trustworthy evidence.
Both the Courts below instead of dealing with the intrinsic merits of the evidence of the witnesses, have acted perversely by summarily disposing of the case, pretermitting the manifest errors and glaring infirmities appearing in the case.
[698A B]
