The Indian Olympic Association was a society registered under the Societies Registration Act, with the principal object to sponsor, supervise, finance, regulate and control all aspects of sports activity in relation to the Asian, Commonwealth, Olympic and International competitions.
The Society had a set of rules and regulations.
There are five categories of members described in Rule 3.
The management of the affairs of the Association is entrusted to an Executive Council defined in Rule 1(v).
Rule 8 provided that the Executive Council shall have (i) a President, (ii) 9 Vice Presidents, (iii) a Secretary General, (iv) 6 Joint Secretaries, (v) a Treasurer and (vi) 19 Members.
The terms of the Executive Council was to be 4 years, while Rule 11 provides the voting procedure.
The Indian Olympic Association was reconstituted with effect from 28 of October, 1984, with the appellant in C.A. No. 852 of 1991, Shri V. C. Shukla as the President, K. Murugan, the appellant in C.A. No. 848 of 1991 as one of the 6 Joint Secretaries.
In November, 1988, one of the Vice President of the 1984 Executive Council, Shri B.S. Adityan, the appellant in C.A. No. 849/91 was elected as President for a term of four years.
On 16th of May, 1990, there was a requisition of 17 Members for a special general meeting for considering the move of a no confidence 659 motion against the aforesaid Shri B.S. Adityan and his Executive Council.
This initiated a period of confrontation between the two groups in the Association.
In May 1990, the Executive Council overruled the aforesaid requisition as invalid and President Adityan called a metting of the General Assembly at Madras for 15th of June, 1990.
For the same day the other group summoned a meeting at New Delhi.
This aforesaid situation led to Court proceedings, and the Delhi High Court restrained the requisitionists from holding their meeting at New Delhi and appointed a retired Judge of the Delhi High Court as an observer for the meeting to be held at Madras.
At this meeting Shri V.C. Shukla, the appellant in C.A. No. 852/91 claimed to have been elected.
The matter was taken to Court and a Single Judge decided in favour of Shri B.S. Adityan, the appellant C.A.No. 8549/91, but when the matter came up before the Full Bench of the High Court, it remitted the matter to a Single Judge who appointed a retired Judge of this Court to discharge the function of the President of the Association as an interim measure.
This Order has been challenged by the appellants in Civil Appeals Nos.
852 853/91.
The Fencing Association of India filed a civil suit at Jabalpur for the declaration that Shri V. C. Shukla had been duly elected.
The application for injunction from having been rejected by the Trial Judge, an appeal had been taken to the High Court where the Single Judge ordered status quo.
Two Civil Appeals were also filed against this order.
It was contended on behalf of the appellants that under the rules the term of the President and the Executive Council was four years and in the absence of a clear provision for a vote of no confidence which would curtail the period, there could be no reduction of the period of office, and that the entire Executive Council could not be voted out of office by a motion of no confidence.
Disposing of the appeals, this Court, HELD: 1. Sports in modern times has been considered to be a matter of great importance to the community.
International sports has assumed greater importance and has been in the focus for over a few decades.
[664D E] 660 2.
It is unfortunate that the highest body incharge of monitoring all aspects of such sports has got involved in group fight leading to litigation and the objectives of the I.O.A. have been lost sight of.
The representation of India in the I.O.A. has been in jeopardy.
[664E F] 3.
The grooming of amateurs has been thrown to the winds and the responsibility placed on the Society has not been responded.
This, therefore, does not appear to be a situation where rights to office will have to be worked out by referring to the provisions of the law relating to meetings, injunction and rights appurtenant to elective offices.
[664F G] 4.
What seems to be of paramount importance is that healthy conditions must be restored as early as possible into the working of the Society and a fresh election has to be held as that seems to be the only way to get out of the malady.
[644G H] 5.
The entire nation is looking up to the results of the competitions at the international games when they are held.
I.O.A. has great responsibilities to discharge in organising and streamlining the national sport activities intended for international events.
The monitoring has to be a continuous one and unless the scheme is ongoing and is made result oriented, the international performance cannot be up to any appreciable level.
[664G 665B] 6.
This does not appear to be a matter where individual rights in terms of the rules and regulations of the Society should engage attention.
[664D E] 7.
It is appropriate that all the litigations now pending should abate, and for appropriate functioning of the Society the litigation outside the headquarters of the Society should not be permitted.
[665B C] 8.
A fresh Executive Council should be set up and for that purpose, elections should be held within two months hence; a retired Judge of this Court is appointed to conduct the elections keeping the provisions of the rules and regulations of the I.O.A. in view.
All the proceedings in the different High Courts abate.
[665C D, G] 9.
It is directed that the Union of India should take greater interest in organising sports both for national and international purposes.
Sports have a role to play in building up good citizens.
That 661 aspect should be kept in view, while a lot of money is allotted for the purpose of improvement of sports, the result has been considerably poor and deceptive.
This aspect of the criticism hear from everywhere in this country shall also be given due consideration.
[666A B]
