The original occupant of the suit godowns had on 1.10.1963 granted to the appellant a licence in respect of the premises and subsequently by a deed of assignment dated 13.8.1966 assigned all its rights, title and interest in the premises in favour of the appellant.
The appellant had in the meantime by agreement dated 27.3.1964 permitted the second respondent to store goods in the premises.
The appellant thereafter requested the Corporation to recognise it as the principal occupant of the premises by means of a formal agreement.
This request was at first rejected by the Corporation on the ground that the second respondent, had been already in occupation of the premises.
Subsequently the Corporation examined the terms and conditions of the agreement dated 27.3.1964 and after satisfying itself the Corporation transferred the occupancy right to the appellant on the appellant executing a formal agreement dated 17.6.1967.
A notice dated 25.7.1969 terminating tenancy in terms of the agreement dated 17.6.1969 was served on the appellant.
This was followed by an enquiry under the Bombay Municipal Corporation Act 1888 which resulted in the order of eviction dated 6.1.1971, the appellant being the principal tenant and the second respondent as a sub tenant.
The enquiry officer, acting as a delegate in terms of section 68 and exercising the power of Commissioner of the Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay, the first respondent under section 195B, ordered eviction of the appellant on the ground of sub letting the premises.
The enquiry officer, on inspection, found that the second respondent was in occupation of the premises as a sub lessee that the appellant 830 had sub let the premises contrary to the terms of the conditions of occupation and had thus become an unauthorised occupant liable to be evicted from the premises in terms of section 105B, and passed an order of eviction against the appellant.
This order was, on appeal, set aside by the appellate officer, on appreciation of the evidence and the terms of the agreements, the appellate officer held that the agreement dated 27.3.1964, approved and recorded the assignment and transfer of the right, title and interest of the original occupant to the appellant, and recognised the appellant as the principal occupant, and that the Corporation was at all material times aware of the appellant 's relationship with the second respondent and the occupation of the premises by the second respondent under the appellant.
The eviction of the appellant solely on the ground of sub letting was therefore unwarranted.
The High Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 227 of the Constitution held that the appellate officer was wrong in saying that the circumstances had not altered so as to warrant an order of eviction on the ground of sub lease, and that the lease in favour of the appellant had been duly determined by the Corporation in terms of the contract, and the appellant having thus become an "unauthorised" occupant was as such liable to be evicted under clause (b) of sub section (1) of section 105B.
The High Court accordingly set aside the order made by the appellate officer under section 105B and restored the order of eviction made under section 105B by the Enquiry Officer.
In the appeal to this Court it was submitted on behalf of the appellant that persons in occupation of premises under authority are not liable to be evicted otherwise than on any one of the statutorily specified grounds, and that the application of clause (b) of sub section (1) of section 105B, is confined to persons in unauthorised occupation, and that the appellate officer having found that the Corporation when it entered into an agreement of occupation with the appellant on 17.6.1967 fully aware of the terms and conditions under which the second respondent was in occupation of the premises under the appellant, the High Court was not justified in upholding the eviction of the appellant on the very same ground.
On behalf of the respondent No. 1 Corporation it was submitted that in view of the finding that the sub lease granted or renewed by the appellant was contrary to clauses (6) and (2) of the agreement dated 17.6.1967 the appellant has, after the expiry of the period stipulated in 831 the notice dated 25.7.1969, become an unauthorised occupant, and is liable to be evicted in terms of clause (b) of sub section (1) of section 105B.
On the question: whether it is open to the Corporation to have recourse to clause (b) of sub section (1) of section 105B to order eviction of the appellant as an unauthorised occupant, and whether clause (b) is attracted where eviction is sought to be made by determination of authority otherwise than in terms of the statute.
Allowing the appeal, the Court, HELD: 1.
Section 105A to section 105H of Chapter VA were inserted in the Act in 1961 to provide for speedy eviction of persons in unauthorised occupation of Corporation premises.
(839C) Section 105A(d) defines 'unauthorised occupation '.
This definition shows that occupation of Corporation premises without authority for such occupation is an unauthorised occupation.
Such occupation includes continuance in occupation by a person after the authority under which he occupied the premises has "expired" or it has been "duly determined".
the definition thus includes not only a trespasser whose initial and continued occupation has never been under any valid authority, but it also includes in equal measure a person whose occupation at its commencement was under authority, but such authority has since expired, or, has been duly determined Which means validly determined.
The expiry of authority to occupy occurs by reason of the terms or conditions of occupation.
On the other hand, the determination of authority to occupy to be due or valid must be founded on one of the grounds specified by the statute.
Any order of eviction on the ground of either "expiry" or due determination" has to be made in accordance with the procedure prescribed by the statute.
[839D H] 3.
Clause (a) of sub section (1) of section 105B contains various grounds upon which a person is liable to be evicted.
Clause (b) says that unauthorised occupation itself is a ground for eviction.
Sub section (2) speaks of show cause notice before an order of eviction by notice is made under sub section (1).
Sub section (3) has conferred sufficient power on the Commissioner to enforce an order of eviction made by him under sub section (1).
For the purpose of holding an enquiry under the Act, the Commissioner is invested with all the powers of a Civil Court (Section 105E) An appeal lies from every order of the Commissioner 832 under section 105B or section 105C to the appellate officer, namely the Principal Judge of the City Civil Court of Bombay (section 105F), whose orders are final and not liable to be "called in question in any original suit, application or execution proceeding" (Section 105G).
[841E G] 4.
The satisfaction of the Commissioner, which is the condition precedent to the exercise of power of eviction by the summary procedure prescribed by the Act, may be in respect of any of the circumstances falling under clauses (a), (b) or (c) of sub section (1) of section 105B.
Clause (a) contemplates eviction of any person on any one of the grounds mentioned in sub clauses (i) to (iv) thereof.
These grounds relate only to a person in authorised occupation of Corporation premises.
They have no application to a trespasser.
[841H 842B] 5.
Likewise, clause (c) presumably applies to authorised occupation of Corporation premises, which the Commissioner is empowered to terminate by ordering eviction of the occupant otherwise than on any of the grounds specified under clause (a), provided the Commissioner is satisfied that the premises in question are required by the Corporation in the public interest.
All that the Commissioner has to satisfy himself in a case falling under clause (c) is as regards the public interest requiring eviction.
Construction of parks, playgrounds, hospitals, colleges, markets, destitute homes and the like will indeed qualify for invoking the Commissioner 's power under clause (c).
[842C] 6.
Clause (b) is a powerful weapon for eviction of an unauthorised occupant.
This clause is applicable equally to a trespasser as it is to a person whose occupation has ceased to be an authorised occupation by reason of expiry of authority in terms thereof or due determination of authority under clause (a) or clause (c) of sub section (1) of section 105B. [842D] 7.
If a person is in occupation without authority, as in the case of a trespasser, or if the authority under which a person has been in occupation has expired in terms thereof and he continues to remain in occupation of the premises, he will be liable to be evicted on the ground mentioned in clause (b) of sub section (1) of section 105B, but in accordance with the procedure laid down in that section and on the satisfaction of the Commissioner, expressed by an order, as to the lack or expiry of authority.
[842E F] 8.
Sub letting as such, without more, is not a ground for eviction 833 under clause (a) (ii).
What attracts eviction in terms of that provision is sub letting which is contrary to the terms or conditions of occupation.
[843C] In the instant case, the appellate officer has found that the occupation of the premises by the second respondent under the appellant was well known to the Corporation; the terms and conditions of that occupation were closely scrutinised by the Corporation before recognising the transfer of rights and interest from the previous principal occupant to the appellant; and, it was on that basis and with that knowledge that the Corporation authorised the occupation of the premises by the appellant in terms of the agreement dated 17.6.1967.
In such circumstances, whatever right of occupation which the second respondent enjoyed under the appellant must be deemed to have been incorporated as a term of the authority granted by the Corporation in favour of the appellant.
The appellate officer has categorically found that there was no evidence whatsoever to indicate that the circumstances in which the premises had been occupied by the second respondent had in any manner, or at any time, altered so as to affect the terms or conditions under which the appellant was recognised as the principal occupant.
The Corporation is, accordingly on the facts found, estopped from having recourse to the ground falling under clause (a) (ii) of sub section (1) of section 105B. [843D G] 9.
In proceedings under Article 227 of the Constitution, the high Court was not justified in interfering with the findings of fact rendered against the Corporation by the appellate officer.
[843H 844A]
