The two questions for determination in this appeal were, (1) whether a settlement under section 8A of the Taxation of Income (Investigation Commission) Act, 1947 (30 Of 1947) made after the commencement of the Constitution was constitutionally valid and (2) whether the waiver of a fundamental right was permissible under the Constitution.
The appellant 's case was on July 22, 1948, referred by the Central Government under section 5(1) of the Act to the Investigation Commission.
for investigation and report.
The Commission directed the authorised official under section 6 of the Act to examine the appellant 's accounts.
He submitted his final report by the end of 1953.
The Commission considered the report heard the assessee and came to the conclusion that Rs. 4,47,915 had escaped assessment.
Thereupon the appellant on May 20, 1954, applied to the Commission for a settlement of his case under section 8A of the Act, agreeing to pay Rs. 3,50,000 by way of tax and penalty at the concessional rate.
The Commission reported to the Central Government approving of the settlement, the Central Government accepted it and it was recorded by the Commission.
The Central Government directed the recovery of the said amount under section 8A(2) of the Act.
The appellant was permitted to make payments by monthly instalments of Rs. 5,000 and the total amount thus paid up to September 8, 1957, aggregated to Rs. 1,28,000.
In the meantime the Income Tax Officer issued a certificate and certain properties of the appellant were attached.
Relying on the decisions of this Court in Suraj Mall Mohta and Co. vs A. V. Visvanatha Sastri, ; and M. Ct.
Muthiah vs The Commissioner of Income tax, Madras, ; , the appellant applied to the Commissioner of Income tax challenging the validity of the settlement made under section 8A of the Act on the ground that section 5(1) Of the Act on which it was founded had been declared void by this Court, and claimed that his properties might be released from attachment and the amount paid under the settlement might be refunded to him.
, On January 29, 1958, the Commissioner of Income Tax sent a reply to the appellant maintaining that the settlement was valid and 529 that the appellant was bound thereunder to pay up the arrears of instalments and requesting him to continue to pay in future.
Against this decision of the Commissioner of Income Tax the.
appellant came up to the Supreme Court by special leave.
It was contended on behalf of the respondent that the Act laid down two distinct and separate procedures, one for investigation and the other for settlement and it was the former alone and not the D, latter that was affected by the decisions of this Court.
and that the appellant by voluntarily entering into the settlement had waived his fundamental right founded on article 14 of the Constitution.
Held (Per Curiam), that both the contentions must fail.
It was not correct to say that the Taxation of Income (In vestigation Commission) Act, 1947, laid down two different procedures, one for investigation and assessment under section 8(2) of the Act and another for settlement under section 8A of the Act and assessment in terms of such settlement and that while the decision of this Court in M. Ct.
Muthiah vs The Commissioner of Incometax, Madras, declaring section 5(1) of the Act to be discriminatory and therefore void, affected only the former procedure and not the latter.
The Act laid down but one procedure and in entertaining a proposal for settlement as in the investigation itself the Commission exercised the same jurisdiction, and powers and followed the one and the same procedure as laid down by sections 5, 6 and 7 Of the Act.
Since the settlement in the instant case was no exception to that rule, it was covered by the decision and must be held to be violative of article 14 Of the Constitution.
M. Ct.
Muthiah vs The Commissioner of Income tax, Madras, ; , applied.
The observations made in the majority judgment of this Court in Syed Qasim Razvi vs The State of Hyderabad, [1953] S.C.R. 589, must be kept strictly confined to the special facts of that case and had no application to the facts of the present case.
Syed Qasim Razvi vs The State of Hyderabad, [1953] S.C.R. 589, held inapplicable.
Per Das, C. J., and Kapur J.
There could be no waiver of the fundamental right founded on article 14 Of the Constitution and it was not correct to contend that the appellant had by entering into the settlement under section 8A of the Act, waived his fundamental right under that Article.
Article 14 was founded on a sound public policy recognised and valued all over the civilised world, its language was the language of command and it imposed an obligation on the State of which no person could, by his act or conduct, relieve it.
As it was not strictly necessary for the disposal of this case, the question whether any other fundamental right could be waived need not be considered in this connection.
Laxamanappa Hanumantappa jamkhandi vs The Union of India; , ; Dewan Bahadur Seth Gopal Das Moht 67 530 vs The Union of India, [1955] 1 S.C.R.773; Baburao Narayanrao Sanas vs The Union Of India, [1954] 26 I.T.R. 725; Subedar vs State, A.I.R. 1957 All.
396 and Pakhar Singh vs The State, A.I.R. 1958 Punj.
294, distinguished and held inapplicable.
Per Bhagwati and gubba Rao, jj.
There could be no waiver '.,not only of the fundamental right enshrined in article 14 but also of any other fundamental right guaranteed by Part III of the Constitution.
The Constitution made no distinction between fundamental rights enacted for the benefit of the individual and those enacted in the public interest or on grounds of the public policy.
There could, therefore, be no justification for importing American notions or authority of decided cases to whittle down the transcendental character of those rights, conceived in public interest and subject only to such limitations as the Constitution had itself thought fit to impose.
Article 13(2) was in terms a constitutional mandate to the State in respect of all the fundamental rights enacted in Part III of the Constitution and no citizen could by waiver of any one of them relieve the State of the solemn obligation that lay on it.
The view expressed by Mahajan, C. J., in Behram Khurshed Pesikaka vs The State of Bombay, , correctly laid down the law on the point.
Since the arguments in the instant case had covered the entire field of fundamental rights, there was no reason why the answer should be confined to article 14 alone.
Behram Khurshed Pesikaka vs The State of Bombay, ; State of Travancore Cochin vs The Bombay Co., Ltd., and The State of Bombay vs R. M. D. Chamarbaugwala; , , referred to.
Per section K. Das, J. It seems clear that article 13 itself re cognises the distinction between absence of legislative power which will make the law made by an incompetent legislature wholly void, and exercise of legislative power in contravention of a restriction or check on such power, which will make the law void to the extent of the inconsistency or contravention; therefore the mere use of the word " void " in article 13 does not necessarily militate against the application of the doctrine of waiver in respect of the provisions contained in Part III of the Constitution.
Behram Khurshed Pesikaka vs The State of Bombay, , considered.
Bhikaji Narain Dhakyas vs The State of Madhya Pradesh, ; ; M. Ct.
Muthiah vs The Commissioner of Income tax, Madras, ; and The State of Bombay vs R.M.D. Chamarbaugwala, ; , referred to.
There was nothing in the two preambles to the Indian and the American Constitutions that could make the doctrine of waiver applicable to the one and not to the other; since the doctrine 531 applied to the constitutional rights under the American Constitution, there is no reason why it should not apply to the fundamental rights under the Indian Constitution.
Case law considered.
But it must be made clear that there is no absolute rule, or one formulated in the abstract, as to the applicability of that doctrine to fundamental rights and such applicability must depend on (1) the nature of fundamental right to which it is sought to be applied and (2) the foundation on the basis of which the plea is raised.
The true test must be whether the fundamental right is one primarily meant for the benefit of individuals or for the benefit of the general public.
Where, therefore, the Constitution vested the right in the individual, primarily intending to benefit him and such right did not impinge on the rights of others, there could be a waiver of such right provided it was not forbidden by law or did not contravene public policy or public morals.
As in the instant case the respondents who had raised the plea, had failed to prove the necessary facts on which it could be sustained, the plea of waiver must fail.
Per Subba Rao, J. Apart from the question as to whether there could be a waiver in respect of a fundamental right, section 5(1) of the Taxation of Income (Investigation Commission) Act, 1947, having been declared void by this Court in M. Ct.
Muthiah vs The Commissioner of Income tax, Madras, as being violative of the fundamental right founded on Art ' 14 Of the Constitution and such decision being binding on all courts in India, the Commissioner of Income tax had no jurisdiction to continue the proceedings against the appellant under that Act and the appellant could not by a waiver of his right confer jurisdiction on him.
No distinction could be made under article 13(1) of the Con stitution between the constitutional incompetency of a legislature and constitutional limitation placed on its power of legislation, for a statute declared void on either ground would continue to be so, so long as the inconsistency continued.
As the inconsistency of section 5(1) of the Act with article 14 continued, it must continue to be void.
Keshavan Madhava Menon vs The State of Bombay, [1951] S.C.R. 228; Behram Khurshed Pesihaka vs State of Bombay, and Bhikaji Narain Dhakras vs State of Madhya Pradesh, ; , referred to.
