In the Punjab Excise and Taxation Department there were two separate cadres known as "Assistant Excise & Taxation Officers" governed under the State Service Class III A Rules, 1956 and "Excise & Taxation Officers" governed by the State Service Class II Rules.
Under the class II Rules, appointments were made in the ratio of(a) 50% by direct recruitment and (b) 50% by promotion from amongst Assistant Excise and Taxation Officers.
Likewise under the Class III A Rules 50% of the vacancies were filled by direct recruitment and 50% by promotion from the subordinate staff comprising the Taxation Inspectors, Excise Inspectors, Ministerial Staff Head Office and Ministerial Staff Sub office who within themselves had shares as laid down.
The Writ Petitioners and the contesting respondents Ram Saran and O.P. Singhla had initially joined the Punjab Excise and Taxation Department as clerks and were confirmed as such.
The Petitioners were promoted and appointed as Excise/Taxation Inspectors by transfer under Rule 7(a)(ii) of the Punjab Excise Subordinate Service Rules, 1943 and their lien in the taxation department suspended under Rule 3.14(b) of the Punjab Civil Service Rules.
Whereas Ram Saran and O.P. Singhla continued in the ministerial cadre and were Assistant and Superintendent respectively at the relevant time.
730 Following reorganisation of the department, the carde of Assistant Excise & Taxation Officers was abolished and all the Assistant Excise & Taxation Officers were redesignated as Excise and Taxation Officers.
Consequently Class III A Rules became redundant.
As under Class II Rules there was no provision for promotion of subordinate staff direct as Excise & Taxation Officers the Government in order to provide avenues of promotion to the ministerial carde including Taxation Inspectors and Excise Inspectors brought in suitable amendments to these Rules on the following terms. "Rule 5.
The members of the service shall be recruited in the following manner namely: (a) xxx xxx xxx (b).
In the case of an Excise and Taxation Officer; (i) by promotion from amongst the Taxation Inspectors and Excise Inspectors who have an experience of working as such for a minimum period of five years; or (ii) by promotion from amongst the Superintendents, Assistant, Accountants and Senior Scale Stenographers working in the Excise and Taxation Commissioners Head Office and in the Divisional and District Offices of the Department of Excise and Taxation, Punjab." Applying the draft amended Rules before they were formally promulgated the contesting respondents Ram Saran and O.P. Singhla were promoted as Excise & Taxation Officers on 22.8.1983.
The Writ Petitioners who had been transferred earlier to other cardes of Excise/Taxation Inspectors and worked there for 14/15 years beyond the probation period were not considered.
They therefore, filed writ petitions in the High Court challenging the promotion of the appellants mainly on the ground that on the basis of their seniority and lien in the ministerial cadre, they had a right to be considered for promotion prior to the appellants.
The appellants and the State contended that if the Petitioners wanted to be considered for this post on the basis of their lien in the ministerial carde, they may seek reversion to this cadre and thereafter their case would be considered on merits in accordance with the eligilbility as prescribed under the amended Rule 5 which includes experience of working as such for a period of five years in the ministerial 731 cadre.
To this reply of the Writ Petitioners was that if the service rendered by them in the other cadre as Excise and Taxation Inspectors was not considered as service rendered in the ministerial cadre, they would be ineligible for consideration to this post.
The learned single judge accepted the petitioners ' contention and in allowing the Writ Petitions held that there was no conscious decision to apply the draft rules and consequently the Petitioners were entitled to be considered for the post of Excise & Taxation Officers without any bar of eligibility as their juniors had already been considered.
On appeal, the Division Bench took the view that the draft rules, though not promulgated were rightly implemented.
However on the question whether service rendered by the Petitioners on transfer to the other cadres could be considered as having been rendered in the Ministerial cadre, the Division Bench relying on the decision of this court in State of Mysore & Anr.
vs P.N. Nanjundiah & Anr., , held that it did and that if that is counted the petitioners would be eligible for promotion under the relevant rules with their suspended lien reviving with effect from the date it had suspended and they shall be considered forthwith.
Against this order Ram Saran and O.P. Singhla have preferred appeals by special leave and so has the State separately.
Reversing the decision of the High Court and allowing the appeals dismissing the writ petitions, this Court, HELD: From the scheme of the Rules and the method of recruitment it is clear that the petitioners while working as Inspectors on appointment by transfer to that cadre had the advantage of being considered for promotion as Officers under the amended Rule 5 out of the quota for Inspectors, while the ministerial staff to the exclusion of the Inspectors were entitled to certain percentage.
[739E] The petitioners without being on the ministerial cadre even by reversion could not claim promotion as a member of the ministerial cadre without revival of the lien.
Such revival could be effected only on reversion and not while the lien remained suspended.
[739F] If the Government employee was on deputation or holding a post in another cadre, the lien shall revive as soon as he ceased to hold the post in another cadre.
There is no revival of the lien during the period the employee continues to hold a post in another cadre.
Therefore, during the period the suspension is operative, the employee cannot claim that he had been continuing in the post in the parent cadre and gaining experience.
[740G] 732 When the rule is clear and specific that for the purpose of promotion from the cadre of Superintendents, Assistants, Accountants, Senior Scale Stenographers to the post of Excise and Taxation Officers, the eligibility qualification is 'experience of working ' as such ' for five years, the employee is not entitled to claim the experience in the ex cadre as experience of working in the ministerial cadre.
[740H 741A] State of Mysore & Anr.
vs P.N. Nanjundian & Anr., , distinguished.
C. Narasinga Rao & Ors.
vs State of Andhra Pradesh by its Secretary, Vol. 2 relied upon.
