Nineteen persons were tried by the Additional District and Session Judge, Khetri in S.T. No. 264 of 1973 for offences under section 302/149, 201/149, 379/149, 147 and 148 for the incident that took place on 25.4.1972 in village Padaria Tula (UP) on the day of filing of the nomination papers for election for the post of Pradhan Gaon Sabha, Tikhra in which fire arms were used by the party led by Bhupendra Singh accused no.l, who was also a candidate for the office of Pradhan of Gaon Sabha resulting in the death on the spot of Gajendra Singh, one of the supporters of the rival candidate Ram Sewak, P.W. 2.
The prosecution case is that both the rival candidates with their supporters had come to village Padaria Tula on the morning of 25.4.1972 where nomination papers had to be filed.
On seeing the party of the deceased arriving, Bhupendra Singh enquired from Ram Sewak (P.W.2) if he had come to file his nomination papers against him.
Gajendra Singh (deceased) intervened and challengingly told the accused No. 1 that he should ask him.
Following the altercation that ensued, it is alleged that Bhupendra Singh fired the first shot on the deceased followed by shooting by his other associates and the deceased fell dead.
The party of Ram Sewak fled from the scene to escape the 857 attack.
It is further alleged that the body of the deceased was dragged by Gajendra Singh and his companions and carried by them on a tractor trolly belonging to A1 on which they had come, burnt it and ashes thrown in the river causing disappearance of the entire evidence.
The first Additional Judge acquitted all the charges on the ground that there are many infirmities in the prosecution case rendering its evidence unworthy of belief.
The state of Uttar Pradesh preferred appeal before the Lucknow Bench of the Allahabad High Court.
The High Court set aside the acquittal of Bhupendra Singh (A1) and convicted him for offence under section 302 I.P.C and awarded sentence of Rigorous Imprisonment for life , set aside the acquittal of A 4, 7, 8 in part, convicted them under section 201 of I.P.C. and sentenced each of them to seven years Rigorous Imprisonment thereunder.
Their acquittal under other charges was confirmed.
Appeal as against rest of the accused was dismissed altogether.
A1, 4, 7 and 8 have thus come in appeal against the judgement of the High Court.
In party allowing the appeal setting aside the conviction of appellants 2 to 4 (A1, 7, 8) under section 201 I.P. C. , and altering the conviction of appellant No. 1 (A1) from one under section 302 I.P. C. to one under section 307 I.P.C. and sentencing him to a term of 10 years rigorous imprisonment thereunder, this Court.
HELD: The evidence only established that the first appellant shot at the deceased but it is not known where the bullet hit and whether that injury caused by the said bullet shot caused the death.
Even in the case of shooting by a rifle unless the evidence shows the particular injury caused by the same and that injury is sufficient to cause death, the offence under section 302 I.P.C. could not be said to have been made out.
In the circumstances, therefore, we are unable to agree with the High Court that the first appellant is guilty of offence under section 302 IPC of causing the death of Gajendra Singh.
However we are of the view that while the first appellant shot at the deceased there could be no doubt that either he had the intention to kill him or at least he had the knowledge that the act could cause the death.
[863D E] We consider that the offence would come under the second limb or second part of section 307, IPC.
Though imprisonment for life also could be awarded as sentence for such an offence, on the facts and circumstances we impose a sentence of 10 years rigorous imprisonment.
We alter the conviction under section 302, IPC to one under section 307 IPC and sentence him to a term of 10 years rigorous imprisonment.
[863G].
858 So far as the offence under section 201 IPC is concerned we have read the entire evidence carefully and the same does not impress as to bring home the offence of screening the evidence.
[863H,865H]
