The 4 appellants along with 11 others were tried for murder and for causing injuries.
The learned sessions judge while acquitting all others of all the charges, convicted A 1, A 2, A 5 and A 1 on different counts.
The sentences awarded to them under various charges including the sentence of life imprisonment under section 302 IPC were ordered to run concurrently.
The convicted accused preferred appeal to the High Court against their conviction and sentences and the State appealed against the acquittal of the rest of the accused.
The High Court altered the convection of A 1 and A 2 under section 302 I.P.C. and 302 read with section 34 respectively into one under section 302 read with section 149 I.P.C. and confirmed the sentence for imprisonment for life.
Except for this modification the convictions and sentences in respect of all the four accused were confirmed.
The state appeal against acquittal of all other accused was dismissed.
In this appeal preferred by the four convicted accused namely, A 1, A 2, A 5 and A 11 their counsel confined his arguments against their convictions and sentences under section 302 read with section 149 I.P.C. only as the appellants had either already served or had almost finished serving to their sentences awarded to them under other charges.
876 The argument was that in the absence of a specific finding to the effect that apart from the 4 appellants the prosecution has proved the involvement of other persons, section 149 I.P.C. cannot be invoked for convicting them under section 302 I.P.C. Confirming the convictions and sentences of the appellants under other charges but allowing their appeal against their conviction and sentence under section 302 I.P.C. read with section 149 I.P.C. this Court, HELD: Since the accused who are convicted were only four in number and the prosecution has not proved the involvement of other persons and the court below have acquitted the other accused of all the offences, section 149 cannot be invoked for convicting the four appellants herein.
The learned judges were not correct in stating that A1, A2, A5 and A11 can be held to be the members of an unlawful assembly along with some other unidentified persons on the facts and circumstances of this case.
The charge was not that accused 1,2,5 and 11 "and others" or "and other unidentified persons" formed into an unlawful assembly but it is that "you accused 1 to 15" formed into an unlawful assembly.
It is not the prosecution case that apart from the said 15 persons there were other persons who were involved in the crime.
When the 11 other accused were acquitted it means that their involvement in the offence had not been proved.
It would not also be permissible to assume or conclude that others named or unnamed acted conjointly with the charged accused in the case unless the charge itself specifically said so and there was evidence to conclude that some others also were involved in the commission of the offence conjointly with the charged accused in furtherance of a common object.
[882A D] Amar Singh vs State of Punjab, [1987] 1SCC 679 and Maina Singh vs State of Punjab, [1976]3SCR 651, followed.
