The petitioner, an Advocate and Chairman of the Environmental Protection Cell filed the petition under Article 32 asking the Court to issue directions for closing down of hazardous industries located in the densely populated areas of Delhi, and for regulation of air pollution caused by automobiles operating in the area as also the thermal units generating power for the Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking.
Making an interim order, and keeping the writ petition pending for the purpose of monitoring, the Court.
HELD: 1.
The incorporation of protection of environment as an obligation of the State in the Directive Principles and the mandate in Article 51 A to the citizens of India as part of fundamental duty are indications of the Constitutional recognition of importance of environment of life both the flora and the fauna.
[870 A B] 2.
Law alone also cannot help in restoring a balance in the biospheric disturbance.
Nor can funds help effectively.
The situation requires a perception and imaginative planning.
It also requires sustained effort and result oriented strategic action.
Campaign for general awakening of the people using automobiles of different classification and among the people inhabiting the Capital is an indispensable preliminary.
[871E G] 3.
All persons using automobiles should have a fair knowledge of the baneful effect on the community including those who use such vehicles on account of the emission from such vehicles.
Until that is done in an effective way the appropriate attitude would not develop and cooperation for reducing pollution would not emerge.
[871 F H] 867 4.
A Committee is set up by this court to look into the problem of vehicular pollution in Delhi and for devising methods of solution of the problem.
[ 872 H 873 A].
A retired Judge of this court to act as Chairman, the petitioner and the Chairman of the Central Pollution Control Board and the person representing the Association of Indian Automobiles Manufacturers could be the members of the Committee.
The Committee would also have the power to co opt experts not exceeding three for its efficient working from time to time.
The Joint Secretary in the Ministry of Environment and Forests shall be the Convenor Secretary of the Committee.
[873A D] 6.
The Committee may be constituted with effect from 18th March, 1991, under an appropriate Notification of the Union Government.
[873D] 7.
The Committee shall furnish a report to this Court once in two months as to the steps taken in the matter.
The Union Government and the Delhi Administration are directed to effectively cooperate with the Committee for its successful operation.
[874B]
