Under Section 3 of the Karnataka Slum Areas (Improvement and Clearance) Act, 1973 Notification No. HMA 59 MCS 76 dated 17.1.1977 was issued by the State Government declaring an extent of one acre in the city of Bangalore, as 'slum area '.
After considering the objections, another notification dated 30.12.1977 was issued under Section 11(1) of the Act declaring the entire land as 'slum clearance area '.
However, on January 20, 1981, the Government issued notification under Section 3(1) cancelling the earlier notification dated 3.12.1977 and re declaring an extent of 14 1/2 guntas only as 'slum area '.
The appellants, an Association representing the interest of slum dwellers and a resident of the area challenged notification dated 20.1.1981 on the ground that it was in violation of the principle of natural justice and Article 14 of the Constitution inasmuch as the slum dwellers affected by the Government 's action were not given an opportunity of being heard and were denied equality, since a major part of the slum area has been excluded from the operation of the scheme.
A Single Judge of the High Court held that the appellants had no locus standi to challenge the notification and that even on merits there was no case.
The Division Bench agreed on the question of locus standi but did not go into the merits.
975 The appellants filed an appeal by special leave before this Court, contending that the High Court had erred in holding that the petitioners had no locus standi, that in view of the purpose of the legislation and the scheme contemplated thereunder, once action had been taken declaring a larger area as 'slum clearance area ', any change thereafter which directly affected the slum dwellers could not be taken without giving the affected persons an opportunity of being heard and, there was, therefore, clear violation of the principle of natural justice, and that there was no specific provision under the statute enabling the Government to rescind the notification, and even assuming that it existed there was no proper exercise of the power.
On behalf of Respondent No. 3 it was submitted that there was no need to hear the owners or occupiers at the stage of issuing notification under Section 3(1) of the Act and Section 11 did not confer any statutory right on the occupiers, and that under Section 21 of the General Clauses Act, the power to withdraw or rescind the notification was inherent and the authority who was empowered to issue the notification was entitled to rescind the same.
The State adopted the contentions of Respondents No. 3.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1. 1.
Where a member of the public acting bona fide moves the Court for enforcement of a fundamental right on behalf of a person or class of persons who, on account of poverty or disability or socially or economically disadvantaged position cannot approach the Court for relief, such member of the public may move the Court even by just writing a letter.
[979E] Bandhua Mukti Morcha vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; , relied on.
section P. Gupta vs Union of India, [19821 2 SCR 365; Olga Tellis vs Bombay Municipal Corporation, [1985] Suppl.
2 SCR 51, referred to. 1.2.
The first appellant Association represents the interests of the slum dwellers and the second appellant himself is one of the residents in the area.
The action of the Government affects a class of persons and if that group of persons is represented by the Association, they have a right to be heard in the matter.
Even a public interest litigation would lie in such a situation.
Therefore, the High Court was wrong in concluding that appellants were incompetent to invoke the jurisdiction of the Court.[979D, F] 976 2.1.
What particular rule of natural justice should apply to a given case must depend to an extent on the facts and circumstances of that case, the framework of the law under which the enquiry is held and the body of persons appointed for that purpose.
It is only where there is nothing in the statute to actually prohibit the giving of an opportunity to be heard but, on the other hand, the nature of the statutory duty imposed itself necessarily implied an obligation to hear before deciding, that the audi alteram partem rule could be imported.
1982F] 2.2.
It is one of the fundamental rules of our constitutional set up that every citizen is protected against exercise of arbitrary authority by the State or its officers.
If there is power to decide and determine to the prejudice of a person, duty to act judicially is implicit in the exercise of such power and the rule of natural justice operates in areas not covered by any law validly made.
[982E] 2.3.
When a declaration is made under Section 3 and a further declaration is made under Section 11, the inhabitants of the areas are affected and any further action in relation to the area which is declared to be 'slum clearance area ' without affording such persons an opportunity of being heard would prejudicially affect their rights.
The right to be heard in the matter has been acquired by the earlier action of the authority in considering the area for the purpose of the scheme.
This is clear from the proviso to sub section (1) of Section 11 of the Act.
When any alteration is sought to be made in the original scheme, it becomes incumbent upon the authorities to give an opportunity to the persons who had been affected by the earlier order and required to adopt a certain course of action.
[983D E] 2.4.
It is true that under Section 21 of the General Clauses Act, the power to issue a notification includes the power to rescind it, and it is always open to the Government to rescind the notification.
[980B] State of Kerala vs K. G. Madhavan Pillai, ; ; State of M.P. vs V.P. Sharma, [1966]3 SCR557; Lt. Governor of H.P. vs Sri Avinash Sharma, [ ; ; Lachmi Narain vs Union of India,[ ; ; State of Bihar vs D. N. Ganguly & Ors., [ ; and Kamia Prasad Khetan vs Union of India, ; , referred to.
But when a notification is made rescinding the earlier notifications without hearing the affected parties, it is clear violation of the principles of natural justice.
Such action in exercise of the implied 977 power to rescind cannot then be said to have been exercised subject to the like conditions within the scope of Section 21 of the General Clauses Act.
[983F] In the circumstances, the notification dated 20.1.1981 is liable to be quashed.
It shall be open to the Government to proceed after affording the slum dwellers an opportunity of being heard on the basis of the earlier notifications that were in force.
[983F G]
