The D.T.C. Workers ' Union and some of its members have filed this Writ Petition under Article 32 of the Constitution praying, as the main relief, for issue of a Writ of Mandamus or Direction to the respondent Corporation to implement w.e.f. 1.1.86 the recommendations of the Fourth Pay Commission as approved by the Government of India to the Central Government employees as per the undertakings given to its employees vide Office Orders No.
PLD IX (465/83/10589 dated 15.9.1983 and DGM(IR)/84/90 dated 7.2.1984.
Relying on the undertakings given in the said Office Orders it has been contended on behalf of the petitioners that the D.T.C. employees will be entitled not only to new pay scales as recommended by the Fourth Pay Commission to the corresponding categories in the Central Government but more in the shape of interim reliefs which they has enjoyed during the period of interregnum between their original pay scale and the new pay scales.
On behalf of the Corporation it has been submitted that all the reliefs which its employees had earlier received, be it additional payment in the nature of interim relief in the sum of Rs.50 or Rs.70 as the case may be, or the revised interim pay scale, pending adoption of the new scale recommended by the Fourth Pay Commission, would merge into the new scale and they would have no entitlement to any additional payment as any such differential treatment will be discriminatory and, therefore, unsustainable.
Disposing of the Writ Petition, this Court, HELD: The overriding consideration behind the Order dated 7.2.1984 is that, as in the case of all Government employees, so in the case of the Corporation employees, the new scales recommended by the Fourth Pay Commission should be fully implemented.
Whatever may be the amounts actually payable in terms to the interim reliefs, the 985 employees of the Corporation should neither be paid less nor more than the Government employees in the corresponding categories.[989C] All employees, whether retained on the original pay scale or placed on the revised interim pay scale during the period preceding 1.1.86, will be placed on the pay scale adopted as per the recommendations of the Fourth Pay Commission in such a way that will be fitted exactly in positions corresponding to their positions on the earlier pay scales.
But the corresponding positions in the new pay scale will naturally carry better emoluments, so as to maintain parity with the Government employees in like categories.
We have no doubt that the recommendations of the Fourth Pay Commission will be fully implemented in terms thereof.
[989D E]
