The appellants, `the promotees ' from Class II service were promoted as Executive Engineers by relaxing five years length of service as Class II Engineers in officiating capacity on various dates between January 6, 1969 to May 29, 1971.
Only the appellant No. 1 and two other were confirmed as Executive Engineers w.e.f. July 11, 1973, December 11, 1974 and December 9, 1975 respectively.
The respondent No.1 was recruited and appointed directly as Asstt.
Executive Engineer w.e.f. October 25,1971.
he was also given relaxation of the length of service of five years as Asstt.
Executive Engineer and was promoted as Executive Engineer on October 8, 1973 and was confirmed w.e.f. December 22, 1976.
199 All the appellants except one M.R. Gupta were further promoted as Superintending Engineers on different dates between 1980 to 1984 whereas the respondent No. 1 was promoted as Superintending Engineer on March 4, 1987.
The applicant No. 1 was further promoted as Chief Engineer The validity of the promotion of respondent No. 1 to the post of Chief Engineer was challenged.
The respondent No. 1 who was shown junior to the appellants, field Writ Petition seeking a writ of mandamus directing the second respondent, State Government to consider his case for promotion as Superintending Engineer from the date on which the respondents were promoted assigning the seniority over the appellants and the consequential reliefs.
On reference, a Division Bench of the High Court held that respondent No. 1 was a member of the service from the date of his initial appointment as Asstt.
Executive Engineer and the appellants and the proforma respondents were not members of the service and directed the Single Judge to dispose of the matter on merit, against which, this appeal on leave was filed.
The appellants contended that the appellants being promoted as Executive Engineers against regular vacancies, which were neither a stop gap arrangement nor fortuitous, and being continued in service without any break from the respective dates o their promotion, they were members of the service in a substantive capacity as Executive Engineers from the respective dates of promotion; that since the respondent No. 1 was recruited as Asstt.
Executive Engineer w.e.f. August 30, 1971 long after the promotion of the appellants, the appellants were seniors to the respondent No. 1 as Executive Engineers, as Proviso to Rule (5)2 entitles them to remain in a substantive capacity as Executive Engineer since requisite number of qualified Asst.
Executive Engineers were not available for promotion; that in view of their continous officiation as Executive Engineers in terms of Rule 2(12)(a) of the rules, they must be deemed to be the members of the service from the dates of promotion and, therefore, they were seniors to the respondent no.1.
The respondents contended that unless the appellants were appointed substantively to the cadre posts they could not be members of the service.
The respondent No. 1 became a member of the service 200 from the date of his initial appointment as Asstt.
Executive Engineer, therefore, he was senior to the appellants and proforma respondents.
As agreed by the parties, this Court declare the law on the interpretation of the rules and leave the matter for the State Govt.
to decide the inter seniority on merits.
Disposing the appeal, it is.
HELD: 1.
Appointment to a post in accordance with the rules is a condition precedent and no one can claim appointment to a post or promotion, as of right, but has a right to be considered in accordance with the rules, Appointment by promotion or direct recruitment, therefore, must be in accordance with the rules so as to become a member of the service in a substantive capacity.
Seniority is to be fixed in accordance with the principle laid down in the rules.
[213G 214A] 2.
The promotee has right to confirmation in the cadre post as per Rule 11(4) if a post is available to him within his quota or at a later date under rule 5(2) read with rule 11(4) and gets appointment under rule 8(11).
His seniority would be reckoned only from the date of the availability of the post and the year of allotment, he shall be next below to his immediate senior promotee of that year or the junior most of the previous year of allotment whether officiating or permanent occupying the post within 50% quota.
[214G 215A] 3.
A direct recruit on promotion within his quota, though later to the promotee is interposed in between the periods and interject the promotee 's seniority; snaps the links in the chain of continuity and steals a march over the approved promotee probationer.[215B] 4.
Mere officiating appointment by promotion to a cadre post outside the quota; continuous efficiation therein and declaration of probation would not clothe the promotee with any right to claim seniority over the direct recruits.
The necessary conclusion would, therefore, be that the direct recruit shall get his seniority with effect from the date of the year of the allotment as Asstt.
Executive Engineer which is not alterable.
Where the promotee would get his seniority w.e.f.
the date of the availability of the posts within 50% quota of the promotees.
[215D] 5.
The seniority of the promotee from Class II service Executive Engineer shall be determined with effect from the date on which the cadre post was available to him and the seniority shall be determined accordingly.[215F] 201 6.
Under the Rules `determination of seniority would be made only after the promotee becomes a member of the service '.
Therefore the year of allotment must be determined having regard to (i) availability of the cadre post within quota; (ii) satisfactory completion of the probation, and (iii) appointment to the post in the substantive capacity in term of Rules 12(6) and (7) read with Rule 11(4) and Rule 8(12).
Any other construction would be contrary to the avowed object of the rules as a whole.[218B C] 7.
There is neither invidious discrimination nor arbitrariness in Rule 2(12)(a) offending articles 14 & 16.
The differentiation drawn between direct recruit and the promotee bears rational relation to the object of Rule 2(12).
[219H] 8.
The Government of Haryana to determine the cadre posts, if not already done, regularly from time to time including the post created due to exigencies of service in terms of Rule 3(2) read with appendix `A ' and allot the post in each year of allotment as contemplated under rule 12 read with Rule 5(2)(a) and issue orders appointing substantively to the respective posts within the quota and determine the inter se seniority between the appellants promotees and the direct recruit in the respective quota cadre posts of Executive Engineers etc.
within four months from the date of receipt of this judgment.
The inter se seniority of promotees and direct recruits shall be determined accordingly.
[220D E] M.S. Mighlani vs State of Haryana & Anr. ; J.C. Yadav vs State of Haryana, ; K.K. Khosla vs State of haryana, [1990] 2 SCC 199; V.B. Badami, etc.
vs Stat of Mysore [1976] 1 SCR 815; K.C. Joshi & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors., to.
R.P. Khanna vs S.A.F. Abbas & Ors, at 557 C J; Baleshwar Dass & Ors.
vs State of U.P. & Ors.
, [1981] 1 SCR 449 at 463; B.S. Yadav vs State of Haryana, ; The Direct Recruit, Clall II Engineering Officers ' Association vs State of Maharasthra & Ors., ; at 745 Distinguished. 9.
It is a cardinal rule of interpretation that a proviso to a particular provision of a stature only embraces the field which is covered by the main provision.
It carves out an exception to the main provision to which it has been enacted by the proviso and to no other.
The proper function of proviso is to except and deal with a case which would otherwise fall within the general language o the main enactment, 202 and its effect to confine to that case.
Where the language of the main enactment is explicit and unambiguous, the proviso can have no repercussion on the interpretation of the main enactment, so as to exclude from it, by implication what clearly falls within its express terms.
[211E F] 10.
The scope of the proviso is to carve out an exception to the main enactment and it excludes something which otherwise would have been within the rule.
It has to operate in the same field and if the language of the main enactment is clear, the proviso cannot be torn apart from the main enactment nor can it be used to nullify by implication what the enactment clearly says nor set a naught the real object of the main enactment, unless the words of the proviso are such that it is its necessary effect [211G H] 11.
In interpreting the rule, effect must be given to allow everyone drawn from the sources to have their due share in the service and chances of involvement to effectively discharge the duties of the posts honestly and efficiently with dedication.
Any wanton or deliberate deviation in the implementation of the rules should be curbed and snubbed and the rules must be strictly implemented to achieve the above purpose.
If wanton doviations are allowed to be repeated, it would breed indiscipline among the services and amounts to undue favour to some and denial of equity for many for reasons known or unknown subverting the purpose of the rules.{213F] 12.
Rules 2(1), 2(3), 2(7), 2(10), 2(12)(a) 5(2)(a) 8, 9(2) 11, 12(3) 12(5) to 12(7) to be construed harmoniously.
lest the legislative animation would be defeated and the rules would be rendered otiose and surpluses.
It would also adversely effect the morale and efficiency of the service.[215C] 13.
With a view to have efficient and dedicated services accountable to proper implementation of Govt.
policies, it is open and is constitutionally permissible for the State, to infuse into the services, both talented fresh blood imbued with constitutional commitments, enthusiasm,drive and initiative by direct recuritment, blended with matured wealth of experience from the subordinate services.[212G] 14.
It is permissible to constitute an integrated service of persons recruited from two or more sources, namely, direct recruitment, promotion from subordinate service or transfer from other services.
Promotee from subordinate service generally would get few chances of 203 promotion to higher echolans of services.
[212H] 15.
Avenues and facilities for promotion to the higher services to the less privileged member of the subordinate service would inculcate in them dedication to excel their latent capabilities to man to cadre posts {213A] 16.
Talent is not the privilege of few but equal avenues made available would explore common man 's capabilities overcoming environmental adversity and open up full opportunities to develop one 's capabilities to shoulder higher responsibilities without succumbing to despondence.
Equity talented young men/women of great promise would enter into service by direct recruitment when chances of promotions are attractive.
[213B] 17.
The chance of promotion would also enable a promotee to imbue involvement in the performance of the duties, obviate frustration and eliminate proclivity to corrupt practices, lest one would tend to become corrupt, sloven and mediocre and a dead wood.
In other words, equal opportunity would harness the human resources to augment the efficiency of the service and undue emphasis on either would upset the scale of equality germinating the seeds of degeneration. {213D]
