In the appellant State, there were number of educational institutions running teachers straining course.
Recognition was not accorded to some institutions as they did not fulfill the conditions.
In other cases, the recognition was under consideration.
Admittedly, none of the respondent institutions was accorded recognition.
Since the Education Department did not permit their students to appear at the Public Examination, the respondent institutions filed a Writ Petition before the High Court praying for direction to the appellant State to recognise the institutions and also for a direction permitting their students to appear at the Public Examination.
Following the decision of the Full Bench in similar cases, the Division Bench directed the appellant State to arrange for supplementary examination in respect of the students of the respondent institutions.
Against the said Judgment the State has preferred these appeals, by special leave.
Allowing the appeals, this court, HELD: 1.1.
In the absence of recognition from the Education Department the students pursuing their studies in such Institution could not appear at the public examination held by the Education Department.
The Full Bench rightly held that students of unrecognized educational 232 institutions could not be permitted to appear at the public examination held by the Government.
On its own findings,s the Full Bench should have refused relief to the petitioners.
The Full Bench 's directions permitting the student to appear at the examination and directing the appellant authorities to make a special provision for supplementary examination were unauthorized and wholly unjustified.
[234E G] 1.2.
The Court cannot be a party to direct the students in disobey the statue as that would be destructive of the rule of law.
Courts cannot grant relief to a party on humanitarian ground contrary to law.
Since the Division Bench issued the said orders following the Judgment of the Full Bench, the orders are not sustainable in law.
Nageshwaramma vs State of Andhra Pradesh, [1986](Suppl.) SCC 166 and A.P. Christians Medical Educational Society vs Government of Andhra Pradesh & Anr., ; , relied on.
2.1 Under Article 30 of the Constitution minorities based on religion or language, have fundamental freedom to establish educational institutions of their own choice, but the State has the right to prescribe regulatory provisions for ensuring educational excellence.
Minority institutions which do not seek recognition are free to function according to their own choice, but if such an institution seeks recognition from the State it has to comply with the prescribed conditions for granting recognition and in that event the minority institution has to follow the prescribed syllabus for examination, courses of study and other allied matters.
These conditions are necessary to be followed to ensure efficiency and educational standard in minority institutions.
[235C F] 2.2.
Even if a minority community has fundamental right to establish and administer educational institution, it has no right to insist upon the State to allow its students to appear at the public examination without recognition or without complying with the conditions prescribed for such recognition.
[236A B] All Bihar Christian Schools Association & Anr.
vs State of Bihar & Ors.
, ; , relied on.
