For the academic year 1983 84, there was a vacancy for the post of Lecturer in Sanskrit, in the College managed by the appellant Trust.
The said post was reserved for candidate from backward classes.
The first Respondent, not belonging to any backward class, applied for the post, even before the appellant Trust issued an advertisement.
An advertisement was issued later without mentioning the academic year for which the appointment was to be made, though admittedly it was for the academic year 1983 84.
The advertisement specifically stated that the post was reserved for a backward class candidate and if no such candidate was available, a candidate from the non backward classes may be appointed for one year.
Within a month, the advertisement was repeated and yet no application was received from any candidate from backward classes.
Hence the appellant trust appointed the First Respondent, who had earlier applied, from 19.3.84 till 30.4.1984.
Again, an advertisement was issued in 1984 for the academic year 1984 85.
And there was no response from any candidate belonging to backward classes.
The First Respondent was interviewed and appointed for one year, till 19.4.1985.
For the academic year 1985 86, no advertisement was issued.
The First Respondent was again appointment to the said post from July 10, 1985 to April 30, 1986.
Thereafter her services were terminated after issue of notice.
No appointment was made to the said post for the academic year 1986 87.
However, on 1.5.1987, an advertisement was issued inviting applications for the said post from candidates belonging to all classes, 283 dereserving the post.
Respondents 1 and 5 and another candidate, all belonging to non backward classes applied.
The 5th Respondent was selected and appointed to the said post.
Thereafter, in respect of non payment of salary for certain period and for setting aside her termination order, the First Respondent approached the College Tribunal.
The Tribunal allowed her claim for salary for the relevant periods, but dismissed her claim for reinstatement, holding that her appointment was purely temporary and her claim that she should be deemed to have been confirmed because she had served for two academic years was not established in the circumstances of the case.
Against the Tribunal 's decision, the First Respondent approached the High Court by way of a Writ Petition.
The High Court allowed the Writ Petition holding that notwithstanding the break in her actual appointment, she was continuously in employment from March 19, 1984 to April 30, 1986, and hence entitled to the benefit of the resolutions of the State Government and the University directions which, according to the High Court, laid down that an employee who was appointed for two consecutive academic years must be deemed to have been on probation right from the time of the first appointment and, therefore, she should be confirmed in the post.
The benefit of full back wages, seniority etc.
was also ordered.
Aggrieved by the Judgment of the High Court, the appellants preferred the present appeal, by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
The appellant Trust had violated the directions of the Government as well as of the University in the appointments in question as a result of which neither the appointment of the 1st respondent nor that of the 5th respondent can be said to have been validly made.
Both the appointments were made without following the Government Resolutions and the University directions in the matter of reservation of seats for backward classes which are binding on the college.
Unfortunately, these aspects of the matter which are evident from the record were lost sight of both by the Tribunal and the High Court.
[287G H;288A] 2.1.
Admittedly, the selection of the 5th respondent was made by a committee where neither the nominee of the Vice Chancellor nor the expert nominated by the University nor the nominee of the Director of 284 Education (Higher Education), i.e., the Director of Ayurveda, was present.
The selection so made was, therefore, not valid.
[289F] 2.2 There is nothing on record to show that when the appellant Trust forwarded its report on appointment of the 5th respondent, it apprised the University of the absence of the expert at the time of his selection.
The University has not reserved the power to relax the rule and permit selection without the presence of the expert.
There is nothing in the University 's letter to show why the University had condoned the absence of the expert.
The approval given by the University being in ignorance of the true state of affairs and in breach of the rule, is legally ineffective and cannot validate the appointment.
[289H,290A B] 3.
Admittedly, the post was reserved for the academic year 1983 84.
The Trust had not given three advertisements within six months for any of the academic years 1983 84, 1984 85 and 1985 86.
On the other hand, for the academic year 1983 84, it issued only two advertisements.
It is not known as to why even these two advertisements were not issued at the beginning of the said academic year.
As regards the second academic year 1984 85, it issued only one advertisement, and no advertisement was issued for the academic year 1985 86.
The initial appointment of the Ist respondent for the academic year 1983 84 and her continuation for the subsequent academic years, viz., 1984 85 and 1985 86 was thus in breach of the Government resolutions and the University direction and, therefore, illegal.
Similarly, since the appointment of the 5th respondent was made without following the procedure prior to dereservation, viz., three advertisements repeated every year for all the three academic years for which the post was to be reserved, his appointment to the post, as if the post stood legally dereserved, was also illegal since the post could not have been dereserved to make it available for a non backward class candidate.[294B E] 4.
Even assuming that her initial appointment and subsequent continuation of service was valid, the First Respondent would not be entitled to the benefit of the University direction of March 11, 1987 because her entitlement to the vacation salary does not extend her period of employment up to the end of the vacation.
That is a perquisite which is conferred on every teacher who has served during the academic year.
It has no connection with the continuation of the employment since even those teachers whose services are validly terminated before the beginning of the vacation period are given the benefit of the salary of the vacation period.
[295E F] 285 5.
The appellant Trust shall advertise the post three times sufficiently in advance and in any case within six months from the close of the present academic year, viz., 1990 1991 as a post reserved for the backward class candidate, and if no application is received from a suitable backward class candidate, the post will be deemed to have been dereserved.
The Trust will then proceed to fill in the same by a candidate belonging to non backward classes.
This fact may be made clear in all the three advertisements.
The 5th respondent will be entitled to apply for the post notwithstanding the fact that he has become overaged.
If he is selected on the basis of his other qualifications, the Selection Committee shall relax in his favour the condition with regard to the maximum age.
If he is appointed to the post, his appointment will be a fresh one and his past service will not count for the probation period.
The Trust shall constitute a proper Selection Committee according to the rules.
[296D F] 6.
To overcome the hardship to the students, the 5th respondent may be permitted to teach as a purely temporary teacher till the process is completed for the academic year 1991 92.
[297C]
