The petitioner, an unsuccessful applicant for registration as an exporter and licensee for exporting coir products, challenged the vires of the rr. 18, 19, 20(1)(a), 21 and 22(a) made by the Central Government in exercise of its powers under section 26(1) of the (45 Of 1953).
The Act had for its object the regulation and control of the Coir industry in public interest.
It was contended on his behalf that the impugned rules, which prescribed the quantitative, and not the qualitative, test for registration of established exporters, were inconsistent with the provisions of the Act and as such, ultra vires the Act and that they tended to create a monopoly in the export trade of coir commodities and thereby destroy the business of small dealers and discriminated between those who carried on large scale business and those who carried on small scale business and thus impugned articles 19 and 14 Of the Constitution.
Held, that the contentions were without substance and must be negatived.
There was no provision in the , that excluded or prohibited the application of the quantitative test and the rules were in no way inconsistent with the Act nor in excess of the powers conferred on the Central Government by section 26 of the Act.
Where an Act sought to control an industry in public interest it would obviously be for the rule making authority to decide which rules and regulations would meet the requirement of public interest.
Such rules and regulations, though reasonable within the meaning of article 19(6), might cause hardship to those who failed to comply with them.
But once it was conceded that the regulation and control of the trade were justified in public interest, article 19(1)(g) could not be invoked to challenge the validity of the rules.
Nor did the impugned rules violate article 14 Of the Constitu tion.
The classification of traders under rr.
18 and 19 was clearly founded on an intelligible differentia that had a rational relation to the object of the Act.
The exemption made by the rules in favour of co operative societies from some of the relevant tests indicated that the Legislature intended to encourage small 780 traders.
It was not, therefore, correct to say that the rules would lead to a monopoly in the trade.
