The appellant purchased the suit property of the minor from a person, to whom the same was sold by the father, the natural guardian, whereas the respondent purchased the suit property from the minor within three years on his attaining majority.
The respondent plaintiff instituted a suit against the appellant defendant, to set aside the transfer of property made by the natural guardian and for recovery of possession of property.
The suit was decreed and the decree was confirmed by the appellate Court as well as by the High Court.
Dismissing the second appeal, the High Court held that the suit instituted bythe respondent as a transferee from the ex minor within three years after the minor attained majority was not hit by section 6(e) of the , against which the present appeal preferred by the appellant defendant.
The appellant contended that the suit was hit by section 6(e) of the , as all that the ex minor was in a position to transfer was the mere right to sue to set aside the sale and recover possession of the property transferred by the natural guardian; and 390 that a person claiming under a minor, referred to in section 8(3) of the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956 can only be a legal representative of a deceased minor and not a person succeeding to the interest of the minor by reason of transfer inter vivos.
The contentions of the respondent were that the ex minor was competent to bring a suit to set aside the sale within a period of three years of his attaining majority and any person claiming under the minor was equally competent to institute action for the same purpose; that the suit to set aside a sale was not for the enforcement of any personal right, but a right in property and the suit was not hit by Section 6(e) of the T.P.Act; and that the provisions contained in Section 6 of the T.P. Act and Section 8 of the Guardianship Act were to be read together.
On the question, whether the respondent in his capacity as a transferee from the ex minor was competent to bring a suit to set aside the sale effected by the minor 's guardian, who had sold the property without obtaining the permission of the Court as required under Section 8 of the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act 1956 and without any legal necessity.
Dismissing the appeal of the appellant defendant this Court, HELD: 1.
In the instant case, on the facts found, the transfer of the property made by the guardian was a voidable transaction and it was, therefore, open to the minor to challenge it and seek recovery of possession.
Such a right of the minor is a right or interest in property which he himself or "any person claiming under him" may enforce by instituting a suit (Section 8(3) of the Guardianship Act).
"Any person claiming under him" must necessarily include a purchaser.
[396G 397A] 2.
Section 8(3) confers a right of suit in the special circumstances postulated therein.
The object of the Act being the protection of the minor, the legislature has though it fit to confer a right of suit in certain circumstances not only on the minor, but also on a person to whom the minor has transferred his rights.[397A B] 3.
The right transferred is an interest in property which is capable of enforcement at the instance of the transferee as it was at the instance of the ex minor prior to the transfer.
Such a provision intended specially for the protection of the interests of the minor, must be read in harmony and consistently with the general provisions con 391 tained in section 6 of the T.P. Act.
[397B C].
A construction which is unduly restrictive of the statory provisions intended for the protections of the interests of the minor must be avoided.
[397F G] 5.
The transfer made by the father during his son 's minority was voidable at the instance of his son who was the real owner, and any person purchasing such property from the natural guardian obtained only a defeasible title.
The minor retained a right in the property to defeat existing adverse claims, and such right is an assignable right.
[397D E] The J.K.Cotton Spinning & Weaving Mills Co.Ltd.
vs The State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors., [1961] 3 S.C.R.185, 194 and Ashoka Marketing Ltd. & Anr.
vs Punjab National Bank & Ors., , 439, followed.
Palaniappa Goundan vs Nallappa Goundan & Ors., AIR 1951 Madras 817 and P.Kamaraju vs C.Gunnayya & Ors., AIR 1924 Madras 322, approved.
Jhaverbhai Hathibhai Patel vs Kabhai Bechar Patel & Ors., AIR 1933 Bom.42; Mon Mohan Battacharjee & Ors.
vs Bidhu Bhusan Dutta & Ors., and Palani Goundan & Anr.
vs Vanjiakkal & Anr., [1956] I.L.R. Mad.1062, over ruled.
Preprakash Surajmal vs Maharashtra Revenue Tribunal.
Nagpur &Ors., A.I.R. 1969 Bom.361; and Ghanshyam Dass vs Dr.
Shiva Shankar Lal & Ors., [1980] All Law Journal 130, referred to.
