The appellant, Rourkela Sramik Sangh, is a trade union in the Rourkela Steel Plant.
It addressed a letter to the Implementation and Evaluation Officer cum Labour Commissioner, under the Code of Discipline 1958, whereby it sought recognition as the sole bargaining agent in the Rourkela Steel Plant.
For this purpose, it requrested the Labour Commissioner to pass orders for immediate verification of the membership of all the trade unions operating in the Plant and to recommend for recognition of the union having majority of the membership.
The Labour Commissioner as the Implementation and Evaluation Officer authorised the Deputy Labour Commissioner to carry out the process of verification of the membership of the registered trade unions, who in turn passed orders calling upon the different trade unions to produce the necessary records.
The Ist respondent Rourkela Mazdoor Sabha which is a rival union, challenged by way of a writ petition the orders passed by the Labour Commissioner and the Deputy Labour Commissioner.
At the same time, the appellant union filed a writ petition seeking a direction to the Labour Commissioner, and the Deputy Labour Commissioner, to complete the process of verification and recognition within a stipulated time.
The High Court by its common judgment allowed the Ist respondent 's petition and dismissed the appellant 's petition.
The High Court held that since the appellant Union had addressed its application for recognition not to the Implementation Machinery but to the Implementation Officer, the same was not properly made as the Implementation Officer had no authority to initiate the process of recognition.
The decision of the High Court was based on the finding that the Implementation and Evaluation Officer was not the "Implementation Machinery" within the meaning of the Code of Discipline.
400 Allowing the appeal and directing the Deputy Labour Commissioner and the Labour Commissioner to complete the proceedings of recognition as expeditiously as possible, this Court, HELD: (1) The "Implementation Machinery" envisaged in section 11 of the Code of Discipline consists of two separate Organisations, viz., Implementation Units in the respective Labour Departments, and Tripartite Implementation Committees at the Central, State and local levels.
Each of the Organisations has been assigned different functions and they are independent of each other while carrying out the same.
Thus, the constitutions of the Implementation units and Implementation Committee, are different and they function in different areas.
[406H 407D] (2) Since the Implementation Unit/Implementation Officer entrusted with the task of granting recognition to the union in the State of Orissa was the Labour Commissioner of the State, the appellant Sangh had rightly approached the Labour Commissioner for the purpose.
[409A] (3) Since the State Labour Commissioner was named as the Implementation Officer who is none but the officer in charge of the Implementation Unit, the State Labour Commissioner as the Implementation Officer has an option either to carry out the verification of membership himself or to entrust it to some other officer like the Deputy Labour Commissioner as in the present case.
That was only an entrustment of a ministerial work.
[409D] (4) The Deputy Labour Commissioner in the present case is the Verification Officer and under clause (10) of Appendix IV, he has to send his report to the Implementation Officer or Unit, i.e., the State Labour Commissioner, and the State Labour Commissioner will in turn communicate his decision as the State Implementation Machinery to the management as well as the Unions.
[409E] (5) The High Court was wrong in holding that the Implementation Unit or the Labour Commissioner was not the "Implementation Machinery" but only a Verification Officer.
[409C]
