The appellant, a manufacturer of cement, entered into an agreement with the Cement Manufacturing Company of India Limited, for sale of cement.
Under the agreement, the appellant was to sell its cement only through the marketing company, and certain sums would be paid for the cement supplied by the marketing company, which had the discretion to fix the sale price.
For the 1950 51, 1951 52 and 1952 53 periods when the appellant was assessed to sales tax for the supply of cement, it maintained at the assessment stage that the transactions were not exigible to sales tax as they were covered under the Explanation to Article 286(1)(a).
The first Appellate Authority and the Board of Revenue did not accept the stand of the appellant.
The Board of Revenue held that cement being a controlled commodity, distribution of cement continued to be controlled during the period, notwithstanding the expiry of the Defence of India Rules.
Relying on the decision of this Court in the case of Rohtas Industries Limited vs State of Bihar, 12 STC 621 the Board of Revenue held that the Cement Marketing Company was an independent organisation and was carrying on business as an independent entity and that what had actually been taxed were the sales effected by the appellant to the Cement marketing Company and not the sales made to the parties which obtained authorization from the Cement Controller.
After analyzing the terms of the contract between the manufacturer and the Marketing Company, this Court held in Rohtas Industries case that there was sale between the manufacturer and the Marketing Company.
251 Following its view taken in Rohtas Industries case as the present case had the same terms, which had been considered in the earlier case, and examining the question whether the sale that took place between the manufacturer and the Marketing Company could be taken to be covered by the Explanation to Article 286(1)(a), this Court, dismissing the appeals, HELD: 1.
There was preceding local sales complete in every respect within Madhya Pradesh by which title to the cement had passed from the appellant to the Marketing Company.
The concept of inter State sale as brought in by the Sixth Amendment or in the subsequent statute known as the Central Sales Tax Act was not in existence for the relevant period now under consideration.
The finding recorded by the authorities was that the delivery of the cement was not the direct result of such sale or purchase of the cement outside the State.
In the absence of such privity the Explanation is not attracted to the transactions.[254E G].
In view of the finding recorded by the authorities that the cement in this case actually had not been delivered as a direct result of such sale or purchase for the purpose of consumption outside the State, the only conclusion that can follow is that the Explanation does not apply and the assessments are justified.[254H 255A].
Rohtas Industries Limited vs State of Bihar, 12 STC 621, followed.
Mohmd.
Serajuddin vs State of Orissa, , distinguished.
