The respondent was appointed in the appellant Corporation and put on probation for a period of two years.
About three month 's after the completion of two years ' period he was served with one month 's notice for termination of his service.
Challenging the termination order the respondent filed a suit for declaration that the termination without enquiry and opportunity of being heard was violative of Rule 9A of the Madhya Pradesh Civil Services Classification, Control and Appeal Rules 1966 and that he became a permanent employee of the Corporation with continuity of service and arrears of salary.
The trail court dismissed the suit, and appeal, it was confirmed.
The High Court allowed the respondent 's second appeal and decreed the suit.
In the appeal, by special leave, before this Court, on behalf of the appellant Corporation it was contended that the respondent being a probationer, would acquire permanent status only on confirmation, that the High Court had committed manifest error in law in holding that on the expiry of two years ' period of probation, the respondent must be deemed to have been confirmed under Rule 14 of the Municipal Officers ' and Servants ' Recruitment Rules, which were no longer in force, and that Rule 8 of the Madhya Pradesh Government Servants ' General Conditions of Service expressly proved confirmation of probation as a condition precedent and since notice terminating respondent 's service was issued, in terms of the rules, before confirmation, it was valid in law.
On behalf of the respondent, it was contended that by operation of the resolution passed by the Municipal Corporation under Section 25 of 321 the Central Provinces and Bearer Municipality Act, 1922, the Municipal Officers and Servants was governed by recruitment rules thereunder, that since no action was taken by the appellant Corporation to dispense with the respondent 's service, on the expiry of the period of two years, as envisaged in Rule 14 of the Municipal Officers ' and Servants ' Recruitment Rules, the respondent must be deemed to have been confirmed, and consequently, the only power the Corporation had was to terminate the respondent 's service in accordance with the classification, Control and Appeal Rules, after conducting an enquiry and giving him reasonable opportunity, that too for misconduct, but since no such procedure was adopted, the notice was illegal and the High Court was justified in granting the decree.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.1 Under the Note to sub rule (2) of Rule 8 of the Madhya Pradesh Govt.
Servant 's, General Conditions of Service Rules, 1961 if the probationer is neither confirmed nor discharged from service at the end of the period of probation, he should be deemed to have been continued in service as probationer subject to the condition of his service being terminated on the expiry of a notice of one calendar month, given in writing by either side.
As per sub rule (6) on passing the prescribed departmental examination and on successful completion of the period of probation, the probationer should be confirmed in the service or post to which he has been appointed.
Then he becomes an approved probationer.
Therefore, after the expiry of the period of probation and before its confirmation, he would be deemed to have been continued in service as probationer.
[375F H] 1.2 Confirmation of probation would be subject to satisfactory completion of the probation and pass in the prescribed examinations.
Expiry of the period of probation, therefore, does not entitle him with a right to deemed confirmation.
The rule contemplates to pass an express order of confirmation in that regard.
By issue of notice of one calendar month in writing by either side, the tenure could be put to an end.
[326A B] 1.3 If the rules do not empower the appointing authority to extend the period of probation beyond the prescribed period, or where the rules are absent about confirmation or passing of the prescribed test for confirmation of probation, inaction for a very long time may lead to an indication of the satisfactory completion of probation.
[327D E] 322 1.4 Rule 8 expressly postulates otherwise.
Hence mere expiry of the initial period of probation which is subject to extension for another period of one year does not automatically have the effect of deemed confirmation, and the status of a deemed confirmation of the probation.
An express order in that regard on fulfillment of the conditions stipulated in the Rule only confers the status of approved probation.[327E F] State of Punjab vs Dharam Singh ; ; Om Prakash Maurya vs U.P. Co op.
Sugar Factories Federation, Lucknow & Ors.
; ; M.A. Agarwal vs Gurgaon Bank & Ors., and State of Gujarat vs Akhilesh C. Bhargav & Ors., ; , distinguished.
1.5 Note to sub rule (2) read with sub rule (6) of Rule 8 manifest she legislative intent that confirmation of the probation of the respondent would be made only on successful completion of the probation and the passing of the prescribed examinations.
The respondent shall, therefore, be deemed to be continued an probation.
Before confirmation the appointing authority is empowered to terminate the service of the probationer by issuing one calendar month 's notice in writing and on expiry thereof the service stands terminated without any further notice.
Within three months from the date of expiry of original two years period of probation and within th extendable period of one year the order of termination was made.
Hence, the question of conducting an inquiry under the Classification, Control and Appeal Rules after giving an opportunity and that too for specific charges does not arise.
[327G H, 328A] In the circumstances the High Court, committed manifest error of law in decreeing the suit.
[328B] 2.
By virtue of the resolution passed by the Municipal Council, which subsequently became Municipal Corporation, making a draft bye law , exercising power under section 173(2) of the Madhya Pradesh Municipal Act, 1922 and confirmed under Section 25(1) of the Act, adopting Government rules to regulate the conditions of service of officers and servants of the Municipal Committee, the Fundamental Rules, Civil Service Regulations, Government Servants ' Conduct Rules, and General Book Circulars of the State Government, as amended from time to time, etc. would apply to the officers of the Municipal Committee and the previous rules were superseded and were no longer in force.
Hence the reliance placed by the High Court on Rule 14 of the Municipal Officers ' and Servants ' Rules is wrong.
[324D E, G H] 323
