The first respondent instituted a suit for mandatory injunction to enforce a contract alleged to have been entered into between him and the appellant, officers of the second respondent Corporation, for appointment to the post of Instrumentation Foreman in the appellants ' company, and for consequential reliefs.
He contended that he had been sponsored by the Chairman and Managing Director of the second respondent Corporation, which was the holding company of the appellants 'company by his two letters for appointment as an Apprentice Engineer in terms of a scheme formulated by the Government of India.
The appellants and the second respondent denied the existence of any contract.
The trial court dismissed the suit.
However, on appeal, the first appellate court decreed the suit and directed the first appellant to appoint the first respondent to the post of Apprentice Engineer under the scheme sponsored by the Government of India.
This was confirmed, in appeal, by the High Court, which held the first respondent was entitled to be appointed to the post of Instrumentation Foreman with effect from the date on which the former incumbent of that post had resigned.
In the appeal before this Court, on behalf of the appellants it was contended that there was no evidence of the contract having been entered into by the appellant with the first respondent; nor was there any evidence of a scheme of the Government of India, which entitled him to be appointed to any post in the appellants ' company, and that, in any view, he was not qualified for appointment as an Apprentice, much less to the higher post of Instrumentation Foreman.
469 On behalf of the first respondent it was contended that the letters addressed by the second respondent in his capacity as Chairman, and Managing Director of the holding company, to the appellants, the officers of the subsidiary company, made it obligatory on the part of the latter to appoint him in terms of the Government of India scheme, as so found by both the first Appellate court and the high Court.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.1 A contract of employment cannot ordinarily be enforced by or against an employer.
The remedy is to sue for damages.
The grant of specific performance is purely discretionary and must be refused when not warranted by the ends of justice.
Such relief can be granted only on sound legal principles.
In the absence of any statutory requirement, courts do not ordinarily force an employer to recruit or retain in service an employee not required by the employer.
There are, of course, certain exceptions to this rule, such as in the case of a public servant dismissed from service in contravention of Article 311 of the Constitution; reinstatement of a dismissed worker under the Industrial Law; a statutory body acting in breach of statutory obligations, and the like.
[475 E] B.N. Tiwari vs District Board, Agra, ; ; U.P. State Warehousing Corporation vs C.K. Tyagi, ; and Executive Committee of Vaish Degree College, Shamli and Ors.
vs Lakshmi Narain and Ors., ; , referred to.
Indian Contract and Specific Relief Acts, by Polock & Mulla, Tenth Edn., page 983 and Halsbury 's Laws of England.
Fourth Edn., Volume 44, paragraphs 405 to 420, referred to.
1.2 In the instant case, neither from the plaint nor from the evidence is it possible to identify and concluded contract to which the first respondent is a party or which he can enforce.
There is no specific plea or evidence as regards the particulars of the scheme of the Government of India in terms of which he seeks relief whether it is a statutory scheme, and if so, what are the provision relied on by him and whether a duty is cast on the appellants and a benefit is conferred on persons like the first respondent.
Assuming that such a scheme existed or any such contract bound the parties, it would be violative of all basic norms of law to decree a suit for specific performance of a contract of personal service.[472E G] 470 1.3 Courts do not ordinarily enforce performance of contracts of a personal character, such as a contract of employment.
Subject to certain well defined categories of exceptions, law does not permit, and the does not contemplate, the enforcement of a contract of a personal nature by a decree for specific performance.
The facts of the instant case do not fall within the exceptions.
[472A, 474D] Rigby vs Connol, , 487 and Executive Committee of Vaish Degree College, Shamli and Others vs Lakshmi Narain and Ors., ; at 1020, referred to.
Cheshire, fifoot and Furmston 's Law of Contract, 11th ed., p. 614 and Halsbury 's Laws of England Fourth Edition, Volume 44, at page 407, referred to.
1.4 Even if there was a contract in terms of which the first respondent was entitled to seek relief, the only which was available in law was damages and not specific performance.
Breach of contract must ordinarily sound in damages, and particularly so in the case of personal contracts.
Assuming that a contractual relationship arose consequent upon the letters addressed by the second respondent to the first appellant, the first respondent was a total stranger to any such relationship, for no relationship of a fiduciary character existed between the first respondent and the second respondent or the appellants.
Neither on principles of law or equity nor under any statute did the first respondent acquire an enforceable right by reason of the letters exchanged between the appellant and second respondent, nor did he have private of any kind to their relationship.
No collateral contract to which he was a party did arise on the facts of this case and at no time was the second respondent acting as his agent.
There is no express or implied contract which is enforceable by him.
[475 H, 476 B] In the circumstances, the decrees of the High Court and the first appellate Court are set aside and that of the trial court is restored.[476D]
