The appellant, a Government servant, was charged with having, contrary to the rules governing the conditions of his service, accepted private employment without sanction of Government while he was still in Government service.
The Officer who held an enquiry against him found the charge to be true and submitted a report.
On April 14, 1954, a notice was issued to the appellant asking him to show cause in accordance with the provisions of article 3II(2) of the Constitution in the following terms:. . .
On a careful consideration of the report, and in particular of the conclusions reached by the Enquiring Officer in respect of the charges framed against you, the President is provisionally of opinion that a major penalty, viz., dismissal, removal or reduction should be enforced on you.
Before he takes that action, he desires to give you an opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken. .
The appellant then showed cause and on October 1, 1954, the President passed an order removing the appellant from service with effect from that date.
It was contended for the appellant, inter alia, that the show cause notice dated April 14, 1954, stated all the three punishments mentioned in article 311(2) and that inasmuch as it did not particularise the actual or exact punishment proposed to be imposed on the appellant, the notice did not comply with the essential requirements of article 311(2) and, therefore, the final order of removal passed on October, 1`954, was not a valid order.
Held, that the show cause notice dated April 14, 1954, did not contravene the provisions of article 311(2) of the Constitution.
There is nothing wrong in principle in the punishing authority tentatively forming the opinion that the charges proved merit any one of the three major penalties and on that footing asking the Government servant concerned to show cause against the punishment proposed to be taken in the alternative in regard to him, because it gives the Government servant better opportunity to show cause against each of those punishments being inflicted on him, which he would not have had if only the severest punishment had been mentioned and a lesser punishment not mentioned in the notice had been inflicted on him.
893 High Commissioner for India and High Commissioner for Pakistan vs I. M. Lall, (1948) L.R. 75 I.A. 225 and Khem Chand vs Union of India, ; , explained.
Jatindra Nath Biswas vs R. Gupta, ; Dayanidhi Rath vs B. section Mohanty, A.I.R. 1955 Orissa 33 and Lakshmi Narain Gupta vs A. N. Puri, A.I.R. 1954 Cal.
335, distinguished.
