The appellants owning mini steel plants have been getting supply of electricity from the Respondent Board.
The Board revised its terms and conditions for supply of electricity, and concessional tariff of 11 paise per unit for 3 years from 1.11.1977 was applied to five steel plants.
This tariff was subsequently enhanced to 12.5 paise per unit.
However, the concessional tariff was not extended to one of the appellants viz. M/s. Andhra Steel Corporation since a Writ Petition had been filed by it claiming that the agreement entered into with the Respondent Board for availing high tension electric supply was no longer in force.
In respect of the other steel plants, the Bard extended the concessional tariff subject to escalations and other terms and conditions and fixed a certain minimum consumption.
However, the tariff was revised to 16 paise without reference to the maximum demand charges from 1.3.1978.
In reply to a clarification sought by the Respondent Board, the State Government clarified that the Government order did not preclude the Board from applying the normal terms and conditions of supply and prescribing the monthly minimum charges and the working out of the escalated rate from time to time.
Subsequently the State Government withdrew the concessional tariff.
The State Government made a further clarification that its intention was to allow the concessional tariff without limiting the concession by imposition of minimum 625 consumption charges till the end of March, 1979.
Aggreived by the withdrawal of the concessional tariff, the mini steel plants filed Writ Petitions before the High Court contending that it was not open to the Electricity Board to have levied minimum charges and it was bound to supply electricity to them at the concessional tariff fixed by the State Government.
It was also contended that State Government 's subsequent clarification should prevail over the earlier one.
Violation of principales of natural justice, doctrine of promissory estoppel and right based on doctrine of legitimate expectation were also contended.
It was further contended that the directions were issued under section 78A of the Electricity Supply Act and hence they were of a compulsory nature and binding on the Board.
The Andhra Steel Corporation contended that while applying the concessional tariff to other mini steel plants, the Electricity Board was not justified in refusing the same to it thereby singling it out and hence its action was discriminatory and male fide.
The High Court rejected the various contentions and dismissed the Writ Petitions.
Aggrieved by the dismissal of their Writ Petitions, the mini steel plants filed appeal before this Court, raising the same contentions as were advanced before the High Court.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court, HELD: 1.
In granting concessional tariff obviously it does not appear to be the purpose to compel the Electricity Board to maintain the supply of the contracted load of electricity to the appellants by incurring loses.
The only purpose in directing supply of energy at concessional rates was to reduce the charges of actual energy consumed by the appellants and this purpose could not be frustrated till the Electricity Board complied with the direction of supplying electricity to them at the concessional rate.
Though the order dated 16.1.80 in substance amounts to a clarification of the earlier order of clarification dated 5th December,1978, it states nothing as to why the clarification contained in the order dated 5th December, 1978 in categorical terms did not express the real intention of the State Government in issuing the earlier Government orders granting concessional tariff.
The orders 626 granting concessional tariff, did not either expressly or by necessary implication grant immunity to the mini steel plants from their obligation to pay minimum charges and this having been categorically stated by the State Government in its clarificatory order dated 5th December, 1978 there was apparently no basis for issuing the second clarificatory order dated 16th January, 1980.
It was issued on some representation made by the mini steel plants at a point of time when Writ Petition on their behalf had already been filed in the High Court and matter was sub judice.
In such a situation, apart from the propriety of issuing the second clarificatory order on 16th January, 1980 it is obvious that what was contained in this order is analogous to an averment made by the State Government in reply to the Writ Petitions filed on behalf of the appellants and it has no bearing in finding out the true import of the orders of the State Government granting concessional tariff.
[633C D;636A E] Amalgamated Electricity Co. vs Jalgaon Borough Municipality, ; and Bihar State Electricity Board vs Green Rubber Industries, [1990] 1 SCC 731, referred to.
By the Government Orders dated 2nd November, 1977 and 26th November, 1977 concession was granted to the appellants.
This is manifest from the government Orders themselves which expressly used the expression "concessional power tariff" or "concessional tariff".
At no stage, the appellants disputed that what was extended to them by the said Government Order was by way of concession.
In view of the settled law.
Neither of the two orders viz., order dated 5.12.78 and 12.3.79 can be said to be illegal on the ground that they were passed in violation of principles of natural justice.[633F H] Shri Bakul Oil Industries vs State of Gujarat, ; ; relied on.
With regard to the plea of promissory estoppel, it is not the case of the appellants that they established their mini plants after the grant of concessional Tariff by the said two Government Orders and but for the grant of such concessional tariff they would not have established their mini steel plants.
The necessary facts so as to sustain the plea of promissory estoppel are not pleaded or established by the appellants.
[635B D] 4.
There is nothing on record to substantiate the plea of doctrine of legitimate expectation on the basis of which the appellants could be held entitled to any relief.[635G] 627 5.
On the facts of the present appeals it is not necessary to go into the question whether the power of fixing tariff under section 49 of the Electricity Supply Act could be regulated by a direction under section 78A thereof.
The electricity Board proceded to implement the directions with regard to fixation of concessional tariff issued by the State Government and resolved to realise electricity charges from the appellants only at the concessional tariff of 12.2 p. as fixed in the Government Order dated 26th November, 1977.
It, however, took the further view that the directions issued by the Government did not have any bearing on the obligation of the appellants to pay minimum charges which they were bound to pay under the agreements executed by them even though such minimum charges were to be calculated at the rate of 12.2 p. per unit subject to escalation as indicated in the Government Orders in question.
Such minimum charges were payable even if no electricity was consumed by the appellants for any reason whatsoever.
[631B D]
