The General Office Order No. 26 dated 1.12.1943 of the Appellant Company provided that employees with 30 years ' service or more would be eligible to receive "Retiring Allowance" (pension).
The said office order also provided that all permanent employees who were in the Company 's service prior to 1.1.1947 and who do not qualify for retiring allowance on retirement, will be eligible for gratuity on finally leaving the Company 's service subject to the prescribed conditions being fulfiled.
In 1956 a memorandum of settlement was signed by the appellant company and the Employees ' Union under which the employees in service prior to 1.1.47 were required to opt at the time of leaving service either for gratuity or in lieu of the gratuity the retiring allowance.
Later the came into force and the payment of gratuity became statuory.
The employer and the Employees ' Union jointly applied to the Government for exemption from the provisions the statue which was refused.
Some of the retiring employees of company filed applications under Section 33 C(2) of the before the Labour Court claiming pension by alleging that payability of pension was a condtion of service and the employer had stopped it without any Justification.
The Labour Court allowed the applications.
Against the 638 order of the Labour Court the employer preferred six writ petitions.
In the meantime the same dispute was referred to the Industrial Tribunal and by an award the Tribunal answered the reference against the employees.
The Employees ' Union challenged the award by filling a writ petition in the High Court.
All the writ petitions were heard by a learned single judge of the High Court who allowed the writ petitions of the management against the order of the Labour Court and dismissed the writ petition preferred by the Labour Union challenging the award of the Tribunal.
Writ appeals were carried against the single Judges ' decision.
The Appellate Bench of the High Court held that gratuity provided under the settlement was not a substitute of pension and the claim of pension was available to employees notwithstanding the settlement.
Hence this appeal by the employer company.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court, HELD: The 1956 settlement between the parties does not provide for payment of pension except to pre 1947 employees and making the benefit liable to exercise of option under clause 6(d) of the settlement.
The retiral benefit (pension) was payable to all qualfied employees as a matter of practice.
If under the settlement that was not done away with, the benefit arising out of General Office order No. 26 would still be available and gratuity contemplated under the settlement would not be a substitute of the retiral benefit of pension.
The Appellate Bench of the High Court was right in holding that the entitlement to pension had not been substituted by the settlement of 1956 and, therefore, the claim to pension subject to qualification being satisfied was available to be maintained notwithstanding the settlement of 1956.
The High Court rigtly came to the conclusion that the Labour Court had justifiably worked out the dues and the claim petition under section 33 C(2) of the 1947 Act.
[641C D, 642C D]
