The appellant, who had put in 10 years of service as Jawan in the Army, was sentenced to 3 months ' R.I. and dismissed from service by the Summary Court Martial, on the charge that his action in carrying 12 bottles of liquor while proceeding on leave to his home town was contrary to the orders on the subject.
The appeal preferred by the appellant, pointing out the irregularities committed in the summary trial, and pleading that he had unblemished record of service, was also rejected by the higher authority.
The writ Petition filed by the appellant was also summarily rejected by the High Court.
In the appeal before this Court, on behalf of the appellant it was contended that the summary trial was vitiated on account of several irregularities committed in conducting the trial, and the sentence awarded to him was wholly disproportionate to the offence committed by him.
Disposing of the appeal, and remanding the case to the Summary Court Martial on the question of sentence, this Court HELD 1.
The trial is not vitiated and no prejudice has been caused to the appellant, inasmuch as from the records it is found that the evidence has been duly recorded and, admittedly, the appellant was carrying extra seven bottles of liquor without the necessary permit.
However, there is an element of arbitrariness in awarding severe punishments and, therefore, an interference is called for and the matter has to be remanded on the question of awarding any of the lesser punishments provided in the .
[679E. 683G H] 677 2.1 Section 72 of the provides that the court martial may, on convicting a person subject to the Act, of any offences specified in Sections 34 to 68 inclusive, award either the particular punishment with which the offence is stated in the said sections to be punishable, or, in lieu thereof, any one of the punishments lower in the scale set out in Section 71, regard being had to the nature and degree of offence.
[680C D] 2.2 In the instant case, in the charge sheet it is merely stated that the action of the appellant in carrying 12 bottles of liquor when he was proceeding to home town was against the orders on the subject.
But in the counter affidavit it is stated that such an act of the appellant came within the meaning of Section 63 of the Act.
This Section may cover various types of misconducts committed by way of an act or omission.
It also provides for awarding any other lesser punishment mentioned in the Act.
Therefore, much depends on the nature of the act or omission of which the person is found guilty.
[680B,E] 2.3 Admittedly, the appellant was granted leave when he was proceeding to his home town.
Enroute he had to pass through a place where prohibition was in force.
He had a valid permit to carry 5 bottles of liquor and the extra 7 bottles were purchased from the Army Canteen itself.
Unless he had some permits or chits given by some higher authorities, he could not have purchased these extra bottles from the Canteen.
He was taking this liquor to his home town to celebrate his brother in law 's marriage, but the local Civil Police checked his baggage and confiscated the bottles as he had no valid permit to carry the extra bottles.
[679G H, 680A] 2.4 Assuming that the offence committed by the appellant is covered by the residuary Section 63, but in awarding the punishment, court martial has to keep in view the spirit behind Section 72 and it has to give due regard to the nature and degree of the offence.
Section 63 provides for awarding of any of the lesser punishments enumerated in Section 71.
In view of these provisions of law and having regard to the nature and degree of the offence, the punishments awarded to the appellant, namely, three months ' R.I. and dismissal from service are severe and are also violative of Section 72.
Ends of justice will be sufficiently met if a lesser punishment as provided under Section 71(f) is awarded to the appellant.
[682E F, 684F] 2.5 Accordingly, the punishments are set aside and the matter remanded to the court martial which shall award any of the lesser 678 punishments having due regard to the nature and circumstances of the case.
Any detention suffered by the appellant after the orders of the court martial will not be treated as a disqualification for being rein stated into service.
[648B] Ranjit Thakur vs Union of India and Others, and Bhagat Ram vs State of Himachal Pradesh, [1983] 2 SCC 442, relied on.
Council of Civil Service Unions vs Minister for the Civil Service, [1984]3 AII ER 935, 950, referred to
