A charge sheet was issued to the petitioner, a directly recruited Accountant in the respondent Corporation alleging that while working in the Transport Wing of the Corporation, he facilitated and abetted the embezzlement of Rs.100 by not ensuring that the amount found was in excess, and thus he failed to serve the Corporation honestly and faithfully, that he made some fictitious entries in the Cash Book and that he made certain information public without the permission of the Managing Director.
The petitioner replied that all the charges were fake and false.
the leave sanctioned to the petitioner earlier for prosecuting legal study was canceled and the petitioner challenged the same in the High Court but the case was adjourned.
Meanwhile, the petitioner 's services were terminated on the ground that he was no longer required and that one month 's pay in lieu of notice would be paid in terms and conditions of his appointment letter and provisions of Staff Regulations of the Corporation.
The petitioner challenged the same before the High Court, but the Writ Petition was dismissed in limine.
702 In the appeal before this Court it was contended that the termination was only a camouflage and that though the petitioner was still a temporary servant, yet the termination amounted to punishment, because of the manner in which it was passed and the background behind it.
It was also contended that though the termination order stated that the petitioner 's services were no longer required, his juniors were retained and were continuing in service, in violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Disposing of the Special Leave Petition, this Court HELD: 1.1 In a case of an order of termination, even that of a temporary employee, the Court has to see whether the order was made on the ground of misconduct if such a complaint was made and in that process the Court would examine the real circumstances, as well as the basis and foundation of the order complained of and if the Court is satisfied that the termination of services is not so innocuous as claimed to be and if the circumstances further disclose that it is only a camouflage with a view to avoid an enquiry as warranted by Article 311(2) of the Constitution, then such a termination is liable to be quashed.
[706E F] Annop Jaiswal vs Government of India & Anr., ; ; Nepal Singh vs State of U.P. & Ors., ; and Jarnail Singh & Ors.
vs State of Punjab & Ors.
, ; , relied on. 1.2 In the instant case, the termination order, though appears to be innocuous was only intended to punish the petitioner for the misconduct, in respect of the allegations which are mentioned in the charges that were served on him.
As a matter of fact, the enquiry was conducted, but before the conclusion of the enquiry, the termination order was passed.
Therefore, it is not difficult to see that the form of the termination order is only a clock for an order of punishment.
[707C D] 1.3 Besides, the termination is also liable to be quashed on the ground that it is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution, as it is clear from the records that while the petitioner 's juniors are retained in service, the petitioner 's services are terminated as no longer required.
[708F, 709A B] Jarnail Singh & Ors.
vs State of Punjab & Ors., [1986]2 SCR 1022 and K.C. Joshi vs Union of India and Ors., [1985]3 SCR 869, relied on.
703 1.4 In the circumstances, the termination order is quashed and the petitioner is directed to be reinstated in service.
However, it shall be open to the respondent Corporation to proceed with the disciplinary enquiry if it so chooses.
[709H] 1.5 As regards the backwages, admittedly the petitioner has been practising as a lawyer since his termination.
But this Court has not refused to grant background that the employee has been practicing as lawyer during the relevant period, but has taken into consideration the probable income that would have been earned him, while granting backwages.
However, a roving enquiry cannot be made by this Court nor would it be possible for the respondent Corporation to unearth the income which the petitioner would have derived as practising advocate.
Undoubtedly, the petitioner would have been entitled to subsistence allowance till his reinstatement, even if the relevant period is treated as one of suspension pending enquiry.
Therefore, the petitioner shall be entitled to the full back wages upto the date of his enrollment as a lawyer and from that date upto the date of reinstatement at the rate of half of the subsistence allowance per month.
Out of the total income, the income admittedly earned by him as a practising lawyer shall be deducted and the balance paid to the petitioner.
The amount so paid shall, for the purpose of income tax, be spread over as if derived during those financial years from the date of his dismissal till date of reinstatement.
[708B, 709D G, 710A B] S.M. Saiyad vs Baroda Municipal Corporation, relied on.
