The appellants (A 1 to A 3 and A 5 6), along with Co accused (A 4), were prosecuted under sections 302/149 of the Indian Penal Code.
Test identification parades were conducted by the Magistrates in which A 6 was identified by PWs 1, 2, 3 and 4 and A 1, 2,3,and 5 were identified by PWs 1 and 2.
The trial court held that the identification parade was perfunctory and was of no assistance to the prosecution.
It also rejected the testimony of PWs 1 to 5 by holding that the evidence of PWs 3, 4, and 5 was untrust worthy and that it was unsafe to accept the testimony of other two eye witnesses, PWs 1 and 2 for recording a conviction.
Accordingly the trial court acquitted all the accused persons.
Against the order of acquittal, the State preferred an appeal before the High Court.
The High Court accepted the testimony of PWs 1 and 2, corroborated by the evidence of test identification parade and the testimony of PWs 3 and 4 to find the appellants guilty.
Accordingly the High Court reversed the order of acquittal and convicted the appellants.
Since A 4 was not identified by the PWs 1 to 4, he was given the benefit of doubt and the High Court confirmed his acquittal.
724 In appeal to this court under section 2 of the , it was contended on behalf of the appellants that PWs (1 and 2) were strangers to the assailants and in the circumstances of the case they did not have the opportunity to identify the assailants and consequently their testimony was not free from doubt; the trial court was right in rejecting the testimony of these witnesses but the High Court erred in reversing the order of acquittal and convicting the appellants by accepting the testimony of these witnesses.
Allowing the appeal and setting aside the order of conviction and sentence, this Court, HELD: 1.It is open to Supreme Court to re examine the evidence for the purpose of satisfying itself whether the High Court was justified in reversing the order of acquittal in the facts and circumstances of the case.
In an appeal against acquittal, the Appellate Court is empowered to evaluate the evidence and arrive at its own conclusion.
But where the view taken by the trial court on an appreciation of the evidence is also a plausible view, the Appellate Court shall be slow to interfere with it even when a different view is possible on a reappraisal of the evidence.
[728F G] 1.1 Even when two evenly balanced views of the evidence are possible one must necessarily concede the existence of a reasonable doubt.
[731F] 2.The evidence given by the witnesses before the Court is the substantive evidence.
In a case where the witness is a stranger to the accused and he identifies the accused person before the court for the first time, the court will not ordinarily accept that identification as conclusive.
It is to lend assurance to the testimony of the witnesses that evidence in the form of an earlier identification is tendered.
If the accused persons are got identified by the witness soon after their arrest and such identification does not suffer from any infirmity that circumstance lends corroboration to the evidence give by the witness before the Court.
But in a case where the evidence before the court is itself shaky, the identification before the magistrate would be of no assistance to the prosecution.
[729D E] 2.1 The credibility of the evidence relating to the identification depends largely on the opportunity the witness had to observe the assailants when the crime was committed and memorize the impression.
725 In the instant case at the scene of the crime when no natural light was available and the street light was at a distance it is unlikely that the eye witnesses by momentary glance of the assailants who surrounded the victim had a lasting impression and the chance of identifying the assailants without mistake.
Therefore the testimony of PWs 1 and 2 is unsafe to be acted upon.
The overall view of the evidence taken by the Trial Court is reasonable and plausible.
The High Court was not justified in interfering with the order of acquittal when the identity and involvement of the appellant was not established beyond reasonable doubt.[731A B, E F G, 730H] 3.
Value of identification parade depends on the effectiveness and the precautions taken against the identifying witness having an opportunity of seeing the persons to be identified before they are paraded with others and also against the identifying witness being provided by the investigating authority with other unfair aid or assistance so as to facilitate the identification of the accused concerned.
When persons who have already known the accused persons to be identified are mixed up with the witnesses the test identification is clearly vitiated and is futile.
In the instant case the magistrates in conducting the test identification parade have committed a grave error because in the case of Accused No. 6 he had mixed up along with PWs 1 and 2 a person known to the accused.
Similarly, in the identification of the other accused, PW 4 who claimed acquitance with Accused Nos. 2, 3 and 5 was mixed up with PWs 1 and 2.
[731C E]
