The appellants are H.T. electricity consumers of various categories in the State of Andhra Pradesh.
The respondent State Electricity Board (the Board), by its orders B.P. Ms. No. 1014 dated 13.12.1983 revised upwards the tariffs for various categories of consumers including H.T. categories 1 (Industrial) and II (Non Industrial); and by Memo No. DE/COML/IV/2250/83/I of the same date it revised upwards the electricity tariffs for highly power intensive industries falling under 644 H.T. Category III.
Tariffs consisted of three parts.
The said three categories of H.T. consumers fell in Part A. H.T. consumers availing supply of electricity for irrigation and agricultural purposes were included in part B. provided for miscellaneous and general charges.
Tariffs were not revised for consumers availing H.T. supply for purposes of irrigation and agriculture falling in part B or L.T. supply for domestic cottage industries, public lighting and small poultry farms units.
Besides the energy charges, the H.T. consumers included in Part A were also required to pay at different rates effective from 1.9.1982 an additional charge levied as `fuel adjustment charges '; and some amount as `voltage surcharged ' in accordance with the terms of the agreement entered into by the individual consumers with the Board.
The writ petitions filed by the appellants challenging the said upward revision of the Electricity Tariffs were dismissed by the High Court upholding the revision of tariffs made by the respondent Board.
Aggrieved the appellants preferred appeals by special leave to this Court.
It was contended on behalf of the appellants that: (1) the upward revision of tariffs by the State Electricity Board was invalid being made without prior consultation with the State Electricity Consultative Council as envisaged by section 16 of the ; (2) without specification of any surplus by the State Government the Board had no power to adjust its tariffs in a manner which resulted in generating any surplus; (3) there is discrimination in recovery of the entire full cost adjustment from the H.T. consumers alone; (4) the upward hike of the tariffs for the H.T. consumers including power intensive consumers was arbitrary and discriminatory inasmuch as it was not related to the cost of generation and was based on irrelevant factors; and (5) and the Board had acted with profit motive losing its public utility character.
Learned counsel representing the power intensive consumers also contended that in the absence of a clause relating to fuel cost adjustment in the G.Os.
issued in respect of the power intensive units, they could not be governed by the clause of fuel cost adjustment made applicable to the H.T.tariffs.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court, HELD: 1.1 The power of fixation of tariffs in the Board is provided by section 49 of this Supply Act which requires the fixation of uniform 645 tariffs ordinarily having regard particularly to the specified factors and enables fixation of such tariffs for any person having regard to the factors expressly stated and any other relevant factors providing further that no unreasonable or undue preference shall be shown to any person by the Board in exercise of its powers of fixing the tariffs.
section 59, requiring the Board to adjust the tariffs for the purpose of its finance is to be read along with section 49.
[667B C; 668B C] 1.2.
The common premise for the purpose of the instant case that the revision of tariffs by the State Electricity Board is a question of policy may indicate that it would be open to the Consultative Council to advise the Board also on the question of revision of tariffs, and if such advice is given, then the Board must consider the same before taking the final decision.
That, however, does not necessarily mean that where no such advice was taken from the Consultative Council or was rendered on account of the absence of any meeting during the relevant period, it would necessarily render invalid the revision of tariffs made by the Board.
[664A B] Though it is advisable to seek advice of the Consultative Council before revision of the tariffs yet failure to do so does not result in invalidation of the revised tariffs.
This consequence appears to be the logical and reasonable view to take of the requirement of section 16 alongwith other provisions of the Act.
[666A B] 1.3 The consequence of non compliance of section 16 is not provided, and the nature of function of the Consultative Council and the force of its advice being at the best only persuasive, it cannot be said that revision of tariffs without seeking the advice of the Consultative Council renders the revisions of tariffs invalid.
[664B C] 1.4 It is also significant that the annual financial statement containing all particulars relating to revision of tariffs is required to be submitted to the State Government in February each year and the State Government is required after receipt of such statement to cause it to be laid on the table of the House or Houses of the State Legislature and the said statement is open to discussion therein.
The Board is bound to take into consideration any comments made on the said statement in the State Legislature.
The 'laying procedure ' before the legislature effectively controls the exercise of the delegated power of the Board.
Thus there is ample provision for discussion on the revised tariffs in the State Legislature with the Board being bound to take into consideration any comments made thereon.
[664C D; 666A] 646 Kerala State Electricity Board vs M/s. S.N. Govinda Prabhu & Bros. & Ors.
, ; , relied on.
2.1 Mere generation of surplus by the Board as a result of adjusting its tariffs when the quantum of surplus has not been specified by the State Government after the 1978 amendment of section 59 of the Act, cannot invite any criticism unless it is further shown that the surplus generated as a result of the adjustment of tariffs by the Board has resulted in the Board acting as a private trader shedding off its public utility character.
If the profit is made not merely for the sake of profit, but for the purpose of better discharge of its obligations by the Board, it cannot be said that the public enterprise has acted beyond its authority.
[669C E] 2.2 The general principle for the Boards finance indicated by section 59 is that prior to the 1978 amendment, tariffs could be adjusted to avoid any loss, but as a result of the shift made by the 1978 amendment the power could be exercised to generate a surplus and when the State Government specified the amount of surplus then the Board was bound to adjust the tariffs to ensure generation of the specified surplus.
However, generation of a reasonable surplus in any year of account without specification of the surplus amount by the State Government was not contra indicated in the provision inasmuch as the duty to generate a surplus was implicit with the added obligation to ensure generating surplus to the extent specified by the State Government when it was so specified by it.
It cannot be accepted as a reasonable view that in the absence of specification of the surplus by the State Government, the Board could not adjust its tariffs to generate even a reasonable surplus in any year of account.
[668E G] 2.3 In the instant case the Board showed that the surplus resulting from upward revision of tariffs applicable to the H.T. consumers was for the purpose of better discharge of its other obligations under the Supply Act and in effect the same has merely resulted in a gradual withdrawal of the concessional tariffs provided earlier to the power intensive consumers which did not in its opinion require continuance of the concessional tariffs any longer.
It was not proved that this assertion of the Board was incorrect or there was any reasonable basis to hold that the upward revision of tariffs applicable to H.T. consumers was merely with a desire to earn more profits like a private trader and not to generate surplus for utiliasation of the funds to discharge other obligations of the Board towards more needy consumers, such as agriculturists, or to meet the needs of expansion of the supply to deserving areas.
[669E G] 647 3.1 The H.T. consumers, including the power intensive consumers, are known power guzzlers and in power intensive industries, electricity is really a raw material.
This category of consumers, therefore, forms a distinct class separate from other consumers like L.T. consumers who are much smaller consumers.
There is also a rational nexus of this classification with the object sought to be achieved.
Moreover, the power intensive consumers have been enjoying the benefit of a concessional tariff for quite some time, which too is a relevant factor to justify this classification.
Placing the burden of fuel cost adjustment on these power guzzlers, who had the benefit of concessional tariffs, for quite some time and have also a better capacity to pay, cannot, therefore, be faulted since the consumption in the power intensive industries accounts for a large quantity.
[670B C] 3.2 It is not unreasonable to take the view that the thermal power has become costlier on account of the increase in fuel cost and could notionally be allocated to the consumption by H.T. and power intensive consumers and, therefore, the fuel cost adjustment is made applicable to them alone.
[671E F] 4.1 The Court would not strike down the revision of tariffs as arbitrary unless the resulting surplus reaches such a height as to lead to the inevitable decision that the Board has shed its public utility character and is obsessed by the profit motive of private entrepreneur in order to generate a surplus which is extravagant.
[672A B] 4.2 The surplus generated by the Board as a result of revision of tariffs during the relevant period cannot be called extravagant by any standard to render it arbitrary permitting the striking down of the revision of tariffs on the ground of arbitrariness nor is it discriminatory.
It was pointed out on behalf of the Board that its action was based on the opinion of Rajadhyaksha Committee 's report submitted in 1980 and the formula of fuel cost adjustment was on a scientific basis linked to the increase in the fuel cost.
This is a possible view to take and, therefore, the revision of tariffs by the Board does not fall within the available scope of judicial review.
[672C D] Kerala State Electricity Board vs M/s. S.N. Govinda Prabhu and Bros. & Ors., ; , relied on.
Shri Sitaram Sugar Company Limited & Anr.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; , followed.
648 5.
It cannot be said that the term relating to fuel cost adjustment had no application to the power intensive consumers during the relevant period.
The Memo dated 18.11.1975 did not merely extend the non specified 'terms and conditions of supply ' applicable to normal H.T. consumers to the power intensive consumers but also "other charges" which were merely illustrated by the words, "such as Misc.
charges, terms and conditions of supply not mention herein".
This express provision in the said Memo clearly provided that except for the provision specifically made for power intensive consumers, in respect of all other provisions the power intensive consumers were to be governed by the provisions, by whatever name called, applicable to the normal H.T. consumers.
However in the bills issued to the power intensive consumers the terms relating to fuel cost adjustment was specifically indicated.
[673D H; 674A] Nav Bharat Ferro Alloys Ltd. vs A.P.S.E. Board Hyderabad, AIR 1985 A.P. 299, approved.
