According to the Prosecution, appellants 1 and 2 have been friends and were in the habit of selling ganja and spending money lavishly.
They attempted to commit theft in their locality, but were no successful.
Therefore, they hatched a conspiracy to entice boys from affluent families to bring cash and jewellery and murder them after taking away the cash and jewellary.
Likewise, they killed 4 boys, in a span of about 5 years.
Both of them were charged with offences under section 120B read with section 34 IPC, section 364 and 392 read with section 397 IPC in all the four cases filed against them, and were convicted by the Sessions Court.
However, in one case, on appeal, they were acquitted by the High Court.
In another case, the death sentence imposed by the Sessions Court is pending confirmation by the High Court.
In the other two cases, both the appellants were sentenced to 712 death by the Sessions Court and on appeal the High Court confirmed the sentence in one case and in the other, the High Court confirmed the death sentence passed against appellant No. 1 and acquitted appellants No. 2 of all the charges.
The appellants preferred the present appeals challenging the said order of the High Court confirming the sentences against them by contending that there was no proper identification of the dead body and that the approver was not a reliable witness and since his evidence did not receive corroboration, it cannot form the basis for convicting the appellants.
It was also contended that the extreme penalty of death sentence imposed was not justified.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court, HELD: 1.1 In a trial for murder it is not an absolute necessity or an essential ingredient to establish corpus delicti.
The fact of death of the deceased must be established like any other fact.
Corpus delicti in some cases may not be possible to be traced or recovered.
If a murder was committed and the dead body was thrown into flowing tidal river or stream or burnt out, it is unlikely that the dead body may be recovered.
If recovery of the dead body, therefore, is an absolute necessity to convict an accused, in many a case the accused would manage to see that the dead body is destroyed etc.
and that would afford a complete immunity to the guilty from being punished and the accused would escape even when the offence of murder is proved.
What, therefore, is required to base a conviction for an offence of murder is that there should be reliable and acceptable evidence that the offence of murder, like any other factum, of death was committed and it must be proved by direct or circumstantial evidence, although the dead body may not be traced.
[717A D] 1.2 In the instant case, the evidence of PWs.
7 to 10 would establish that they have seen the dead body of the deceased in the well and brought it out and the photograph was taken at the time of inquest.
It was identified to be that of the deceased by no other than the mother of the deceased.
Thus there is no doubt as regards the identity of the dead body.
Also the medical evidence establishes that the deceased died due to stabbing with sharp edged weapon like knife.
[717E] 2.
Law is settled that an approver is a competent witness against the accused person.
But the court, to satisfy its conscience, insists as caution and prudence to seek, as a rule, corroboration to the evidence 713 of the approver, a particips criminis from independent evidence occular or circumstantial, of general particulars regarding the story spoken of by the approver of the commission of the crime and the part played by the accused therein to find whether it is true and worthy of acceptance.
The reliability of the evidence of an approver should be considered from totality of the facts and circumstances.
In one of the two trials there is no dispute that such a corroborative evidence connecting both the appellant is available which was minutely considered by the trial court and the High Court and was accepted.
There is infirmity in that regard.
In the other trial appellant No. 2 was acquitted on the ground that his extra judicial confession made to PW 23, the only corroborative evidence, was disbelieved by the High Court.
Both the Courts below gave categorical finding that PW 1 is a reliable witness.
The evidence of the approver received corroboration from independent evidence.
The canopy of the material evidence from independent sources sufficiently corroborates the approver 's evidence.
He is a reliable witness.
No infirmity has been pointed out to disbelieve his evidence.
[719D H; 720A] Rameshwar vs The State of Rajasthan, ; ; section Swaminathan vs State of Madras, AIR 1957 SC 340; Sarwan Singh vs The State of Punjab, , ; ; B.D. Patil vs State of Maharashtra, ; Md. Hussan Umar Kochra etc.
vs K.S. Dalipsinghji & Anr., [1970] 1 SCR 130; Ram Narain vs State of Rajasthan, ; and Abdul Sattar vs Union Territory, Chandigarh, [1985] (Suppl.) SCC 599, relied on.
King vs Baskervilli, and Mahadeo vs The King, AIR 1936 P.C. 242, referred to.
In the instant case, it is clear from the evidence that the accused indulged in illegal business of purchase and sale of ganja.
They conspired to entice innocent boys from affluent families, took them to far flung places where the dead body could not be identified.
The letters were written to the parents purporting to be by the deceased to delude the parents that the missing boy would one day come home alive and that they would not give any report to the police and the crime would go undetected.
Four murders in a span of five years were committed for gain in cold blooded, premeditated and planned way.
In this case the trial of the murder relating to the two deceased practically took place simultaneously by which date the appellants were convicted for the murder of two other boys.
Therefore, the reference of conviction and sentence by the Sessions Court to those two cases also are relevant facts.
One of the deceased is no other than the nephew of appellants No. 1.
This 714 would establish his depravity and hardened criminality.
No regard for precious lives of innocent young boys was shown.
They adopted the crime of murder for gain as a means to living.
As such there is no infirmity in the sentence awarded by the Sessions Court and confirmed by the High Court.
[721D G] 4.
The doctrine of benefit of doubt only would operate in proof of the commission of the offence.
If there is any reasonable doubt, not the doubt of vacillating mind of a Judge, the accused is entitled to that benefit and be acquitted.
The benefit of doubt again does not enter in the area of consideration of imposing sentence.
[720C] 5.1.
Undue sympathy to impose inadequate sentence would do harm to the justice system to undermine the public confidence in the efficacy of law and society could not long endure under serious threats.
If the courts did not protect the injured the injured would then resort to private vengeance.
It is, therefore, the duty of every court to award proper sentence having regard to the nature of the offence and the manner in which it was executed or committed etc.
[721C] 5.2.
The compassionate grounds such as the accused being young bread winners of the family etc.
would always be present in most casts and are not relevant for interference with the sentence.
[722D] 6.
Under section 235(2) when the accused has been given right to be heard on the question of sentence it is a valuable right.
To make that right meaningful the procedure adopted would be suitably moulded and the accused given an opportunity to adduce evidence on the nature of the sentence.
The hearing may be on the same day if the parties are ready or to a next date but once the court after giving opportunity, proposes to impose appropriate sentence again there is no need to adjourn the case under section 235(2) to next date.
In the present matters the counsel was directed by the High Court to show any additional grounds on the question of sentence, but the counsel was unable to give any additional ground.
[722B C]
