The appellant landlord filed a suit for eviction of the respondent firm defendant commission agent firm, from his shop under section 15(3)(a)(iii) of the Hyderabad House (Rent, Eviction and Lease) Control Act, 1954 on the ground that the appellant required the suit shop for his own personal use as he intended to start commission agency and other business; and that the respondent did not vacate the premise inspite of his two notices, terminating the tenancy.
The respondent filed written statement before the Additional Rent Controller accepting the ownership of the appellant and tenancy of the respondent and denied the appellant 's allegation that he required the premises for his personal use, as the appellant was a member of Hindu Joint family comprising of his father, and his brothers, and his brothers and appellant; the appellant as one of the partners of registered firm runs a kirana of commission agency shop under the name and style of M/s Rajmal Sumermal Surana and the appellant owned many houses and shops and as such was not entitled to an order of eviction.
In the additional written statement it was further stated that the appellant purchased the house from one registered partnership firm and one of the partners of the firm was occupying the house as a permanent tenant since Samwat 2002.
It was also contended that the partners of the firm were not made parties to the eviction proceedings and hence the suit was not tenable.
The Trial Court considering the evidence allowed the suit holding that the appellant was entitled to evict the respondent in view of the provisions of Section 15(2)(vi) of the Act, though the plea of bona fide requirement was negatived.
The tenant respondent filed an appeal under section 25 before the 733 District Judge, which was dismissed though it was held that the landlord failed to prove that he required the premises for personal use.
The tenant respondent 's revision petition under section 26 to the High Court, was allowed by a Single Judge.
Allowing the landlord 's appeal, this Court HELD: 1.
The jurisdiction of the High Court in revision against the order passed on appeal by the District Judge is a limited one and it is almost pari materia with the provisions of Section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
The High Court while exercising the revisional jurisdiction can interfere with the order passed on appeal by the appellate authority only on three grounds, i.e. (i) where the original or appellate authority exercised a jurisdiction not vested in it by law, or (ii) where the original or appellate authority failed to exercise a jurisdiction so vested, or (iii) where in following the procedure or passing the order, the original or appellate authority acted illegally or with material irregularity.
[738C E] 2.
The findings in any view of the matter whatsoever cannot be held to be either without jurisdiction vested with them, nor it can be held to be made by the original or appellate authority illegally or with material irregularity.
[738G] 3.
The revisional jurisdiction of the High Court under Section 26 of the said Act is confined strictly to the jurisdictional error or illegal exercise of jurisdiction.
The finding of the High Court to the effect that it was the duty of the Court in the interest of justice to interfere even with the concurrent finding of facts because on the record, High Court found that there was not a single factor to come to the conclusion that the claim was mala fide or was not bona fide as required by the statute, is entirely baseless and not in accordance with the provisions of Section 26 of said Act which confers revisional Jurisdiction on the High Court.
[738H 739B] 4.
The claim of permanent tenancy by one of the partners has been clearly and unequivocally made in the additional written statement filed on behalf of the respondent.
In such circumstances, the provisions of Section 15(2) (vi) of the said Act are applicable and an order of eviction can very well be passed on this ground alone.
[739F] 734
