The appellants forcibly took P.W. 2 to a lonely place on 19.3.1983, made her to drink liquor and committed sexual assault on her.
Thereafter they left her in a truck.
While the said truck was unloading materials near a village, the victim stealthily left the truck and concealed herself near a fence.
P.W. 7 rescued her and took her to the house of P.W. 8, one of her distant relative, from where her father P.W. 1 took her back and lodged the report at the police station.
A case under sections 363 and 376 read with section 341.I.P.C. was registered against both the appellants.
After completion of the investigation, a charge sheet was submitted and the appellants were tried for the aforesaid offences.
The appellants denied the prosecution allegations and pleaded that they were falsely implicated because of refusal by one of them to marry the girl and previous enmity with the other.
The Assistant Sessions Judge rejected the defence pleas, and found that the appellants committed rape on the victim without her consent, and relying on section 114A of the Evidence Act, convicted the appellants under section 376(2)(g), I.P.C. and sentenced each of them to rigorous imprisonment for three 840 years.
Since the victim was more than 16 years of age, the appellants were acquitted of the charge under section 363, I.P.C. On dismissal of their appeal against the conviction and sentence by the Addl.
Session Judge, the appellants filed a revision application before the High Court.
The High Court duly considered and appraised the evidence and held that the appellants committed rape on PW 2 forcibly without her consent.
Ultimately the appellants came in appeal by special leave to this Court.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
In cases of rape, generally it is difficult to find any corroborative witnesses except the victim of the rape.
However, corroboration is not the sine que non for a conviction in a rape case.
In the Indian setting, refusal to act on the testimony of a victim of sexual assault in the absence of corroboration as a rule, is adding insult to injury.
[843D F] Bharwada Bhoginbhai Hirjibhai vs State of Gujarat, ; and Rameshwar vs The State of Rajasthan, ; , relied on.
In the instant case, the victim girl clearly stated in her evidence that she had been taken to a solitary house in the hills by appellant No. 1 where she was made to drink liquor and thereafter she was undressed and forcibly subjected to sexual intercourse by both the accused appellants one after the other.
Her uncontroverted testimony was accepted by all the courts and they concurrently found that she had been raped without her consent.
[844F G] 3.
Apart from the legal presumption that flows from the provisions of section 114A of the Evidence Act, it is clearly evident in the instant case, that the victim girl protested and struggled while she was subjected to sexual assault forcibly by the accused persons and this clearly evinces absence of consent on her part in such sexual intercourse.
[844H; 845A] 4.
The High Court rightly held that it cannot be expected to re appraise the evidence as a court of appeal while exercising its revisional power under section 401 Cr.
P.C. [845E F] 841 State of Orissa vs Nakula Sahu and Ors., ; , relied on.
This Court hearing an appeal by special leave cannot consider and re appraise the evidence once again in the face of concurrent findings of facts arrived at by all the courts below.
[845F]
