The appellant took on lease some agricultural lands from one Viswas Rao and by operation of Section 32(1) of the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act 67 of 1948, which was applicable to the lease, he became a deemed purchaser from tillers ' day i.e. 1.4.1957.
Since the landlord was insane, the right to purchase was statutorily deferred under section 32 F till date of its cessation or one year after death.
Pursuant to the notification issued under Section 88(1)(b) of the Act, certain lands including those of the appellant 's lease hold lands were reserved for industrial purpose; thereby making sections 1 to 87 of the Act inapplicable to the exempted area.
During the subsistence of disability of the landlord, his son Vasant Rao sold the land to the respondent under registered sale deed.
Vishwas Rao died in September 1965.
The appellant became entitled to purchase the land on and from August 19, 1966.
He therefore filed an application before Mamlatdar to fix the price.
He fixed on enquiry at Rs.4,95/65 P. which was paid by the appellant.
In the enquiry, the respondent contended that he purchased the property from Vasantrao, son of the landlord and by operation of the second proviso to Section 88(1)(b), the lands stood exempted from the operation of Section 1 to 87 of the Act.
So the Mamlatdar had no jurisdiction to decide the price of the land.
The appellant 's contention was that Vasantrao had no right to sell the lands during the life time of his father, the Karta of the Hindu Joint Family.
The sale was invalid and did not bind him.
He had acquired statutory right of `deemed purchaser ' and its exemption under section 88(1)(b) did not divest his statutory right.
The Mamlatdar accepted the appellant 's contention and allowed the petition.
On appeal to the Collector and revision to the Revenue Tribunal, the decision of Mamlatdar was reversed.
The Division Bench of the High Court dismissed the writ petition.
Hence this appeal by the appellant, after obtaining special leave.
On the question: whether the operation of the second proviso to Section 88(1)(b) of the tenancy Act, 1948 has retrospective effect depriving the appellant of the statutory right? 803 Allowing the appeal, this Court HELD: Section 88 of the Act empowers the government to exempt certain other lands from the purview of Sections 1 to 87 of the Act.
The State Governments exercised their power from time to time under Section 88(1)(b) and issued notification and punished in the official Gazette specifying certain areas as being reserved for non agricultural or industrial development i.e., urban development.
[806C D] It any land in the newly added area has been transferred or acquired between the date of the notification issued under first proviso and October 9, 1964, such transfer or acquisition of land shall have the effect as if it was made in an area to which the main part of the proviso and Section 88(1)(b) would apply.
The necessary consequence would be that the provisions of Sections 1 to 87 shall not apply and shall be deemed never to have applied to such added area.
It is implicit that such transfer or acquisition made, to bring within the net of second proviso, must be valid and bona fide one and not colourable, fraudulent, fictitious or nominal.
[809G 810B] In the instant case, since Vasantrao did not obtain any order from the competent court under the Lunacy Act to have him appointed as Manager of the joint family to alienate the property, the sale is per se illegal, The sale, therefore, appears to be to defeat the statutory right of the appellant.
The rigour of the second proviso to Section 88(1)(b) is thus inapplicable.
Thereby the right and interest as deemed purchaser acquired by the appellant has not been affected by subsequent notification issued under section 88(1)(b).
[811F G] Sukharam @ Bapusaheb Narayan Sanas & Anr.
vs Manikchand Motichand Shah & Anr., [196] 2 S.C.R. 59; Mohanlal Chunilal Kothari vs Tribhovan Haribhai Tamboli, ; ; Sidram Narsappa Kamble vs Sholapur Borough Municipality & Anr., ; ; Parvati & Ors vs Fatehsinhrao Pratapsinghrao Gaekwad, ; ; Navinchandra Ramanlal vs Kalidas Bhudarbai & Anr., ; ; P.K. Gobindan Nair & Ors.
vs P. Narayanan Nair & Ors., Indian Cases 743; and A. Ramacharlu vs Archakan Ananthacharlu & Anr., A.I.R. 1955 A.P. 261, referred to.
