The respondents, who lost the State Assembly elections as candidates of the Mezo National Front(MNF) from different constituencies of Mizoram, challenged the election of the Congress (I) candidates on the ground of corrupt practices in the High Court.
The appellants the returned candidates raised certain preliminary objections regarding the maintainability of each petition.
On the basis therefore two preliminary issues were raised for consideration.
The appellants moved for striking off the pleadings.
Thereupon, the original petitioners the respondents applied for amendment of their election petitions which was strongly opposed by the appellants.
The preliminary objections, the applications for striking off the pleadings and the amendment applications were heard together.
The two preliminary issues raise were (i) whether the election petitions were in conformity with the requirements of Section 81 and 83 753 of the Representation of the Peoples Act, 1951 and the Rules framed thereunder by the High Court and (ii) whether rule 1 and the other related rules and notes thereto enabling the filing of the Election Petition before the Stamp Reporter assigned to the election court by the Chief Justice were ultra vires Article 329 of the Constitution and Section 169 read with Sections 80, 80A and 81 of the R.P. Act.
The appellants contended that the election petitions being photo copies, could not be treated as election petitions as contemplated by law; that the copies of petitions served on them were not attested to be true copies of the original petitions as required by Section 81(3); that the election petitions were not signed and verified in the manner laid down by the Code of Civil Procedure inasmuch as the source of information had not been disclosed in the verification or in the affidavit in Form 25 as required by rule 94A of the Conduct of Election Rules, 1961 (the Rules); that no schedule of material particulars of corrupt practice had been annexed to the affidavit purporting to be under Form 25, and that the presentation of the election petitions before the Stamp Reporter was inconsistent with Sections 80, 80A and 81 of the R.P. Act and Article 329 of the Constitution.
The averments in each election petition were identical.
The High Court rejected the preliminary objections and party allowed the applications for striking off the averments in the election petitions and partly permitted certain amendments to the election petitions, against which order the present appeals are filed in this Court under Article 136 of the Constitution.
The returned candidate the appellant contended that paragraph 3 of the election petition was the most crucial paragraph inasmuch as it disclosed the names of towns and villages as well as the period during which the alleged corrupt practices were committed had been deliberatedly omitted from the verification clause and the affidavit; that failure to mention paragraph 3 of the election petition in both the verification clause of the petition and the affidavit was fatal and cannot be cured after the expiry of the limitation period of 45 days; that the affidavit was not in Form No. 25 prescribed under Rule 94A of the Rules and since Section 83 of the R.P. Act is mandatory and failure to adhere to Form No. 25 was fatal, as the doctrine of substantial compliance had no place in election law but even if that doctrine could be invoked, the respondent failed to make substantial compliance; that the election petitions being photocopies could not be entertained as valid 754 election petitions; that copies of the election petitions served on the returned candidates were not attested as true copies of the original as required by Section 81(3); that the election petitions and the schedule and annexures were not signed and verified as required by the Code; that an election dispute founded on the allegation of corrupt practice being quasi criminal in nature calls for strict adherence to the requirements of election law as was evident from Section 86(I) of R.P. Act which provided for dismissal of an election petition which failed to comply with the requirements of Section 81, 82 or 117 of the statute; and that if the Code did not apply to Mizoram, it applied to an election petition because section 83(I)(c) obligates that an election petition `shall be signed by the petitioner and verified in the manner laid down in the Code for the verification of pleadings '.
This Court partly allowing the appeals, HELD: 1.
Our election law being statutory in character must be strictly complied with since an election petition is not guided by ever strictly complied with since an election petition is not guided by ever changing common law principles of justice and notions of equity.
Being statutory in character it is essential that it must conform to the requirements of our election law.
But at the same time the purity of election process must be maintained at all costs and those who violate the statutory norms must suffer for such violation.
If the returned candidate is shown to have secured his success at the election by corrupt means he must suffer for his misdeeds.
[772B D] 2.
A charge of corrupt practice has a two dimensional effect; its impact on the returned candidate has to be viewed from the point of view of the candidate 's future political and public life and from the point of view of the electorate to ensure the purity of the election process.
There can, therefore, be no doubt that such an allegation involving corrupt practice must be viewed very seriously and the the High Court should ensure compliance with the requirements of Section 83 before the parties go to trial.
[783D E] 3.
What is essential is that the petitioner must take the responsibility of the copy being a true copy of the original petition and sign in token thereof.
No particular form of attestation is prescribed; all that the sub section enjoins is that the petitioner must attest the copy under his own signature to be a true copy of the petition.
By certifying the same as true copy and by putting his signature at the foot thereof, the petitioner of each election petition had clearly complied with the letter and spirit of section 81(3) of the R.P. Act.
[786A B] 755 4.
Section 86(I) mandates that the High Court `shall ' dismiss an election petition which does not comply with the provisions of Section 81 or Section 82 or Section 117 of the R.P. Act.
The language of this sub section is quite imperative and commands the High Court, in no uncertain terms, to dismiss an election petition which does not comply with the requirements of section 81 of section 82.
[773B D] 5.
Election of a returned candidate can be rendered void on proof of the alleged corrupt practice.
In addition thereto he would incur a subsequent disqualification also.
This harshness is essential if we want our democratic process to be clean, free and fair.
Eradication of corrupt practice from our democratic process is essential if we want it to thrive and remain healthy.
Our democratic process will collapse if unhealthy corrupt practices like appeals to voters on basis of caste, creed, community religion, race, language, etc., are allowed to go unchecked and unpunished.
Use of corrupt practices in elections to secure short term gains at the cost of purity of our democratic process must be frowned at by every right thinking citizen.
[773D F] 6.
It is for that reason that the law has provided for double jeopardy to deter candidates, their agents and others from indulging in such nefarious practices, their agents and others from indulging in such nefarious practices.
But while there is sufficient justification for the law to be harsh with those who indulge in such practices, there is also the need to ensure that such allegations are made with a sense of responsibility and concern and not merely to vex the returned candidate.
It is with this in view that the law envisages that the particulars of such allegations shall be set out fully disclosing the name of the party responsible for the same and the date and place of its commission.
A simple verification was considered insufficient and, therefore, the need for an affidavit in the prescribed form.
These procedural precautions are intended to ensure that the person making the allegation of corrupt practice realises the seriousness thereof as such a charge would be akin to a criminal charge since it visits the party indulging in such practice with a two fold penalty.
[773E H] 7.
If full particulars of an alleged corrupt practice are not supplied, the proper course would be to give an opportunity to the petitioner to cure the defect and if he fails to that opportunity that part of the charge may be struck down.
[775F G] 8.
Once the amendment sought falls within the purview of section 86(5), the High Court should be liberal in allowing the same unless, in the facts and circumstances of the case, the Court finds it unjust and 756 prejudicial to the opposite party to allow the same.
Such prejudice must, however, be distinguished from mere inconvenience.
[775G H] 9.
The power conferred by section 86(5) cannot be exercised to allow any amendment which will have the effect of introducing a corrupt practice not previously alleged inthe petition.
If it is found that the proposed amendments are not in the nature of supplying particulars but raise new grounds, the same must be rejected but if the amendments are sought for removing vagueness by confining the allegations to the returned candidate only such an amendment would fall within the parameters of section 86(5) of the R.P. Act.
[789B D] 10. Clause(c) of sub section 83 provides that an election petition shall be signed by the petitioner and verification of the pleadings.
Under section 83(2) any schedule or annexure to the pleading must be similarly verified.
Order 6 Rule 15 is the relevant provision in the Code.
Sub rule (2) of Rule 15 says that the person verifying shall specify with reference to the numbered paragraphs of the pleading, what he verifies on his own knowledge and what he verifies upon information received and believed to be true.
The verification must be signed by the person making it and must state the date on and the place at which it was signed.
The defect in the verification can be (i) of a formal nature and not very substantial (ii) one which substantially complies with the requirements and (iii) that which is material but capable of being cured.
[776A C] 11.
The object of requiring verification of an election petition is clearly to fix the responsibility for the averments and allegations in the petition on the person signing the verification and at the same time discouraging wild and irresponsible allegations unsupported by facts.
[776C D] 12.
In cases where corrupt practice is alleged in the petition, the petition shall also be supported by an affidavit in the prescribed form, i.e. Form No. 25 prescribed by Rule 94A of the Rules.
[776D E] 13.
While defective verification or a defective affidavit may not be fatal, the High Court should ensure its compliance before the parties go to trial so that the party required to meet the charge is not taken by surprise at the actual trial.
[783E F] 14.
The charge of corrupt practice has to be proved beyond reasonable doubt and merely preponderance of probabilities.
757 Allegation of corrupt practice being quasi criminal in nature, the failure to supply full particulars at the earliest point of time and to disclose the source of information promptly may have an adverse bearing on the probative value to be attached to the evidence tendered in proof thereof at the trial.
Therefore, even though ordinarily a defective verification can be cured and the failure to disclose the grounds or sources of information may not be fatal, failure to place them on record with promptitude may lead the court in a given case to doubt the veracity of the evidence ultimately tendered.
If, however, the affidavit of the schedule or annexure forms an integral part of the election petition itself, strict compliance would be insisted upon.
[783G 784B] 15.
The requirements of section 81(3) are mandatory and failure to comply with them would render the petition liable to summary dismissal under section 86(I) of the R.P. Act.
[784G] 16.
If a document does not form an integral part of the election petition but is merely referred to in the petition or filed in the proceedings as evidence of any fact, failure to supply a copy thereof will not prove fatal.
Therefore the maintainability of an election petition will depend on whether the schedule or annexure to the petition constitutes an integral part of the election petition or not.
If it constitutes an integral part it must satisfy the requirements of section 81(3) and failure in that behalf would be fatal.
But if it does not constitute an integral part of the election petition, a copy thereof need not be served along with the petition to the opposite party.
[787A C] 17.
The High Court is directed to issue directions to the election petitioner of each petition to remove the defects within such time as it may allow and if they or any of them fail to do so, pass appropriate consequential orders in accordance with law.
[789A B] Gurumayam section Sarma vs K. Ongbi Anisija Devi, Civil Appeal No. 659 of 1957 dated 9.2.1961; State of Nagaland vs Rattan Singh; , ; V.L.Rohlus vs Deputy Commissioner, Aizawal, ; Raj Narain vs Indira Gandhi; , at 1307: ; ; Manphul Singh vs Surinder Singh, [1973] 2 SCC 599 at 608; K.M. Mani vs P.J. Antony, ; ; Samant N. Bal Krishna vs George Fernandez, ; ; D.P. Mishra vs Kamal Narayan Sharma, ; ; Balwan Singh vs Lakshmi Narain, ; Murarka Radhey Shyam vs Roop Singh Rathore; , ; State of Bombay vs Purushottam Jog Naik; , ; The Barjum Chemicals Ltd. The Company Law 758 Board, [1966] Supp.
SCR 311; K.K. Nambiar vs Union of India, ; at 125; Jadav Gilua vs Suraj Narain Jha, AIR 1974 Patna 207; M/s Sunder Industries Ltd. vs G.E. Works, AIR 1982 Delhi 220; K.K. Somanathan vs K.K. Ramachandran, AIR 1988; Kerala 259; Kamalam vs Dr. Syed Mohammad, ; ; M/s. Sukhwinder Pal vs State of Punjab, ; ; Z.B. Bukhari vs Brij Mohan, ; Prabhu Narayan vs K.K. Srivastava, ; ; Satya Narain vs Dhuja Ram, ; ; M. Karunanidhi vs Dr. H.V. Hande, ; Mithlesh Kumar Pandey vs Baidyanath Yadav, [1984] 2 SCR 278; Rajender Singh vs Usha Rani, [1984] 3 SCC 339; U.S. Sasidharan vs K. Karunakaran; , and Ch.
Subba Rao vs Member, E.T. Hyderabad, Referred to.
When by the same statute the words `Election Commissioner ' were substituted by the expression `High Court ' with effect from December 14, 1966.
Even though by the said Amendment Act jurisdiction was conferred on High Court in place of the Election Commission, surprisingly the title of chapter II continues to read `Presentation of election petitions to Election Commission '.
Parliament will well to correct this slip by substituting the words `High Court ' for the expression `Election Commission ' to bring it in conformity with the changes introduced by Act 47 of 1966.
[768E F]
