Gift to certain movable assets was made to the respondent assessee by a Muslim businessman, when he was seriously ill, and died of the illness after six weeks of the execution of the document.
In gift tax assessment proceedings, the assessee claimed exemption for this gift under Section 5(1)(xi) of the Gift Tax Act, 1958, on the ground that the gift was made in contemplation of death.
The Gift Tax Officer rejected the claim.
But, on appeal, the Appellate Assistant Commissioner allowed the exemption relying on the circumstances under which the gift was made and the events followed thereafter and the evidence of the Sub Registrar, who was brought to residence for effecting registration, and the doctor, who was treating the donor.
On appeal by the Gift Tax Officer, the Tribunal affirmed the finding of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner regarding the donor 's illness but did not allow the exemption on the ground that, though there was delivery of possession of the gifted movables, the gift was unconditional and absolute, since it had not been specifically expressed or impliedly present in the deed that the gift must revert back in the event of the donor recovering from illness and that the gifted property had to be kept as a gift in case the donor died of his illness.
However, on a reference made at the instance of the assessee for opinion, the High Court held that such a condition need not be mentioned in the deed and 847 it could be inferred from the attending circumstances of the gift, and since the donor was actually sick at the time of execution of the deed and died of the same illness without recovery, after a short period, the gift in question was made in contemplation of death and therefore, entitled to exemption from tax under Section 5(1)(xi) of the Act.
In the appeal before this Court, on behalf of the Department it was contended that the gift in contemplation of death should be conditional, and in the absence of indications in the document to the effect that if the donor did not die, he should be entitled to remain in complete domination of the gifted property, the gift would become inter vivos and absolute, and that the exemption under Section 5(1)(xi) of the Gift Tax Act was not available to the assessee, since Section 191 of the Indian Succession Act was not applicable to marz ul maut gift.
Dismissing the appeal by the Department, this Court HELD: 1.1 Explanation (d) to sub section (2) of Section 5 of the Gift Tax Act, 1958 states that a gift made in contemplation of death has the same meaning as in Section 191 of the .
The requirements of a gift in contemplation of death as laid down by Section 191 are: (i) the gift must be of movable property; (ii) it must be made in contemplation of death; (iii) the donor must be ill and he expects to die shortly of the illness; (iv) possession of the property should be delivered to the done; and (v) the gift does not effect if the donor recovers from the illness or the donee predeceases the donor.
These requirements are similar to the constituent elements of a valid donatio martis causa.
[853C E] Cain vs Moon, @ 286, referred to. 1.2.
In the instant case, all the conditions prescribed, except perhaps the last one are found present by the fact finding authorities.
[853G] 1.3.
The recitals in the deed of gift are not conclusive to determine the nature and validity of the gift.
The party may produce evidence aliunde to prove that the donor gifted the property when he was seriously ill and contemplating his death with no hope of recovery.
These factors in conjunction with the factum of death of the donor may be sufficient to infer that the gift was made in contemplation of death.
It is implicit in such circumstances that the donee becomes the owner of the gifted property only if the donor dies of the illness and if the donor recovers from the illness, the recovery itself operates as a revocation of the gift.
[854B C] 848 1.4 It is not necessary to state in the gift deed that donee becomes owner of the property only upon the death of the donor.
Nor it is necessary to specify that the gift is liable to be revoked upon the donor 's recovery from the illness.
The law acknowledges these conditions from the circumstances under which the gift is made.
[854C D] Halsbury 's Laws of England, 4th Edn.
20 p. 41 para 67; Jerman on Wills, 8th Edn.
Vol, 1 p. 46 47; Williams on "Executors and Administrators", 14th Edn.
p. 315, and Corpus Juris Secundum, vol.
38 p. 782 and p. 917 para 110, referred to.
1.5 In the light of this and in view of the findings recorded by the Tribunal about the serious sickness of the donor and his state of mind at the time of making the gift in question, it can be reasonably concluded that the gift was not absolute and irrevocable.
On the contrary, it would be legitimate to infer that the gift was in contemplation of death.
any other view would be inappropriate.
[856A B] 2.1 Marz ul maut is also entitled to exemption from gift tax under Section 5(1)(xi) of the Gift Tax Act, 1958.
[856B] 2.2 The exemption to gift in contemplation of death is provided under Section 5(1)(xi) of the Gift Tax Act, and not under Section 191 of the , Section 191 furnishes only the meaning or requirements of gift in contemplation of death.
It a gift in contemplation of death is recognised by the personal law of parties satisfying the conditions contemplated under Section 191 of the , cannot be denied exemption under Section 5(1)(xi) of the Act, Even assuming that Section 191 as such will not be applicable to the parties.
[856C D] 2.3 Under Mohammedan Law gift made during marz ul maut (death bed illness) is subject to very strict scrutiny and subject to all other conditions necessary for the validity of a hiba or gift, including delivery of possession of the donor to the donee.
[856D] Mulla 's Mohammedan Law, pp. 111 Sections 135 & 136, referred to.
2.4 Marz ul maut is a malady which induces an apprehension of death inthe person suffering from it and which eventually results in his death.
There are three tests laid down to determine whether illness is to be regarded as marz ul maut.
They are; (i) Proximate danger of death 849 so that there is preponderance of khauf or apprehension that at the given time death must be more probable than life.
(2) There must be some degree of subjective apprehension of death in the mind of the sick person.
(3) There must be external indicia chief among which would be the inability to attend to ordinary avocations.
[856E F] Rashid Karmalli and anr.
vs Sherbanoo, [1907] 31 ILR Bombay 2641, referred to.
2.5 Therefore, under the Principles of Mohammedan Law, the gift made in marz ul maut could be regarded as gift made in contemplation of death, since it has all the requisites prescribed under Section 191 of the .
The only limitation is that the disposition is restricted to a third on account of the right of the heirs.
[857C D] Syed Ameer Ali: Mohammedan Law, Vol. 1, 4th Edn.
1985 p. 59 60, referred to.
