The appellant Co operative Housing Society Ltd. made some unauthorised constructions in a 36 storeyed building.
The Bombay Municipal Corporation issued a show cause notice calling upon the society to show cause as to why the upper eight floors of the building should not be demolished so as to limit the development to the permissible Floor Space Index (F.S.I.) since the additional Floor Space Index to the extent of 2773 sq.
was gained by the appellant.
The appellants submitted a reply to the show cause notice.
The Administrator of the Municipal Corporation made an order on 21st Septmber, 1984 requiring the appellant to demolish 24,000 sq.
on the eight upper floors of the building on the basis of 3000 sq.
on each floor.
The Administrator as well as the State Government dismissed the representation and appeal by the appellant.
So the appellant filed a writ petition in the High Court which also dismissed with the observation that the appellant be given a choice to reduce the construction upto permissible limit by any alternative proposal within the four corners of the rules and regulations within one month from 28th October 1985 the Municipality may consider.
The appellant made application to the Municipal Corporation giving several alternative proposals on 21st November 1985.
But it also preferred a special leave petition before this court against the High Court Judgment.
The special leave petition leave petition was dismissed on January 17, 1986.
The appellants alleged that they submitted another proposal to the Municipal Corporation on 17th February, 1986 and a meeting for hearing alternative proposals was fixed up by the Municipal commissioner and put forward its case in support of the new proposals and the Municipal Commissioner said he would consider the proposals and take decision.
On 27th December 1988 the appellant wrote a letter to the Municipal Commissioner to consider the alternative proposal i.e. of 746 vertical demolition of the building instead of demolishing the eight upper floors.
In January, 1989 the officers of the corporation agreed that demolition can be made vertically so as to bring the entire construction within the permissible Floor Space Index where as the work of demolition of upper eight floors of the building were entrusted to a company by the Municipal Commissioner.
So the appellant again filed a writ in the High Court.
It was dismissed by the Single Judge as well as by the Division Bench dated 5th March, 1990.
The appellants came by Special Leave Petition in this Court; The main grievance of the appellant being that vertical demolition proposal was not considered.
Inspite of orders of this Court in this regard to the Municipal Corporation no agreeable solution could fructify.
The proposal was examined by the Municipal Commissioner but rejected on 13th November, 1990 and submitted the detailed report to this Court.
Dismissing the petition the Court HELD: The appellant had made illegal constructions in violation of Floor Space Index to the extent of more than 24000 sq.
The decision taken by the Municipal Commissioner does not suffer from any want of jurisdiction nor is violative of any law or rules.
It is well settled that the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution is not an appellate Court on the administrative decision taken by the authorities.
Since the tendency of raising unlawful constructions and unauthorised encroachments is increasing in the entire country and such activities are required to be dealt with by firm hands.
Such unlawful constructions are against public interest and hazardous to the safety of occupiers and residents of the multistoreyed buildings.
[749F, 750B, E F] This case should be a pointer to all the builders that making of unauthorised construction never pays and is against the interest of the society at large.
The rules, regulations and by laws are made by the corporations or development authorities taking in view the larger public interest of the society and it is the bounden duty of the citizens of obey and follow such rules which are made for their own benefits.
[750H 715B]
