The appellant plaintiff instituted a Regular Civil Suit in the court of Joint Civil Judge, J.D., Ahmednagar for vacant possession of the suit property and also for arrears of rent.
It was pleaded by the appellant that the defendants were in possession of the suit shop on the monthly rent and the tenancy commenced from the first day of every month and ended on the last day of the said month according to English calender.
The plaintiff based his suit primarily on two grounds viz., that the defendants had committed default in the payment of statutory rent and were thus defaulters and secondly the appellant required the premises for bona fide need for setting up an office for her husband, who is tax consultant.
It was asserted by the plaintiff that the defendants had acquired alternative business placed both in the vicinity of the suit premises, being partners of the firms named in the plaint and also elsewhere and they no longer required the premises.
It was also added that the suit premises remained mostly locked and no business was carried on there; defendants 1 to 3 having shifted from Ahmednagar to Pune were doing business there.
The defendants denied the allegations contained in the plaint, stating that the suit property was in their possession since last 20 years at the annual rent of Rs.255.36 ps; that an receipt of the notice they had sent the rent amounting to Rs.517 92 ps.
by Money Order which the appellant refused being not correctly calculated; then again the defendants sent Rs.960 by Demand Draft which was also refused by the appellant as miscalculated.
Thereafter the defendants sent Rs.658.55 ps.
by Money Order which was accepted by the appellant.
According to the tenants they are always to pay the rent and in fact the appellant 's husband had been accepting the rent without issuing any receipt therefore.
According to the defendants, the requirement of the plaintiff was neither bona fide nor reasonable; her husband, an 942 Income Tax and Sales/Tax Practitioner was working with Mr. Gandhi as one of his partners and also having his own office.
Further the plaintiff was in possession of an area 15ft.
x 25ft.
on the ground floor facing towards west, adjacent to the suit premises and also complete first floor 45ft.
x 15ft.
The Trial Court held that the defendants failed to prove that the suit premises were leased to them at annual rent and as such they were held to be defaulters as the deposits of rent were not made within the meaning of Section 12(3)(a) and 12(3)(b) of the Rent Act.
The Trial Court further found that as the plaintiff has no other accomodation at Ahmednagar except the suit premises and the partnership of the plaintiff 's husband with with S.B. Gandhi had been dissolved, the plaintiff reasonably required the suit premises for the purpose of opening office of her husband as Tax Consultant.
Accordingly the Trial Court decreed the suit and directed the defendants to hand over the vacant possession of the suit premises within one month of the date of order.
Being aggrieved, the defendants filed an appeal before the Additional District Judge, Ahmednagar.
The Additional District Judge, held that the trial court was right in holding that the defendant No. 1 was paying the rent monthly and he was a monthly tenant but there were no arrears for the statutory period in order to hold that the defendants were defaulters for which their tenancy was liable to be determined.
On the question of bona fide requirement of the appellant, the Additional District Judge also considered the application for additional evidence which disclosed that the plaintiff 's husband had purchased a plot and constructed a big bungalow covering about 2000 sq.
and held that it was not known whether the Municipality had given permission for habitation and furthermore the requirement of the plaintiff was especially for conducting her husband 's profession of Tax Practitioner at the required suit premises, which is not for residential purposes.
On this reasoning the Additional District Judge held that the subsequent circumstances have not much relevance and the requirement of the plaintiff appellant was a bona fide and genuine one.
Accordingly he affirmed the decree passed by the Trial Court.
The Respondent tenant being aggrieved filed a writ petition under Article 227 of the Constitution praying for setting aside the decree of ejectment passed against him.
The High Court, on a consideration of the additional evidences which have been expressly mentioned in the application for additional evidence, held that the husband of the appellant had required a plot in T.P. Scheme No. III, Ahmednagar and constructed a big bungalow thereon during the pendency of the appeal 943 and has been residing there.
The said premises consisted of a 2000 sq.
covered area and the appellant was using the same for residence and office purpose also.
The High Court held that the said bungalow can be conveniently used for the residence of the plaintiff and her family members as well as for the purpose of opening of office of Tax Consultant by her husband.
That apart, the entire first floor of the suit premises can be conveniently utilised for opening the office of Tax Consultant by the plaintiff 's husband.
The High Court therefore on that reasoning allowed the writ petition and set aside the judgments and decrees passed by the Courts below.
Hence this appeal by the appellant landlord by special leave.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court HELD: The lower Appellate Court, after considering the evidences held that the defendant are not defaulters as there were no arrears for the statutory period.
Thus, the question of the default on the part of the defendants in the payment of rent was not at all raised nor agitated before the Court of Appeal below by the plaintiff.
[952F G] It is now beyond the pale of any doubt that in appropriate cases events subsequent to the filing of the suit can be taken notice of and can be duly considered provided the same is relevant in determining the question of bona fide requirement.
The High Court was right in duly considering the new facts and circumstances that have been brought to the notice of the Court by the application for additional evidence filed under Order 41 Rule 27 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
[957H 958A] In the appeal it has been rightly held by the High Court after considering the subsequent facts and materials brought out by the application for additional evidence that the plaintiff failed to prove reasonable and bona fide need for her occupation of the suit premises for the purpose of opening the Tax Consultancy office of her husband, Amritlal Mutha.
Considering the facts and circumstances as well as the subsequent materials brought out by the application for additional evidence, we have no hesitation in our mind to hold that the aforesaid findings arrived at by the High Court is totally unexceptionable and so the same cannot be interfered with in this appeal.
[958F G] The words ``reasonable requirement ' ' undoubtedly postulatethat there must be an element of need desire or wish.
The distinction between desire and need should doubtless be kept in 944 mind but not so as to make even the genuine need as nothing that a desire.
M/s. Variety Emporium vs
V. R.M. Mohd. Ibrahim Naina; , ; Chandavarkar Sita Ratna Rao vs Ashalata section Guram, ; ; Pasupuleti Venkateswarlu vs The Motor & General Traders, ; ; Hasmat Rai & Anr.
vs Raghunath Prasad, ; Amarjit Singh vs Smt.
Khatoon Quamarain; , ; and Begum and Ors.
vs Abdul Ahad Khan and Ors., ; ;
