The appellant was convicted by the courts below under Section 302 IPC and sentenced to life imprisonment for the murder of one G.
It was alleged that when the deceased and his companion, PW 4 were proceeding in a rickshaw, pulled by PW 3, the appellant and his five companions launched an attack on them.
While PW 4 received an injury by a cycle chain, the deceased received stab injuries, to which the succumbed on the spot.
On the First Information Report lodged by PW 4, statements of three eye witnesses viz. PW I, an on looker and PWs 3 and 4 recorded during the course of investigation, and the evidence regarding discovery of incriminating articles and find of human blood on them, the appellant and his five companions were chargesheeted for the murder of the deceased. 2 During the trial, two of the eye witnesses, viz. PWs 3 and 4 were declared hostile, since they expressed their inability to identify the accused persons as assailants of the deceased.
Though PW 1 supported the prosecution in examination in chief, he expressed some doubt regarding the identity of the appellant and one other assailant in the cross examination.
The trial court refused to place reliance on the evidence of the three eye witnesses and acquitted all, except the appellant.
It convicted the appellant under Section 302 IPC and sentenced him to life imprisonment on the evidence that the appellant was absconding, that he had discovered the weapon which was found to be stained with human blood and the factum of find of human blood on the pant worn by him at the time of his arrest The appellant 's appeal was dismissed by the High Court.
While ignoring the evidence of PWs 3 and 4, the High Court relied on the evi dence of PW 1 holding that his subsequent attempt to create a doubt regarding the identity of the appellant was of no consequence, since there was intrinsic material in his evidence to establish the presence of the appellant amongst the assailants of deceased.
It also relied on the discovery evidence and find of human blood on the weapon and on the pant he was wearing at the time of his arrest.
The State did not prefer an appeal against the five companions of the appellant who were acquitted by the trial court.
In the appeal before this Court on behalf of the appel lant it was contended that (1) the prosecution version regarding the incident, particularly, the involvement of the appellant was highly doubtful since the correctness of the First Information Report, purported to have been lodged by PW4 was itself doubtful since he had disowned it; (2) the presence of PW1 at the scene of offence and at the time of occurrence was highly doubtful and the High Court committed an error in placing reliance on his testimony in examina tion in chief, while brushing aside his statement in cross examination; (3) same set of Panch witnesses had been em ployed for all the discovery panchnamas as well as the attachment of clothes of the appellant and others and since PW5, Panch witness was closely associated with the family and was a stock witness for the prosecution, no reliance could be placed on the evidence of such a highly interested and chosen witness and consequently find of human blood on the weapon and the pant lost its probative value; (4) the two circumstances, viz. that the appellant was not found for two days, and human blood was present on the weapon and his pant constituted extremely thin and weak evidence to record a finding of guilt, particularly, when the trial court had discarded all the eye witnesses ' evidence and doubted the contents of the FIR, and when the Serologist did not deter mine the blood group of the stains on the weapon and pant of the 3 appellant; (5) in the absence of positive evidence that the fatal injury ' No. I was caused by the appellant only, his conviction substantively under Section 302 IPC could not be sustained; (6) since appellant 's companion were acquitted, and the State had not preferred any appeal against their acquittal, he could not be convicted with the aid of Section 34 or 149 IPC, since the acquittal of the co accused created a legal bar against his conviction, which could not be got over by reappreciation of evidence; and (7) the eye witness es ' evidence could not be relied upon as their names did not figure in the inquest report prepared at the earliest time.
On behalf of the State it was contended that (1) evi dence of PWs 3 and 4 could not be treated as effaced from the record, merely because the prosecution chose to treat them as hostile on the limited question of identity of assailants;(2) PW I was neither a chance witness nor was he faking his presence at the scene of occurrence at the mate rial time; (3) it was not necessary in law to mention names of witnesses in the inquest report as the purpose of prepar ing the report was merely to make a note of the physical condition of the body and the marks of injury thereon no ticed at that point of time; (4) nothing was alleged against PW 5.
Panch witness, nor the appellant had given any expla nation regarding existence of human blood on the weapon and his pant in his statement recorded under section 313 of the Cr.
P.C.; (5) even if the appellant could not be substan tively convicted under Section 302 II 'C, he could still be convicted with the aid of Section 34 or 149 II 'C, if the Court came to the conclusion that more than one person launched the attack and notwithstanding the acquittal of others by the trial court, this Court could reach its own conclusion as the higher court was not bound by the appreci ation of evidence by the trial court or even the High Court.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.1 The evidence of a prosecution witness cannot be rejected in toto merely because the prosecution chose to treat him as hostile and cross examined him.
The evidence of such witnesses cannot be treated as effaced or washed off the record altogether, but the same can be accepted to the extent their version is found to be dependable on a careful scrutiny thereof.
[13C] Bhagwan Singh vs State of Haryana, ; Rabinder Kumar Dey vs State of Orissa, ; and Syed lqbal v.state of Karnataka, [1980] 1 S.C.R. 95, relied on.
4 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1991] 3 S.C.R. 1.2 In the instant case the evidence of two eye witness es PW 3 and 4 challenged by the prosecution in cross exami nation because they refused to name the accused in the dock as the assailants of the deceased.
The trial court made no effort to scrutinise the evidence of these two witnesses even in regard to the factum of the incident.
It refused to look into their evidence treating it as non est, on their being declared hostile by the prosecution.
This approach of the trial court is legally unacceptable.
The High Court has not endeavoured to assess their evidence since it thought that the conviction of the appellant could be sustained on the evidence of PW 1.
From the evidence of these two wit nesses the fact that the deceased and PW 4 came to the place of occurrence in the rickshaw of PW 3 is established.
So also the fact that on their reaching the place of occur rence, they were surrounded by some persons and an assault was launched on them in which PW 4 received an injury and the deceased died is also established.
The only area they have not supported the prosecution and resiled from their earlier statements is regarding the identity of the assail ants but the fact remains that the deceased had received three injuries as narrated by PW 12, who conducted the post mortem, and succumbed to the injuries on the spot.
Similarly, there is no doubt at all that PW 4 had gone to the police station and had lodged the First Information Report.
The detailed narration about the incident in the First Information Report goes to show that the subsequent attempt of PW 4 to disown the document, while admitting his signature, thereon, is a shift for reasons best known to him.
Once the presence of PW 4 is accepted, the presence of PW 3 at the scene of occurrence cannot be doubted.
[13D, 14C, D F, B] 2.
The Trial Court has not accepted PW I 's evidence on the ground that he was not a natural witness, and was only a chance witness.
However, on a reading of the entire evidence of PW I it is clear that his statement in cross examination on the question of identity of the appellant and one of his companions is a clear attempt to wriggle out of what he had stated earlier in his examination in chief.
Since the inci dent occurred at a public place, it is reasonable to infer that the street light illuminated the place sufficiently to enable this witness to identify the assailants.
During the one month period that elapsed since the recording of exami nation in chief, something transpired which made him shift his evidence on the question of identity to help the appel lant.
In the circumstance there is no doubt that PW I had ample opportunity to identify the assailants of the de ceased, his presence at the scene of occurrence is not unnatural nor is his statement that he had come to purchase vegetables unacceptable.
There are no contradiction in his evidence to doubt his testimony.
He is a totally independent wit 5 ness, who had no cause to give false evidence against the appellant and his companions.
Therefore, his evidence is acceptable regarding the time, place and manner of the incident as well as the identity of the assailants.
[14H 16C] 3.1 The evidence of eye witnesses could not be rejected on the ground that their names did not figure in the inquest report prepared at the earliest point of time.
[16D] 3.2 A perusal of Section 174 of the Criminal Procedure Code would clearly show that the object of the proceedings under this Section is merely to ascertain whether a person has died under suspicious circumstances or an unnatural death and if so what is the apparent cause of the death.
The question regarding the details as tO how the deceased was assaulted or who assaulteld him or under what circumstances he was assaulted is foreign to the ambit and scope of the proceedings under the section.
In these circumstances, neither in practice nor in law, was it necessary for the police to have mentioned these details in the inquest re port.
[16E F] Pedda Narain vs State of Andhra Pradesh, [1975] Supp.
S.C.R. 84 relied on.
4.1 There was no injunction in law against the same set of witnesses being present at the successive enquiries if nothing could be urged against them.
Even in the case of an interested party, his evidence cannot be overlooked on that ground.
[17G. E] Himachal Pradesh Administration vs Omprakash, ; , relied on.
4.2 In the instant case, merely because the same set of Panch witnesses were used for Witnessing all the three discoveries as well as the attachment of the clothes of the appellant and his companions, PW 5 's evidence could not be discarded since nothing had surfaced in crossexamination to shake his evidence.
Besides, except being a good neighbour nothing more is shown against him.
As regards recovery of weapon, as well as the appellant 's blood stained pant, there is hardly any effective cross examination, nor has the appellant offered any explanation in his statement recorded under Section 313 of the Criminal Procedure Code.
Hence PW 5 's evidence cannot be rejected on the specious plea of being an interested witness.
In the circumstances, hi, evidence was rightly accepted by both the courts below.
[17 A, C D, F, 18 A] 6 5.1 The factum of find of the incriminating weapon from the appellant 's garage, and his inability to explain the presence of human blood thereon is a circumstance against him.
Similarly, the existence of human blood on the pant that he was wearing at the time of his arrest, for which no explanation was offered by him, is also a circumstance against him, particularly because no injury was noticed on him.
[18B D] 5.2 There is also direct testimony of PW I, besides that of PWs 3 and 4.
The find of human blood on the weapon and the pant, with no explanation for the same lends corrobora tion to the testimony of PW 1.
When he states that he saw the appellant inflicting a knife blow on the deceased.
In the circumstances, it cannot be accepted that in the absence of determination of blood group, the find of human blood is of no consequence.
[19B C] Kansa Behera vs State of Orissa, ; and Surinder Singh vs State of Punjab, [1989] Suppl.
2 S.C.C. 21, distinguished.
6.1 No doubt it is not possible from the ocular evi dence to record a definite finding of fact that the appel lant had caused the fatal injury.
On the contrary the evi dence of PW 1 indicates that in all probability the stab wound inflicted by the appellant resulted in injury No. 2, which by itself was not sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death.
I Since the prosecution evidence does not disclose that the fatal blow, which caused injury No. 1 was given by the appellant, it means that the fatal blow was given by someone else, and this establishes the fact that more than one person participated in the commission of the crime.
On an independent examination appreciation of the evidence of the three eye witnesses, viz. PWs 1, 3 and 4 that several persons had participated in the commission of the crime.
The failure on the part of PWs 3 and 4 to identi fy the others does not alter the situation.
On the other hand, from the evidence of PW 1, it is clear that some of the accused participated in the commission of the crime.
[19E, 25A C] 6.2 No doubt in the absence of a State appeal, the High Court could not, nor can this Court interfere with the acquittal of the co accused, but this Court is not bound by the facts found proved on the appreciation of evidence by the courts below, and is, in law, entitled to reach its own conclusion different from the one recorded by the courts below on a review of the evidence.
The acquittal of the accused does not create a legal bar against the conviction of the appellant with the aid of Section 34 or 149 IPC.
[21C F] 7 Brathi vs State of Punjab, ; , affirmed.
Baikuntha Nath Chaudhury vs The State of Orissa, ; Kasturi Lal vs State of Haryana, ; Chandubhai Shanabhai Parmdr vs State of Gujarat, ; Sukh Ram vs State of M.P., [1989] Suppl.
1 SCC 214 and Krishna Govind Patil vs State of Maha rashtra; , , distinguished.
6.3 In the circumstances, the conviction of the ap pellant can be sustained with the aid of Section 34 or 149 as the case may be and it is safe to confirm the appellant 's conviction with the aid of section 34 I.P.C. [25D] The conviction of the appellant is accordingly con firmed and sentence awarded to him is maintained.
[25E] 7.
The omission to refer to the decision of larger Bench rendered Krishna Govind Patil 's case does not render the decision in Brathi 's case per incuriam.
In any event that decision does not take a view inconsistent with the ratio laid down in Brathi 's case.
[24G] Sukh Ram vs State of M.P., [1989] suppl.
1 SCC 214 and Brathi vs State of Punjab; , referred to.
