Appellants 1 and 2, along with other co accused, were prosecuted for the offence of murder.
The entire evidence was circumstantial: (a) The murder was committed by Appel lant 2 in the dispensary of the Appellant 1, a doctor, with his connivance; (b) the dead body was taken out of the dispensary of the appellant 1 and the same was kept on an ekka and carried to a village Dibbi where it was placed in the courtyard of one of the co accused; and (c) Recovery of the dead body from the courtyard of a co accused.
The Trial Court acquitted the accused from whose house the dead body was recovered but convicted the remaining four accused for the offences under section 302/34 of the Indian Penal Code.
On appeal by the accused persons the High Court acquitted the other two coaccused but upheld the conviction of the two appellants.
Against their conviction, the appel lants filed appeals in this Court, By an order dated 3.5. 1991, this Court allowed their appeals and set aside their conviction.
Giving reasons in support of its judgment, this Court, HELD: 1.
It is a cardinal principle of criminal juris prudence that circumstantial evidence must be fully estab lished from which there should be inevitable conclusion of the guilt of the accused beyond any reasonable doubt and the facts so established should be consistent only 55 with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused, ruling out any hypothesis of innocence of the accused.
[58B] 2.
There is yet another basic rule of criminal jurispru dence that if two views are possible on the evidence adduced in a case of circumstantial evidence, one pointing to the guilt of the accused and the other to his innocence, the Court should adopt the latter view favourable to the ac cused.
[59C] 3.
The prosecution has to succeed on the basis of its own evidence and it can not rely on the absence of defence to sustain the guilt as there is no justification for rais ing such assumption against the appellants.
[63B] Hanumant vs The State of Madhya Pradesh, [1952] 3 S.C.R. 1091; Shivaji Saheb Rao Bobde & Anr.
vs State of Maharash tra; , and Sharad B. Chand vs Maharashtra, ; , referred to.
In the instant case, there are glaring circumstances which are fatal to the prosecution case.
The prosecution has produced evidence only to the effect that a dead body was taken out of the dispensary of Appellant 1 by Appellant 2 and other accused persons and the same was carried on the ekka to village Dibbi.
The prosecution witnesses have merely deposed that they had seen a dead body being placed on the ekka and taken to village Dibbi.
None of the prosecution witness has however, deposed that he had seen the face of the dead body or identified the same.
In the absence of such evidence it would not be reasonable to assume that the dead body which was taken out from the dispensary and placed on the ekka was that of the deceased.
In the absence of identi fication of dead body by the witnesses it is not legitimate to hold that the dead body which was taken out from the dispensary of Appellant 1 was that of deceased.
[62E F, G] 4.1 There is another vital defect in the prosecution case.
The prosecution failed to produce any evidence that the deceased was taken to the dispensary for treatment by Appellant 2 and other accused persons while she was alive and that she was admitted to the dispensary of Appellant 1 for treatment, at a time when she was alive.
In the absence of any such evidence there are various possibilities and probabilities, one of them being that the deceased may have been brought to the dispensary for medical assistance after she was found to be strangulated by some one.
Further there is no evidence of the fact 56 that when the deceased was inside the dispensary no other person had access to her except the appellants.
In the absence of any such evidence it would not be legitimate to assume that the deceased was strangulated in the dispensary by Appellant 2 with the connivance of Appellant 1 Therefore, the prosecution failed to prove the necessary facts and the circumstances established by it are not sufficient to con clusively point to the appellants as the perpetrator of the crime or to rule out the hypothesis of their innocence.
Accordingly, the High Court and the Trial Court both commit ted error in convicting the appellants.
The High Court was also not justified in drawing adverse inference for complet ing the chain of circumstances to uphold the appellant 's conviction merely on the appellant 's false explnaton in, defence.
[62G H, 63A C D]
