The appellant company manufactured railway wagons in accordance with the specifications, terms and conditions contained in the agreements entered between the appellant and the Railway Board from time to time.
The Railway Board without charging any price supplied wheel sets, axle boxes and various other finished components of wagons, which were termed as "free supply items," to the appellant, which were used in the manufacture of wagons and supplied the complete wagons to the Railway Board.
The invoice value of the wagon charged by the appellant did not include the value of the "free supply items.
" The central excise authorities issued show cause to the appellant as to why the excise duty be not computed and charged on the value of the complete, wagon, including that the "free supply items".
The appellant challenged the show cause notices by filing a Writ Petition before the High Court.
Holding that the excise duty could only be charged on the invoice value under the contract, the Single Judge allowed the petition.
The appeal filed by the Respondents against the judgment of the Single Judge was allowed by the Division Bench of the Court, against which the present appeal was made by the appellant company.
On the question, whether the excise duty under sections 3 and 4 of the Central Excise and Salt Act, 1944 was to be charged on the invoice value of the wagon or on the value of completed wagon including that of the "free supply items".
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, 961 HELD: 1.
Section 3 of the Act provides for levy of the duty of excise.
It is a levy on goods produced or manufactured in India.
Section 4 of the Act lays down the measure by reference to which the duty of excise is to be assessed.
The duty of excise is linked and chargeable with reference to the value of the excisable good and the value is further defined in express terms by the said section.
In every case the fundamental criterion for computing the value of excisable article is the normal price at which the excisable article or an article of the like kind and quality is sold or is capable of being sold by the manufacturer.
[940G 965A] 2.
What comes down from the assembly line of the appellant 's factory is a complete wagon and as such the appellant being manufacturer of wagons, is liable to pay duty of excise on the value of a complete wagon.
The "free supply items" like wheel sets etc.
in the process of manufacturing become part of the complete wagon and loose their identity.
It hardly matters how and in what manner the components of the wagon are procured by the manufacturer, so long as the appellant is manufacturing and producing the goods called "wagons" it is liable to pay duty of excise on the normal value of the wagon.
[965A C] Empire Industries Limited and Others vs Union of India and Others, ; and M/s. Ujagar Prints and Others vs Union of India and Others, ; , followed.
