Due to a collision on the highway between a Petrol tanker and a truck, the Petrol tanker went off the road and fell on its side at some distance from the highway.
As a result of it, petrol leaked out and collected nearby.
Nearly four hours after the collision an explosion took place in the petrol tanker resulting in fire.
A large number of persons who had assembled near the petrol tanker sustained burn injuries; few of them succumbed to the injuries.
Re spondent 's son was of the persons who died as such.
Respondent filed a claim before the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal under Section 110 of the Motor Vehicles Act for Rs.75,000 as compensation.
She also claimed Rs.15,000 as compensation under Section 92A of the Act.
The Tribunal dismissed the claim under Section 92A on the ground that the explosion could not be said to be an accident arising out of the use of the petrol tanker and so the provisions of Sec tion 92A were not attracted.
It held that the explosion and the fire which took place after about four hours of the accident had no connec 27 tion with the accident and it was altogether a different and independent accident, It also observed that the villagers took benefit of the earlier accident and while they were trying to pilfer petrol ' from the tanker there was friction which caused the ignition and explosion and since an outside agency was responsible therefore the subsequent accident of explosion and fire could not be said to be an accident arising out of the use of the tanker.
On appeal, a Single Judge of the High Court disagreed with the finding of the Tribunal that the explosion was a direct consequence of the attempt to pilfer petrol from it and further held that in view of Sub Section (4) of Section 92A if there was a wrongful act, neglect or default on the part of the deceased or injured, the claim under Section 92A for compensation for no liability cannot be rejected.
He observed that the fact that at the material time, the tanker was not driven on the highway but was lying turtle on the side of the highway, would not make any difference and that the tanker was a vehicle lying on the side of the highway and would be covered by the expression 'use ' in Section 92A of the Act and so compensation would be payable under 'no fault liability '.
The petitioners filed a Letters Patent Appeal against the said decision and a Division Bench of the High Court dismissed the same affirming the findings of the Single Judge.
The Bench held that the collision between the tanker and the other vehicle which occurred earlier and the escape of petrol from the tanker which ultimately resulted in explosion and fire were not unconnected but related events.
It rejected the claim of the petitioners that the first information report recorded by the police and the panchnama indicated that the explosion and fire near the petrol tanker had been caused by careless act of throwing away of a match stick used for lighting a beedi or cigarette.
Aggrieved by the said decision, the petitioners pre ferred the present petition for special leave to appeal.
On behalf of the petitioners, it was contended that the petrol tanker was not a motor vehicle, as defined ln Section 2(18) of the Act, at the time the explosion and fire took place because at that time the petrol tanker was lying turtle and was not capable of movement on the road; that since before the explosion and fire the petrol tanker was lying immobile it could not be said that the petrol tanker was in use as a motor vehicle at the time of the explosion and fire; that even if it is found that the petrol tanker was in use as a motor vehicle at the time of the explosion and fire, there was no causal relationship between the 28 collision which took place between the petrol tanker and the truck and the explosion and fire in the petrol tanker which took place about four and half hours later and it cannot, therefore, be said that the explosion and fire in the petrol tanker was an accident arising out of the use of a motor vehicle.
Dismissing the petition, this Court, HELD: 1.
Section 92A of the was in the nature of beneficial legislation enacted with a view to confer the benefit of expeditious payment of limited amount by way of compensation to the victims of an accident arising out of the use of a motor vehicle on the basis of no fault liability.
In the matter of interpretation of a bene ficial legislation the approach of the courts is to adopt a construction which advances the beneficient purpose underly ing the enactment in preference to a construction which tends to defeat that purpose.
[39E G] Motor Owners ' Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Jadavji Keshavji Modi & Ors., [1982] 1 SCR 860; Skandia Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Kokilaben Chandravadan & Ors., ; , relied on.
Manjusri Raha & Ors.
B.L. Gupta & Ors.
; , ; State of Haryana vs Darshana Devi & Ors., ; ; Bishan Devi & Ors.
vs Sirbaksh Singh & Anr., ; ; N.K.V. Bros. Ltd. vs M. Karumai Ammal and Ors.
; , and Gujarat State Road Transport Corporation vs Ramanbhai Prabhatbhai & Anr., ; , referred to.
The petrol tanker was a vehicle manufactured for the purpose of transporting petrol.
It was a vehicle which had been adapted for such use and was suitable for use on the road for transporting petrol.
At the time when the petrol tanker collided with the truck on the national highway, it was being used for the purpose of transporting petrol.
It cannot, therefore, be disputed that when the said collision took place it was a motor vehicle as the said expression was defined in section 2(18) of the Act.
Merely because the petrol tanker had turned turtle as a result of the collision and was lying at a short distance away from the road, does not mean that it had ceased to be suitable or fit for use on the road and it had ceased to be a motor vehicle.
It could be said that as a result of the collision with the truck the petrol tanker was damaged to such an extent that there was no reasonable prospect of the vehicle ever being made mobile again.
In the circumstances, it cannot be held that the petrol tanker which was a motor vehicle when it collided with the 29 truck had ceased to be a motor vehicle after the said colli sion and it could not be regarded a motor 'vehicle under Section 2(18) of the Act at the time when the explosion and fire took place.
[40H; 41A C, 42D E] Bolani Ores Ltd. etc.
vs State of Orissa.
; , ; Newberry vs Simmonds, and Smart vs Allan & Anr., , referred to.
The word 'use ' has a wider connotationas to cover the period when the vehicle is not moving and is stationary and the use of a vehicle does not cease on account of the vehi cle having been rendered immobile on account of a break down or mechanical defect or accident.
In the circumstances, it cannot be said that the petrol tanker was not in the use at the time when it was lying on its side after the collision with the truck.
[44F G] Pushpa Rani Chopra vs Anokha Singh & Ors., ; General Managar, K.S.R.T.C. vs section Satalingappa & Ors., and Oriental Fire & General Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Suman Navnath Rajguru & Ors., , ap proved.
Elliott vs Grey, and Government Insur ance Office of New South Wales vs R.J. Green & Lloyd Pty. Ltd.; , , referred to.
There is no ground for interfering with the find ings recorded by the High Court that those persons who sustained injuries as a result of the explosion and fire in the petrol tanker did not indulge in any unlawful activity which might have caused the explosion and fire.
The matter has, therefore, to be examined in the light of the meaning to be assigned to the words "arising out of" In the expres sion "accident arising out of the use of a motor vehicle" in Section 92A of the Act.
[46D E] 4.2.
The words "arising out of" have been used in var ious statutes in different contexts and have been construed by Courts widely as well as narrowly, keeping in view the context in which they have been used in a particular legis lation.
[46F] 4.3.
In the context of motor accidents the expressions "caused by" and "arising out of" are often used in statutes.
Although both these expressions imply a causal relationship between the accident resulting in injury and the use of the motor vehicle but they differ in the degree of 30 proximity of such relationship.
As compared to the expres sion "caused by" the expression "arising out of" has a wider connotation and the causal relationship is not required to be direct and proximate and it can be less immediate.
[47G; 48E] 4.4.
The expression "caused by" was used in Sections 95(1)(b)(i) and (ii) and 96(2)(b)(ii) of the Act.
In Section 92A of the Act, Parliament, however, chose to use the ex pression "arising out of" which indicates that for the purpose of awarding compensation under Section 92A, the causal relationship between the use of the motor vehicle and the accident resulting in death or permanent disablementis not required to be direct and proximate and it can be less immediate.
This would imply that accident should be connect ed with the use of the motor vehicle but the said connection need not be direct and immediate.
This construction of the expression "arising out of the use of a motor vehicle" in section 92A enlarges the field of protection made available to the victims of accident and is in consonance with the beneficial object underlying the enactment.
[48D E] Mackinnon Machkenzie & Co. Pvt. Ltd. vs Ibrahim Mahommed Issak, ; ; Government Insurance Office of New South Wales vs R.J. Green & Ltyoyd Pl.
Ltd., ; ; Heyman vs Darwins Ltd., ; Union of India vs E.B. Aaby 's Rederi A/S, and Samick Lines Co. Ltd. vs Owners of the Antonis P. Lemos, [1985] 2 WLR 468, referred to.
In the facts and circumstances of the present case, the accident involving explosion and fire in the petrol tanker was connected with the use of tanker as a motor vehicle.
The High Court was right in holding that the colli sion between the tanker and the other vehicle which had occurred earlier and the escape of petrol from the tanker which ultimately resulted in the explosion and fire were not unconnected but related events and merely because there was interval of about four to hour and half hours between the said collision and the explosion and fire in the tanker, it cannot be necessarily inferred that there was no causal relation between explosion and fire.
In the circumstances, it must be held that the explosion and fire resulting in the injuries which led to the death of the Respondent 's son was due to an accident arising out of the use of the motor vehicle viz., the petrol tanker.
[48G H; 49A B] 6.
The object underlying the enactment of Section 92A is to make available to the claimant compensation amount to the extent of Rs.15,000 in case of death and Rs.7,500 in case of permanent disable 31 ment as expeditiously as possible and the said award has to be made before adjudication of the claim under Section 110A of the Act.
This would be apparent from the provision of Section 92B of the Act which provides that a claim for compensation under Section 92A in respect of death or perma nent disablement of any person shall be disposed of as expeditiously as possible and where compensation is claimed in respect of such death or permanent disablement under Section 92A and also in pursuance of any right on the prin ciple of fault, the claim for compensation under Section 92A shall be disposed of in the first place.
With a view to give effect to the said directive contained in Section 92B of the Act, the Maharashtra Government has amended the Rules and has inserted special provisions in respect of claims under Section 92A in Rules 291A, 291B, 297(2), 306A, 306B, 306C and 306D of the Rules.
The object underlying the said provi sions is to enable expeditious disposal of a claim petition under Section 92A of the Act.
The said object would be defeated if the Claims Tribunal is required to hold a regu lar trial in the same manner as for adjudicating a claim petition under Section 110A of the Act.
[52B E] 7.
Rules 291A, 306A and 306B of the Bombay Motor Vehi cles Rules, 1989 contain adequate provisions which would ennable the Claims Tribunal to satisfy itself in respect of the matters necessary for awarding compensation under Sec tion 92A of the Act and in view of these special provisions the Claims Tribunal is not required to follow the normal procedure prescribed under the Act and the Rules with regard to adjudication of a claim under Section 110A of the Act for the purpose of making an order on a claim petition under Section 92A of the Act.
[53B D]
