The Uttar Pradesh Sales of Motor Spirit, Diesel Oil and Alcohol Taxation (Amendment) Act, 1976 amended sub section (1) of section 3 of the United Provinces Sales of Motor Spirit, Diesel Oil and Alcohol Taxation Act, 1939 purporting to levy purchase tax on industrial alcohol, which was chal lenged in a writ application before the High Court by the respondents.
The respondents contended before the High Court that the State Legislature was incompetent to levy tax with reference to Entry 54 of List II in respect of industrial alcohol in so far as that article was the subject of regulation by the Central Government in exercise of its power under section 18G of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951; that the price of that article was regulated by the relevant Price Control Orders made by the Central Government under the IDR Act and any levy of sales tax or purchase tax by the State by recourse to Entry 54 of List II would come into direct conflict with the law made by Parliament and the control exercised by the Central Government under that law in regard to an industry falling under Entry 52 of List I read with Entry 33 of List III.
65 Relying upon the decision of a Constitution Bench of this Court in Synthetics and Chemicals Ltd. & Others vs State of U.P. & Others, ; the respondents further contended that, in so far as industrial alcohol was concerned, the State was incompetent to levy sales tax, by reason of the operation of the Ethyl Alcohol (Price Control) Orders made by the Central Government under section 18G of the IDR Act.
The appellants Opposite parties contended that the decision of this Court in ; did not deal with the question of levy of tax failing under Entry 54 of List 1I and that the power of the State to levy taxes on the sale or purchase of goods was not the subject of consideration in that decision.
The High Court allowing the writ petition and declaring the U.P. Act 8 of 1976 to be null and void held that the levy of purchase tax on industrial alcohol was, during the operation of the PriCe Control Orders of the Central Govern ment beyond the legislative competence of the State, against which the State filed the present Appeal.
The appellant submitted that the reference to sales tax in the judgment of this Court in ; , which the High Court in the present case thought was binding upon it, was accidental and per incurium and did not arise from the judgment; that the levy of sales tax was not in question at any stage of the arguments, nor was the question considered as it was not in issue; that the Court gave no reason what ever for abruptly stating that sales tax was not leviable by the State by reason of the Ethyl Alcohol (Price Control) Orders.
The respondents contended that the prices strictly controlled by the Central Government in exercise of its power under the IDR Act; that the State Law cannot be al lowed to disturb such prices; that any attempt to raise the prices, despite the strict control exercised by the Central Government by means of statutory orders, was an invalid exercise of power.
On the question, whether or not the power of the State to levy tax on the sale or purchase of goods falling under Entry 54 of List 1I will comprehend industrial alcohol, allowing the appeal of the State, this Court, HELD: Per T. Kochu Thommen & R.M. Sahai, JJ.
66 1.01.
The High Court was clearly in error in striking down the impugned provision in sub section (1) of section 3 of the United Provinces Sales of Motor Spirit, Diesel Oil and Alcohol Taxation Act, 1939 as amended by the U.P. Act 8 of 1976, undoubtedly fails within the legislative competence of the State being referrable to Entry 54 of List 11.
[91A] 1.02.
The decision of this Court in Synthetics ; is not an authority for the proposition canvassed by the assessee.
This Court has not, and could not have, in tended to say that the Price Control Orders made by the Central Government under the IDR Act imposed a fetter on the legislative power of the State under Entry 54 of List II to levy taxes on the sale or purchase of goods.
The reference to sales tax in paragraph 86 of that judgment was merely accidental or per incuriam and has therefore, no effect on the impugned levy.
So far ds industrial alcohol was con cerned, the State was incompetent to levy sales tax by reason of the operation of the Ethyl Alcohol (Price Control) Orders made by the Central Government in exercise of its power under section 18G of the IDR Act.
[91A C, 73E F] Per T. Kochu Thommen, J. 2.01.
This Court in Synthetics & Chemicals Ltd. & Others vs State of U.P. & Others, ; was concerned with only one question, and that was whether the States could levy excise duty or vend fee or transport fee and the like by recourse to Entries 51 or 8 in List 11 in respect of industrial alcohol and it did not deal with the taxing power of the State under 54 of List II, although there is a refer ence to sales tax.
"The State may charge excise duty on potable alcohol and sales tax under Entry 52 of List II".
Entry 52 of List II is mentioned in connection with Excise duty and sales tax, but neither of them fails under Entry 52.
Reference to Entry 51 of List 11 ought to have been made, if it was excise duty that the Court had in mind.
Entry 54 of List 11 would have been referred to, and not Entry 52, if the Court had in mind sales tax.
On the other hand, Entry 52 had any application to the fees or charges in question.
[80B F] The abrupt observation of this Court in ; was without a preceding discussion, and inconsistent with the reasoning adopted by this Court in earlier decisions from which no dissent was expressed on the point.
[80G H] 2.02.
The question in the instant case is whether or not the 67 impugned legislation fails in pith and substance within Entry 54 of List 11, and not whether the industry (Producing goods the sale of which is leviable to tax under the im pugned legislation) is controlled within the ambit of Entry 52 of List I was not considered in ; [87H 88B] Synthetics and Chemicals Ltd. & Others vs State of U.P. State of Uttar Pradesh & Others vs M/s. Synthetics & Chemcials Ltd. & Others, ; , overruled in ; , Referred to.
Per R.M. Sahai, J. (Concurring) 2.03.
A decision which is not express and is not founded on reasons nor it proceeds on consideration of issue cannot be deemed to be a law declared to have a binding effect as is contemplated by Article 141.
Uniformity and consistency are core of judicial discipline.
But that which escapes in the judgment without any occasion is not ratio decedendi.
[93B C] 2.04.
Any declaration or conclusion arrived without application of mind or preceded without any reason cannot be deemed to be declaration of law or authority of a general nature binding as a precedent.
Restraint in dissenting or overruling is for sake of stability and uniformity but rigidity beyond reasonable limits is inimical to the growth of law.
[93D E] 2.05.
Law declared is not that can be culled out but that which is stated as law to be accepted and applied.
A conclusion without reference to relevant provision of law is weaker than even casual observation.
[93E F] 2.06.
In absence of any discussion or any argument the order was founded on a mistake of fact, and, therefore, it could not be held to be law declared.
[94B C] 2.07.
The conclusion of law by the Constitution Bench in ; that no sales or purchase tax could be levied on industrial alcohol with utmost respect fell in both the exceptions, namely, rule of sub silention and being in per incurium to the binding authority of the precedents.
[94C D] 68 Young vs Bistol Aeroplane Ltd., [1944] I KB 718; Jaisri Sahu vs Rajdewan Dubey, ; Lancaster Motor Company (London) Ltd. vs Bremith Ltd., [1941] IKB 675; Municipal Corporation of Delhi vs Gurnam Kaur, ; and Shama Rao vs State of Pondicherry, AIR 1967 SC 1680, Referred to.
Per T. Kochu Thommen.
The power of regulation and 'control is separate and distinct from the power of taxation.
Legislative exer cise of regulation or control referrable to Entry 52 of List I or Entry 8 of List 11 is distinct and different from a taxing power attributable to Entry 54 of List I or Entry 92A or 92B of List I. The power to levy taxes on sale or pur chase or consignment is referrable to these Entries, and subject to the other provisions of the Constitution, the taxing power of the State is not cut down by the general legislative control vested in Parliament and referrable to the general topics of legislation.
[86G 87H] 3.02.
Any exercise of power by the State which trans gresses upon the power of Parliament or of the Central Government, as its delegate, is to the extent of such trans gression null and void.
[85C] 3.03.
None of the entries in the Concurrent List deals with tax but general subjects of legislation.
No conflict can, therefore, arise between the taxing powers of the Union and the States.
Parliament has the power to legislate in respect of a 'controlled ' industry failing under Entry 52 of List I, and both Parliament and the States have the power to legislate in respect of the trade and commerce in, and the production, supply and distribution of, the products of a 'controlled ' industry (Entry 33 of List Ill).
These are not taxing entries and do not, therefore, relate to taxes, but powers of regulation and control.
The power to control industry being thus vested in Parliament (Entry 52 of List I) and the legislative power in respect of trade and com merce in such industry being concurrently vested in the Union and the States (Entry 33 of List III) any exercise of control by the State must be subject to the legislative power of Parliament.
[84H 85C] 3.04.
The taxing power of the State on a matter falling within its competence under Entry 54 of List II, namely, sale or purchase of goods (other than newspapers) is, sub ject to the taxing power of Parliament under Entry 92A of List I and other provisions of the Constitution, plenary and unlimited, and untrammelled by the supervisory or regulatory power of Parliament under Entry 52 of List I read with its 69 concurrent power under Entry 33 of List III.
This is the crucial: distinction between the wide taxing power of the State under Entry 54 of List II and its conditional or restricted taxing power, for example, over mineral rights mentioned in Entry 50 of that List.
[82E G] 3.05.
Similarly, the power of the State in respect of potable alcohol (as distinguished from industrial alcohol) falling under Entry 8 of List II is significantly unfet tered, unlike, for example, mines and mineral development over which the regulatory power of the State is specifically stated to be subject to the regulatory power of Parliament (see Entry 23 of List II read with Entry 54 of List I).
The legislative competence of the State in respect of mines and minerals was held to be denuded to the extent that the field was covered by section 9 of the Central Act, namely, Mines and Minerals (Regulations and Development Act), 1957.
[82G 83A] 3.06.
Unlike mines and minerals, alcohol stands on a different footing, and is dealt with differently, dependent on whether it is potable or not.
What is significant is that legislation failing in pith and substance under Entry 8 or Entry 51 of List 1I in relation to alcoholic liquor for human consumption (as distinguished from industrial alcohol) whether for the purpose of levying vend fee or transport fee or excise duty, strictly confined to such articles, is not subject to challenge on the ground of legislative incompe tence or repugnancy by reason of the power vested in Parlia ment under Entry 52 or Entry 84 of List I or Entry 33 of List III.
Incompetence or repugnancy arises only when the impact of the legislation falls, not incidentally, but substantially on industrial alcohol so as to transgress on a field occupied by Parliament.
[83A C] 3.07.
The matters concerning intoxicating liquors are included within the legislative competence of the States.
In respect of any such matter, the States are competent to levy fees (Entry 66 of List II).
Entry 51 of List II relating to excise duty on alcoholic liquors for human consumption clearly refers to liquor for human consumption, the same meaning has been judicially ascribed in ; to 'intoxicating liquors ' in Entry 8 of the same List, the legislative competence of the State in respect of 'intoxi cating liquors ' referred to in Entries 8 and 66 of List II as a subject of legislation and fee respectively and the power of the State to levy excise duty on "alcoholic liquors for human consumption" falling under Entry 51 of the same List must necessarily be confined to potable alcohol, and cannot include industrial alcohol or medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol (see Entry 84 of List I).
70 Any transgression by the State on industrial alcohol will be invalid for want ' of power by reason of the limitation of Entries 8 and 51 of List II (being confined to potable alcohol) and consequent transgression on areas covered by Entries 52 and 84 of List I respectively relating to de clared industry and excise duty on industrial alcohol and medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol, and also for repugnancy arising from a clash with the centrally occupied field failing under Entry 33 of List III.
[85E, 85H 86D] 3.08.
The power to tax under Entry 54 of List II being a specific power, it cannot be cut down or in any manner lettered by the general power of control exercised by Par liament, by legislation on a matter failing under Entry 52 of List I relating to an industry, the control of which by the Union is declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest, read with Entry 33 of List III dealing with trade anti commerce in, and the production, supply and distribution of the products of any such con trolled industry, and imported goods of the same kind as such products, and other articles mentioned in Entry 33.
[89F H] 3.09.
The impugned provision of the Uttar Pradesh Sales of Motor Spirit, Diesel Oil and Alcohol Taxation (Amendment) Act, 1976 levying tax at the point of first purchase of alcohol in the State is undoubtedly an impost failing in pith and substance under Entry 54 of List II.
In the absence of any fetter on the legislative power and in the absence of any valid challenge against the provision as a colourable piece of legislation, the impugned legislative enactment ' remains unimpeachable.
[89H 90B] 3.10.
The control exercised by the Central Government by virtue of section 18G of the IDR Act is in a field far/removed from the taxing power of the State under Entry 54 of List II.
So long as the impugned legislation fails in pith and substance within the taxing field of the State, the control of the Central Government in exercise of its power under the IDR Act in respect of a controlled industry fail ing under Entry 52 of List cannot in any manner prevent the State from imposing taxes on the sale or purchase of goods which are the products of such industry and which are referrable to Entry 33 of List III.
The taxing power of the State under Entry 54 of List II cannot be cut down by the general legislative power of control of the Centre.
[90B D] 3.11.
The levy of fee, whether called vend fee or trans port fee or duty or charge, whether levied by Rules purport edly made under the Excise Act or the Prohibition Act or any other statute, otherwise than as 71 a proper levy falling in pith and substance under a taxing Entry, was not valid, to the extent that it lacked quid pro quo and applied to industrial alcohol.
Any such fee or charge can he justified as a mode of control falling in pith and substance under Entry 8 read with Entry 66 of List II only to the extent that it remains within the bounds of the concerned subject matter, namely, `intoxicating liquors ', which must necessarily exclude industrial alcohol.
[90D F] 3.12.
Taxes on sale or purchase are not governed by the Price Control Orders, made under the IDR Act, the purpose of which is to prevent the seller from pricing his goods beyond the limit prescribed by the Orders.
That is a fetter on the free play of demand and supply.
When supply is scarce, the prices are bound to rise and it is that vice which is con trolled by fixing the maximum price.
But that does not in any manner curtail the power of the State to levy taxes on the sale or purchase of goods.
It is no doubt true that the consumer of the article must, in addition to the price, pay purchase tax due in respect of them.
But that is by reason of a valid levy which is within the constitutional power of every State, and is dehors the price, though often referra ble to it.
[90F H] State of Bombay & Anr.
vs F.N. Balsara, ; ; India Cement Ltd. & Ors.
vs State of Tamil Nadu & Ors.
, ;I M.P.V. Sundararamier & Co. vs The State of Andhra Pradesh & Anr., ; at 1479; M/s. R.M.D.C. (Mysore) Private Limited vs The State of Mysore, ; Ganga Sugar Corporation Ltd. vs State of Uttar Pradesh & Others, ; ; Ch.
Tika Ramji & Others etc.
vs The State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors., ; ; Kannan Devan Hills Produce Company.
Ltd. vs The State of Kerala & Another, ; and Hoechst Pharmaceuticals Ltd. & Anr.
vs The State of Bihar & Others.
, ; , referred to.
" Per.
R.M. Sahai, J. (Concurring) 3.13.
Power to tax is a sovereign power.
In federal system of governance it is exercised by distribution of power between the Union and the State Both are supreme in their sphere.
That is brought out Clearly by Article 246(1) and Article 246(3) of the Constitution.
The legislative field for levying tax by Union is set out in Entries 82 to 92 in List I and State in Entries 45to 63 in List II of the VIlth Schedule.
There is no overlapping.
Fields are clearly demarcated.
Limitations and restrictions are also mentioned.
