Article 324(2) of the Constitution empowers the Presi dent to fix and appoint such number of Election Commission ers as he may from time to time determine.
By a notification dated 7.10.1989 the President fixed the number of Election Commissioners at two.
By another notification dated 16.10.89, the President appointed the petitioner and another person as Election Commissioners.
Simultaneously, the Presi dent also promulgated the rules regulating the conditions of service and tenure of the Election Commissioners under which an Election Commissioner was to hold office for a term of five years or until he attained the age of 65 years whichev er was earlier.
However, on 1st January, 1990, the President issued two notifications rescinding the earlier two notifications dated 7.10.89 and 16.10.89.
Consequently, the two posts of Elec tion Commissioners were abolished and the appointment of the petitioner and the other Election Commissioner came to an end.
159 160 The petitioner filed a writ petition in this Court challenging the legality of the notifications dated 1st January, 1990 contending that: (a) the Election Commission being an independent body, the abolition of the posts of Election Commissioners and their consequent removal tampered with the independence of the Election Commission directly or indirectly; (b) in view of the service rules made by the President the Election Commissioners were entitled to con tinue in office for full tenure of five years or until they attained the age of 65 years whichever was earlier; (c) the notification abolishing the two posts and removing the petitioner and the other Election Commissioner were issued mala fide under the advice of the Chief Election Commission er; (d) Petitioner 's removal affected him materially; and (e) the flashing of the photographs of the petitioner and other Election Commissioner while announcing their removal on the television during a news bulletin subjected them to severe loss of dignity and reputation. ' Dismissing the petition, this Court, HELD: 1.
The Election Commission as envisaged by the Constitution is an independent institution and has to func tion as such.
In the discharge of its duties and functions it is not amenable to the control of any other body.
The salient features of the composition of the Election Commis sion as given in Article 324 are that the Commission shall always consist of a permanent incumbent, viz. the Chief Election Commissioner.
But the President has also been given the power to appoint such number of other Election Commis sioners as he may, from time to time, fix.
While the ap pointment of the Chief Election Commissioner is a must, the appointment of the other Election Commissioner or Commis sioners is not obligatory.
The number of other Election Commissioners is left to the discretion of the President depending upon the need felt from time to time.
[169A B C] 1.1 However, in the matter of the conditions of service and tenure of office of the Election Commissioners, a dis tinction is made between the Chief Election Commissioner on the one hand and Election Commissioners and Regional Commis sioners on the other.
Whereas the conditions of service and tenure of office of all are to be such as the President may, by rule determine, a protection is given to the Chief Elec tion Commissioner in that his conditions of service shall not be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment, and he shall not be removed from his office except in like manner and on the like grounds as a judge of the Supreme Court.
These protections are not available either to the Election Commissioners or to the Regional Commissioners.
Their conditions 161 of service can be varied even to their disadvantage after their appointment and they can be removed on the recommenda tion of the Chief Election Commissioner, although not other wise.
Thus in these two respects not only the Election Commissioners are not on par with the Chief Election Commis sioner, but they are also placed on par with the Regional Commissioners although the former constitute the Commission and the latter do not and are only appointed to assist the Commission.
[169H, 170A B C] Article 324(4) though spells out the relationship be tween Election Commission and Regional Commissioners does not help to throw light on the relationship between the Chief Election Commissioner and Election Commissioners inter se.
The fact that the Regional Commissioners are to be appointed by the President in consultation with the Commis on to asist the Commission to perform its functions, though places the Election Commissioners on a higher pedestal than the Regional Commissioners does not raise them to the status of the Chief Election Commissioner.
The Chief Election Commissioner does not, therefore, appear to be primus inter partes, i.e. first among the equals, but is intended to be placed in a distinctly higher position.
Therefore, it cannot be held that the Election Commissioners have the same powers and the authority as the Chief Election Commissioner, and it may well be that the Chief Election Commissioner has the power to disregard and override the views of the Election Commissioners the abolition of their posts therefore least infringed on the independence of the Commission.
[175B, 174H, 175A, 170E, 180B] 1.2 The petitioner and the other Election Commissioners were appointed when the work of the Commission did not warrant their appointment.
It is evident from record that the then Government had thought it fit to make the two appointments although there was no need to do so.
What other considerations weighed with the then Government in making the appointment is anybody 's guess, and the Court does not propose to go into them.
However, it was expected that the Union of India would candidly admit the initial mistake of making the said appointments rather than defend them on non existent grounds.
Not only there was no need for the said appointments, but also the appointments in the absence of the definition of their roles in the Commission were creating an untoward and unworkable situation rendering the Commission internally torn and ineffectual in its function ing.
Thus the manner of appointment of the Election Commis sioners and the attitude adopted by them in the discharge of their functions was hardly calculated to ensure free and independent functioning of the Commission, much less its smooth working.
[175E, 179C D, E, 178C] 162 1.2.
In view of the fact that there was no need for the posts of the Election Commissioners at the time the appoint ments were made and that in the absence of a clear defini tion of their role in the Commission, particularly, vis a vis the Chief Election Commissioner, the appointments were an oddity, the abolition of the posts far from striking at the independence of the Commission paved the way for its smooth and effective functioning.
[179H, 180A] 2.
The instant case is not a case of a premature termi nation of service.
It is a clear case of the abolition of posts and the termination of the service is a consequence thereof.
Hence the termination of service is not open to challenge on the ground of any illegality.
[180D E] 3.
The allegations of mala fides against the Chief Election Commissioner are hard to accept.
The removal of the Election Commissioners was not on the recommendations of the Chief Election Commissioner under the 2nd proviso to clause (5) of the Article 324.
Nothing has been brought on record to show that even otherwise the Government while abolishing the posts had acted on the suggestion of the Chief Election Commissioner.
On the other hand, the records shows that although there were bickerings even on petty issues, all the decisions were taken ultimately unanimously.
It is, however, another thing that this unison in working, in the circum stances, could not have been guaranteed for all time to come, and the Government if they desired the continuance of the two Commissioners had an option to make the rules of business.
That the Government chose one rather than the other option is no ground to allege mala fides against them and much less against the Chief Election Commissioner.
[181B; 180F H, 181A] 4.
Material loss on account of cutting short of the tenure is not unknown in a service career and is one of the exigencies of employment.
The creation and abolition of post is the prerogative of the executive, and in the present case of the President.
Article 324(2) leaves it to the President to fix and appoint such number of Election Commissioners as he may from time to time determine.
The power to create the posts is unfettered.
So also is the power to reduce or abolish them.
If, therefore, the President, finding that there was no work for the Election Commissioners or that the Election Commission could not function, decided to abolish the posts, that was an exigency of the office held by the petitioner.
[181C D] 5.
The flashing of the photographs of the petitioner and the other Election Commissioner in the news bulletin by the Doordarshan was 163 clearly uncalled for.
Although there is nothing on record to show at whose instance it was done, yet the act deserves condemnation in the strongest language.
It was within the powers of the Government to investigate the incident and it could have offered to investigate the event and to make proper amends to the petitioner and the other Election Commissioner.
Instead it has casually dismissed the incident by a mechanical denial of it.
The attitude adopted by the Government towards the erstwhile public servants is strongly disapproved.
[182E F G H, 183A] 6.
It appears that there is an impression in some quar ters that if the Government admits its mistake whether it is committed by the same Government or the earlier Government, it loses its face.
Nothing can be farther from reality.
In a democratic regime, the Government represents the people.
It adds to its respectability and credibility, if the Govern ment also owns its mistakes frankly.
[179D E] 7.
In the absence of rules to the contrary, the members of a multi member body are not and need not always be on par with each other in the matter of their rights, authority and powers.
[174C] 7.1 It is an acknowledged rule of transacting business in a multimember body that when there is no express provi sion to the contrary, the business has to be carried on unanimously.
The rule to the contrary such as the decision by majority, has to be laid down specifically by spelling out the kind of majority whether simple special of all the members or of the members present and voting etc.
[174E] 7.2 In a case such as that of the Election Commission which is not merely an advisory body but an executive one, it is difficult to carry on its affairs by insisting on unanimous decisions in all matters.
No procedure has been laid down for transacting the business when Election Commis sioners are appointed.
Hence, a realistic approach demands that either the procedure for transacting business is spelt out by a statute or a rule either prior to or simultaneously with the appointment of the Election Commissioners or that no appointment of Election Commissioners is made in the absence of such procedure.
[174F G] 8.
There is no doubt that two heads are better than one, and particularly when an institution like the Election Commission is entrusted with vital functions, and is armed with exclusive uncontrolled power to execute them, 'it ' is both necessary and desirable that the powers are not exer cised by one individual, however, all wise he may be.
It iII conforms the tenets of the democratic rule.
It is true that the inde 164 pendence of an institution depends upon the persons who man it and not on their number.
A single individual may some times prove capable of withstanding all the pulls and pres sures, which many may not.
However, when vast powers are exercised by an institution which is accountable to none, it is politic to entrust its affairs to more hands than one.
It helps to assure judiciousness and want of arbitrariness.
The fact, however, remains that where more individuals than one man an institution, their role have to be clearly defined, if the functioning of the institution is not to come to a naught.
[178E G]
