The Petitioners, foreign nationals engaged in Christian missionary work have been staying in India continuously for a long time since pre independence period.
They continued to stay on the basis of resi 149 150 dential permits renewed from time to time.
In 1985 an order was passed asking them to leave the country and they made representations to the authorities, followed by further representations in 1986 for naturalisation further extension of stay.
However by order dated 8.7.1987 their request was rejected and they were asked to leave the country by 31st July, 1987.
The petitioners challenged the said order in the writ petitions filed before this Court.
It was contended by the petitioners that since they were staying in this country for a period of more than five years immediately preceding the commencement of the Consti tution, they should be held to have duly acquired Indian citizenship on the basis of Article 5(e) of the Constitution of India; that their continuous stay in India has estab lished their case of domicile in India which cannot be rejected merely because were holding foreign passports; that proceedings against them have been initiated under section 9 of the enabling them to defend their case; that they were denied hearing; and that in no event the Superintendent of Police who had signed the deportation order was authorised to do so.
Dismissing the Writ Petitions, this Court, HELD: 1.
Every person must have a personal law, and accord ingly every one must have a domicile.
He receives at birth a domicile of origin which remains his domicile, wherever he goes, unless and until he acquires a new domicile.
The new domicile, acquired subsequently, is generally called a domicile of choice.
The domicile of origin is received by operation of law at birth and for acquisition of a domicile of choice one of the necessary conditions is the intention to remain there permanently.
The domicile of origin is retained and cannot be divested until the acquisition of the domicile of choice.
By merely leaving his country, even permanently, one will not, in the eye of law, lose his domicile until he acquires a new one.
This proposition that the domicile of origin is retained until the acquisition of a domicile of choice is well established and does not admit of any exception.
[156D F] Central Bank of India vs Ram Narain, ; , relied on.
Halsbury 's Laws of England, 4th Edn., Vol. 8, para 421, referred to.
One of the necessary conditions mentioned in Article 5 of the 151 Constitution is that the person concerned must be having his domicile in the territory of India at the commencement of the Constitution.
It is not established that they had such an intention for the sole reason that the Petitioners 'have been staying in India for more than a decade before the commencement of the Constitution, and it cannot be deemed that they acquired domicile in India and consequently Indian citizenship.
[154E] 3.1.
For the acquisition of a domicile of choice, it must be shown that the person concerned had a certain State of mind, the animus manendi.
If he claims that he acquired a new domicile at a particular time, he must prove that he had formed the intention of making his permanent home in the country of residence and of continuing to reside there permanently.
Residence alone, unaccompanied by this state of mind, is insufficient.
[156H; 157A] 3.2.
The burden to prove that the petitioners had an intention to stay permanently in India lies on them.
The available materials on the record leave no room for doubt that the petitioners did not have such intention.
At best it can be said that they were uncertain about their permanent home.
During the relevant period very significant and vital political and social changes were taking place in this country, and those who were able to make up their mind to adopt this country as their own, took appropriate legal steps.
The petitioners preferred to stay on, on the basis of their passports issued by other countries, and obtained from time to time permission of the Indian authorities for their further stay for specific periods.
None of the applications filed by the petitioners in this connection even remotely suggested that they had formed an intention of permanently residing here.
[157B D] Mohd. Ayub Khan vs Commissioner of Police, Madras, and Kedar Pandey vs Narain Bikram Sah, ; , distinguished.
Union of India vs Ghaus Mohammed, ; , referred to.
The fundamental right of the foreigner is confined to Article 21 for life and liberty and does not include the right to reside and settle in this country, as mentioned in Article 19(1)(e), which is applicable only to the citizens of this country.
The power of the Government in India to expel foreigners is absolute and unlimited and there is no provision in the Constitution fettering this discretion.
The legal position on this aspect is not uniform in all the countries but so far the law which 152 operates in India is concerned, the Executive Government has unrestricted right to expel a foreigner.
[158C E] Hans Muller of Nurenburg vs Superintendent, Presidency Jail, Calcutta & Ors., ; , relied on.
So far the right to be heard is concerned, there cannot be any hard and fast rule about the manner in which a person concerned has to be given an opportunity to place his case and it is not claimed that if the authority concerned had served a notice before passing the impugned order, the petitioners could have produced some relevant material in support of their claim of acquisition of citizenship, which they failed to do in the absence of a notice.
[158E F] 6.
The contention that the Superintendent of Police was not authorised to direct deportation of the petitioners, is devoid of merit.
Actually the order was not passed by the Superintendent of Police.
It was the decision of the Central Government, which was being executed by the Superintendent of Police.
This is clear from the order.
[158G]
