The appellant, a cash clerk in the establishment of Delhi Milk Scheme, was placed under suspension under Rule 10(2) of the Central Civil Service (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965, pending investigation into a crimi nal case, connected with the forgery of a cheque, in which he was arrayed as an accused.
Subsequently, his services were terminated under Rule 5(1) of the Central Civil Serv ices (Temporary Service) Rules, 1965.
Though he was acquit ted in the criminal case, he was not re instated.
However, the Central Administrative Tribunal set aside the termina tion order and directed that the appellant would continue to be under suspension from the original date of termination of service, and that it would be open to the competent authori ty, to revoke his suspension and re instate him in service or continue him under suspension, if it decided to initiate disciplinary proceedings against him.
Pursuant to the decision of the Tribunal, the Management passed an order under Rule 10(4) of the Rules placing the appellant under suspension from the date of original order of termination and also directed that there should be fur ther enquiry against the appellant.
Allowing the appeal preferred by the appellant and modifying the Tribunal 's order, HELD: 1.1 There are three requirements for the applica tion of Rule 10(4) of the Central Civil Services (Classifi cation, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965.
These are (i) the Government servant is dismissed, removed or compulsorily retired as a measure of penalty; (ii) the said 331 penalty is set aside or declared or rendered void by a decision of a Court of Law; and (iii) the disciplinary authority decides to hold a further inquiry against the Government servant on the allegations on which the original order of penalty was imposed.
[334F G] 1.2 In the instant case, the original order of termina tion was not passed against the appellant as a measure of punishment.
It was a 'simpliciter termination ' under Rule 5(1) of the CCS (Temporary Service) Rules, 1965.
The Tribu nal has set aside that order on the ground that it amounts to punishment and the order of punishment could not have been made without holding an inquiry.
But that is not the same thing to state that the Management made an order termi nating the services by way of penalty.
It treated the said order as a simpliciter discharge.
Hence Rule 10(4) has no application.
Besides, there was no question of the Manage ment deciding to hold a further inquiry, since there was no earlier inquiry against the appellant and it would be misno mer to call it a further enquiry as contemplated under Rule 10(4).
[335B C] 1.3 Thus, the power to place a delinquent officer under suspension from the date of the original order of dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement from service would be available provided the original order was made by way of penalty and that order has been set aside by a Court of Law.
Since there was no inquiry leading to the removal of the appellant in the first instance, the decision to hold fresh inquiry does not attract Rule 10(4).
The retrospective suspension of the appellant is, therefore, unjustified and without authority of law.
However the order of suspension would operate prospectively and the appellant would be entitled to re instatement with all back wages till that day since the original order of termination has been set aside by the Tribunal.
The Tribunal 's order is modified according ly.
[335D G]
