On 31st May, 1986 the Government of India approved, in principle, the 'Two Stream ' concept of career management of Army Officers which envisaged that officers on promotion to Major General and Lt. General will be bifurcated into the 'Command and Staff ' and the 'Staff Only ' Stream.
By an order dated 9th September, 1986 issued by Military Secretary, Army Headquarters, the modalities of the concept, were worked out and it was inter alia provided that for the purpose of seniority, officers of the 'Staff Only ' Stream will be junior to officers of the 'Command and Staff" Stream.
While adopting the methodology for implementation of the 'Two Stream Concept ', in its note dated 22nd September, 1986 the Military Secretary stated that two options are available for fixing the sequence of promotion under the 'Stream Concept '.
Under option 'A ' the existing sequence of promo tion is maintained and in that officers are to be promoted as per their inter se seniority, irrespective of the stream.
In the case of Option 'B ', whereas the existing sequence of promotion is maintained, but promotion is to be effected in accordance with the stream in which an officer is being promoted.
After giving advantages and disadvantages of the two options, the said note recommended that option 'B ' should be adopted.
The Military Secretary 's note was ap proved by Vice Chief of Army Staff and the Chief of Army Staff.
By a communication dated 1st June, 1987 the Military Secretary clarified its earlier note dated 22nd September, 1986 explaining that officers of the General Cadre of a particular batch seniority approved in the 'Command and staff ' Stream will be en block senior to those 351 officers of the same batch approved on the 'Staff Only ' Stream.
However, an officer of an earlier batch approved on the 'Staff Only ' Stream will be senior to an officer of subsequent batch approved on the 'Command and Staff Stream.
Under the promotion policy of Army every officer is given three chances for consideration for promotion.
The first opportunity is called "fresh cases".
The second oppor tunity is called "first review cases" and the third opportu nity is called "final review cases".
An officer not approved for promotion loses one year on seniority and slides into the batch of the next year.
The respondent, commissioned in the army in 1954, while acting as Brigadier, was selected as Major General in 1956 batch.
Accordingly, his seniority was fixed alongwith 1956 batch.
While working as Major General he was considered for promotion to the rank of Lt. General in 1989 but was disap proved.
He thus lost seniority of 1956 batch.
He was then considered as a first review case in 1990 alongwith 1957 batch comprising of final review case of 1955 batch, first review case of 1956 batch and fresh case of 1957 batch and was approved for selection for 'Staff Only ' Stream.
Since he was approved only for 'Staff Only ' Stream, in the select panel dated 26th October, 1990 he was placed below all other Major Generals who were approved for selection in the Stream of 'Command and Staff.
Aggrieved by his placement below the officers who were approved for 'Command and Staff ' Stream, he filed a writ petition in the High Court which directed the Union of India to treat the respondent senior to all the other Major Gener als who were promoted to the acting rank of Lt. General in the 'Command and Staff ' stream and to expeditiously promote him ahead of the 1957 batch.
Against the decision of the Division Bench of the High Court the Union of India filed an appeal in this Court.
Setting aside the order of the High Court, this Court, HELD: 1.
The Division Bench of the High Court totally misunderstood the note of the Military Secretary dated 22nd September, 1986 as well as the note of the Vice Chief of Army Staff.
In the note of the Military Secretary dated 22nd September, 1986, Option 'A ' which was prevalent practice was substituted by option 'B ' which was recommended for future and which was accepted both by Vice Chief of Army Staff as well as Chief of Army Staff.
[369H 370E] 352 2.
It is clear from option 'B ' which was adopted for working out the 'Two Stream Concept ' that the seniority will first be given to the 'Command and Staff ' stream selected from any of the earlier batches and after the 'Command and Staff ' stream has been accorded the seniority, the three streams of 'Staff Only ' will be given seniority and that the final review, the first review or fresh stream of 'Staff Only ' rank below the similar three streams of 'Command and Staff '.
[362B C] 3.
It is also clear from the Scheme that the Officer who Were approved for 'Command and Staff ' Stream can be appoint ed both for 'Command ' as well as 'Staff ' vacancies whereas the officers who were approved only for stream of 'Staff Only ' can only be appointed to the vacancies relating to 'Staff ' and cannot be appointed relating to vacancies for 'Command '.
The expression 'same batch ' referred to in para graph 9 of the Military Secretary 's letter dated 1st June, 1987 is for the officers who were considered for selection at one time and not the individual batch of the Major Gener al.
[370B] 4.
Option 'B ' has not been reviewed till date.
There can be no doubt that if option 'A ' was available for preparation of select list the respondent would have been senior to other persons who were recommended for 'Command and Staff ' Stream.
But option 'A ' was given up and option 'B ' was recommended for approval.
Since option 'B ' has been adopted and accepted the seniority of the respondent placed in the panel dated 26th October, 1990 is unexceptionable.
[370F G] 5.
The respondent cannot take advantage for being pro moted earlier than the officers selected for the 'Command and Staff ' Stream.
[374B1
