The appellant, a registered dealer under U.P. Sales Tax Act, 1948 has been selling machinery including sugarcane crusher.
The State Government was issuing Notifications from time to time exempting agricultural implements from the levy of sales tax.
The State Government by its Notification dated 14.11.1980 amended the list and enumerated agricultural implements.
Since sugarcane crusher (Kohlu) was not included therein, the appellant claimed before the Sales tax Commis sioner that the Kohlu meant for extracting juice from sugar cane was an agricultural implement and as such was exempt from levy of sales tax.
Since the Commissioner negatived his claim, the appellant preferred an appeal before the Sales Tax Tribunal.
The Tribunal having upheld the findings of the Commis sioner, the appellant filed a revision petition before the High Court.
Relying on its earlier decision, the High Court dismissed the revision petition.
Aggrieved by the High Court 's decision, the appellant has preferred the present appeal.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
The agricultural process comes to an end when the crop is harvested and is brought home for marketing or for further processing.
Preparation of gur from Sugarcane is not the continuation of the agricultural process.
[427D E] 424 Bharat Engineering and Foundry Works vs The U.P. Govern ment, [1963] 14 S.T.C. 262 and Commissioner of Income tax, West Bengal, Calcutta vs Raja Benoy Kumar Sahas Roy, , relied on.
While giving meaning to an item in a taxing statue the Courts should give it a meaning as intended by the framers of the statute by looking at the various items mentioned in a particular group.
The items in one group should be considered in a generic sense.
[427F] 3.
In the instant case the notification dated November 14, 1980 includes various items under the head "agricultural implements".
The said definition cannot be confined to the various implements specifically mentioned therein.
The definition being inclusive it has a wider import and any other implement which answers the description of an agricul tural implement can be included in the definition.
A bare reading of the notification shows that all the implements mentioned by the name after the word "including. . "are by and large those which are used for cultivation of land and other operations which foster the growth and preserve the agricultural produce.
None of these implements can be worked after the agricultural process in respect of a crop comes to an end.
Therefore the intention of the framers of the notification could only be to limit the general words in the notification to the implements of the same kind as are specified therein.
As such sugarcane crushers do not come within the definition of agricultural implements.
[427F H; 428A B]
