The petitioner, the Editor of the English daily newspaper Searchlight of Patna, was called upon by the Secretary of the Patna Legislative Assembly to show cause before the Committee of Privileges of the Assembly why appropriate action should not be taken against him for the breach of privileges of the Speaker and the Assembly for publishing in its entirety a speech delivered in the Assembly by a member thereof, portions of which were directed to be expunged by the Speaker.
It was contended on behalf of the Petitioner that the said notice and the proposed action by the Committee were in violation of his fundamental right to freedom of speech and expression under article 19(1)(a) and of the protection of his personal liberty under article 21 of the Constitution, and that, as an editor of a newspaper, he was entitled to all the benefits of the freedom of the Press.
The respondents relied on article 194(3) Of the Constitution and claimed that the proceedings in the House as those in the British House of Commons were not usually meant to be published, and in no circumstances was it permissible to publish the parts of a 807 speech which were directed to be expunged and, therefore, formed no part of the official report and such publication was in clear breach of the privileges of the Assembly.
The points for determination were: (1) Could the British House of Commons entirely prohibit the publication of its proceedings or even of such portions of them as had been directed to be expunged ? (2) Assuming that the British House of Commons had such power and consequently the State Legislature also had such power under Article 194(3), could the privileges of the Legislature under that Article prevail over the fundamental right guaranteed by article 19(1)(a)? The Bihar Legislature not having admittedly made any law governing its powers and privileges under Entry 39 of List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, the question naturally was as to what were the powers, privileges and immunities of the British House of Commons at the commencement of the Constitution.
Held (per Das, C. J., Bhagwati, Sinha and Wanchoo, jj.) that there could be no doubt that the liberty of the Press was implicit in the freedom of speech and expression guaranteed to a citizen under article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution and that must include the freedom of propagation of ideas ensured by the freedom of circulation.
Romesh Thappar vs State of Madras, ; , Brijbhushan vs The State of Delhi, ; and Express Newspaper Ltd. vs Union of India, , relied on.
The liberty of the Press in India flowed from this freedom of speech and expression of a citizen and stood on no higher footing and no privilege attached to the Press as such.
Arnold vs King Emperor, (1914) L.R. 41 I.A. 149, referred to.
A survey of the evolution of Parliamentary privileges in England showed beyond doubt that at the commencement of the Indian Constitution, the British House of Commons had the power or privilege of prohibiting the publication of even a true and faithful report of the debates or proceedings that took place in the House, and with greater reason, the power and privilege of prohibiting publication of an inaccurate or garbled version of such debates and proceedings.
These were the powers and privileges that article 194(3) conferred on State Legislatures and article 05(3) conferred on the Houses of Parliament in India.
It would not be correct to contend that article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution controlled the latter half of article 194(3) or of article 105(3) Of the Constitution and that the powers, privileges and immunities conferred by them must yield to the fundamental right of the citizen under article 19(1)(a).
As articles 194(3) and 105(3) stood in the same supreme position as the provisions of Part III of the Constitution and could not be affected by article 13, the principle of harmonious construction must be adopted.
808 So construed, the provisions of article 19(1)(a), which were general, must yield to article 194(1) and the latter part of its cl.
(3), which are special, and article 19(1)(a) could be of no avail to the petitioner.
Ramjilal vs Income tax Officer, Mohindergarh, [1951] S.C.R. a 127 and Laxamanappa Hanumantappa vs Union of India, ; , applied.
Anand Bihayi Mishra vs Ram Sahay, A.I.R. (1952) M.B. 31, disapproved.
Gunapati Keshavyam Reddy vs Nafisul Hasan, A.I.R. (1954) S.C. 636 explained as having proceeded on concession by counsel.
Nor could the petitioner complain of any breach, actual or threatened, of his fundamental right under article 21 of the Constitution since article 194(3) read with the rules, framed by the Bihar Legislative Assembly in exercise of its power under article 208 of the Constitution, laid down the procedure for enforcing its powers, privileges and immunities under that Article and any deprivation of his personal liberty as a result of the proceedings before the Committee of Privileges would be in accordance with procedure established by law.
Held, further, that it was not for this Court to prescribe any particular period for moving a privilege motion so as to make the subject matter of the motion a specific matter of recent occurrence within the meaning of the said rules.
This was a matter for the speaker alone to decide.
The time within which the Committee of privileges was to submit its report was a matter between the House and its Committee and the party whose conduct was the subject matter of investigation could have no say in the matter.
The effect in law of the order of the Speaker to expunge a portion of the speech of a member might be as if that portion had not been spoken and a report of the whole speech despite the speaker 's order might be regarded as a perverted and unfaithful report and Prima facie constitute a breach of the privilege of the Assembly.
Whether there had in fact been a breach of the privilege of the Assembly was, however, a matter for the Assembly alone to judge.
Per Subba Rao, J. The second part of article 194(3) was clearly a transitory provision and had no higher sanctity than that of the first.
While a law when made by the State Legislature under the first part would, by virtue of article 13(2), be void to the extent it contravened the provisions of 19(1)(a), unless saved by article 19(2), there could be no reason why the powers, privileges and immunities conferred under the second part should be free from the impact of the fundamental rights.
As there was no inherent inconsistency between articles 19(1)(a) and the second part of article 194(3), full effect must be given to them both on the principle of harmonious construction.
The 809 wide powers and privileges enjoyed by the Legislature and its members should, therefore, be so exercised as not to impair the fundamental rights of the citizen, particularly of one who was not a member of the Legislature.
In case of a conflict, article 19(1)(a) must prevail over article 194(3) and not vice versa and the privilege must yield to the extent it affected the fundamental right.
Gunupati Keshavarm Reddy vs Nafisul Hasan, A.I.R. (1954) S.C. 636, applied.
At the commencement of the Constitution the House of Commons had no privilege to prevent the publication of a correct and faithful report of its proceedings, save those in respect of secret sessions held under exceptional circumstances, and had only a limited privilege to prevent mala fide publications of garbled, unfaithful and expunged reports of the proceedings.
In the instant case, neither the notices nor the documents enclosed therewith disclosed any mala fides on the part of the petitioner or that he had knowledge that any portion of the speech had been expunged by the Speaker.
Consequently, even supposing article 194(3) prevailed over article 19(1)(a), the petitioner was entitled to succeed.
Wasan vs Walter, , relied on.
