The three appellants and their eldest brother, under a family partition, which took place in 1954, kept in common certain ancestral properties under the management of the latter.
These properties were acquired in pursuance of a notification dated 15.1.1967 under section 4(1) of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894.
The eldest brother filed objections referring to the partition deed of 1954 and stated that each of the four brothers had 1/4 share in the properties in question.
Ultimately the compensation was made to all the brothers at 1/4th share each.
The eldest brother sought six references under section 18 being dissatisfied with the awards.
The Civil Court enhanced the compensation and granted an award of 1/4th share thereof to the eldest brother with solatium and interest, but did not award the balance amount to the appellants in their respective shares on the ground that they did not jointly ask for the reference.
Out of the remaining three brothers two asked for reference for two awards only and the last one did not ask for reference of any award.
On appeal, the High Court confirmed the award and decrees of the civil court.
Aggrieved, the appellants preferred appeals by special leave to this Court.
On the question: whether in a reference under section 18 of the Land Acquisition Act sought for by one of the co owners, the other co owners, who did not expressly seek reference are entitled to enhanced compensation pro rata as per their shares? Allowing the appeals, this Court, 466 HELD: 1.1 The Courts below committed a manifest error in refusing to pass an award and payment thereof to the appel lants.
The coparceners claimants appellants in the instant case were entitled to payment of the enhanced award by the Civil Court pro rate of their 1/4th share each with 15 per cent solatium and 4 per cent interest as awarded by the Civil Court.
[471C D] 1.2 It was not in dispute that under the partition deed, the four brothers as coparceners kept in common the acquired property under the management of the eldest brother.
The income derived therein was being shared in proportion to their shares by all the brothers.
Therefore, it remained as joint property.
As co owners everyone was entitled to 1/4th share therein.
[468E; 470F] 1.3 When one of the co owners or coparceners made a statement in the reference application that the acquired property belonged to him and his brothers, that he himself and his brothers were dissatisfied with the award made by the Collector and that they were entitled to higher compen sation, it would be clear that he was making a request, though not expressly stated so but by necessary implication that he was acting on his behalf and on behalf of his other co owners or coparceners and was seeking a reference on their behalf as well.
What was acquired was their totality of right, title and interest in the acquired property and when the reference was made in respect thereof under section 18, they were equally entitled to receive compensation pro rata as per their shares.
[468F; 471A B] 2.1 One of the co owners can file a suit and recover the property against strangers and the decree would ensure to all the co owners.
A co owner is an owner of the property acquired but entitled to receive compensation pro rata.
[470A & E] 2.2 A co owner is as much an owner of the entire property as a sole owner.
It is not correct to say that a co owner 's property was not his own.
He owns several parts of the composite property along with others and it cannot be said that he is only a part owner or a fractional owner in the property.
[470C D] 2.3 No co owner has a definite right, title and inter est in any particular item or a portion thereof.
On the other hand he has right, title and interest in every part and parcel of the joint property or coparcenary under Hindu Law by all the coparceners.
[470A B] Kanta Goel vs
B.P. Pathak & Ors., ; ; Sri Ram 467 Pasricha vs Jagannath & Ors., and Pal Singh vs SunderSingh (dead) by Lrs.
& Ors., [1989] 1 S.C.R. 67, relied on.
It is surprising that the State having acquired the property of a citizen would take technical objections re garding the entitlement of the claim.
The State certainly is right and is entitled to resist claim for enhancement and lead evidence in rebuttal to prove the prevailing price as on the date of notification and ask the court to determine the correct market value of the lands acquired compulsorily under the Act.
But so far as the persons entitled to receive compensation are concerned, it has no role to play.
It is for the claimants inter se to lay the claim for compensation and the Court would examine and award the compensation to the rightful person.
[469E F]
