The petitioner and its predecessors had licence for distillery at Ujjain to manufacture rectified spirit and the last of such licence held by the petitioner was for the period 1.4.1976 to 31.3.1981.
For the licensing period commencing from 1.4.1981 to 31.3.1986, the petitioner was unsuccessful and the licence was granted in favour of Rajd hani Distillery Corporation.
The petitioner impugned the same but failed both before the High Court as also before the Court.
Thereafter, the petitioner filed a writ petition in the High Court claiming restitution of the distillery but failed and an appeal against the High Court 's order was preferred before this Court, which has been disposed of whereby this Court has declined to grant restitution but directed that the petitioner should move an application before the State Government to have the value of the plants licence on February 19,1982 and reiterated his request by number of reminders including the one in November 3, 1986.
In the interregnum, the Government policy was changed by a cabinet sub committe policy decision dated 30.12.1984, whereby they decided to grant licence to the existing licen sees of the distilleries and that they should construct the factories at their expenses on the land allotted by the State Government or acquired and allotted by the State Government and that they shift the business to new factories and the licence would be for a period of five years.
Several writ petitions including the one by the petitioner were filed in the High Court challenging the policy.
The High Court quashed part of the policy decision.
Against that order, petitions were filed by the State and the unsuccess ful petitioners including the petitioner in this Court.
Those petitions were disposed of by this Court by its judg ment in the case of State of M.P.v.
Nandlal Jaiswal and Ors.
, ; The court upheld the validity of the Government policy.
During the course of the arguments, the Attorney General of India conceded that if the petitioner makes an application for grant of licence, it would be considered by the Govern 493 ment and disposed of quickly.
Pursuant thereto the petition er made an application on December 25, 1987.
The State Government rejected the application by letter dated February 8, 1988, which among other things is impugned in this peti tion under Article 32 of the Constitution.
It is contended on behalf of the petitioner that the intention behind the solemn undertaking given by the State in Nandlal Jaiswal 's case clearly showed that the intention was to grant the licence to the petitioner rejection is contrary to the undertaking and violating the fundamental right of the petitioner to establish and trade in the manu facture and distribution of the liquor; further it is dis criminatory is as much as licences have been issued to others similarly placed.
Alternatively, it is contended that if it is not found feasible to grant licence for Ujjain, the same be granted for Ratlam Distillery.
Counsel for the State urged that it has not been found feasible to grant licence to the petitioner due to grounds stated in the order which are in confermity with the change in policy and the court should not interfere.
On behalf of Rajdhani Distillery Corpn.
it was urged that unless there is cut in the supply area of the operation of the existing licences and a sepa rate supply area is carved out, no licence could be issued to the petitioner; that new policy is in vogue for the succeeding licensing period of 1991 to 1993, and the li cences having been issued to persons, who are not represent ed in this court, the court should not grant the relief asked 1or in the writ petition.
Dismissing the writ petition, this Court,
