The appellants, teachers in a minority institution fully financed by State, went on a strike and when they were called hack to duty, they did not return within time, lead ing to appointment of alternate teachers.
They approached the High Court for their absorption.
The High Court having dismissed the matter, the aggrieved teachers have preferred the present appeal by special leave.
By interim orders, this Court has already directed the absorption of the teachers in different institutions.
Seven teachers have been absorbed in the very same institution.
It was contended on behalf of the seven teachers that they should be paid salary for the period of gap before their absorption and that their senior ity should be maintained.
The alternate teachers who worked in the interregunum contended that they should be paid salary for the period they worked.
Disposing the appeal, this Court, HELD 1.
One set of teachers have actually worked while the other set has not.
The teachers had gone on strike and when they were called hack to duty a group of teachers including the seven did not return within time and that.
led to appointment of alternate teachers.
It is clear from the material on record that the alternate teachers did work during the period.
It may not be appropriate to hold that they are not entitled to remuneration for the work done.
However, the institution has admittedly not received any benefit of service during the relevant period from the other set viz. the seven teachers who were absorbed later.
On the principle that.
when work is not done remuneration is not to be paid, no direction is given for payment.
If they are entitled to salary, it is open to them to take appropriate proceeding to claim the same.
It does not 560 finally close their clam against the State or the institu tion.
The alternate teachers who have worked and if they have not been paid, they should be disbursed the salary due to them.
Then iS some contest as to whether they are quali fied or not.
On the basis of the facts on record the teach ers appear to be qualified and that question should not be reopened.
In regard to two teachers Who were prepared to walt to take their chance, they would not be paid any remu neration.
Seven teachers who have now been provided jobs under the orders of this Court and those who were waiting to take their Chance should be equated for the common period of no Work [562F H, 563A C] 2.
However, the seven teachers who have got absorption should be given their seniority for the period they were out of employment.
The Director of Public Instruction is re quired to take this order into account and given them credit for seniority for the period they were out of employment on the deemed situation.
that they had worked.
This would not entitle them to salary unless they are otherwise entitled to the same.
[563D]
