The appellant company purchased machinery worth Rs.2,81,741 in the year 1957 and gave it on hire to another company which insured the machinery.
In the year 1966, a fire broke out in the lendee company causing extensive damage to the machinery of the appellant.
On a settlement of the insurance claim the lendee company paid to the appellant a sum of Rs.6,32,533 on account of the destruction of its machinery.
The difference between the actual cost of the machinery and its written down value worked out to Rs.2,62,781 which the appellant (the asses I see) showed in its income tax return for the relevant year as profit chargeable to tax under section 41(2) of the Income Tax Act.
The lncomeTax Officer subjected to tax also the additional amount of Rs.3,50,792 the difference between the amount of insurance claim and the original cost of the machinery treating the same as capital gains chargeable under section 45 of the Act, and rejected the case of the appellant that the capital gains tax was not attracted to the amount received on account of the insurance claim since there was no transfer of capital asset as was contemplated by section 45 read with section 2(47) of the Act.
The appeal of the assessee was dismissed by the Appel late Assistant Commissioner, but its claim was accepted by the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal which held that the amount was not received on account of transfer of the capital asset but on account of damage to it and that section 45 was attracted only when there was a transfer of the capital asset.
The reference at the instance of the revenue was an swered by the High Court against the assessee.
Aggrieved the assessee filed the appeal before this Court on a certificate granted by the High Court.
On the question: whether the money received towards the insurance claim on account of the damage to. or destruction of the capital 578 asset was so received on account of the transfer of the asset within the meaning of section 45 of the Act and was, there fore, chargeable to the capital gains tax under the said section, Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.1 The money received under the insurance policy is by way of indemnity or compensation for the damage, loss or destruction of the property.
It is not in consideration of the transfer of the property for the transfer of any right in it in favour of the insurance company.
It as by virtue of the contract of insurance or of indemnity, and in terms of the conditions of the contract.
[584C D] 1.2 In the case of damage, partial or complete, or destruction for loss of property there is no transfer of it in favour of a third party.
The fact that while paying for the total loss of or damage to the property, the insurance company takes over such property or whatever is left of it, does not change the nature of the insurance claim which is indemnity or compensation for the loss.
The payment of insurance claim is not in consideration of the property taken over by the insurance company, for.
one is not consid eration for the other.
The insurance claim is not the value of the damaged property.
The claim is assessed on the basis of the damage sustained by the property or the amount neces sary to restore it to its original conditions.
It is not a consideration for the damaged property.
[584C, F G] 1.3 In the instant case, the amount received by the assessee was the one received by it as damages on account of the loss of its machinery.
The lendee company, as a bailee, had insured the machinery hired from the assessee, since it was liable to make good the loss of the machinery to the assessee.
This was implied under a contract of bailment unless it was provided to the contrary.
The lendee company paid the insurance amount pro rata to the assessee.
[587D G] 1.4 The insurance was on reinstatement basis which meant that the property was to be restored to the condition in which it was, before the fire.
The insurance company paid the amount for the restoration of the machinery which had to be on the basis of its value at the time of the fire.
The machinery in question was purchased in the year 1957 and the fire broke ' out on.
August 11, 1966.
Taking into considera tion the ordinary course of events, it was legitimate to presume that the cast of machinery had gone up during the intervening period and the assured and, therefore, the assessee, was entitled to recover on the basis of the 579 increased value of the machinery.
[584H; 585A B] Halsbury 's Laws,of England, Fourth Edition, Vol.
25, re ferred to.
2.1 The capital gains is attracted by transfer and not merely by extinguishment of right howsoever brought about.
The transfer may be effected by various modes and one of the modes is the extinguishment of right on transfer of the asset itself or on account of the transfer of the right or rights in it.
The extinguishment of right or rights must in any case be on account of its or their transfer in order to attract the provisions of Section 45 which speaks about capital gains arising out of "transfer" of asset and not on account of "extinguishment of right" by itself.
[583G H; 584A] If extinguishment of right or rights is not due to transfer and is on account of the destruction or loss of the asset, it is not a transfer and does not attract the provi sions of section 45 which relate to transfer and not to mere extinguishment of right but to one by transfer.
Hence an extinguishment of right not brought about by transfer is outside the purview ors.
[584A B] Whatever the mode by which a transfer is brought about, the existence of the asset during the process of transfer is a pre condition.
Unless the asset exists in fact, there cannot be a transfer of it.
[583E] Transfer presumes both the existence of the asset and of the transferee to whom it is transferred.
[584C] 2.2 When an asset is destroyed there is no question of transferring it to others.
The destruction or loss of the asset, no doubt, brings.
about the destruction of the right of the owner or possessor of the asset, in it.
But it is not on account of transfer.
It is on account of the disappear ance of the asset.
The extinguishment of right in the asset on account of extinguishment of asset itself is not a trans fer of the right but its destruction.
By no stretch of imagination, the destruction of the right on account of the destruction of the asset can be equated with the extinguish ment of right on account of its transfer.
[583E G] 3.1 Although the definition of "transfer" in Section 2(47) of the Act is inclusive, and, therefore, extends to events and transactions which may not otherwise be "trans fer" according to its ordinary, popular and natural sense, yet it also mentions such transactions as 580 sale, exchange etc.
to which the word "transfer" would properly apply in its popular and natural import.
Since those associated words and expressions imply the existence of the asset and of the transferee, according to the rule of noscitur a sociis, the expression "extinguishment of any rights therein" would take colour from the said associated words and expressions, and will have to be restricted to the sense analogous to them.
[585C E] If the legislature intended to extend the definition to any extinguishment of right, it would not have included the obvious instances of transfer, viz. sale, exchange etc.
Hence the expression "extinguishment of any rights therein" will have to be confined to the extinguishment of rights on account of transfer and cannot be extended to mean any extinguishment of right independent of or otherwise than on account of transfer.
[585E F] 3.2 The High Court, was not correct in reading the expression " 'extinguishment of any rights" in the assets as any extinguishment of right whether it resulted in or was on account of transfer nor was it right in assuming that for "transfer" within the meaning of Section 45 the asset need not exist.
It erred in ignoring the basic postulate that Section 45 does not relate to extinguishment of right but to transfer.
Having concentrated its attention on the words "extinguishment of right" rather than on "transfer", the High Court, misdirected itself and proceeded on the basis that every extinguishment of right whether by way of trans fer or not, is attracted by Section 45.
[585F G; 584B] Commissioner of Income Tax vs Madurai Mills Co. Ltd., and Commissioner of Income Tax vs Mohanbhai Pamabhai, , referred to.
Whether the lendee company had insured assessee 's machinery as bailees or as agents of the assessee would make no difference.
The insurance policy contained the ' rein statement clause requiring the insurer to pay the cost of the machinery as on the date of the fire.
[587G H; 588A] 5.
In an insurance policy with the reinstatement clause, the insurer is bound to pay the cost of the insured property as on the date of destruction of loss, and it matters very little if the amount so paid by the insurance company is invested for purchasing the destroyed asset or for any other purpose.
[588A B] C. Leo Macho do vs Commissioner of Income Tax, , approved.
581 Income tax Commissioner vs
J.K. Cotton Spinning & Weaving Mills Co. Ltd., , disapproved.
