An 'industrial Company ', as defined in Section 2(7)(c) of Finance Act, 1973 was entitled to certain concessions in the matter of taxation.
The appellant, a private limited company running a cold storage, laid claim to such benefits contending that it came within the meaning of 'industrial company ' since the activity carried on by it came within the words 'processing of goods '.
The income Tax Officer, rejected the assessee 's claim but the Appellate Assistant Commissioner conceded the claim, and directed remission of the proceedings to the income Tax Officer for re computation of the tax by treating the appel lant as an 'industrial company '.
The Tribunal accepted the appeal of the Revenue and held that the appellant was not an 'industrial company '.
This was upheld by the High Court.
Dismissing the appeal preferred by the assessee, this Court, HELD: 1.1 The term 'processing ' is of a wider amplitude and has various aspects and meanings.
in common parlance 'processing, is understood as an action which brings forth some change or alteration of the goods or material which is subjected to the act of processing.
The dictionary meaning of the term is not very different from this meaning in one sense while various other meanings of Wider amplitude are also available.
[593G H, 594A] 1.2 In a cold storage, vegetables, fruits and several other articles, which require preservation by re frigeration are stored.
While as a result of long storage, scientific examination might indicate loss of moisture content, that is not sufficient for holding that the stored articles have 590 undergone a process within the meaning of Sec.2(7)(c) of the Finance Act, 1973.
[594C] Chowgule, & Co. Pvt. Ltd. and Anr.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; , relied on.
Commissioner of Income tax vs Radha.
Nagar Chid Storage (P) Ltd., and Addl.
Commissioner of Income tax, Kanpur vs Farrukhabad Cold Storage (P) Ltd., 107 I.T.R. 816, referred to.
Kilmarnock Equitable Co operative Society Ltd. vs IRC., [1966] 42TC 675 at Page 681, referred to.
