One Ram Subba Reddy, an advocate, politician and a tradeunionist, was murdered on the night between 14th and 15th April, 1975, at his house in Proddatur, when the de ceased is stated to have received fatal blows by lethal weapons whilst his daughter (PW 1), sleeping nearby received injuries when she attempted to go to help her father.
Ac cording to the prosecution, Accused No. 1 (Respondent No. 1), was a friend and a regular visitor to the house of the deceased, till they fell out on account of trade union activities.
Accused No. 1 was the President of the workmen 's unions of Andhra Cotton Mills, Proddatur, International Packaging Company, Proddotur and Transport Workers, espous ing the cause of workmen and directing their union activi ties while the deceased, a practising Advocate represented the managements of these companies and tendered legal advice to them in connection with the various labour problems arising in those companies.
The deceased who was a lawyer for the companies had advised the accused No. 1 not to resort to violence for settlement of industrial disputes.
The fact that infuriated accused No. ' 1 further was the help which the deceased agreed to provide to PW 11 for setting up an office of INTUC in his own office.
This was intended to counter the militant activities of Accused 1 who was in control of most of the labour unions in the town.
According to the prosecution at about 3.30 a.m. on the day of occurrence, PW 1 who was sleeping on the terrace of the house nearby her father, woke up bearing the cries of her father ans saw accused 1 with 6 or 7 others stabbing her father with daggers.
She raised an alarm and tried to go to rescue her father but she was prevented by three of them from getting up; accused No. 3 had gagged her mouth with his hand and had pinned her down to the cot.
Thereafter accused 5 tried to stab her with a dagger twice but on both the occasions she warded off the blows and in the process sus tained injuries on her left index finger, 601 thumb and palm extending to another finger.
After the as sailants left, she got down and informed her mother PW 2 about the incident; she opened the door to PWs 3 and 4, who were sleeping outside.
She sent a message to the police through PW S, her neighbour, as telephone lines were cut.
The police took up investigation and 19 persons including the respondents were put up for trial before the Additional Sessions Judge, Cuddapah on different charges e.g. criminal conspiracy, rioting and murder, etc.
The learned trial judge came to ie conclusion that the prosecution had failed to establish the Charge of criminal conspiracy under Section 120B, I.P.C. It accepted the testimony of PWs 1to 5 and held (i) that the incident occurred at 3.30 a.m. on the terrace of the residence of the deceased; (ii) the injuries borne on the fingers of PW 1 were not self inflicted as suggested by defence and (iii) that the intimation of the incident was the police without loss of time.
Accordingly the trial Judge convicted Accused Nos. 1 and 3 under Sections 148 and 302 and Sec. 324 with the aid of Section 149, I.P.C. and accused No. S under Section: 148, 302 and 324, I.P.C. and sentenced all the three to life imprisonment for murdering Ram Subba Reddy and to rigorous imprisonment for 3 years under section 148, IPC.
The other 16 accused were acquitted.
The convicted persons appealed to the High Court and the State filed an application for enhancement of the sentence imposed on Accused No. 1 to capital punishment.
The High Court allowed the appeal by the convicted persons and acquitted them.
Hence this appeal by the State against the order of acquit tal, by special leave.
The High Court bold that the evidence of PW 1 is tainted in that the names of accused 2 and 4 who were strangers to her figure in her statement Exh.
P 1 and further her statement regarding identity of Accused 3 and S was unacceptable.
The High Court therefore found the evi dence led by the prosecution untrustworthy.
and thus acquit ted the accused appellants before it.
Partly allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: On the question of presence of PW 1 in Proddatur on the date of the incident, apart from the oral evidence of PWs 1 to 3 and 5, there is the documentary evidence in the form of the entry exhibit S6 recorded by PW 24 in the general diary on April 15, 1975 at about 4 30 a.m.
That entry was made on the information supplied by PW 5.
It is clearly stated therein by PW S that he had been told by PW 1 that her father was murdered at his residence.
It was on receipt of this information that the police went to the house of the deceased, drew up the inquest report and recorded the state ments of those present there including PW 1.
The presence of PW 1 is, therefore clearly established 602 by this document prepared within an hour from the time of the incident.
This contemperaneous document corroborates the oral evidence of the aforesaid witnesses.
[614A.C] The High Court failed to realise that when an injury is on an accessible part of the body, which the individual can himself reach, such an injury could also be self inflicted and when a medical witness is asked if it was possible to self inflict it he would have to answer in the affirmative unless the direction of the injury or such other factors show otherwise.
But merely because the medical officer says that they could be self inflicted, there is no reason to jump to such a conclusion unless.
circumstances establish such a possibility.
In the present case there was hardly any opportunity to self inflict them.
Her not being a left hander should make no difference because she is bound to use that hand to ward off the blows if her assailant is on that side of her bed.
The High Court was not justified in con cluding that PW 1 had self inflicted the wounds found on her left hand.
This conclusion of the High Court is, to say the least, wholly conjectural and totally against the weight of evidence on record.
[615F 616A] Once it is accepted that PW 1 had slept on the terrace and had sustained the injuries in the incident, her evidence regarding the identity of accused No. 1 who was quite well known to her cannot be doubted.
[616G] The evidence of PW1 is that when she heard the cries of her father she woke up and saw accused No. 1 and six or seven others belabouring him.
This means that she did not know and could not identify the companions of accused No. 1.
However, when she tried to raise an alarm three of the assailants approached her and pinned her down to the bed, and one of them threatened to stab her.
He did carry out his threat as is evidenced from the injuries sustained by her.
She was able to identify two of them at the identification parade held on May 23, 1975.
This is proved through the evidence of PW 14 who conducted the test identification parades.
Now accused Nos. 3 and S had surrendered before the Court on May 13, 1975.
PW 14 received the requisition for arranging a test identification parade on May 17, 1975.the identification parade was actually held on May 23, 1975 There is no valid explanation tendered by the prosecution for the delay in holding the identification parades.
The High Court was reluctant to place absolute reliance on the evidence of PW 1 regarding the identity of accused Nos. 3 and 5.
In the absence of a valid explanation for the delay, the Court did not think that this approach of the High Court can be said to be manifestly wrong to call for intervention.
[617A E] 603 The Court, in the result, partly allowed the appeal in so far as it related to original Accused No. 1 respondent No. 1 set aside the High Court 's order acquitting him and restored the order of trial Judge convicting and sentencing him.
The Court affirmed the High Court 's order of acquittal passed in respect of other accused, giving them the benefit of doubt.
[617E G] State of Jammu and Kashmir vs Hazara Singh & Anr., , referred to.
