The appellant and Dr. Jain, respondent No. 4, completed their M.B.B.S. course in the years 1983 87.
from Gandhi Medical College, Bhopal.
While Dr. Jain had been admitted into that course in the Gandhi Medical College, Bhopal after he had passed the entrance test, the appellant first sought admission to M.B.B.S. course in the M.S. Ramayya Medical College, Bangalore, after paying the capitation fee and after completing the first year of the course in that Col lege she got herself transferred in 1984 to the Gandhi Medical College, Bhopal, with the approval of the State Government and with no objection from the Ramayya College, Bangalore.
After passing M.B.B.S. both of them cleared their internship of one year and also joined a house job in Radiology in the same college and completed the same in August 1989.
Both of them then applied for a single seat in the Master 's Degree (M.D.) course in Radiology at Gandhi Medical College, Bhopal.
The appellant having secured higher marks got admission to this seat in preference to Dr. Jain.
Dr. Jain, thereupon, challenged the admission of the appellant by means of a writ petition before the High Court on the ground inter alia that the transfer of the appellant from the Bangalore Medical College to the Bhopal Medical College was itself invalid and since the very admission of the appellant to the M.B.B.S. course degree in the Bhopal College was invalid, she could not at all have been considered for admission to the M.D. course which was available only to the institutional candidates.
The High Court allowed the writ petition, quashed the admission of the appellant and directed that Dr. Jain, be admitted to that seat.
Hence this appeal by the appellant.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: The validity of an order for transfer may be chal lenged 430 contemperaneonsly by a third party whose claim for admission or transfer is superseded by such order but cannot be al lowed to be challenged by a third party because he finds, in retrospect, at a future point of time, that it has affected his interests as a result of subsequent events.
[437E] The order of the State of Madhya Pradesh permitting the transfer of the appellant cannot be struck down as void.
There has been some irregularity hut, in the circumstances in which it was passed, it was one within the competence of the State Government.
[437F] There is the need to avoid disturbing settled issues which affect the life and career of an individual after a lapse of time or after the interposition of further events, as a result of which he has rightly developed a sense of security.
[441B] In the instant case, the merit list of 1989 is nothing but a reproduction of the merit list of 1988 confined to a narrower group of students of the same hatch.
The latter did show the appellant to have obtained more marks than Dr. Jain and, in this sense, was adverse to his interests.
The omis sion of Dr. Jain to challenge the correctness of the list then lulled the appellant into a sense of security that the merit list was acceptable to all.
Dr. Jain, should therefore be barred, on equitable consideration from challenging the order of merit at the present stage.
[441G]
