The appellant, a public limited company, was the lessee of wo cinema houses, " West, End " and " Capitol " situated within the Poona cantonment area.
, By a notification dated June 17, 1948, the Bombay Government with the sanction of the Governor General in Council imposed certain taxes in the cantonment of Poona including an entertainment tax of Rs. 10 per show on the appellant 's cinema houses and Rs. 5 per show on others.
The appellant, who paid the tax under protest, brought the suit, out of which the present appeal arose, for a declaration that the 64 imposition of the said tax by the respondent was illegal, for a permanent injunction restraining it from levying the tax and for the refund of Rs. 45,802, paid as tax by the appellant.
The trial Court decreed the suit but the High Court, on appeal by the respondent, reversed the decision of the trial Court and dismissed the suit. ' Under section 60(1) of the (11 Of 1924), read with section 73 (xiv) Of the Bombay Municipal Boroughs Act, 1925 (Bom.
XVIII of 1925), the respondent had the power to impose any other tax which the Bombay Provincial Legislature could impose on the province.
The question, therefore, was whether the Bombay Legislature had the power to impose the tax in question.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant that although the Provincial Legislature had undoubtedly the power under section 100 of the Government of India Act, 1935, read with Entry 50 in Sch.
VII thereto, to make law with respect to " taxes on luxuries, including taxes on entertainments, amusements, betting and gambling ", the said entry contemplated a law imposing taxes on persons who enjoyed the luxuries, entertainments or amusements and not on persons who provided them.
Such a tax, if levied on the latter would be one on profession, trade or calling as contemplated by Entry 46 of the said Schedule and could not exceed Rs. 100 per annum under section 142A of the Government of India Act, 1935, and Rs. 250 per annum under article 276(2) of the Constitution.
Held, that the contention must be negatived.
It is well settled that in construing an entry conferring legislative powers, the widest possible construction according to their ordinary meaning must be given to the words used.
There could be no reason, therefore, in construing Entry 50, to differentiate between the giver and the receiver of the luxuries, entertainments or amusements and both must be held to be amenable to the tax.
Navinchandra Mafatlal vs The Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay City, , referred to.
Although an entertainment tax was regarded as a tax on expenditure, there was no warrant for holding that Entry 50 contemplated only a tax on moneys spent on luxuries, entertainments or amusements.
What it had in view were these matters, and not either the giver or the receiver of them, as the real objects of legislation.
The impugned tax was distinguishable from a tax on a pro fession or calling.
It was a tax imposed on an actual show, and not on a profession or calling whether there was an exercise of it or not.
