The defendant appellant was a sub tenant in terms of a sub lease granted to him by the non occupancy tenants for a period of five years from 1.1.1950 expiring on 31.12.1954 in respect of the land in dispute of which the plaintiff re spondent was the proprietor.
On 14.9.1954 the original tenants surrendered their interests in the holding to the proprietor who .issued a notice dated 2.11.1954 to the sub tenant demanding vacant possession of the land by 31.12.1954, the agreed date of expiry of the sub lease, and, since the latter failed to comply with the notice, the propriter filed a suit fro, ejectment under section 180 of the nited Provinces Tenancy Act, 1939.
The Trial Court as well as the first appellate court decided all the issues in favour of the plaintiff, but dismissed the suit as not maintainable holding that the defendant being a sub tenant was liable to be ejected only in terms of section 175 and not under section 180 of the Act, and had the suit been brought under section 175 it would have been stayed in terms of the Government Notification dated 23.1.1953.
In the second appeal by the plaintiff the High Court held that the suit was rightly brought under section I80 and, finding the other issues in favour of the plaintiff, it decreed the suit.
Aggrieved, the defendant filed the appeal by special leave to this Court.
It was contended on behalf of the defendant appellant that his interest in the land was not extinguished on the extinction of the 673 tenants ' interest but continued even after termination of the period of his sub lease notwithstanding the plaintiffs ' notice; that although the term of lease had expired, he was not in unlawful or unauthorised occupation but was in pos session of the land by reason of his being a lessee, and, therefore, section 175of the United Provinces Tenancy Act, was applicable; and that he ceased to be a sub tenant and was elevated to the position of a tenant on the extinction of the interests of the tenants on their surrender of the holding.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: (By the Court Dr.
T.K. Thommen & R.M. Sahai, JJ.) (1) The interest of a non occupancy sub tenant, is liable to be extinguished consequent on the extinction of the inter ests of the nonoccupancy tenant, and he enjoys a legal right for a limited period in terms of the statute.
(2) A person who continues to remain in occupation of the land even after the expiry of the period of his lease, and despite the landlords ' notice to quit the permises, can no longer be regarded as a tenant as referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) of section 175 of the United Provinces Tenancy Act, 1939.
(3) The persons who axe not, or are no longer, tenants at the time of the suit, and liable to ejectment, have to be proceeded against under section 180 of the United Provinces Tenancy Act, 1939.
Per Dr. Thommen, J. 1.1 The extinguishment of the interest of a non occupan cy tenant would, as envisaged by section 47(1) of the United Provinces Tenancy Act, 1939, extinguish the interest of his sub tenant except as otherwise proVided in sub sections
(3) and (4).
[685A B] 1.2 Notwithstanding the extinction of the interest of the the by reason of his surrender or any other reason mentioned under subsection (4) of section 47, a sub tenant whose sub tenancy had not expired, was protected for the remainder of the term of the sub lease or for 5 years, whichever period be the shorter, but subject to the requirement of sub section (5) about rent.
[681G H] 2.1 In the instant case, the interests of the tenants had become extinguished in terms of clause (c) of section 45 of the United Provinces 674 Tenancy Act by reason of surrender of their interests in the holding on 14.9.54 in favour of the proprietor plaintiff.
[679G H] Once the interest of the person under whom the defendant held the land was extinguished, the defendant was no longer a sub tenant, but a person enjoying a legal right for a limited period in terms of the statute.
[685B] Birendra Pratap Singh & Anr.
vs Gulwant Singh & Ors., ; , referred to.
Biswabani (P) Ltd. vs Santosh Kumar Dutta & Ors.
, ; , held inapplicable.
The interest of the defendant, being that of a nan occupancy subtenant, was, subject to the provisions of sub ss.(4)and (5) of section 47, liable to be extinguished consequent on the extinction of the interests of the non occupancy tenants.
[681 B C] 2.2 The statutory right vested in the defendant remained in force only for the statutority limited period, for the purpose of removal of standing crops and other products of the earth, and he had an obligation to vacate the holding, as envisaged by section 48.
[681H; 682A] 2.3 The terms and conditions under which the defendant held the sub lease under the tenants continued to be binding and enforceable between the plaintiff and the defendant for the period from 14.9.1954, which was the date of surrender by the tenants, till 31.12.1954, which was the date on which the defendant 's sub lease expired.
This was, however, sub ject to sub section
(5) of section 47 which provided that, if the rent payable by the sub tenant was less than the rent that was payable by the tenant, the sub tenant had the option of vacating the holding or continuing in possession for the period permitted by the statute on payment of rent at the higher rate which was applicable to the tenant.
[681E F] 3.1 Section 175 of the United Provinces Tenancy Act, dealing with a non occupancy tenant, is confined to a person who is a tenant either in terms of an unexpired lease or by reason of his being allowed to continue in possession, after the expiry of the period of the lease.
The section has no application to past tenants whose interests have become extinguished for the reasons stated in section 45 or section 47 or whose lease has been duly determined.
[682F G; 683E] 675 675 3.2 There must be an existing or continuing legal rela tionship between the owner and the person in possession of the land.
In the absence of any such relationship, either because no lease or any other interest or right was ever granted or because it was duly determined or extinguished, a person retaining possession of the land without the consent and contrary to the will of the landlord does not come within the purview ors.
[684A B] 3.3 Persons who are not, or, who are no longer, tenants at the time of suit, and liable to ejectment, have to be proceeded against under section 180.
[682G H] 3.4 section 180 has no application to a present tenant.
It is meant for ejectment of a person who has no present right to retain possession of land either because his occupation commenced without any such right or the right by which he commenced the occupation has since been duly extinguished or terminated in accordance with the law in force.
[683B; 684B C] Bhinka & Ors.
vs Charan Singh, [1959] Supp. 2 SCR 798, referred to.
The learned Judges of the High Court were correct in holding that insofar as the defendant continued to remain in occupation of the land even after the expiry of the period of his lease, and despite the landlord 's notice to quit the premises, he could no longer be regarded as a tenant re ferred to in clause (a) or (b) of section 175 and, therefore, that section had no application to him.
The right section in terms of which a suit had to be brought against him, as the plaintiff did in the instant case, was section 180.
[686G H; 687A] Per Sahai.
J.: 1.1 Sub tenant, literally or statutorily either in the Rent Control legislations or agricultural tenancies, normal ly is a person in possession holding from the tenant.
His right or interest depends on provisions in the statute.
[687C] 1.2 Under U.P. Tenancy Act, sub tenant according to clause (22) of section 3 holds land from a tenant, and even though he is included in the definition of tenant in clause (23) and is non occupancy tenant under section 31 of the Act, yet, he is inferior class of tenant as he is specifically precluded by section 39 from subletting and has no security of tenure as he can be evicted under section 175 of the Act and his interest in the holding 676 extinguishes, statutorily, under section 47 on extinction of interest of his tenant under section 45 of the Act.
[687C D] 2.1 A combined reading of sub sections (1) and (4) of section 47 shows that the interest of a sub tenant extinguishes on surrender by his tenant but this is deferred for the period mentioned in sub section (4).
The extinction is complete but its operation is postponed to a later date.
The right creat ed by sub section (4) being limited in operation it cannot extend beyond the period mentioned in it.
[689G H; 690A B] 2.2 Section 47 is wider in application and immediate in operation.
It extends to every tenant holding under a tenant other than permanent tenure holder or fixed rate tenant.
The interest of such tenant extinguishes, automatically and immediately by operation of law on extinction of interest of his chief tenant.
No further requirement is contemplated.
He becomes liable to ejectment.
If he continues in possession he is a trespasser unless he holds with consent of the landholder/landlord expressly or impliedly, and, as envis aged by section 48, he is required to vacate the holding .except for the standing crops and produce which he is permitted to remove as any other tenant ejected in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
[689A C] ' Section 47(4) does not arrest extinction.
It only postpones it.
[690C D] Birendra Pratap vs Gulwant Singh and Others, ; referred to.
2.3 The expression, 'Except as provided ' in sub section (1) of section 47 does not carve out an exception to extinction of interest of Subtenant but to its immediate operation.
That is interest in the holding is extinguished but form a future date namely expiry of the period of leases or five years whichever is shorter.
This benefit or concession cannot be stretched to vest any fresh tenancy right in him after expiry of the period.
[689F G] 2.4 No new tenancy is created by sub section
(4) of section 47.
What is made binding and enforceable is the old covenant existing between the tenant and sub tenant for the remainder period of the sub lease.
Whatever right a sub tenant ac quires it ceases to operate after the expiry of period of lease or the period mentioned in the sub section.
No second extinction is visualised.
[690E F] 3.1 Status of a person in possession after expiry of the remainder 677 period of lease or five years as provided in section 47(4) can neither be of statutory tenant nor a tenant holding over as understood in common parlance.
He is a person in possession without authority of law.
[690G] 3.2 A sub tenant whose extinction is postponed as a matter of concession because of the tenant 's prejudicial acts cannot be placed any higher than other sub tenants who are required to vacate their holding immediately under section 48.
Therefore, retention of possession by such person cannot he except otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of the Act for the time being in force.
[690G H; 691A] 4.
The full Bench of the High Court was right in holding that the effect of extinction of sub tenant 's interest under section 47(1) of the Act was not only that 'he could no longer be held to he in the capacity of subtenant ' but even the 'new right ' of continuance for the remainder period of lease which was created under section 47(4) was limited and did not vest any right in such person to continue after that date nor any fresh right of sub tenancy could be deemed to ac crue; consequently, possession of such person after expiry of the extended period, was otherwise than in accordance with the provision of law against whom a suit for ejectment under section 180 of the Act was maintainable.
[691A C]
