The petitioner who was convicted under section 302 IPC on 6.3.1979 and sentenced to life imprisonment; was also tried for a second murder committed while he was on parole after his conviction and sentence for the first murder, and was convicted under section '303 IPC.
Altering the conviction to one under section 302 IPC, for the second murder this Court sentenced him to life imprisonment instead of death sentence and by its judgment dated 30.9.1983 directed that in case any remission and commutation in respect of his earlier sentence 'was granted, the latter sentence should commence thereafter.
The petitioner filed a writ petition under Article 32 of the Constitution.
praying for his release on the ground that both the life sentences had to run concurrently in accord ance with section 1427(2) Cr. P.C., and as he had undergone 14 years sentence of imprisonment with remissions at the time of filing the writ petition on .February 19, 1990, he was entitled to be released. 'It was contended that this Court 's direc, tion dated 30.9.83 was .contrary to section 427(2) of the Code of Criminal 743 Procedure, 1973 since it amounted to directing that the two sentences of life imprisonment were to run consecutively and not concurrently.
On behalf of the respondents it was contended that the direction of this Court, properly construed, was not contrary to.s.
427(2) Cr.
P.C. and, therefore, the question of issuing any writ or directions as claimed by the peti tioners did not arise.
Disposing of the petition treating it as one for clari fication of the judgment dated 30.9.1983 this Court, HELD: 1.1 A sentence of transportation for life or imprisonment for life must prima facie be treated as trans portation or imprisonment for the whole of the remaining period of the convicted person 's natural life unless the remaining sentence is 'commuted or remitted by the appropri ate authority.
This being so at the stage of sentencing by the Court on a subsequent conviction, the earlier sentence of imprisonment for life must be understood in this manner and, therefore, there can b no question of a subsequent sentence of imprisonment for a term or for life running consecutively which is the general rule laid down in sub s (1) ors.
427, Cr.
P.C. [747G; 749D E] 1.2 The earlier sentence of imprisonment for life being under stood to mean as sentence to serve the remainder of life in prison unless commuted or remitted by the appropri ate authority and a person having only one life span, the sentence on a subsequent conviction of imprisonment for a term or imprisonment for life as envisaged by section 427(2) of the Cr.
P.C., can only be superimposed to the earlier life sentence and certainly not added to it since extending the life span of the offender or for that matter anyone is beyond human might.
[749F G] It cannot be said that a sentence of life imprisonment is to b treated asasentence of imprisonment for a fixed term.
[748B] Gopal Vinayak Godse vs The Stateof Maharashtra & Ors., ; and MaruRam vs Union of India & Anr., ; , followed.
2.1 The operation of the superimposed subsequent sen tence of Iife imprisonment should not be wiped out merely because in respect of to correspondingI earlier sentence of life imprisonment any remission or commutation was granted by the appropriate.authority.
[75lF G] 744 2.2 In the instant case, the last sentence in the direc tion meant that in case, any remission or commutation was granted in.
respect.
of the earlier sentence of life impris onment alone then the benefit of that remission or commuta tion would not ipso facto be available in respect of the subsequent sentence of life imprisonment which would contin ue to be unaffected by the remission or commutation in respect of the earlier sentence alone.
The consequence would be that the petitioner would not get any practical benefit of any remission or commutation in respect of his earlier sentence because of the superimposed subsequent life sen tence unless the same corresponding benefit in respect of the subsequent sentence was also granted to the petitioner.
It was in this manner that the direction 'was given for the two sentences of life imprisonment not to run concurrently.
[750E H; 751A] The subsequent sentence of imprisonment for life had, therefore, to run concurrently with the earlier sentence of imprisonment for life awarded to the petitioner.
[750C D] 3.
The general rule enunciated in sub,section (1) of section 427 Cr.
P.C. is that without the Court 's direction the subsequent sentence will not run concurrently but consecu tively.
[749G] The only situation in which no direction of the Court is needed to make the subsequent sentence run concurrently with the previous sentence iS provided for in sub,section (2) which has been enacted to avoid any possible controversy based on sub,section (1) if there being no express direction of the Court to that effect.
[749G H; 750A] Sub,section (2) is in the nature of an exception to the general rule enacted under sub section (1) of section 427 0Cr.
P.C. [T50A] 4.1 The mandatory minimum of 14 years ' actual imprison ment prescribed by section 433A Cr.
P.C. which has supremacy over the Remission Rules and short sentencing statutes made by the various States would not operate against those whose cases were decided by the trial court before the 18th Decem ber, 1978 when section 433A Cr.
P.C. 'came into force but the section would apply to those sentenced by the trial court after 18.12.1978 even though the offence was committed prior to that date.
[748D E] Maru Ram vs Union of India & Anr., ; , followed.
745 4.2 In the instant case, section 433A Cr.
P.C. was applicable to petitioner in respect of both sentences of life imprison ment since the conviction by the trial court even for the first murder was after 18.12.1978, the second offence itself being committed after 18.12.1978.
The mandatory minimum of 14years ' actual imprisonment as required by section 433A even for the first sentence of life imprisonment was not served out by the petitioner, and, therefore, irrespective of the points raised in the instant petition on the basis of section 427(2) Cr.
P.C. the petitioner could not claim relief much less a writ under Article 32 of the Constitution in the absence of the remaining sentence being remitted by the Government.
[748E G] 5.
The petitioner 's incarceration was the result of a valid judicial order and, therefore, there could be no valid claim to the infringement of any fundamental right which alone could be the foundation for a writ under Article 32 of the Constitution.
[747E F]
