Respondent No. 1 is a Cooperative House Building Society registered under the Delhi Cooperative Societies Act, 1972.
It was formed in October 1959, with a view to procure land, which the Central Government proposed to allot for the resettlement of displaced persons.
The members of the Socie ty fail in three categories viz., (i) employees of the Ministry of Rehabilitation, New Delhi (ii) employees of the MiniStries in Delhi/New Delhi which were under the charge of the Minister/Minister Of State of Rehabilitation Ministry and (iii) employees working in the subordinate offices of the Ministry/Department of Rehabilitation who were posted outside Delhi/New Delhi and wanted to settle in Delhi after their superannuation.
It may be mentioned that the members in the third category were enrolled as members pursuant to the amended bye law 5(1)(a) (iii), at the Society 's Managing Committee 's meeting held on 17.11.1979.
At the said meeting the cases of 15 other members were also regularised, as the affidavits furnished by them earlier were on scrutiny found defective, which they had replaced by filing fresh affida vits.
The Society proceeded to make allotment of land to its members and draw of lots was held on 14.12.1988.
The draw of lots was challenged by the appellants before the Delhi High Court on the ground that they are senior to 15 persons aforementioned and others.
The appellants also challenged ,the validity of the Notification dated 27th October 1987 insofar as it made the amended bye law 5(1)(a)(iii) effec tive retrospectively.
The High Court having dismissed the petition, the appellants have filed this appeal after ob taining special leave, and the question involved for deter mination in the appeal inter alia relates to the seniority of the members of the society which constitutes the basis for allot 840 ment of plots at the time of drawing of lots.
DiSmissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: The notification dated 27th October, 1987, indi cates that by its earlier part the Lt. Governor has exempted the society from the provision of Section 12 of the Act.
This was clearly permissible on a plain reading of Section 88.
By its later part the notification provides that the amended bye law 5(1)(a) i(iii) "will have retrospective effect with effect from 10.1.1968.
" The word "which" seems to have been omitted after "as registered on 10.3.86" and before "will have retrospective effect".
It is clear not only from the context of the notification but also from its Hindi version.
[849E F] What weighed with the Lt. Governor in passing the order dated 10.8.1985 was that persons for whose benefit the bye law was sought to be amended had become members of the society many years ago, that their names figured even in the list of members which was supplied by the Society to the Department of Rehabilitation and which formed the basis for allotment of land to the society and that it would be neither fair nor just to leave them in the lurch now by depriving them of their membership when they cannot become members of any other society.
It was pointed out by the Lt. Governor that the proposed amendment in the bye law was "designed to regularise such of the members." [855E F] The notification dated 29.8.1990 purports to rescind the earlier notification dated 27th October 1987 only and does not speak in clear terms that the quasi judicial order dated 19.8.1985 was also being rescinded.
On the facts and circum stances this hardly makes any difference inasmuch as even though the quasi judicial order dated 19th August 1985 has not been expressly nullified, it has certainly for all practical purposes been nullified by necessary implication.
This could not be done and the notification dated 29th August 1990 is ultra vires on this ground alone.
[857B C] A quasi judicial order once passed and having become final cannot be reviewed by the authority passing that order unless power of review has been specifically conferred.
[856C] The quasi judical order dated 19th August, 1985 had been passed by the Lt. Governor under Section 76 of the Act.
No power to review such an order has been conferred by the Act.
[856D] 841 Partap Singh vs State of Punjab, ; ; Kruse vs Johnson, ; Registrar of Cooperative Societies, Trivandrum & Anr.
K. Kunhambu & Ors., ; at p. 267 and State of Kerala & Ors.
K.G. Madhhvan Pillai & Ors., , referred to.
