The appellant, an adjudicating authority held the demand from the respondent towards excise duty on biaxially orien tal polypropylene films as set ant in the show cause notice dated 25.10.1983 as barred by limitation and dropped further proceedings.
A copy of the order despatched on 21.12.1984 was received by the respondent on 21.12.1984.
The Central Board of Excise and Customs after considera tion of the order, on 11.12.198S directed the appellant to apply under Section 3SE(1) of the Central Excises & Salt Act, 1944, to the Customs, Excise & Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal for correct determination of the points arising out of the order dated 21.12.1984 and the appellant filed the application under section 35E(4) of the Act.
Before the Tribunal the respondent urged that the rele vant date of the Collector 's (adjudicating authority 's) order for the purposes of Section 35E(3) should he taken as 28.11.1984 and not 21.12.1984 when it was received by the respondent and on that basis the order of the Board under Section 35E(1) of the Act should he held as beyond the period of one year from the date of the decision or order of the adjudicating authority and therefore the application before the Tribunal was incompetent.
863 The Tribunal dismissed the application holding that the application was not maintainable.
In this appeal tided under Section 35L of the Act, the appellant contended that mere writing an order in file kept in the office was no order in the eye of law in the sense of affecting the rights of the parties for whom the order was meant and that though the order of the adjudicat ing authority was made on 28.11.1984 a copy of the same was sent to the respondent only on 21.12.1984 and received by him on the very day and that therefore the limitation would start only at the earliest from 21.12.1984; that enabling the giving of the direction under Section 35E(1) and the application under Section 35E(4) in pursuance of that direc tion should he treated as if a right of appeal given to the department; that the departmental authorities and the pri vate parties were to he treated equally as aggrieved persons for the purposes of calculating the time for making the direction under Section 35E(3) of the Act.
On the question, what is the relevant date for the purpose of calculation of the period of one year provided under Section 35E(3) of the Central Excises & Salt Act, 1944, dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
If an authority is authorised to exercise a power or do an act affecting the rights of parties, he shall exercise that power within the period or limitation pre scribed therefore.
The order or decision of such authority comes into force or becomes operative or becomes an effec tive order or decision on and from the date when it is signed by him.
The date of such order or decision is the date on which the order or decision was passed or made; that is to say when he ceases to have any authority to tear it off and draft a different order and when.he ceases to have any locuspaetentiae.
Normally that happens when the order or decision is made public or notified in some form or when it can he said to have left his hand.
The date of communication of the order to the party whose rights are affected is not the relevant date for purposes of determining whether the power has been exercised within the prescribed time.
[869D F] 2.
If the intention or design of the statutory provi sion was to protect the interest of the person adversely affected, by providing a remedy against the order or deri sion any period of limitation prescribed with reference to invoking such remedy shall he read as commencing from the date of communication of the order.
But if it is a limita tion for a competent authority to make an order the date of exer 864 cise of that power and in the case of exercise, of suo moto power over the subordinate authorities ' orders, the date on which such power was exercised by making an order are the relevant date for determining the limitation.
[871H 872B] 3.
Section 35E comes under the latter category of an authority exercising its own powers under the Act.
It is not correct to equate the Board to one of the two parties to a quasi judicial proceeding before the Collector and the Board 's right under Section 35E to the exercise of the right of appeal by an aggrieved assessee from an order passed to its prejudice.
[872B C] 4.
The power under Section 35E is a power of superin tendence conferred on a superior authority to ensure that the subordinate officers exercise their powers under the Act correctly and properly.
Where a time is limited for the purposes by the statute, such power should he exercised within the specified period from the date of the order sought to he reconsidered.
To hold to the contrary would he inequitable and will also introduce uncertainties into the administration of the Act.
[872C E] 5.
The direction to file an appeal under Sections 35E(1)(2) of the Act by the Board and the Collector, as the case may he, is to the very adjudicating authority who would otherwise he bound by his own order and not expected to he aggrieved by the same.
When an appeal is filed on such direction, the appellant will be the adjudicating authority himself and not the authority who gave the direction.
[867D E] 6.
The period of one year fixed under sub section (3) of Section 35E of the Act should he given its literal meaning and so construed the impugned direction of the Board was beyond the period of limitation prescribed therein and therefore invalid and ineffective.
[872G] Annamalai Chetti vs Col.
J.G. Cloete, Mad. 189, Seshamma vs Sankara, Mad. 1; The Secre tary of State for India in Council vs Gopisetti Narayanaswa mi Naidu Guru, ILR 34 Madras 151; Raja Harish Chandra Raj Singh vs The Deputy Land Acquisition Officer & Anr., [1962] 1 SCR 676; Asstt.
Transport Commissioner (Administration) U.P. & Ors.
vs Sri Nand Singh, ; Muthia Chettiar vs CIT, ILR and Viswanathan Chettiar vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Madras, , referred to. 865
