The petitioners challenged the constitutional validity of the U.P. Consolidation of Holdings Act (U .
P. V of 954), as amended by the amending Acts, which was intended to encourage the development of agriculture by the allotment of compact areas to tenure holders in lieu of scattered plots so that large scale cultivation might be possible with all its attendant advantages.
A notification was issued under section 4 Of the impugned Act declaring the decision of the State Government to formulate a scheme of ' consolidation in respect of the area where the petitioners held their lands.
This was followed up by a statement of proposals under section 19.
The petitioners objected to these proposals and thereafter appealed to the Settlement Officer (Consolidation) but to no effect.
It was contended, inter alia, on their behalf that (1) the provisions of sections 8, 9 and 10 read with those Of s 49 Of the impugned Act were discriminatory in that they laid down a procedure for correction and revision of revenue records for 929 villages under consolidation that was vitally different from that applicable to other villages under the U.P. Land Revenue Act, 1901; (2) that sections 14 to 17 as also sections 19 to 22 read with section 49 conferred arbitrary powers on the consolidation authorities in respect of the lands of the tenure holder and his rights therein and deprived him of the protection of courts available to other tenure: holders and that (3) section 29B which provided for compensation, by giving inadequate compensation, offended article 31(2) Of the Con stitution.
Held, that the contentions must fail.
Although the procedure laid down by the impugned Act was to some extent different from that under the U.P. Revenue Act, 1901, it was by no means arbitrary or devoid of natural justice.
Regard being had to the advantages that consolidation conferred on the tenure holder such difference was supportable as a permissible classification on an intelligible differentia reasonably connected with the object of the Act.
The expeditious procedure for effectuating consolidation laid down by ch.
II of the Act read with the Rules, therefore, could not be said to violate article 14 Of the Constitution.
Nor could for similar reasons the provisions of ch.
III of the Act be said to violate article 14 Of the Constitution.
The provision Of section 22(2) Of the Act which made the decision of the arbitrator final by ousting the jurisdiction of ordinary courts even where a party had obtained a decree which might be under appeal, was necessary in the interest of expedition.
Having regard to the peculiar conditions in cases of this kind and the advantages a scheme of consolidation offered to the entire body of tenure holders, it could not be said that the cash compensation for tenure holders provided by section 29B of the impugned Act was inadequate, even assuming that article 31(2) applied to the case.
