The Respondent forwarded his nominations for election to the Council of the appellant No. 1 Institute by registered post to the Secretary, Appellant No. 1, on May 17, 1991, and May 18, 1991.
They were received on May 23, 1991, and May 27, 1991 respectively and were rejected on the ground that they were received after the time and date fixed for the reciept of the nominations, i.e., 5.00 p.m. on May 21, 1991.
Being aggrieved, the respondent filed a writ petition in the High Court seeking a writ of certiorari to quash the order rejecting his nominations.
The Division Bench of the High Court allowed the writ petition holding that once the Secretary was satisfied that a nomination had been duly forwarded by the registered post to him at least 48 hours before the specified date and time, it must be deemed to have been received within the time provided.
The Institute and its Secretary flied the SLP in this Court contending that under Regulation 87(2),the nominations must be forwarded by registered post and must reach the Secretary of ' the Council not later 922 than 5.00 p.m. on the specified date, i.e., May 21, 1991; that the proviso came into play only when a nomination was delivered to the Secretary against an acknowledgement before the specified time and specified date and the Secretary was satisfied that a valid nomination had been duly forwarded by registered post to him at least 48 hours before the speci fied date and time; and that the High Court had erred in disregarding the opening part of the proviso which read "Provided that a nomination delivered against an acknowl edgement before the aforesaid time and date. " The respondent contended that what was intended to be prescribed by the use of expression, "so as to reach him not later than 5.00 p.m. on the specified date" in clause (ii) of sub regulation (2) of Regulation 87, was that the nomina tions which had been forwarded by registered post to the Secretary 48 hours before the specified time and date of the election must be deemed to have reached the Secretary in time.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
The entire scheme of sub regulation (2) of Regulation 87 and the proviso shows that one of the main pre conditions required before a nomination can be said to have been duly received, is that a valid nomination must be received by the Secretary before the specified time and date.
[926C] 2.
It is true that the rule, in terms, requires that the nominations should be sent by registered post, but taking into account the fact that such a nomination might not be received by the Secretary even though posted more than 48 hours before the specified time and date, it was provided that if the nomination was delivered by hand to the Secre tary before the specified time and date against acknowledge ment, that nomination would be treated as having been valid ly received provided the Secretary was satisfied that the nomination was forwarded by registered post to him by the candidate 48 hours prior to the specified time and date.
[926D E] 3.
What is meant by the use of the expression, "so as to reach him not later than 5.00 p.m. on the specified date" in sub regulation (2) of Regulation 87, is that the nomination must be forwarded by registered post to the Secretary so as to reach him in fact or actually reach him not later than 5.00 p.m. on the specified date.
The rigour of the rule is relaxed by the proviso under which if a proper nomination was 923 delivered against an acknowledgement before the specified time and date, it would be deemed to have been forwarded and to have reached within the time prescribed provided the Secretary was satisfied that the nomination had been duly forwarded by the registered post at least 48 hours before the specified time and date.
[926G 927A]
