The Respondent retired as Judge of the High1 Court on 3.10.1983 on superannuation and elected to receive his pension under of the First SChedule to the .
As a Judge of the High Court, he had put in service of 5 years 10 months and 17 days and his pension was determined at Rs.8,400 p.a. and family pension at Rs.250 p.m.
In 1986, the Act was amended providing for an increased pension from 1.11.1986.
Thereafter, the Respondent filed a Writ Petition before the High Court praying for directions that he was entitled to refixation of his pension from the date of his retirement at Rs.9,600 per annum on the basis that the period of his service for pension was fit to be enlarged to six years, by addition of 1 month and 13 days; that from November 1, 1986 his pension may be refixed at Rs.20,580 per annum at the rate of Rs.3,430 for six complet ed years of service; and that the family pension admissible to his wife be calculated on the basis that he had completed six years of service.
During the pendency of the Writ Petition the Respondent made representations to the Government of India that since the respondent fell short of 6 completed years of service only by 1 month and 13 days, the President may be pleased to allow him to add the period so as to 874 caluclate the pension, gratuity and family pension on the basis of 6 completed years of service as a Judge.
By its order dated April 16, 1987 the Government of India rejected the representation of the respondent among other grounds that the request was belated.
By its judgment dated March 15, 1988 the High Court allowed the Writ Petition directing the Government to retix his pension, family pension and gratuity treating him as having put in six completed years of service.
The Union of India has preferred the present appeal, by special leave against the High Court 's order.
It was contended on behalf of the appellants that the High Court has re written the retirement benefit provisions of the First Schedule to the Act which it was not entitled to and hence the refxation of the pension on that basis was wholly illegal and unconstitutional However, during the pendency of the appeal this Court in its proceedings dated December 15, 1988 the Government directed, after obtaining the necessary sanction from the President under Section 16 of the Act, the addition of 1 month and 13 days subject to the final decision of this Court in the appeal.
However, it was added that the period shall be disregarded in calculating additional pension.
if any, under , and of the First Sched ule of the said Act.
Allowing the appeal, this Court.
HELD: 1.
It is a well known practice in pensionary schemes to fix a minimum period for purposes of pension.
What shall be the minimum period for such pension will depend on the particular service, the age at which a person could enter into such service.
the normal period which he is expected to serve before his retirement on superannuation, and various other factors.
There is nothing in evidence to suggest that the period of seven completed years of service fixed for pension is arbitrary.
So far as the Judges of the High Court are concerned even under the Government of India Act a period of seven completed years of service before superannuation was prescribed for eligibility for pension.
In fact no pension was provided for those who had not com pleted seven years of service under pre constitutional scheme.
Thus there are historical grounds or reasons for fixing not less than seven years of service for pension.
Part I deals with pensionary scheme.
Prescribing a minimum period of service before retirement on superannuation, for pension is the very scheme itself and not a classification.
It is a qualification for eligibility.
It is different from computation of pension.
All those who 875 satisfy that condition are eligible to get pension.
[885G H; 886A C] 2.
Even those who had completed seven years of service were not given pension for all the completed years of serv ice at the rate of Rs.1,600 per annum and a maximum limit has been fixed for purposes of pension.
If one calculates the maximum amount provided with reference to the rate per year roughly in about 14 years of service one would have reached the maximum amount.
Any service above that period is not taken into account.
Thus a person who had put in the minimum period for getting the maximum pension could be said to be favourably treated against the person who had put in more number of years of service than needed for the maximum pension and thereby discriminated.
[886D E] 3.
It is not correct to state that the amount of pension provided in paragraph 9 is minimum pension.
The said para graph does not use the word 'minimum ' but only states that if a Judge retires without being eligible for pension under any of the provisions.
notwithstanding anything contained in the other provisions.
the pension of a particular amount mentioned therein shall be paid to the Judge.
This amount is not calculated or has any reference to any period of serv ice.
A Judge who had put in only two years of service before retirement will also receive the same amount as that of a Judge who has completed six years of service.
If the provision is struck down as unconstitutional the condition relating to completion of seven years of service in para graph 2, all those who had put in less than six completed years of service would be seriously affected and paragraph 9 also would become inapplicable.
Further, it may be open to those who have put in more than five years or more than four years as the case may be.
to contend that they are discrimi nated against because persons who had put in less than that period will get pension at much higher rate.
[886F H: 887A] 4.
The Amending Act 38 of 1980 provided that the amend ed liberalised pension scheme would apply only to a Judge who has retired on or after the commencement of the High Court and Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Amendment Act.
A similar provision which made the amendment 01 1976 applicable only to those Judges who have retired on or after October 1.
1974 was struck down as ultra vires and it was decided that the benefit of the amendment was available to.
all the retired Judges irrespective of the date of retirement but subject to the condition that the enhanced pension was payable only with effect from October 1, 1974.
The Amending Act of 1986 could not restrict the applicability of the amended provision to only those who have retired on or after the commencement of the Amending Act.
It 876 would be applicable to all the Judges irrespective of the dates of retirement and they would be entitled to be paid pension at the rates provided therein with effect from November 1, 1986.
[883A D] Union of India vs B. Malick. ; ; N.L. Abhyankar vs Union of India, ; and D.S., Nakara vs Union of India, ; , referred to.
In the instant case.
High Court had exceeded its jurisdiction and power in amending and altering the provi sions of paragraph 2 by substituting different minimum period for eligibility for pension in paragraph 2 of Part I. Since the respondent has not put in seven completed years of service for pension he will be eligible for pension at the rates provided in paragraph 9 of Part I of the First Sched ule to the Act, that is to say for the period from 4.10.1983 to 31.10.1986 at the rate of Rs.8,400 per annum and for the period on and from November 1, 1986 at the rate of Rs. 15,750 per annum.
[887B C] 6.
Since in compliance with the mandamus issued by the High Court, the President of India was pleased to sanction the addition of one month and 13 days to the service of the respondent to make it six years of completed service subject to the final decision in this appeal, this Court does not go into the question whether the High Court was right in set ting aside the earlier rejection for addition of the period.
The addition of one month and 13 days does not make any difference in calculation of pension it is relevant only for the purpose of calculating the gratuity under section 17A(3) of the Act.
As the period was less than three months and as the President was pleased to sanction the addition in exer cise of his power under Section 16 of the Act though subject to the final decision of this Court it is just and necessary to allow this addition to remain for the purposes of calcu lation of gratuity, and family pension only though not for pension.
The respondent will be entitled to fixation of family pension and for payment of gratuity calculated on the basis of his having completed six years of service.
[887D H] 7.1.
It is not the duty of the Court either to enlarge the scope of the legislation or the intention of the legis lature when the language of the provision is plain and unambiguous.
The Court cannot rewrite, recast or reframe the legislation for the very good reason that it has no power to legislate.
The power to legislate has not been conferred on the courts.
The Court cannot add words to a statute or read words into it which are not there.
Assuming there is a defect or an omission in the 877 words used by the legislature the Court could not go to its aid to correct or make up the deficiency.
Courts shall decide what the law iS. and not what it should be.
The Court of course adopts a construction which will carry out the obvious intention of the legislature but could not legislate itself.
But to invoke judicial activism to set at naught legislative judgment is subversive of the constitutional harmony and comity of instrumentalities.
[885A D] 7.2 Modifying and altering the scheme and applying it to others who are not otherwise entitled to under the scheme, will not also come under the principle of affirmative action adopted by courts some times in order to avoid discrimina tion.
What the High Court has done in this case is a clear and naked usurpation of legislative power.
[885F] P.K. Unni vs Nirmala Industries, ; Mangilal vs Suganchand Rathi, ; Sri Ram Ram Narain Medhi vs The State of Bombay, [1959] Supp. 1 SCR 489; Smt.
Hira Devi & Ors.
vs District Board, Shahjahanpur, ; ; Nalinakhya Bysack vs Shyam Sunder Haldar & Ors., ; ; Gujarat Steel Tubes Ltd. vs Gujarat Steel Tubes Mazdoor Sabha, ; ; section Narayanaswa mi v.
G. Pannerselvam & Ors., ; ; N.S. Varda chari vs G. Vasantha Pai & Anr., ; ; Union of India vs Sankal Chand Himatlal Sheth & Anr., ; and Commissioner of Sales Tax, U.P.v.
Auriaya Chamber of Commerce, Allahabad; , , relied on.
