The appellant the Improvement Trust framed a develop ment scheme under the Punjab Town Improvement Act, 1922 and notices under Section 36 of the Act were published in the Daily Tribune on May 31, 1977, June 7, 1977 and June 14, 1977 and in the local Daily Ajit on May 30, 1977, June 6, 1977 and June 13, 1977 and in the Punjab Government Gazette on June 17, 1977, June 24, 1977 and July 1977, respectively.
A notification as required under Section 42 of the Act was published on June 30, 1980 sanctioning the development scheme.
The notification was challenged by the Respondents in a writ petition in the High Court on the ground that the notification was not issued within the stipulated period of three years from the first publications of the notice.
The Single Judge of the High Court allowed the writ application and the Division Bench of the High Court dis missed the Letters Patent Appeal, against which the present petition has been filed by the Improvement Trust, contending that the time limit of three years for the issue of the notification under section 42 of the Act was not prescribed under the Act; that the first proviso to section 6 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, was not applicable to the scheme in question, and; that the provisions of Section 6 of the Land Acquisition Act were 929 incorporated in the Act from the very time of its enactment and hence, any amendment to the said section after that date would not be applicable to acquisitions under Act.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
In a case where a statute is incorporated by a reference into another statute, an amendment of the statute so incorporated after the date of incorporation does not affect the second statute and the provisions of the latter statute remain the same as they were at the time of incorpo ration.
[934F G] 2.
Where one statute is referred to in another, it may be merely by way of reference or by way of incorporation of the same.
This depends on the language used in the latter statute and other relevant circumstances.
[934G] 3.
In the present case, there is no question of incorpo ration of any of the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act into the Punjab Improvement Act 1922 at all as the latter Act does not deal with acquisition of land for the purposes of a scheme as contemplated under the Act.
The acquisition of such land for the purposes of the scheme is left to the general law of the land in that connection, namely, the Land Acquisition Act, which has to be resorted to for the pur poses of acquisition of land for the purposes of a scheme as contemplated under the Punjab Town Improvement Act.
The only difference is that some of the provisions of the Land Acqui sition Act, as referred to in the relevant sections of the Act, are given effect to as amended by the relevant sections of the Act.
In these circumstances, it cannot be held that any provisions of the Land Acquisition Act have been incor porated into the Act and the provisions of the Land Acquisi tion Act which have to be applied, are the provisions as they stood at the relevant time, namely, at the time of acquisition, in the absence of a contrary intention.
[934G C] 4.
The notification under Section 42 should have been published within the period of three years of the date of publication of the notification under Section 4(1) of the Land Acquisition Act, as required under the first proviso to Section 6 of the Land Acquisition Act.
Under sub clause (1) of Clause (2) of the Schedule to the said Act, the first publication of a notice of any improvement scheme under section 36 of the said Act, is 930 substituted for and has the same effect as the publication in the Government Gazette of a notification under sub sec tion (1) of Section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act.
The notice under section 36 of the said Act is required to he published, inter alia, in a newspaper or newspapers as set out in section 36(2)(a) of the said Act.
In the present case, such a notice was first published in the daily 'Ajit ' on May 30, 1977, and hence, the notification under Section 42 of the said Act should have been published on or before May 30, 1980.
In fact, the notification under Section 42 of the said Act, admittedly, was published on June 30, 1980 and hence, was clearly beyond time.
[935C F] Mahindra and Mahindra Ltd. vs Union of India and Anoth er; , and Secretary of State for India in Council vs Hindustan Cooperative Insurance Society Ltd., [1958] IA 259 at 267, referred to.
