The appellant filed an application before the Central Administrative Tribunal, Patna Bench, for a declaration that the second proviso to rule 4 of Civil Services Examination Rules was violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitu tion of India.
By an interim order the Tribunal allowed the appellant to appear at the Civil Services (Main) Examina tion, 1990, subject to the result of the final orders in the original application.
The said application was transferred to this Court.
In a bunch of similar cases, the Central Administrative Tribunal, Delhi upheld the validity of Rule 4 of Civil Services Examination Rules.
In appeal to this Court (Civil Appeal Nos. 5439 52/90)** by an interim order dated 7.12.1990, the appellants therein were allowed to appear in Civil Services (Main) Examination, 1990; and while finally disposing of the appeals, the judgment of CAT, Delhi was affirmed.
Dismissing the case of the appellant in view of the judgment in C.As Nos.
5439 52/90,** this Court, HELD: The appellant was also entitled to the same benefits as granted to the appellants in Civil Appeals No. 5439 52/90, namely: (i) All those candidates who appeared for the Civil Services (Main) Examination, 1990, pursuant to this Court 's order dated 7.12.90 and qualified themselves for the inter view, shall be permitted to appear for the interview test and that if those candidates completely and satisfactorily qualify themselves by getting through the written examina tions as well as the interview shall be given proper alloca tion and appointment on the basis of their rank in the merit list notwithstanding the restriction imposed by the second proviso to rule 4 and this Court 's judgment 113 upholding the validity of the said proviso since the re spondents have no/ questioned and challenged the directions given by C.A.T. Principal Bench, Delhi in its judgment dated 20.8.1990.
(ii) The un challenged directions given by the C.A.T. in its judgment as well as directions given by this Court in its order dated 7.12.90 were not controlled by any rider in the sense that the said directions were subject to the result of the cases and hence those directions would be confined only to those candidates who appeared for C.S.E. 1990 and no further.
The seniority of those successful candidates in C.S.E. 1990 would depend on the service to which they have qualified.
The seniority of the left out candidates would be maintained in ease they have joined the service to which they have been allocated on the result of previous C.S.E. and such candidates will not be subjected to suffer loss of seniority as held by the C.A.T. Delhi in its judgment.
[pp 114 H, 115A D] **Mohan Kumar Singhania & Ors.
vs Union of India, [1991] Supp. 1 SCR 46
