Mr. N.L. Patel was posted as Chief Judicial Magistrate at Nadiad in October, 1988.
He soon found that the local Police was not cooperating with the courts in efficting service of summons, warrants and notices on accused persons, as a result of which the trials of cases were delayed.
He made complaint against the local police to the District Superintendent of Police and forwarded a copy of the same to the Director General of Police but nothing concrete hap pened.
On account of these complaints, Mr. S.R. Sharma, Police Inspector, Nadiad was annoyed with the Chief Judicial Magistrate and he withdrew constables posted in the CJM Court.
In April 1989, the CJM filed two complaints with the Police against the Police Inspector and other Police Offi cials, Nadiad for delaying the process of the Court.
On 25th July, 1989, the CJM directed the police to register a crimi nal case against 14 persons who had caused obstruction in judicial proceedings but subsequently since unqualified apology was tendered, the CJM directed the Police Inspector to drop the cases.
The Police Inspector reacted strongly to the CJM 's direction and he made complaint against the CJM to the Registrar of the High Court through the District Super intendent of Police.
On account of the aforesaid facts there was hostility between the Police of Nadiad and the CJM.
939 On 25th September 1989, the Police Inspector met the CJM in his chambers to discuss a case where the Police had failed to submit the charge sheet within 90 days.
During discussion the Police Inspector invited the CJM to visit the police station to see the papers and assured him that he would mollify the sentiments of the police officials.
At 8.35 p.m. on the said date, the Police Inspector sent a Police Jeep to the CJM 's residence and he went to the Police Station.
According to the CJM when he arrived in the Police Station he was forced to consume liquor and on his refusal he was assulted, handcuffed and tied with rope by Police Inspector, Sub Inspector, Head Constable, and Constable and that he was sent to Hospital for Medical Examination under handcuffs.
A photographer was arranged to take his photo graph which was published in the newspapers.
The Police Inspector disputed these allegations and according to him the CJM entered his chamber at the Police Station in a drunken state, shouting and abusing him and since he was violent, he was arrested, handcuffed and sent to Hospital for Medical Examination.
He himself wanted to be photo graphed and that is why the photographs were taken by the press photographer.
As the incident undermined the dignity of courts in the country, Judicial Officers, Judges and Magistrates all over the country were in a state of shock, they felt insecure and humiliated.
A number of Bar Associations passed Resolutions and went on strike.
The Delhi Judicial Service Association, the All India Judges Association, Bar Council of Uttar Pradesh and many others approached this Court by means of telegrams and petitions under Article 32 for saving the dignity and honour of the judiciary.
The CJM also filed an application for quashing the two FIRs lodged against him and for directing the trial of his complaint as State case an award of compensation.
On 29.9.1989 this Court took cogni zance of the matter by issuing notices to the State of Gujarat and other Police Officers.
Since there was serious dispute between the parties with regard to the entire incident, the Court appointed the senior puisne Judge of the Allahabad High Court to inquire into the incident and to submit a report to the Court.
The inquiry was held on behalf of the Court and not under the provisions of the Commission of Inquiry Act.
A detailed report was submitted to this Court and the Court directed copies to be delivered to the concerned parties and permit ted the parties and the contemners to file their objections before this Court.
940 The Learned Commissioner 's Report establised the follow ing facts and circumstances: that the CJM found that the Police of Nadiad was not effective in service of summons and had adopted an attitude of indifference to the court 's orders, and as complaints were forwarded to the authorities by the CJM there was confrontation between the local police and the magistracy.
When the CJM visited the police station pursuant to the Police Inspector 's request to discuss the matter, he was forced to consume liquor and on his refusal he was assaulted.
He was tied up with a rope by the Police personnel and handcuffed deliberately in defiance of the state 's Police Regulations and Circulars and the decision of this Court in Prem Shankar Shukla vs Delhi Administration.
, A panchnama showing the drunken state of the CJM was pre pared by the Police Inspector and signed by two panchas a Mamlatdar and a Fire Brigade Officer.
A press photographer was brought on the scene, the police personnel posed with the CJM for the press photographer and the same was pub lished in newspapers.
A request made by the CJM to the Civil Hospital doctors to contact and inform the District Judge about the incident was not allowed.
On examination at the hospital, the body of the CJM was found to have a number of injuries.
His blood was taken and chemical examination conducted.
The Chemical Examiner submitted a report holding that the blood sample contained alcohol.
At the initial stage only one case was registered against the CJM by the Police under the Bombay Prohibition Act, but when lawyers met the Police Inspector for securing release of the CJM on bail, the offence being bailable, the Police Inspector, registered another case under Sections 332 and 506 IPC in order to frustrate the attempt.
The District Superintendent of Police did not take immediate action in the matter but created an alibi that he had gone elsewhere and stayed in the government Rest House there, the register of the Rest House however indicating that the entry regarding the stay was manipulated subsequently by making an interpolation.
On behalf of the contemners Police Officers it was contended that: (1) this Court had no jurisdiction or power to indict the Police Officers even if they are found to be guilty, as their conduct does not amount to contempt of this Court.
Articles 129 and 215 demarcate the respective areas of jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and the High Courts respectively, and this Court 's jurisdiction under Article 129 is confined to the contempt of itself only, and it has no jurisdiction to indict a person for contempt of an infe rior court subordinate to the.
High Court.
(2) Even if the Supreme Court is a court of record, it has no power to take action for the contempt of a Chief Judicial Magistrate 's court as neither the constitution nor any statutory provi sion confer any 941 such jurisdiction or power on this Court.
So far as the High Court is concerned, it has power of judicial and administra tive superintendence over the subordinate courts and Section 15 of the Contempts of Courts Act, 1971 expressly confers power on the High Court to take action for the contempt of subordinate courts.
(3) Under Entry 77 of List I of the Seventh Schedule, Parliament has legislative competence to make a law curtailing the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and Section 15 of the Contempts of Courts Act 1971 curtails the inherent power of this Court with regard to contempt of subordinate courts.
Inherent powers are always preserved but they do not authorise a court to invest itself with juris diction when that jurisdiction is not conferred by law.
(4) Assumption of contempt jurisdiction with regard to contempt of subordinate and inferior courts on the interpretation of Article 129 of the Constitution is foreclosed by the deci sions of the Federal Court in K.L. Gauba vs The Honable the Chief Justice and Judges of the High Court o] ' judicature at Lahore & Anr., AIR 1942 FC 1.
This Court being the successor to the Federal Court was bound by the decisions of the Federal Court under Article 374(2) of the Constitution.
(5) In our country there is no court of universal jurisdiction, as the jurisdiction of all courts including the Supreme Court is limited.
(6) Article 142(1) does not contemplate any order contrary to statutory provisions.
(7) The findings recorded by the Commission cannot be taken into account as those findings are hit by Article 20(3) of the Constitution.
The Attorney General urged that the power to punish contempt is a special jurisdiction which is inherent in a Court of record, that a superior court of record has inher ent power to punish for contempt of itself and it necessari ly includes and carries with it the power to punish for contempt committed in respect of subordinate or inferior courts, that a superior court of record having power to correct the order of an inferior court has power to protect that court by punishing those who interfere with the due administration of justice of that court.
It was further urged that the recognises and preserves the existing contempt jurisdiction and power of the court of record for punishing for contempt of subordi nate or inferior courts, that the Act has not affected or restricted the suo motu inherent power of the Supreme Court being a court of record which has received constitutional sanction under Article 129, that since this Court has taken cognizance of the contempt matter arising out of the inci dent which is the subject matter of trial before the crimi nal court, this Court has ample power under Article 142 of the Constitution to pass any order necessary to do justice and prevent abuse of process of the court and that there is no limitation on the power of this Court under Article 142 942 in quashing a criminal proceeding pending before a subordi nate court.
The basic questions that arose for consideration of the Court were: (a) whether the Supreme Court has inherent jurisdiction or power to punish for contempt of subordinate or inferior courts under Article 129 of the Constitution, (b) whether the inherent jurisdiction and power of the Supreme Court is restricted by the , (c) whether the incident interfered with the due administration of justice and constituted contempt of court, and (d) what punishment should be awarded to the contemners found guilty of contempt.
Disposing of the writ petitions, Criminal Miscellaneous Petitions, and contempt petitions, this Court.
HELD: 1.1 Contempt of court is an act or commission calculated to interfere with the due administration of justice.
It includes civil and criminal contempt.
[991D] Bowen L.J. in Helmore vs Smith, at 455, referred to.
1.2 The definition of criminal contempt is wide enough to include any act by a person which would tend to interfere with the administration of justice or which would lower the authority of court.
The public have a vital stake in effec tive and orderly administration of justice.
The Court has the duty of protecting the interest of the community in the due administration of justice and, so, it is entrusted with the power to commit for contempt of court, not to protect the dignity of the Court against insult or injury, but, to protect and vindicate the right of the public so that the administration of justice is not perverted, prejudiced, obstructed or interfered with Offutt vs
U.S.; , , referred to.
[991F] 1.3 The power to punish contempt is vested in the Judges not for their personal protecting only, but for the protec tion of public justice, whose interest, requires that decen cy and decorum is preserved in Courts of Justice.
Those who have to discharge duty in a Court of Justice are protected by the law, and shielded in the discharge of their duties.
Any deliberate interference with the discharge of such duties either in court or outside the court by attacking the presiding officers of the court, would amount to criminal contempt and the courts must take serious cognizance of such conduct.
[993B] 943 The object and purpose of punishing contempt for interference with the administration of justice is not to safeguard or protect the dignity of the Judge or the Magis trate, but the purpose is to preserve the authority of the courts to ensure an ordered life in society.
[991H] Attorney General vs Times Newspapers, (1974] A.C. 273 at p. 302, referred to.
1.5 The Chief Judicial Magistrate is head of the Magis tracy in the District who administers justice to ensure, protect and safaguard the rights of citizens.
The subordi nate courts at the district level cater to the need of the masses in administering justice at the base level.
By and large the majority of the people get their disputes adjudi cated in subordinate courts.
It is, in the general interest of the community that the authority of subordinate courts is protected.
If the CJM is led into a trap by unscrupulous Police Officers, and if he is assaulted, handcuffed and roped, the public is bound to lose faith in Courts, which would be destructive of the basic structure of an ordered society.
If this is permitted Rule of Law shall be supplant ed by Police Raj.
[992D E] 1.6 The conduct of Police Officers in the instant case, in assaulting and humiliating the CJM brought the authority and administration of justice into disrespect, affecting the public confidence in the institution of justice.
[992G] 1.7 The incident is a clear interference with the admin istration of justice, lowering its judicial authority.
Its effect was not confined to one District or State, it had a tendency to affect the entire judiciary in the country.
The incident high lights a dangerous trend that if the Police is annoyed with the orders of a presiding officer of a court, he would be arrested on flimsy manufactured charges, to humiliate him publicly as has been done in the instant case.
[992F] 1.8 The facts of the instant case, demonstrate that a presiding officer of a court may be arrested and humiliated on flimsy and manufactured charges which could affect the administration of justice.
In order to avoid any such situa tion in future, it is necessary to lay down guidelines which should be followed in the case of arrest and detention of a Judicial Officer.
[1000F] 1.9 In view of ' the paramount necessity of preserving the independence of judiciary and at the same time ensuring that infractions of law are ' properly investigated the following guidelines are to be 944 followed: (a) If a judicial officer is to be arrested for some offence, it should be done under intimation to the District Judge or the High Court as the case may be.
(b) If facts and circumstances necessitate the immediate arrest of a judicial officer of the subordinate judiciary, a technical or formal arrest may be effected.
(c) The fact of such arrest should be immediately communicated.to the District and Sessions Judge of the concerned District and the Chief Justice of the High Court.
(d) The Judicial Officer so arrested shall not be taken to a police station, without the prior order or directions of the District & Sessions Judge of the concerned District, if available.
(e) Immediate facilities shall be provided to the Judicial Officer for communication with his family members, legal advisors and Judicial Officers, including the District & Sessions Judge.
(f) No statement of a Judicial Officer who is under arrest be recorded nor any panchnama be drawn up nor any medical test be conducted except in the presence of the Legal Advi sor of the Judicial Officer concerned or another Judicial Officer of equal or higher rank, if available.
(g) There should be no handcuffing of a Judicial Officer.
If, however, violent resistance to arrest is offered or there is imminent need to effect physical arrest in order to avert danger to life and limb, the person resisting arrest may be over powered and handcuffed.
In such case, immediate report shall be made to the District & Sessions Judge concerned and also to the Chief Justice of the High Court.
But the burden would be on the Police to establish the necessity for effecting physical arrest and handcuffing the Judicial Officer and if it be established that the physical arrest and hand cuffing of the Judicial Officer was unjustified, the Police Officers causing or responsible for such arrest and handcuffing would be guilty of misconduct and would also be personally liable for compensation and/or damages as may be summarily deter mined by the High Court.
[1000G 1001F] 1.10 These guidelines are not exhaustive but are the minimum safeguards to be observed in case of arrest of a Judicial Officer.
These should be implemented by the State Governments as well as by the High Courts.
[1001G] 1. 11 No judicial officer should visit a Police Sta tion on his own except in connection with his official and judicial duties and functions, and this also with prior intimation to the District and Sessions Judge.
[1002B] 2.1 The Supreme Court as the Apex Court is the protec tor and guardian of justice throughout the land, therefore, it has a right and also a duty to protect the courts whose orders and judgments are amenable to correction, from com mission of contempt against them.
This 945 right and duty of the Apex Court is not abrogated merely because the High Court also has this right and duty of protection of the subordinate courts.
The jurisdictions are concurrent and not exclusive or antagonistic.
[967G H] 2.2 Article 136 vests the Supreme Court with wide powers to grant special leave to appeal from any judgment, decree determination sentence or order in any cause or matter passed or made by any court or tribunal in the territory of India except a court or tribunal constituted by or under any law relating to the Armed Forces.
The Court 's appellate power under Article 136 is plenary, it may entertain any appeal by granting special leave against any order made by any Magistrate, Tribunal or any other subordinate court.
The width and amplitude of the power is not affected by the practice and prcedure followed in insisting that before invoking the jurisdiction under Article 136 the aggrieved party must exhaust remedy available under the law before the appellate authority of the High Court.
Self imposed restric tions do not divest it of its wide powers to entertain any appeal against any order or judgment passed by any court or tribunal in the country without exhausting alternative remedy before the appellate authority or the High Court.
The power of the Court under Article 136 is unaffected by Arti cles 132. 133 and 134(A) in view of the expression "notwith standing anything in this Chapter" occurring in Article 136.
[968E 969A] Durga Shankar Mehta vs Thakur Raghuraj Singh & Ors., [1955] 1 SCR 267 and Arunachalam vs P.S.R. Sadhananthm & Anr., ; , referred to.
2.3 In addition to the appellate power, the Supreme Court has special residuary power to entertain appeal against any order of any court in the country.
The plenary jurisdiction of the Court to grant leave and hear appeals against any order of a court or Tribunal, confers power of judicial superintendence over all the courts and Tribunals in the territory of India including subordinate courts of Magistrate and District Judge.
The Court has, therefore, supervisory jurisdiction over all courts in India.
[970F] 2.4 Article 129 provides that the Supreme Court shall be a court of record and shall have all the powers of such a court including the power to punish for contempt of itself.
Article 215 contains similar provision in respect of High Court.
Both the Supreme Court as well as High Courts are courts of record having powers to punish for contempt in cluding the power to punish for contempt of itself. [970G] 946 2.5 The Constitution does not define "Court Of Record".
A "Court of Record" is a court where acts and judicial proceedings are enrolled in parchment for a perpetual memo rial and testimony, which rolls are called the 'record ' of the court and.are conclusive evidence of that which is recorded therein.
[970H 971 E] ' Wharton 's Law Lexicon: Words & Phrases (Permanent Edi tion) vol.
10 p. 429: Halsbury 's Laws of England Vol.
10 p. 319.
2.6 In India prior to the enactment of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1926, High Court 's jurisdiction in respect of contempt of subordinate and inferior courts was regulated by the principles of Common Law of England.
The High Courts in the absence of statutory provision exercised power of con tempt to protect the subordinate courts on the premise of inherent power of a Court of Record.
[974F G] Rex vs Aimon, ; ; Rainy vs The Justices of Seirra Leone, 8 Moors PC 47 at 54; Surendra Nath Banerjee vs The Chief Justice and Judges of the High Court at Fort William in Bengal, ILR to Calcutta 109; Rex vs Parke, [1903] 2 K.B. 432 at 442; King vs Davies, ; King vs Editor of the Daily Mail, ; Attorney General vs B.B.C.; , ; Venkat Rao ; Mohandas Karam Chand Gandhi [1920] 22 Bombay Law Re porter 368; Abdul Hassan Jauhar 's AIR 1926 Allahabad 623; Shantha Nand Gir vs Basudevanand, AIR 1930 Allahabad 225 FB; Mr. Hirabai vs Mangal Chand, AIR 1935 Nagpur 46; Harkishan Lal vs Emperor, AIR 1937 Lahore 497; Mohammad Yusuf vs Imtiaz Ahmad Khan, AIR 1939 Oudh, 131 and Legal Remembrancer vs Motilal Ghosh, ILR , referred to.
2.7 The Kings Bench in England and High Courts in India being superior Court of Record and having judicial power to correct orders of subordinate courts enjoyed the inherent power of Contempt to protect the subordinate courts.
The Supreme Court being a Court of Record under Article 129 and having wide power of judicial supervision over all the courts in the country, must possess and exercise similar jurisdiction and power as the High Courts had prior to Contempt Legislation in 1926.
Inherent powers of a superior Court of Record have remained unaffected even after Codifi cation of Contempt Law.
[976G 977A] Sukhdev Singh Sodhi vs The Chief Justice and Judges of the PEPSU High Court, ; and R.L. Kapur vs State of Tamil Nadu, ; , referred to.
947 2.8 The was enacted to define and limit the powers of Courts in punishing contempts of courts and to regulate their procedure in relation there to.
There is no provision therein curtailing the Supreme Court 's power with regard to contempt of subordinate courts, Section 15 expressly refers to this Court 's power for taking action for contempt of subordinate courts.
The section prescribes modes for taking cognizance of criminal contempt by the High Court and Supreme Court.
It is not a substantive provision conferring power or jurisdiction on the High Court or on the Supreme Court for taking action for the contempt of its subordinate courts.
The whole object of prescribing procedural modes of taking cognizance in Section 15 is to safeguard to valuable time of the High Court and the Supreme Court being wasted by frivolous complaints of contempt of court.
Section 15(2) does not restrict the power of the High Court to the cognizance of the contempt of itself or of a subordinate court on its own motion although apparently the Section does not say so.
[977A C, 978G 979A] S.K. Sarkar, Member, Board of Revenue, U.P. Lucknow vs Vinay Chandra Misra; , , referred to.
3.1 Under Entry 77 of List I of the Seventh Schedule read with Article 246, Parliament is competent to enact a law relating to the powers of the Supreme Court with regard to 'contempt of itself '.
Such a law may prescribe procedure to be followed and it may also prescribe the maximum punish ment which could be awarded and it may provide for appeal and for other matters.
But the Central Legislature has no legislative competence to abridge or extinguish the juris diction or power conferred on the Supreme Court under Arti cle 129.
The Parliament 's power to legislate in relation to the law of contempt relating to the Supreme Court is limit ed, therefore the does not impinge upon the Supreme Court 's power with regard to the contempt of subordinate courts under Article 129.
[979C F] 3.2 Article 129 declares the Supreme Court a court of record and it further provides that the Supreme Court shall have all the powers of such a court including the power to punish for contempt of itself The expression used in Article 129 is not restrictive, instead it is extensive in nature.
If the Framers of the Constitution intended that the Supreme Court shall have power to punish for contempt of itself only, there was no necessity for inserting the expression "including the power to punish for contempt of itself.
" [979G] 3.3 Article 129 confers power on the Supreme Court to punish for 948 contempt of itself and in addition, it confers some addi tional power relating to contempt as would appear from the expression "including".
The expression "including" has been interpreted by courts, to extend and widen the scope of power.
The plain language of the Article clearly indicates that the Supreme Court as a Court of record has power to punish for contempt of itself and also something else which could fall within the inherent jurisdiction of a court of record.
[979H 980A] 3.4 In interpreting the Constitution, it is not permis sible to adopt a construction which would render any expres sion superfluous or redundant.
[980B] 3.5 While construing Article 129, it is not permissible to ignore the significance and impact of the inclusive power conferred on the Supreme Court.
[980B] 3.6 The conferment of appellate power on the Court by a statute section 19 of the does not and cannot affect the width and amplitude of inherent powers of this Court under Article 129 of the Constitution.
[981E] K.L. Gauba vs The Honable the Chief Justice and Judges of the High Court of Judicature at Lahore & Anr AIR 1942 FC 1, distinguished.
4.1 Article 374(2) is in the nature of a transitory provision to meet the exigency of the situation on the abolition of the Federal Court and setting up of the Supreme Court.
There is no provision in the said Article to the effect that the decisions of the Federal Court shall be binding on the Supreme Court.
The decisions of the Federal Court and the Privy Council made before the commencement of the Constitution are entitled to great respect but these decisions are not binding on the Supreme Court and it is always open to this Court to take a different view.
[983F G] Om Prakash Gupta vs The United Provinces, AIR 1951 Allahabad 205 and State of Bombay vs Gajanan Mahadev Badley, AIR 1954 Bombay 352, approved.
The State of Bihar vs Abdul Majid, ; and Shrinivas Krishnarao Kango vs Narayan Devji Kango & Ors., ; , referred to.
949 K.L. Gauba vs The Hon 'ble the Chief Justice and Judges or the High Court of Judicature at Lahore & Anr., AIR 1942 FC 1 and Purshottam Lal Jaitly vs The King Emperor, , explained and distinguished.
The Federal Court exercised limited jurisdiction as conferred on it by the Government of India Act 1935.
The question regarding the inherent power of the Supreme Court as a Court of Record in respect of the contempt of subordi nate Courts was neither raised nor discussed in its deci sions.
The Federal Court observed that if the High Court and the Federal Court both have concurrent jurisdiction in contempt matters, it could lead to conflicting judgments and anamolous consequences.
That may be so under the Government of India Act as the High Court and the Federal Court did not have concurrent jurisdiction, but under the Constitution, High Court and the Supreme Court both have concurrent juris diction in several matters, yet no anamolous consequences follow.
[985H 986B] 4.2 The Federal Court did not possess the wide powers as the Supreme Court has under the Constitution.
There are marked difference in the constitution and jurisdiction and the amplitude of powers exercised by the two courts.
In addition to civil and criminal appellate jurisdiction, the Supreme Court has wide powers under Article 136 over all the courts and Tribunals in the country.
The Federal Court had no such power, instead it had appellate power but that too could be exercised only on a certificate issued by the High Court.
The Federal Court was a court of record under Section 203 but it did not possess any plenary or residuary appel late power over all the courts functioning in the territory of India like the power conferred on the Supreme Court under Article 136 of the Constitution.
Therefore, the Federal Court had no judicial control or superintendence over subor dinate courts.
[986C E] 4.3 Advent of freedom, and promulgation of the Constitu tion have made drastic changes in the administration of justice necessitating new judicial approach.
The Constitu tion has assigned a new role to the Constitutional Courts to ensure rule of law in the country.
These changes have brought new perceptions.
In interpreting the Constitution, regard must be had to the social, economic and political changes, need of the community and the independence of the judiciary.
The Court cannot be a helpless spectator, bound by precedents of colonial days which have lost relevance.
Time has come to have a fresh look to tile old precedents and to lay down law with the changed perceptions keeping in view the provisions of the Constitution.
[986F G] 950 5.1 Courts constituted under a law enacted by the Par liament or the State Legislature have limited jurisdiction and they cannot assume jurisdiction in a matter, not ex pressly assigned to them, but that is not so, in the case of a superior court of record constituted by the Constitution such a court does not have a limited jurisdiction, instead it has power to determine its own jurisdiction.
No matter is beyond the jurisdiction of a superior court of record unless it is expressly shown to be so, under the provisions of the Constitution.
In the absence of any express provision in the Constitution, the Apex Court being a Court of record has jurisdiction in every matter and if there be any doubt, the Court has power to determine its jurisdiction.
If such determination is made by the High Court, the same would be subject to appeal to this Court, but if the jurisdiction is determined by this Court it would be final.
[988C E] Naresh Shridhar Mirajkar & Ors.
vs State of Maharashtra ; and Ganga Bishan vs Jai Narain, , referred to.
5.2 Since the Supreme Court has power of judicial super intendence and control over all the courts and Tribunals functioning in the entire territory of the country, it has a corresponding duty to protect and safeguard the interest of inferior courts to ensure the flow of the stream of justice in the courts without any interference or attack from any quarter.
The subordinate and inferior courts do not have adequate power under the law to protect themselves, there fore, it is necessary that this Court should protect them.
Under the constitutional scheme it has a special role in the administration of justice and the powers conferred on it under Article 32, 136, 141 and 142 form part of the basic structure of the Constitution.
The amplitude of the power of the court under these Articles of the Constitution cannot be curtailed by law made by Central or State Legislature.
[987A C] 5.3 The Supreme Court and the High Court both exercise concurrent jurisdiction under the constitutional scheme in matters relating to fundamental rights under Articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution.
Therefore, this Court 's jurisdic tion and power to take action for contempt of subordinate courts would not be inconsistent to any constitutional scheme.
[987D] 5.4 The Apex Court is duty bound to take effective steps within the constitutional provisions to ensure a free and fair administration of justice through out the country.
For that purpose it must wield the 951 requisite power to take action for contempt of subordinate courts.
Ordinarily, the High Court would protect the subor dinate courts from any onslaught on their independence, but in exceptional cases, extraordinary situation may prevail affecting the administration of public justice or where the entire judiciary is affected, this Court may directly take cognizance of contempt of subordinate courts.
[987F] 5.5 The Supreme Court will sparingly exercise its inher ent power in taking cognizance of the contempt of subordi nate courts, as ordinarily matters relating to contempt of subordinate courts must be dealt with by the High Courts.
The instant case is of exceptional nature as the incident created a situation where functioning of the subordinate courts all over the country was adversely affected and the administration of justice was paralysed, therefore, this Court took cognizance of the matter.
[987G 988A] 6.1 Though there is no provision like section 482 of the Criminal Procedure Code conferring express power on the Supreme Court to quash or set aside any criminal proceeding pending before a criminal court to prevent abuse of process of the court, but the Court has power to quash any such proceeding in exercise of its plenary and residuary powers under Article 136 of the Constitution, if on the admitted facts no change is made out against the accused or if the proceedings are initiated on concocted facts, or if the proceedings are initiated for oblique purposes.
[996E] Once the Supreme Court is satisfied that the criminal proceedings amount to abuse of process of court it would quash such proceedings to ensure justice.
[996G] State of West Bengal & Ors.
vs Swapan Kumar Guha & Ors., ; and Madhavrao Jivajirao Scindia & Ors.
vs Sambhajirao Chandrojirao Angre & Ors., ; , referred to.
6.2 The inherent power of the Supreme Court under Arti cle 142 coupled with the plenary and residuary powers under Articles 32 and 136 embraces power to quash criminal pro ceedings pending before any court to do complete justice in the matter before this Court.
If the court is satisfied that the proceedings in a criminal case are being utilised for oblique purposes or if the same are continued on manufac tured and false evidence or if no case is made out on the admitted facts, it would be in the ends of justice to set aside or quash the criminal proceeding.
It is idle to sug gest that in such a situation this Court should be a help less spectator.
[997B C] 952 6.3 The Court 's power under Article 142(1) to do "complete justice" is entirely of different level and of a different quality.
Any prohibition or restriction contained in ordinary laws cannot act as a limitation on the constitu tional power of this Court.
Once this Court has seisin of a cause or matter before it has power to issue any order or direction to do "complete justice" in the matter.
This constitutional power of the Apex Court cannot be limited or restricted by provisions contained in statutory law.
[997G] 6.4 What would be the need of "complete justice" in a cause or matter would depend upon the facts and circum stances of each case and while exercising that power the Court would take into consideration the express provisions of a substantive statute.
Once this Court has taken seisin of a case, cause or matter, it has power to pass any order or issue direction as may be necessary to do complete jus tice in the matter.
[998D] Prem Chand Garg vs Excise Commissioner, U.P. Allahabad, [1963] Supp. 1 SCR 885 and A.R. Antulay vs
R.S. Nayak & Anr., [ ; , referred to.
In the instant case, the foundation of the criminal trial of CJM NL Patel is based on facts which have been found to be false.
It would be in the ends of justice and also to do complete justice in the cause to quash the crimi nal proceedings.
[998F] 7.1 Article 20(3) of the Constitution declares that no person accused of any offence shall be compelled to be a witness against himself.
In order to avail the protection of Article 20(3) three conditions must be satisfied.
Firstly, the person must be accused of an offence.
Secondly, the element of compulsion to be a witness should be there, and thirdly it must be against himself.
All the three ingredi ents must necessarily exist before protection of Article 20(3) is available.
If any of these ingredients do not exist, Article 20(3) cannot be invoked.
[964E F] Balkishan Devidayal vs State of Maharashtra, ; , referred to.
7.2 Mere issue of notice or pendency of contempt proceedings do not attract Article 20(3) of the Constitution as the contemners against whom notices were issued were not accused of any offence.
A Criminal contempt is punishable by the superior courts by fine or imprisonment, but it has many characteristics which distinguishes it from an ordinary offence.
[964G] 953 7.3 The power to take proceedings for contempt of Court is an inherent power of a Court of record.
The Criminal Procedure Code does not apply to such proceedings.
Since the contempt proceedings are not in the nature of criminal proceedings for an offence, the pendency of contempt pro ceedings cannot be regarded as criminal proceedings merely because it may end in imposing punishment on the contemner.
A contemner it is not in the position of an accused.
It is open to the Court to cross examine the contemner and even if the contemner is found to be guilty of contempt, the Court may accept apology and discharge the notice of contempt, whereas tendering of apology is no defence to the trial of a criminal offence.
This peculiar feature distinguishes con tempt proceedings from criminal proceedings.
In a criminal trial where a person is accused of an offence there is a public prosecutor who prosecutes the case on behalf of the prosecution against the accused but in contempt proceedings the court is both the accused as well as the judge of the accusation.
[966C E] Debabrata Bandopadhyaya 's case; , , referred to.
7.4 In the instant case, the contemners do no stand in the position of a "person accused of an offence" merely on account of issue of notice of contempt by this Court and the Commission which was acting on behalf of this Court had full authority to record the testimony of the contemners.
There has, therefore, been no violation of Article 20(3) of the Constitution and the Commission 's finding are not violated.
[966F G] 8.1 In determining, what punishment should be awarded to contemners found guilty, the degree and the extent of part played by each of the contemners has to be kept in mind.
[998G] 8.2 In the instant case, Sharma, the Police Inspector was the main actor in the entire incident and who had planned the entire episode with a view to humiliate the CJM in the public eye is the main culprit and therefore, he deserves maximum punishment.
The Sub Inspector took an active part in assaulting and tying the CJM at the behest of the Police Inspector.
The Head Constable and Constable also took active part in handcuffing and tying the CJM with ropes, but as subordinate officials they acted under the orders of the superior officers.
The Mamlatdar was a friend of the Police Inspector, he had no axe to grind against the CJM but he acted under the influence of the Police Inspec tor.
So far as the DSP is concerned, he actively abetted the commission of onslaught on the CJM.
The contemners are held guilty of contempt and awarded punishment.
[998H 999B] 954 8.3 The Police Inspector to undergo simple imprisonment for a period of six months and to pay fine of Rs.2,000.
The Sub Inspector to undergo simple imprisonment for a period of five months and pay a fine of Rs.2,000 and in default one month 's simple imprisonment.
Head Constable and Constable, each to undergo simple imprisonment for two months and a fine of Rs.500 and in default 15 days simple imprisonment.
The Mamlatdar to undergo simple imprisonment for a period of two months and a fine of Rs.1,O00 and in default one month 's simple imprisonment.
The DSP is sentenced to imprisonment for a period of one month and a fine of Rs.1,O00 and in default simple imprisonment for 15 days.
So far as the other respondents against whom notices were issued no adequate material on record holds them guilty.
The contempt notices are therefore discharged.
[999C E] 9.1 The Court expressed displeasure on the conduct of the DGP.
As the head of the Police in the State, he was expected to intervene in the matter and to ensure effective action against the erring Police Officers.
He was totally indifferent to the news that a CJM was arrested, handcuffed, roped, and assaulted.
He took this news as a routine matter without taking any steps to ascertain the correct facts for effective action against the erring Police Officers.
If the head of the State Police Administration exhibits such indif ference to a sensitive matter which shook the entire judi cial machinery in the State, nothing better could be expect ed from his subordinate officers.
The State Government should take action departmentally on the basis of the find ings recorded by the Commission.
[999F 1000A]
