Section 36(1) of the East Punjab Public Safety Act, 1949, (Punj.
5 Of 1949), which was passed in the wake of the partition disturbances in India with a view to ensure public safety and the maintenance of public order, provided that offences mentioned therein land committed in the area declared to be dangerously disturbed under section 20 Of the Act, should be tried under the summons procedure prescribed by Ch.
XX of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
By the first notification issued under section 2o of the Act, the whole of the Province of Delhi was declared to be a dangerously disturbed area; subsequently the second notification purported to cancel the first.
The third notification then sought to modify the second by inserting into it the words "except as respect things done or omitted to be done before this notification ".
The fourth and last notification issued under section 36(1) of the Act sought to save proceedings thereunder pending after the cancellation of the first notification.
The appellant who was put up for trial in three cases for offences ordinarily triable under the warrant procedure, was tried under the summons procedure according to section 36(1) of the Act and the first notification and the trials were continued even after the expiry of the Act in respect of substantial parts of them under the same procedure and ended in his conviction which was affirmed by the High Court in appeal.
The Act was a temporary Act and contained no provision saving pending proceedings. 'It was contended on behalf of the appellant that the first part of section 36(1) of the Act in treating the disturbed areas as a class by themselves and providing a uniform procedure for the trial of specified offences violated article 14 Of the Constitution and that the continuance of the trials under the summons procedure even after the expiry of the Act was invalid.
Held, that the two tests of the validity of the classification made by the Legislature were, (1) that the classification must be based on an intelligible differentia and (2) that this differentia must be reasonably connected with the object of the legislation.
Thus tested, there could be no doubt, in the present case, that the classification on a geographical basis made by the impugned 88 Act between areas that were dangerously disturbed and other areas, in the interest of speedy trial of offences, was perfectly justified.
Ram Krishna Dalmia vs justice Tendolkar; , , relied on.
Lachmandas Kewalram Ahuja vs The State of Bombay, ; , held inapplicable.
But since the impugned Act was a temporary Act and contained no appropriate provision saving the summons procedure prescribed by it, that procedure could not, on the expiry of the Act, apply to the cases pending against the appellant.
Krishnan vs The State of Madras, ; , relied on.
Wicks vs Director of Public Prosecutions, [1947] A.C. 362, referred to.
The third and the fourth notifications, obviously intended to cure the absence of a saving provision in the Act, were 'wholly outside the authority conferred on the delegate by section 2o or section 36(1) of the Act and must be held to be invalid.
With the issue of the second notification, therefore, the entire province of Delhi ceased to be a dangerously disturbed area.
It was erroneous to apply by analogy the provisions of section 6 of the General Clauses Act to cases governed by a temporary Act, such as the one in question, which did not contain the appropriate saving provision and contend that since the trials had commenced validly, their continuance under the same procedure even after the declaration had ceased to operate and subsequent orders of conviction and sentence passed therein were valid as well.
Srinivasachari vs The Queen, Mad. 336, Mukund vs Ladu, and Gardner vs Lucas, , held inapplicable.
Ram Singh vs The Crown, A.I.R. 1950 East Punjab 25, dis approved.
Syed Qasim Razvi vs The State of Hyderabad, [1953] S.C.R. 589, referred to and distinguished.
