In a writ petition decided by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana, it allowed the ad hoc appointments made by the Government of Punjab to the posts of Patwaris, to continue for six months from the date of the judgment and directed the Government to make regular appointment of Patwaris within that period.
Since the Service Selection Board, Punjab was not constituted at the relevant time, the Govern ment of Punjab by a Notification dated 26.8.86 amended Rule 2(a) of the Punjab Revenue Patwari Class III Services Rules, 1963, and empowered the State Government to authorise "other authorities" to make recruitment to the service.
According ly, the Government constituted a selection committee for each district.
The District Committee of Patiala consisted of the Dy.
Commissioner, Patiala as Chairman, and District Revenue Officer, the District Sainik Welfare Officer and the District Social Welfare Officer (Scheduled Caste) as its Members.
The pending names of the candidates before the Service Selection Board were sent to the Committee for selection.
The District Collector also invited applications from children affected by the riots at Delhi, terrorists affected families in Punjab and the like special categories.
By the date of the interview the District Revenue Officer was transferred and his successor participated in the Selec tion.
The selections were challenged by unsuccessful candi dates in several writ petitions which were dismissed by the High Court.
Aggrieved the petitioners filed appeals before this Court by special leave.
153 It was contended on behalf of the appellants that the selection was bad because: the Committee was not properly constituted; the District Collector was not competent to invite applications afresh; written test was abandoned and only oral interviews were conducted; no proper opportunity was given to appellants in the interview inasmuch as 821 candidates were interviewed in 15 hours.
It was also prayed that since the appellants had meanwhile become overage, the Government should be directed to relax their age and to give appointments to them.
Dismissing the appeals, this Courts, HELD 1.1 On the transfer of the member having been nominated by virtue of his office, the incumbent in office was entitled to participate in the selection of the candi dates.
The committee constituted was properly composed of the representatives enumerated therein, and the selection of the candidates, therefore, was legal and valid.
[pp. 155 F G; 156 A] 1.2 Although the representation of the Scheduled Castes need be by an officer belonging to Scheduled Caste, and the District Social Welfare Officer (Scheduled Caste), as re quired should be an officer belonging to the members of the Scheduled Castes, yet it is not uncommon that the Social Welfare Officer may be an officer other than one from the Scheduled Castes.
[p. 155 G,H] 2.
If applications from candidates are invited and they are called for interview though under a mistaken compliance on wrong impression, the selection of the candidates, so applying, does not become illegal.
[p. 156 D] 3.
Normally it may be desirable to conduct written test and in particular hand writing that which is vital for a Patwari whose primary duty is to record clearly entries in revenue records followed by oral interview.
The rules did not mandate to have both.
Options were given either to conduct written test or viva voce or both and the committee adopted viva voce as a method to select the candidates which could not be said to be illegal.
[p.157 D E] 4.
On an average three minutes were spent for each candidate for selection.
Keeping in view the facts that educational qualifications were apparent from the record, the candidates normally hailing from rural background had presumptively good knowledge of rural economy and 154 culture, under the circumstances, much time need not be spent on each candidate for selection except asking some questions on general knowledge and aptitude for work as Patwari etc.
[p. 157 B D] Ashok Yadav vs State of Haryana, [1985] Suppl.
1 SCR 657, held inapplicable.
The appellants had taken the chance for selection and they were not selected on the basis of comparative merits.
Merely because they were carrying on the litigation, there could not be any justification to give direction to the Government to consider their cases by relaxing the age qualification for appointment as Patwari.
[157 F G]
