The appellant, an Ex Treasurer of a Co operative Society was said to have defalcated a sum of Rs. 95,790.54 and for recovery thereof, proceedings were initiated under section 48 of the Bihar and Orissa Co operative Societies Act, 1935 with interest accrued thereon of Rs. 25,55 as on December 30, 1976.
The Registrar referred the matter to the Asstt.
Regis trar who on enquiry and having given the opportunity to the appellant passed an award, against which appeal was filed.
The Deputy Registrar allowed the appeal on the ground that the appellant was surcharged.
On revision, the first respondent set aside the appel late order and confirmed the award with a further direction to pay interest till date of recovery.
The appellant filed a writ petition which was dismissed in limine by the High Court against which this appeal by special leave.
The appellant contended that the Registrar had no revi sional 144 jurisdiction under Section 56 since the award of the Asstt.
Registrar was by the Registrar under the Act acting as Registrar 's delegate; that surcharge proceedings against the appellant were initiated under Section 40 in which the appellant was found payable of partial amount, as against which, the society filed an appeal before the Government, which was pending and the award amounted to double jeopardy for the same liability and therefore, it was illegal.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
A bare reading of the relevant provisions in Section 48 clearly manifests the legislative intention that the Registrar on reference, himself may decide the dispute or transfer it for disposal to a person exercising powers of the Registrar in this behalf.
If the Registrar himself decides the dispute under Section 48(3) the question of either appeal or revision to him does not arise except a review.
This dichotomy is to be maintained when a revisional power is to be exercised by the Registrar.
The power of revision is conferred expressly only, either on application or suo moto, against any order passed by "a person exercis ing the powers of the Registrar".
Obviously it refers to the person appointed to assist him under section 6(2) (a) of the Act.
[148G H, 149 A] 2.
The Registrar under section 6(1) of the Act has his pre eminent supervisory authority over the function and orders of the Registrars appointed under section 6(2)(a) to assist him in the discharge of the duties or functions under the Act except over his delegate under sub section (4) of section 6.
His supervisory or revisional power is to correct all palpable material errors in the orders passed or the action taken by the subordinate officers feeding injustice.
Merely because the Asstt.
Registrar on reference exercised the powers under sub,section (3) of section 48.
The Registrar is not denuded of his supervisory or revisional powers under section 56 of the Act.
Therefore, the Addl.
Registrar as delegate of the Registrar is clearly within his power to exercise his revisional power over the appellate order under section 48(6) of the Act.
It is accordingly legal and valid.
[149 E G] 3.
The language in section 56 was couched very widely without being hedged with any limitation like the revisional powers under section 115 C.P.C. or the similar language used in sister Acts in some other States.
The reason appears to be obvious.
The order of the Dy.
Registrar by language 145 of sub section (6) ors.
48, undoubtedly shall be final.
When the legislature gives 'finality ' to an order, it is normally not open to revision.
But still it must be construed in the light of the scheme of the Act, its operation and resultant effect.
The language in section 56 is not hedged with any limita tion of the finality in sub section (6) of Section 48.
The revisional power under section 56 is independent of the appellate powers under section 48(6).
The latter is amenable to revision by the Registrar.
[150 D F] 4.
The proceedings under section 40 are not in substitution of section 48, but are independent of and in addition to the normal civil remedy under section 48.
The culpable negligence, misconduct, misappropriation, fraudulent conduct etc.
are relevant facts to be established in the proceedings under section 40.
But that is not so under section 48.
Therefore, mere initiation or an order passed under section 40 does not divest the jurisdiction or power of the Registrar under section 48 when it was referred to for a decision of the dispute.
Exercise of the jurisdiction to pass an award under section 48(3) or revision under section 56 does not amount to double jeopardy.
[151 C D] 5.
Section 2(i) of the Act defines "Registrar", which means a person appointed to perform the duties of Registrar or Co operative Societies under this Act.
The State Govern ment may appoint a person to be the Registrar of the Co operative Societies besides Additional Registrar and also appoint persons to assist such Registrar.
Under sub section 2(a) the persons appointed to assist the Registrar are entitled to exercise all or any of the powers of the Regis trar under the Act except under section 26.
Sub section (4) of Section 6 gives power to the Registrar to delegate, transfer or assign to the Addl.
Registrar all the powers including the powers under section 26 and 56 and thereupon the Addl.
Regis trar as a delegate of the Registrar is empowered to exercise powers so transferred or assigned or delegated to him.
Section 6 thereby makes a clear distinction between the exercise of the powers of the Registrar, by the Addl.
Regis trar as a delegate of the Registrar and of the Asstt.
Registrars or Dy.
Registrars appointed to assist the Regis trar empowered as such in the discharge of their functions under the Act.
Such assistants are entitled by statutory operation to exercise the powers under the Act conferred by the State Govt.
except to the extent expressly excluded by the statute.
[147 B, 148 A B] Din Dayal Singh vs The Bihar State Cooperative Marketing Union Ltd., 146 , over ruled Chintapalli Agency Taluk Arrack Sales Co op.
Society Ltd. vs Secretary (Food & Agricultural), Govt.
of Andhra Pradesh, ; , followed.
Roop Chand vs State of Punjab, [1963] Suppl.
1 SCR 539, distinguished.
