The appellants ' lands were acquired under the Land Acquisition Act.
The appellants claimed land value at the rate of Rs. 10 per sq. yard, but the Land Acquisition Offi cer awarded compensation at the rate of Rs.0.88 per sq. yard.
On a reference the Sub Judge determined the market value at Rs. 11 per sq. yard on the basis of certain com parable transactions, but granted the compensation at the rate of Rs. I0 as the appellants themselves had claimed only at that rate.
On an appeal preferred by the Respondent State, the High Court determined the market value of the lands at the rate of Rs. 6.50 per sq. yard and reduced the total compensation, following the decision of this Court in Tribeni Devi vs Collector, Ranchi, AIR 1972 SC 141 that a deduction of 1/3 of the value is to be made when large extent of land is acquired under housing scheme.
Aggrieved by the High Court 's decision, the appellants preferred the present appeals, contending that the High Court had erroneously applied the principle laid down in Tribeni Devi 's case without properly appreciating the nature of the land in question and the purpose for which it had been acquired.
It was further contended that there was no justification for making any deduction since the land in question was fully developed and eminently suitable for being used as house sites.
Even in respect of the land acquired for the purpose of formation of the road, it was argued, the High Court wrongly proceeded on the basis that expenses have to be incurred for development.
On behalf of the Respondents, it was contended that the appellants ' lands form part of large tract acquired for the purpose of construction of 173 houses, that the other transaction based .on which compensa tion was decided by the Sub Judge, related to small plots of land which were fully developed and while comparing the transactions, it was necessary to take into account the development that is required to be made for bringing the acquired land suitable for the purpose of construction and that 1/3 of the value was rightly deducted.
Allowing the appeals, this Court, HELD 1.
The principle of deduction in the laud value covered by the comparable sale is adopted in order to arrive at the market value of the acquired land.
In applying the principle it is necessary to consider all relevant facts.
It is not the extent of the area covered under the acquisi tion, the only relevant factor.
Even in the vast area there may be land which is fully developed having all amenities and situated in an advantageous position.
If smaller area within the large tract is already developed and suitable for building purposes and have in its vicinity roads, drainage, electricity, communications etc.
then the principle of deduction simply for the reason that it is part of the large tract acquired, may not be justified.
[177 D].
Tribeni Devi vs Collector, Ranchi, ; , distinguished.
Kaushalya Devi vs Land Acquisition Officer, ; ; Administrator General of West Bengal vs Collector, Varanasi, ; ; Special Tahsildar, Land Acquisi tion, Vishakapatnam vs Smt, A. Mangala Gown, ; , relied on.
2 In the instant case, the lands involved are of even level and fit for construction without the necessity for levelling or reclamation.
Having found that the land is to be valued only as building sites and stated the advantageous position in which the land in question lies though forming part of the larger area, the High Court should not have applied the principles of deduction.
[177 F H] 3.
The proposition that large area of land cannot possibly fetch a price at the same rate at which small plots are sold is not absolute proposition and in given circum stances it would be permissible to take into account the price fetched by the small plots of land.
If the larger tract of land because of advantageous position is capable of being used for the purpose for which the smaller plots are used and is also situated in a 174 developed area with little or no requirement of further development, the principle of deduction of the value for purpose of comparison is not warranted.
With regard to the nature of the plots involved in these two cases, it has been satisfactorily shown on the evidence on record that the land has facilities of road and other amenities and is adjacent to a developed colony and in such circumstances it is possi ble to utilise the entire area in question as house sites.
In respect of the land acquired for the road, the same advantages are available and it did not require any further development.
[178 B,C).
