Rule 4 of the Civil Services Examination Rules provide that every candidate appearing at the examination, who is otherwise eligible, shall be permitted three attempts at the examination.
(The attempts are now increased to four).
Under Proviso to the said Rule the restriction on the number of attempts is not applicable in the case of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes candidates who are otherwise eligible.
By a notification dated 13.12.1986 the Central Executive Authority inserted second proviso to Rule 4.
The said second proviso provided that a candidate who on the basis of the results of the previous Civil Services Examination, had been allocated to the I.P.S. or Central Services, Group 'A ' but who expressed his intention to appear in the next Civil Services Main Examination for competing for IAS, IFS, IPS or Central Services, Group 'A ' and who was permitted to abstain from the probationary training in order to so appear shall be eligible to do so, subject to the provisions of Rule 17 and that the said candidate when allocated to a service on the basis of the next Civil Services (Main) Examination can either join that service or the service to which he has already been allocated on the basis of the previous CSE and that if he fails to join either of the services, his alloca tion based on one or both the examinations, as the case may be, will stand cancelled.
Further, notwithstanding anything contained in Rule 8, a candidate who accepts allocation to a service and is appointed to that service shall not be eligi ble to appear again in the CSE unless he has first resigned from the service.
In other words, a candidate failing within the ambit of this proviso can appear in the CSE for all the permitted attempts subject to his age limit if he intends to appear again in the CSE provided he first resigns from the service which he accepts on allocation and to which he is appointed.
Rule 8 of the Civil Services Examination Rules precludes the candidate who have been appointed to the IAS, or IFS from sitting in the ensuing examination while in service.
The said rule provide that a candidate who is appointed to the Indian Administrative Service (IAS) or the Indian For eign Service (IFS) on the basis of result of an earlier examination before the commencement of the ensuing examina tion and 48 continues to be a member of that service will not be eligi ble to compete at the sub sequent examination, even if he is disillusioned and wants to switch over.
Further, this rule states that in case, a candidate has been appointed to the IAS or IFS on the basis of the earlier examination and after the subsequent preliminary examination, but before the main examination, the candidate, if continues to be a member of that service, shall not be eligible to appear in the ensu ing main examination notwithstanding that the said candidate has qualified himself in the preliminary examination.
Simi larly if a candidate is appointed to the IAS or IFS after the commencement of the Main examination but before the announcement of the result and continues to be a member of that service, the said candidate shall not be considered for appointment to any service/post on the basis of the result of this examination.
Rule 17 of the Civil Services Examination Rules provide that if a candidate has been approved for appointment to IPS and expresses his intention to appear in the CSE (Main) for higher civil service, the services for which he is eligible to compete are IAS, IFS and Central Services Group 'A '.
Similarly, a candidate who has been approved for appointment to the Central Services Group 'A ' and expresses his inten tion to appear in the next CSE (Main) the services to which he will be eligible to compete are IAS, IFS and IPS.
The second proviso to Rule 17 provides that a candidate who is appointed to a Central Services Group 'B ' on the result of an earlier examination will be considered for appointment to IAS, IFS, IPS and Central Services Group 'A '.
The eligibility of a candidate to appear in the Civil Services Examination with regard to nationality, age and qualifications is given under Regulation 4 of the IAS (Appointment by Competitive Examination) Regulations, 1955.
Clause (iii a) of the said Regulation provides that unless covered by any of the exceptions that may from time to time be notified by the Central Government in this behalf, every candidate appearing for the examination after 1st January, 1979, who is otherwise eligible, shall be permitted three attempts at the examination, and the appearance of a candi date at the examination will be deemed to be an attempt at the examination irrespective of his disqualification or cancellation as the case may be, of his candidature.
The legality and constitutionality of second proviso to Rule 4 and 49 Rule 17 was challenged before the Central Administrative Tribunal.
The Tribunal held that the second proviso to Rule 4 and Rule 17 were valid and were not hit by Article 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
In appeals to this court, it was contended on behalf of the appellants (1) that second proviso to Rule 4 of the CSE Rules was invalid because: (a) it puts embargo restricting the candidates who are seeking to improve their position vis a vis their career in government service; (b) it travels beyond the intent of main rule viz. Rule 4; (c) it is ultra vires to clause (iii a) of regulation 4 of the I.A.S (Appointment by competitive Examination) Regulation, 1955 in as much as the power to notify exceptions do not include the power to make candidates ineligible who are otherwise eligi ble in terms of clause (i) to (iii) of Regulation 4; (d) it is bad since the authorities have stepped out of the consti tutional limits in issuing the notification inserting the impugned proviso and that it has not been placed before the House of Parliament; (e) it is arbitrary and irrational having no nexus with the object of recruitment to the post of civil services; (f) it is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution because it discriminates between group 'A ' and group 'B ' services i.e. it excludes the candidates appointed to group 'A ' services from competition while no such embargo is placed restricting the candidates to Group 'B ' services; (2) that the second proviso is not applicable to the candidates belonging to SC or ST; (3) Proviso to Rule 17 of the Civil Services Examination is invalid since it places restriction on candidates who are seeking to improve their position vis a vis their career.
DismiSsing the appeals, this Court, HELD: 1.
If Rule 4 of Civil Services Examination Rules is examined in juxtaposition of clause (iii a) of Regulation 4, it is clear that both Rule 4 of CSE Rules and Clause (iii a) of the Regulation 4 show that every eligible candi date appearing at the Civil Services Examination should be permitted three attempts at the examination which are now increased to four under Rule 4 of the CSE Rules.
The eligi bility of a candidate to appear in the CSE with regard to nationality, age and educational qualifications is given under clauses (i) to (iii) of Regulation 4 but the Govern ment by exercise of its executive power has imposed certain restrictions under some specified circumstances.
A plain and grammatical reading of clause (iii a) of Regulation 4 shows that if the number of 50 attempts are covered by any of the exceptions that may from time to time be notified by the Central Government in this behalf, then the notification will become enforceable and only in the absence of such notification, every candidate normally can appear for all permitted attempts at the examination whether three or four.
The impugned second proviso does not restrict or put an embargo on the number of attempts in the normal course.
But the restriction is only when the conditions enumerated in the impugned proviso are satisfied.
The restriction imposed by the impugned proviso cannot be said to be unjust, unreasonable or arbitrary or change of any policy.
Moreover, the spirit of the main rule is not in any way disturbed.
[80 B F, 92 D] 1.1 The restriction or embargo, as the one under consid eration is not only placed on the candidates who on the basis of the result of the previous CSE had been allocated and appointed to IPS or Central Services Group 'A ' but also on the candidates appointed in the higher echelon of civil service.
There is a far more restrictive rule in existence, namely Rule 8 of the CSE Rules which precludes the candi dates who have been appointed to the IAS or IFS, from sit ting in the ensuing examination while in service.
Further, this rule states that in case, a candidate has been appoint ed to the IAS or IFS on the basis of the earlier examination and after the subsequent preliminary examination, but before the Main examination, that candidate if continues to be a member of that service, shall not be eligible to appear in the ensuing main examination notwithstanding that the said candidate has qualified himself in the preliminary examina tion.
Similarly if a candidate is appointed to the IAS or IFS after the commencement of the main examination but before the announcement of the result and continues to be a member of that service, the said candidate shall not be considered for appointment to any service/post on the basis of the result of this examination.
But there is no bar for a candidate who is appointed to the IAS/IFS resigning from that service and sitting in the examination for IPS or any Central Service Group 'A '.
[86 B F, 86 G H] Under Rule 4 of CSE Rules notwithstanding anything contained in Rule 8, a candidate who accepts allocation to a service and appointed to that service shall not be eligible to appear again in the CSE unless he first resigns from that service.
In other words, a candidate who is allocated and appointed to a service can sit in the ensuing examination provided he first resigns from that service.
This restric tion, is a reasonable one in order to 51 achieve the desired result.
Thus the second proviso to Rule 4 of the CSE Rules does not travel beyond the intent of the main rule putting any unjustifiable embargo and the proviso is not ultra vires Regulation 4(iii a) of Regulations 1955 on the ground that it makes the candidates ineligible who are otherwise eligible in terms of clauses (i) to (iii) of the said Regulation and the proviso to Rule 17 is not in valid.
[86H, 87 A C] 2.
An enactment is never to be held invalid unless it be, beyond question, plainly and palpably in excess of legislative power or it is ultra vires or inconsistent with the statutory or constitutional provisions or it does not conform to the statutory or constitutional requirements or is made arbitrarily with bad faith or oblique motives or opposed to public policy.
[87 C D] 2.1 While interpreting a statute the consideration of inconvenience and hardships should be avoided and that when the language is clear and explicit and the words used are plain and unambiguous, the court is bound to construe them in their ordinary sense with reference to other clauses to the Act or Rules as the case may be, so far as possible, to make a consistent enactment of the whole statute or series of statutes/Rules/Regulations relating to the subject mat ter.
Added to this, in construing a statute, the court has to ascertain the intention of the law making authority in the backdrop of the dominant purpose and the underlying intendment of the said statute and that every statute is to be interpreted without any violence to its language and applied as far as its explicit language admits consistent with the established rule of interpretation.
[83 F G] Maxwell on the "Interpretation of statutes" 10th Edn.
page 7; Craies on Statute Law, 5th Edn.; 6th Edn., page 89; referred to.
King Emperor vs Benoari Lal Sharma, AIR 1945 PC 48; Wardurton vs Loveland, [1832] 2 D & CH.
(H.L.) 480;Suffers vs Briggs, ,8; Commissioner of Income Tax vs
section Teja Singh; , ; M. Pentiah and Ors.
vs Muddala Veeramallappa and Ors., ; ; It.
Col. Prithi Pal Singh Bedi etc.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; A.R. Auntlay vs
R.S. Nayak; , ; Maharashtra State Board of Secondary and Higher Secondary Education and Anr.
vs Paritosh Bhupesh Kurmar sheth etc.
, [1985] I S.C.R. 29; Philips India Ltd. vs Labour Court, Madras and Ors., ; ; Balasinor Nagrik Cooperative Bank Ltd. vs Babubhai Shankerlal Pandya and Ors., ; 52 Dr.
Ajay Pradhan vs State of Madhya Pradesh and Ors.
, ; ; LIC vs Escorts, ; , referred to.
2.2 A Proviso to a Section/Rule is expected to except or qualify something in the enacting part and presumed to be necessary.
When the impugned second proviso to Rule 4 of the CSE Rules is interpreted in its grammatical meaning and cognate expressions and construed harmoniously with the substantive rule, it is pellucid that the said proviso only carves out an exception to Rule 4 of the CSE Rules in given circumstances and under specified conditions and, therefore, the second proviso cannot be read in isolation and inter preted literally.
On the other hand the substantive Rule 4 is be read in conjunction with the two provisos appended thereto so as to have a correct interpretation.
[83H, 85 E F] 2.3 In the Proviso, in dispute, there are no positive words or indications which would completely exclude the operation of the substantive rule the spirit of which is reflected in Regulation 4 of the Regulations, 1955.
The restriction imposed by the second proviso is only under certain circumstances.
Although the notification introducing the impugned proviso, has to be strictly construed, the Court cannot overlook the very aim and object of the proviso thereby either defeating its purpose or rendering it redun dant or inane or making it otiose.
Judged from any angle, it is not possible to hold that there is a violent breach of the provisions of the substantive Rule 4 of CSE Rules and Regulation 4 (iii a) and it cannot.
be held that the im pugned second proviso either subverts or destroys basic objectives of Rule 4 and that it is ultra vires.
[85F H, 86 A B] Maxwell on "The Interpretation of statute", 11th edn.
page 155; Kent 's Commentary on American Law, 12th Edn.
1 463, referred to.
Gen. vs Chelsea Waterworks Co., [1731] Fitzg.
195; Piper vs Harvey,[1958] I Q.B. 439: R. vs Leeds Priso (Gover nor), ; Ram Narain Sons Ltd. and Ors.
vs Assit.
Commissioner of Sales Tax and Ors, ; ; Abdul Jabar Butt & lint.
vs State of Jammu and Kashmir, ; ; Commissioner of Income Tax vs section Teja Singh, ; ; The Commissioner of Income Tax Mysore Travancore Cochin and Coorg., Bangalore vs The Indo Mercantile Bank Ltd., ; ; Madras & Southern Mahratta Railway Co. vs Bezwada Municipality, [1944] L.R. 71 I.A. 113, Corpn.
of the City of Toronto vs Attorney General for Canada, [1946]A.C. 32; Mackinnon Mack enzie & Co. Ltd. vs Audrey D ' Cost and Anr., [1987] 2 SCC 469, referred to.
The argument that the second proviso is bad since the authorities have stepped out of the constitutional limits in issuing the notification inserting the impugned proviso and that it has not been placed before the Houses of the Parlia ment, has to be rejected because the proviso has been intro duced by the Central Executive Authority under the powers flowing from Article 73(1) (a) of the Constitution, accord ing to which the executive power of the Union subject to the provisions of the Constitution shall extend to the matters with respect to which Parliament has power to make laws, but of course subject to the proviso made thereunder.
Needless to point out that whilst by virtue of clause 1 (a) of Arti cle 73, the executive power of the Union which is co exten sive with the legislative power of Parliament can make laws on matters enumerated in List I (Union List) and List II (Concurrent list) to the Seventh Schedule of the Constitu tion, under Article 162 of the Constitution, the executive power of the State Executive which is coextensive with that of the State legislature can make laws in respect of matters enumerated in List III ( State List) and also in respect of matters enumerated in List II (Concurrent List), subject to the provisions of the Constitution.
[77 D G] 3.1 In the instant case, the Central executive authority has not either expressly or impliedly changed the policy of the Government by exercising unreasonable and arbitrary discretion and the present Rule 4 with its newly added second proviso does not repeal the essential features of the pre existing Rule 4 but only limits the ambit of the opera tion of the price 4 under a given situation.
Hence, there is no substance in the contention that the second proviso is bad and that the central executive authority has trans gressed the constitutional limits.
[77 H, 78 A] 4.
Article 14 declares that the State shall not deny to any person equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws within the territory of India.
The cherished principle underlying the above Article is that there should be no discrimination between one person and another if as regards the subject matter of the legislation, their posi tion is the same.
[103 H, 104 A] 4.1 Differential treatment does not per se constitute violation of Article 14 and it denies equal protection only when there is no rational or reasonable basis for the dif ferentiation.
Thus Article 14 condemns discrimination and forbids class legislation but permits classification 54 founded on intelligible differentia having a rational rela tionship with the object sought to be achieved by the Act/Rule/Regulation in question.
The Government is legiti mately empowered to frame rules of classification for secur ing the requisite standard of efficiency in services and the classification need not scientifically be perfect or logi cally complete.
Every classification is likely in some degree to produce some inequality.
[104 B D] R.K. Dalmia vs Justice Tendolkar, ; ; Budhan Choudhry vs State of Bihar, ; ; Kumari Chitra Ghosh and Anr.
vs Union of India and Ors, ; ; State of Jammu & Kashmir vs Triloki Nath Khosa & Ors., ; ; A.S. Sangwan vs Union of India, ; Akhil Bhartiya Soshit Karamchari Sangh (Railway) vs Union of India & Ors., vs ; ; Deepak Sibal vs Punjab University ; ; Chiranjit Lal vs Union of India ; Ameeroo nissa vs Mahboob, ; Gopi Chand vs Delhi Admin istration; , ; E.P. Royappe vs Stale of Tamil Nadu, ; ; Maneka Gandhi vs Union of India [1978] 1 SCC 248; Ramana vs International Airport Authority of India, AIR ; Union of India vs Tulsiram Patel, ; ; Swadeshi Cotton Mills vs Union of India,[1981] 2 SCR 533; Central Inland Water Transport Corporation vs Brojo Nath, ; Devadasan vs Union of India; , ; Birendra Kumar Nigam and 0rs.
vs Union of India, W.P. Nos.
220 222 of 1963 decided on 133.64, referred to 4.2 The selections for IAS, IFS, and IPS Group 'A ' services and group 'B ' service are made by a combined com petitive examination and viva voce test.
There cannot be any dispute that each service is a distinct and separate cadre, having its separate field of operation, with different status, prospects, pay scales, the nature of duties, the responsibilities to he post and conditions of service etc.
Each of the services is founded on intelligible differentia which on rational grounds distinguishes persons grouped together from those left out and that the differences are real and substantial having a rational and reasonable nexus to the objects sought to be achieved.
Therefore, once a candidate is selected and appointed to a particular cadre he cannot be allowed to say that he is at par with the others on the ground that all of them appeared and were selected by a combined competitive examination and viva voce test and that the qualifications prescribed are comparable.
The classification of services is not based on artificial in equalities but is hedged within the salient features 55 and truly founded on substantial differences.
Judged from this point of view, it is not possible to hold that the classification rests on an unreal and unreasonable basis and that it is arbitrary or absurd.
[103C, 106C, 103 D E] 43 It cannot also be disputed that the candidates allocated to Group 'A ' services are more meritorious com pared to candidates allocated to Group 'B ' services.
Conse quently, those allocated to Group ' B ' services get lower position compared to those allocated to Group A ' services.
The pay scales in Group 'B ' services are comparatively less than those meant for IAS, IFS and IPS and Central Services Group 'A '.
There is a clear cut separation on the basis of ranking and merit and, therefore, it cannot be said by any stretch of imagination that both Group 'A ' and Group 'B ' services fail under one and the same category but on the other these services are two distinct and separate catego ries falling under two different classifications.
Therefore, there is no discrimination whatsoever involved on account of the introduction of the second proviso in question and the said proviso is not ultra vires of Article 14 or Article 16 of the Constitution of India.
[97 B C, 106G] 5.
In the normal course, a candidate belonging to SC/ST category can enjoy all the benefits under the rules and regulations.
But the restriction imposed under the second proviso is only for a specified category of candidates by treating all such candidates at par and without making any exception to the candidates belonging to SC/ST.
The submis sion that the second proviso is an independent one does not merit consideration because the second proviso to Rule 4 begins with the words 'provided further . . " which expression would mean that a strict compliance of the second proviso is an additional requirement to that of the substan tive rule 4 and the first proviso.
The expression "provided further" spells out that the first proviso cannot be read in isolation or independent of the second proviso but it must be read in conjunction with the second proviso.
[89 C E] 5.1 Once the candidates belonging to SC or ST get through one common examination and interview test and are allocated and appointed to a service based on their ranks and performance, and brought under the one and the same stream of category, then they too have to be treated among all other regularly and lawfully selected candidates and there 56 cannot be any preferential treatment at that stage on the ground that they belong to SC or ST, though they may be entitled for all other statutory benefits such as to the relaxation of age, the reservation etc.
The unrestricted number of attempts, subject to the upper age limit, is available to the SC/ST candidates in the normal course but that is subject to the second proviso because when once they are allocated and appointed along with other candidates to a category/post, they are treated alike.
Therefore, there is no merit in the submission that the second proviso is not applicable to the candidates belonging to SC or ST.
[89 E G,91H, 92 A] 5.2 There may be some hard cases, but the hard cases cannot be allowed to make bad law.
As long as the second proviso does not suffer from any vice, it has to be con strued, uniformly giving effect to all those falling under one category in the absence of any specific provision ex empting any particular class or classes of candidates from the operation of the impugned proviso and no one can steal march over others failing under the same category.
Hence the right of candidates belonging to SC and ST competing further to improve their career opportunities is limited to the extent permissible under the second proviso 10 Rule 4 read with Rule 17 of the C.S.E. Rules.
[91 F G] C.A. Rajendran vs Union of India & Ors '.
, ; ; State of Kerala vs N.N. Thomas, ; ; Akhil Bharriya Soshit Karamchari Sangh/Railway) vs Union of India [1963] Suppl.
1 SCR 439; Triloki Nath vs State of J&K ; ; T. Devadasan vs Union of India, ; ; Comptroller and Auditor General of India vs K.S. Jaganna than; , ; Janki Prasad vs State of J&K, ; ; General Manager vs Rangachan, AIR [1962] SC.
36, referred to.
There is no denying the fact that the civil service being the top most service in the country has got to be kept at height, distinct from other services since these top echelons have to govern a wide variety of departments.
Therefore, the person joining this higher service should have breadth of interest and ability to acquire new knowl edge and skill since those joining the service have to be engaged in multiple and multifarious activities.
In order to achieve this object, the selectees of this higher civil services have to undergo training in the National Academy/Training institutes wherein they have to undergo careful programme of specialized 57 training as probationers.
The various schemes of training are based on the conviction that splendid active experience is the real training and the selectees are to be trained in the academies in all kinds of work they have to handle afterwards with a band of senior chosen officers.
[92 H, 93 A B] 6.1 The rationale underlying the course at the training centres is that the officers of civil services must acquire an understanding of the constitutional, social, economic and administrative framework within which they have to function and also must have a complete sense of involvement in the training and thereafter in the service to which he is ap pointed.
The initial training is in the nature of providing young probationers an opportunity to counter act their weak points and at the same time develop their social abilities and as such the aspect of training is the most important of all.
[93 C D] Hermer Fines, the Theory and Practice of Modern Govern ment; United Nations Handbook on Civil Service Laws and Practice, referred to.
Lila Dhar vs State of Rajasthan & Ors., [1981] 4 SCC 159, referred to.
6.2 The effort taken by the Government in giving utmost importance to the training programme of the selectees so that this higher civil service being the top most service of the country is not wasted and does not become fruitless during the training period is in consonance with the provi sions of Article 51 A (j) of the Constitution.
[77 A] 63 There is a dynamic and rational nexus between the impugned second proviso and the object to be achieved.
