The appellants along with another were tried of the charge of murder under Section 302, I.P.C., read with Sec tion 34, I.P.C. The prosecution case was that the appellants as well as the deceased 's brother and his son were residing in a vil lage.
The deceased came to the village on 6.7.1974.
On 8.7.1974 at about 10.30 a.m., the deceased 's brother along with his wife and his son had gone to the mango grove across the choe to collect mangoes to give to the deceased.
While they were returning home along the pathway, the deceased was seen coming in the opposite direction.
The two appellants along with another accused, emerged on the scene and at tacked the deceased.
Appellant No.1 had a datar and Appel lant No. 2 had a sua and their companion had a lathi.
After inflicting injuries with the weapons the appellants escaped.
The deceased was removed to the house of one Darbara Singh for being rushed to the hospital, but within a short time, he breathed his last.
The first information was lodged at the police station, around 7.00 P.M., and the crime was registered and investi gated and finally chargesheeted.
The post mortem examination of the dead body revealed that the deceased had sustained lacerated injuries and three stab wounds and that he died on account of the shock and hemorrhage as a result of the injuries.
The motive alleged was that there had been some grouse on account of the transfer of agricultural land that be longed to the family, among the 240 children of the three brothers.
The Sessions Judge acquitted the accused of the charge.
The High Court, in appeal preferred by the State convicted the appellants and sentenced them to undergo imprisonment for life, against which, this appeal under Section 2 of the Supreme Court (Enlargement of Criminal Appellate Jurisdic tion) Act, 1970 was filed.
The appellants contended that the view taken by the trial court was reasonable and there was no justification for upsetting the judgment even if a different view could have been taken by the appellate court on reappraisal of the evidence; that the High Court did not dislodge the various reasons given by the trial court for discarding the evidence and that the conclusion drawn by the High Court on the evidence on record was wrong.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
The prosecution evidence in the case is wholly reliable and it leads to irresistible conclusion that the appellants had intentionally caused the death of the de ceased.
The occurrence took place in broad day light at a place close to the residence of the witnesses.
The appel lants are the near relations of the deceased and the wit nesses and it has happened in the background of the family rued.
The first information has been recorded within a few hours which in the circumstances of the case cannot be considered as unreasonably delayed.
The version given in the F.I.R. is substantially the same as the one spoken to by the witnesses before the Court.
[243 C D] 2.
The eye witnesses have given consistent account of the role played by each of the appellants.
There would not have been any difficulty for the witnesses to identify the appellants from a distance and across the reeds even if they could get only a glimpse of them in the course of their action, and the medical evidence is not Inconsistent.
[243 E F] 3.
The fact that the acquittal of the companion of the appellants had not been interfered with by the High Court cannot advance the case of the appellants.
The High Court has given him the benefit of doubt on the materials that emerged in the evidence.
That is no reason to discard the evidence of the witnesses so far as the appellants are concerned when such 241 evidence does not suffer from any serious infirmity; [243 H; 244 A]
