The appellant was in possession of a plot as a tenant.
Pursuant to Town Planning Scheme framed by the respondent Corporation under the Bombay Town Planning Act, 1955 the said plot was re constituted i.e. the plot was altered by the making of the Town Planning Scheme.
The respondent was injuriously affected by the said scheme because it has the effect of terminating his possession and adversely affected his business in the demised premises.
However, before fina lising the scheme the Town Planning Officer neither issued special notice to the respondent a required under sub rule (3) nor provided him an opportunity as provide 227 under sub rule (4) of Rule 21 of the Bombay Town Planning Rules, 1955.
The appellants filed a civil suit challenging the action and the Trial Court issued a permanent injunction restraining the respondent Corporation from reconstituting the plot until due procedure was followed.
On appeal by the Corporation a Single Judge of the High Court allowed the appeal and set aside the decree of the Trial Court and dismissed the suit.
The Single Judge fol lowed the decision of the Full Bench in Dungarlal Harichand vs State of Gujarat & Ors.
holding that the appellants were not entitled to special notice under sub rule (3) and opportunity under sub rule (4) and 2that non compliance with the said rule does not vitiate the Planning Scheme.
The decision of the Single Judge was con firmed in Letter Patent appeal by the Division Bench of the High Court.
In tenant 's appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the Respondent Corporation that (i) compliance with sub rule 21(3) & (4) was not mandatory; (ii) Since sub rule 21 (3) is only an additional advantage It is dis pensable and could be waived; (iii) the framing of the Town Planning Scheme is for the benefit of the residents of the Local authority as an amenity provided therein to the gener al public i.e. construction of General Post Office, the interest of the general public outweighs the individual interest.
Therefore, sub rule 21(3) is not mandatory; (iv) the use of the word 'shall ' in rule 21(3) may be construed as directory and not as mandatory.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
Under Section 105 of Transfer of Property Act, a lease creates right or an interest in enjoyment of the demised property and a tenant or a sub tenant is entitled to remain in possession of the demised property until the lease is duly terminated and eviction takes place in accordance with law.
Therefore, a tenant or a sub tenant in possession of a tenement in the Town Planning Scheme is a person inter ested within the meaning of Rules 21(3) & (4) of the Rules.
But he must be in possession of the property on the crucial date i.e. when the town plan scheme is notified in the official gazette.
Every owner or tenant or a sub tenant, in possession on that date alone shall be entitled to a notice and opportunity.
Accordingly, appellants are entitled to notice under sub rule (3) and a 228 reasonable opportunity under sub rule(4) thereof.[234H;235A B;235 E] 2.
A conspectus of the statutory scheme brings out the fact that the Town Planning Officer before making the final scheme and submitting it to the local authority is required to follow the procedure prescribed by the Act and the Rules.
At the relevant stages, he is required to issue notice to the affected person.
[234 F G] 2.1 A reading of section 32 of the Bombay Town Planning Act, 1955 read with Rule 21(3) makes it abundantly clear that the Town Planning Officer is to give notice of at least 3 days in the prescribed manner to the affected persons to submit objections or views; affected persons are to be given ade quate opportunity under rule 21(4) to respond and thereafter the Officer is to demarcate the area allotted to or reserved for public purposes or for purpose of the local authority and the reconstituted plots to be allotted to persons in ownership with the shares of such persons in common plot etc.
[236 G H] 3.
Rule 21(3) speaks of special notice of at least three days duration.
It is inconsonance with and in compli ance of the principles of natural justice.
The legislature thus made a distinction between the general notice envisaged in sub rule (1) of Rule 21 and special notice under sub rule (3) of Rule 21, which was in addition to the former.
[237 C] 3.1 The purposes of clauses (3) and (4) of Rule 21 are obvious and the consequences that would ensue are self evident.
The issuance of notice under sub rule (3) and giving of sufficient opportunity under sub rule (4) are self evident to subserve the basic concept of fair and just procedure.
These sub rules subserve the principles of natu ral Justice to avoid arbitrariness offending Article 14 and to be Just and fair procedure satisfying the mandate of Article 21.
[237 C,E] 4.
It is settled law that before depriving a person of his property or imposing any further liability, the principle of natural justice require prior notice and reasonable opportunity to him to put forth his claim or objections.
[237 B] 4.1 Since the non compliance with issuance of notice and giving of sufficient opportunity contemplated under sub rules (3) and (4) of Rule 21 229 injuriously affects the right to property of the owner or interest of the tenant or sub tenant, as the case may be, it shall be construed to be mandatory and not directory.
There fore, the issuance of special notice of at least three clear days duration and giving sufficient opportunity to the person affected to put forth his views of the scheme are mandatory and non compliance thereof vitiates the validity of the final scheme.
[237 H; 238 A; 237 E] Kaushikprasad Chandulal Mahadevia & Anr.
vs The Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation and Ors., (1970) 11 G.L.R. 993; Mohanlal Jesinghbhai vs PJ.
PateI, Town Development Officer, Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation & Ors, , approved.
Dungarlal Hanchand vs State of Gujarat & Ors., , disapproved.
The appearance of 'shall ' is not conclusive, nor per se connotes its mandatory contour.
Its meaning must be ascertained in the light of the legislative intent in its employment, the context in which it was couched, the conse quences it produces the result it effected and above all the purpose it seek to serve, would all be kept in view.
From the fact situation the courts are to cull out the intention whether the construction to be put up would subserve the purpose of the legislative intent or tend to defeat it.
Public interest, is always, a paramount consideration.
[237 F G] 6.
The principle of Waiver connotes issuance of notice and non response thereto.
Everyone has a right to waive an advantage or protection which law seeks to give him.
Un doubtedly, if a notice is issued and no representation is made by either the owner, tenant or a sub tenant, it would amount to waive the opportunity and such person cannot be permitted to turn round, after the scheme reaches finality, to say that :here is non compliance of sub rules (3) and (4) of Rule 21.
It would amount to putting premium on dilatory and dishonest conduct.
[238 B C]
