Under the provisions of Delhi Sugar Dealers Licensing Order 1963, a person was entitled to keep only upto a maxi mum of 10 quintals of sugar without licence and sugar means any form of sugar including Khandsari sugar containing more than 90% of Sucrose.
The appellant 's business premises were raided and 80 bags of sugar viz. 53 bags of Khandsari, 18 bags of Khand sari (dust) and 9 bags of Khandsari (sulphur) were seized in his presence.
Two samples each from all the three varieties of Khandsari were taken and three samples of sugar were sent for analysis to the public analyst, who reported that the samples contained sucrose 93.5%, 942% and 97.16% respective ly.
The Collector passed an order confiscating the entire seized stock of sugar as the same was kept without any licence.
Against the order of the Collector, the appellant filed an appeal before the Lt. Governor, Delhi which was dismissed.
The writ petition filed against the order of Lt. Governor was dismissed in limine by the High Court.
In appeal to this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellant that (a) only two samples each out of the three bags were taken from the entire lot of Khandsari and this could at the most show that only three quintals of Khandsari was 'sugar ' and the same being less than 10 qtls.
, there was no violation of the Licensing Order: (b) it was necessary for the prosecution to prove that the appellant was in possession of more than 10 quintals of sugar and this could only be done by taking samples from all the bags of Khand sari if it wanted to show that other bags of Khandsari also contained more than 90% of sucrose; (c) the possibility cannot be excluded that those bags from which samples were not taken, did not contain sucrose more than 90%.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, 139 HELD: A large quantity of 80 quintals of Khandsari was found in the appellant 's premises, whereas only 10 quintals of sugar was allowed to be kept without licence.
At the time of seizure of the goods two samples each were taken sepa rately from three different varieties of Khandsari at the instance of the appellant.
It was proved by the public analyst that all the three samples contained sucrose more than 90%.
it was not disputed by the appellant at the time of taking samples or thereafter that the samples taken would not represent the correct quantity of sucrose in those bags of Khandsari from which samples were not taken.
In his written reply to the show cause notice issued by the Collec tor no such objection was raised by the appellant.
In the circumstances of the ease if the Collector was satisfied that 80 quintals of sugar was found in the appellant 's premises without licence, it cannot be held that the order of confiscation passed by the Collector was arbitrary or based on no material.
It was quite reasonable for the Col lector to hold that there was more than 10 quintals of Khandsari having more than 90% sucrose and this violated the Sugar Licensing Order.
Therefore, there was sufficient justification for him to pass the order of confiscation.
Accordingly, the order of confiscation passed by the Collec tor is maintained.
[142 C, 141 F H, 142A C, D] Suraj Bhan Sharad Kumar vs Delhi Administration Criminal Revision No. 104 of 1980 decided on 25th September, 1980 by Delhi High Court distinguished.
In the instant case more than 10 years have already elapsed to the alleged commission of the offence.
Therefore, it would be against the interests of justice to further continue any criminal proceedings in the case.
Accordingly, it is directed that the criminal proceedings launched and pending against the appellant should be dropped.
[142 E]
