Early one morning the five appellants, Tej Singh armed with a spear, his son Mizaji armed with a pistol which he carried in the folds of his dhoti, his nephew Subedar, his cousin Machal and his servant Maiku armed with lathis went to take forcible possession of a field which was in the cultivatory possession of Rameshwar and others.
While Tej Singh stood guard, Maiku started ploughing and overturning the jowar that had been sown in one portion of the field and the others started cutting the sugarcane which stood in another portion.
When Rameshwar and others arrived they protested to Tej Singh, whereupon all the accused gathered near Tej Singh and asked the complainants to go away otherwise they would be finished.
On their refusal to go, Tej Singh asked Mizaji to fire at them and Mizaji shot Rameshwar dead.
The Courts below found that the common object of the unlawful assembly was to take forcible possession of the field and to meet every eventuality even to the extent of causing death if interfered with.
It accordingly convicted the appellants under section 302 read with section 149, Indian Penal Code, and sentenced Mizaji to death and the others to imprisonment for life.
The appellants contended that the other appellants could not have the knowledge that Mizaji carried a pistol in the folds 941 of his dhoti, that the murder was not committed in prosecution of the common object to take forcible possession nor did the other appellants know that murder was likely to be committed in furtherance of the common object.
Held, that the appellants had been rightly convicted and sentenced under section 302 read with section 149 Indian Penal Code.
The extent to which the members of the unlawful assembly were prepared to go in prosecution of the common object, is indicated by the weapons carried by them and their conduct.
The circumstances show that the appellants must have known that Mizaji was carrying a pistol.
The appellants were prepared to take forcible possession at any cost and the murder was immediately connected with the common object.
Under the first part Of section I49 the offence committed in prosecution of the common object must be one which was committed with a view to accomplish the common object and must be connected immediately with the common object of the unlawful assembly of which the accused were members.
Even if the offence committed was not in direct prosecution of the common object of the assembly, it would yet fall under section I49 if it could be shown that the offence was such as the members knew was likely to be committed.
The expression 'know ' does not mean a mere possibility, such as might or might not happen.
Queen vs Sabid Ali, Cr., Chikkarange Gowde vs State of Mysore, A.I.R. (1956) S.C. 731, referred to.
The fact that the appellants went to take possession in the absence of the complainants did not show that the common object was not to take forcible possession as proceedings were going on between the parties in the Revenue Court for possession over the field and the appellants had gone armed with lethal weapons prepared to overcome the opposition which they knew they would meet.
Mizaji was rightly given the sentence of death.
He shared the common object of the unlawful assembly and carried the pistol from his house to use it in prosecution of the object and did use it.
The fact that he used the pistol at the instance of his father was not a mitigating circumstance.
