One Smt. 'M ' inherited from her husband certain agri cultural lands.
Some of the lands were under mortgage and in the possession of defendants 2 to 6.
She died intestate after the came into force.
As there was no heir entitled to succeed to her property, mutation was sanctioned in favour of the State.
The grandson of her brother claiming to be her legal heir filed a suit for possession of the property and for a declaration that he was entitled to redeem the mortgaged property from defend ants 2 to 6. 'The suit was resisted by the First Defendant, viz. the State on the ground that the intestate had left no heir to succeed and the mutation effected in favour of the State was valid.
Defendants 2 to 6 contended that the right to redeem the mortgage had extinguished, and they have become the owners of the property as they were in possession for more than sixty years.
The Trial Court dismissed the suit holding that the plaintiff was not entitled to succeed to the property of the deceased since the property was inherited from her husband.
As regards the mortgage, it was left open to be decided later as agreed to by the parties.
Plaintiff preferred an appeal and the District Judge dismissed the same.
On a second appeal preferred by him, the High Court decreed the 459 suit for possession even against defendants 2 to 6.
The State as well as the defendants 2 to 6 have preferred the present appeals by special leave.
The appellant State contended that the plaintiff Re spondent was not a qualified heir under the and hence it was a case of failure of heirs resulting in the devolution of estate on the Government.
The other appel lants (Defendants 2 to 6) contended that the High Court ought not have decreed the suit against them since the plaintiff Respondent 's right to redeem the mortgage was not adjudged by the trial court and by agreement the question was expressly left open.
Dismissing the appeal preferred by the State and allow ing the appeal of defendants 2 to 6, this Court, HELD: 1.
The property is escheated to the Government when an intestate has left no heir qualified to succeed to his or her property.
The property shall devolve on the Government and the Government shall take the property sub ject to all the obligations and liabilities of the property.
It is only in the event of the deceased leaving behind no heir to succeed, the State steps in to take the property.
The State does not take the property as a rival or preferen tial heir of the deceased but as the Lord paramount of the whole soil of the country.
[464 B,C] 2.
Section 29 of the shall not operate in favour of the State if there is any other heir of the intestate.
Indeed, Section 29 itself indicates that there must be failure of heirs. 'Failure ' of heirs means the total absence of heirs to the intestate.
A female Hindu being the full owner of the property becomes a fresh stock of descend.
If she leaves behind any heir either under sub section (1) or under sub section (2) of Section 15, her property cannot be escheated.
[464 E,F] Halsbury 's Laws of England, 4th Edn.
17 para 1439; referred to.
Sub Section (2) of Section 15, intended only to change the order of succession specified under sub section (1) and not to eliminate the other classes of heirs.
Section 15(2) came to be incorporated on the recommendations of the Joint Committee of the two Houses of Parliament.
The report of the Joint Committee which was accepted by Parliament indicates that this sub section was intended to revise the order of succession among the heirs to a Hindu female and to prevent the properties from passing into the hands to per sons to whom justice would 460 demand that they should not pass.
That means the property should go in the first instance to the heirs of the husband or to the source from where it came.
[464 F, H, 465 C] 3.2.
Sub section (2)(b) of Section 15 emphasises that the property of the intestate shall not devolve upon the heirs referred to in sub section (1) in the order specified thereunder but upon heirs of the husband.
The object is not to eliminate the other heirs under sub sectiOn (1) and not to exclude them from inheritance altogether.
There is no justice in such a construction of Section 15.
The Parliament could not have intended that result.
[465 F G.] Bhajya vs Gopikabai and Anr, ; , referred to.
