The petitioners foreign nationals found to be carrying gold biscuits of foreign origin were arrested by the Customs authorities.
Their applications for grant of bail under section 437 Cr.
P.C. were rejected.
Thereafter orders of their detention were passed under section 3(1) of the Conserva tion of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling Activi ties Act.
The grounds of detention alongwith the lists of documents annexed thereto were served in time.
The petition ers made representations which were rejected.
In the writ petitions under Article 32 of the Constitu tion, the petitioners before this Court contended that there was no compelling necessity for their detention under the as they were in jail and their bail applica tions were rejected and passports seized; that the provi sions of the Act were not attracted, as each of the inci dents in the case of the respective petitioners was solitary and there were no anticidents showing their involvement in the like incidents; that there was non application of mind by the detaining authority as copies of the bail applica tions and the orders refusing bail which were relevant documents were neither placed 436 before the detaining authority nor were supplied to them.
On behalf of one of the petitioners it was also contended that there was no application of mind by the detaining authority inasmuch as the order of detention mentioned only smuggling and once the detenu is in jail, his passport being seized he could no more indulge in smuggling.
Dismissing the writ petitions, this Court, HELD: 1.1 A detention order can validly be passed even in the case of a person who is already in custody.
In such a case, it must appear from the grounds that the authority was aware that the detenu was already in custody.
[451 F] 1.2 When such awareness is there then it should further appear from the grounds that there was enough material necessitating the detention of the person in custody.
This aspect depends upon various considerations and facts and circumstances of each case.
If there is a possibility of his being released and on being so released he is likely to indulge in prejudicial activity then that would be one such compelling necessity to pass the .detention order.
The order cannot be quashed on the ground that the proper course for the authority was to oppose the bail and that if bail is granted notwithstanding such opposition the same can be questioned before a higher Court.
[451G H, 452 A] Dharmendra Suganchand Chelawat & Anr.
vs Union of India vs
S.N. Sinha, Commissioner of Police, Ahmedabad & Anr., ; , referred to.
Rameshwar Shah vs District Magistrate, Burdwan, ; , followed.
N. Meera Rani vs Government of Tamil Nadu &Anr.
, ; ; Sanjay Kumar Aggarwal vs Union of India & Ors., ; and Kamarunnissa etc.
vs Union of India &Anr., , relied on.
2.1 If the detenu has moved for bail then the applica tion and the order thereon refusing bail even if not placed before the detaining authority it does not amount to sup pression of relevant material.
The question of non applica tion of mind and satisfaction being impaired does not arise as long as the detaining authority was aware of the fact that the detenu was in actual custody.
[452 B] 437 2.2 Accordingly the non supply of the copies of bail application or the order refusing bail to the detenu cannot affect the detenu 's right of being afforded a reasonable opportunity guaranteed under Article 22(5) of the Constitu tion, when it is clear that the authority has not relied or referred to the same.
[452 C] 2.3 When the detaining authority has merely referred to them in the narration of events and has not relied upon them, failure to supply bail application and order refusing bail will not cause any prejudice to the detenu in making an effective representation.
Only when the detaining authority has not only referred to but also relied upon them in arriv ing at the necessary satisfaction then failure to supply these documents, may, in certain cases depending upon the facts and circumstances, amount to violation of Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India.
Whether in a given case the detaining authority has casually or passingly referred to these documents or also relied upon them depends upon the facts and the grounds, which aspect can be examined by the Court.
[452 C E] 2.4 In a case where detenu is released on bail and is at liberty at the time of passing the order of detention.
then the detaining authority has to necessarily rely upon them as that would be a vital ground for ordering detention.
In such a case the bail application and the order granting bail should necessarily be placed before the authority and the copies should also be supplied to the detenu.
[452 E F] M. Ahmedkutty vs Union of India & Anr., ; ; Ramachandra A. Kamat vs Union of India. ; ; Frances Coralie Muffin
W.C. Khambra.
; ; Icchu Devi Choraria vs Union of India. ; Pritam Nath Hoon vs Union of India ; ; Lallub hai Jobibhai Patel vs Union of india; , ; Tushar Thakker vs Union of India ; Kirti Kumar Chaman Lal Kundalia vs Union of India ; Ana Carolina D 'Souza vs Union of India [1981] Supp.
SCC 53(10); Mst.
L.M.S. Ummu Saleema vs Shri B.B. Gujaral & Anr.
, ; ; Abdul Sattar Abdul Kadar Shaikh vs Union of India & Ors., and SaVed Farooq Mohammad vs Union of India & Anr., JT , referred to.
It is entirely within the subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority whether or not there were compelling circumstances to detain the person concerned.
[p. 440 E] 438 4.1 In the instant case, in the counter affidavit it was stated that the period of remand to the judicial custody was to expire the next day after the detention.
Therefore, there was every likelihood of the detenu 's moving for bail and getting released on bail.
These materials showed that the detaining authority was not only aware that the detenus were in jail but also noted the circumstances on the basis of which he was satisfied that they were likely to come out on bail 'and continue to indulge in the smuggling activities.
[453 B C] As mentioned in the grounds of detention, there was relevant material on the basis of which the detaining au thority was satisfied that there was compelling necessity to pass the detention orders.
It, therefore, cannot be said that there were no compelling reasons justifying the deten tion despite the fact that detenus were already in custody.
[443 C, 453 C] 4.2 Failure to supply the bail applications and the orders refusing bail did not in any manner prejudice the detenus from making representations particularly when they were fully aware of the contents of the applications made by them and also the refusal orders.
However, when they are not referred to or relied upon, the non supply does not affect the detention.
[453 C D] 5.1 Even a solitary incident may speak volumes about the potentialities of the detenu and merely on the ground that there were no antecedents the detention order cannot be quashed.
The authorities cannot and may not in every case salvage the antecedents but even a solitary incident may manifest the potentialities of a detenu in the activities of smuggling.
[p. 443 D E] 5.2 The potentialities of the detenu as gathered from his act of smuggling form basis for detention.
It is diffi cult to comprehend precisely the manner in which a detenu with certain potentialities may likely to indulge in the activities of smuggling.
It is for the detaining authority to derive the necessary satisfaction on the basis of the materials placed before him.
[p. 455 B C]
