The appellant was in the service of the respondent company as a Section Salesman.
He was terminated from serv ice on 12th July, 1973 on the ground that he was on an unauthorised absence since 13th January, 1973.
At the instance of the appellant the Government referred to the Labour Court for adjudication the question whether the termination of the services of the appellant by the respondent company was legal and justified and if not to what relief he was entitled to.
The Labour Court held that the appellant was not a "workman" and that, therefore, the reference was incompetent but it answered the question whether the termination itself was illegal in favour of the appellant.
The appeal was filed in this Court against the order of the Labour Court.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
In order to come within the definition of "workman" under the Industrial Disputes Act as it stood in the year 1973 when the appellant 's service was terminated, the employee has to be under the employment to do the work of one of the types of work i.e. manual, skilled rod/or clerical in nature.
[475 E] 473 2.
The appellant was employed to do canvassing and promoting sales for the company.
The duties involve the suggesting of ways and means to improve the sales; a study of the type or status of the public to whom the product has to reach and a study of the market condition.
He was also required to suggest about the publicity in markets and melas, advertisement including the need for posters, holders and cinema slides.
These duties do require the imaginative and creative mind which could not be termed as either manu al, skilled, unskilled or clerical in nature.
The supervis ing work of the other local salesman was only incidental to his main work of canvassing and promotion in the areas of his operation.
Such a person cannot be termed as a workman.
[475 F G] 3.
The Sales Promotion Employees (Conditions of Service)Act, 1976, defines "sales promotion employees" as meaning a person employed or engaged in any establishment for hire or reward to do any work relating to promotion of sales or business or both.
[476 A B] 4.
The object of the enactment and the employees covered by the enactment also go to show that persons who are em ployed for sales promotion normally would not come within the definition of workmen under the Industrial Disputes Act.
[476C D] In view of the fact that a long period of over 16 years had passed it would be unjust to leave the appellant without any remedy at this stage.
To meet the ends of justice, the Company is to pay an amount equivalent to three years salary at the rate he was drawing when the appellant 's services were terminated, in addition to whatever amount they were paying during the pendency of the appeal.
[476 E,F] Burmah Shell Oil Storage and Distribution Company vs Burmah Shell Management and Staff, ; ; D.S. Nagraj vs Labour Officer, Kamal & Ors., ; JJ.
Decbane Distributor vs State of Kerala and Ors., , referred to.
