The appellant a partnership firm consisted of nine partners.
One Satya Narain was one of the partners.
He submitted a tender to the respondents on July 25, 1973 on behalf of the firm offering to supply 1000 quintals of Gram Dal at the rate of Rs.185/ per bag.
Tender was accepted by the respondents.
The appellant committed breach of the contract and as a result, the respondents filed an applica tion under sec.
20 of the before the District Court for making reference for arbitration in terms of the contract.
The application was allowed and the dispute was re ferred for arbitration.
Against the order of the Addl.
District Judge, an appeal was filed before the High Court and the High Court confirmed the order of the Additional District Judge.
This appeal by special leave under article 136 of the Constitution is against the order of the High Court.
The appellant contended that by operation of Sec.19(2)(a) of the Partnership Act, 1932, there was no implied authority given to one of the partners to refer the dispute relating to the business of the firm for arbitration and therefore the reference made by the court, pursuant to a contract entered into by one of its partner, Satya Narain on behalf of the firm, was without jurisdiction and that the original con tract did not contain arbitration clause.
In a separate letter with a rubber stamp (facsimile) of the firm, one of the partners agreed for reference to arbitration and there fore the reference did not bind the other partners.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, 543 HELD: 1.
The operation of Secs.
18 & 19(1) is subject to the exceptions engrafted in sub sec.
(2) of Sec. 19.
19(2)(a) provides that in the absence of any usage or custom of trade to the contrary, the implied authority of a partner does not empower him to submit a dispute relating to the business of the firm to arbitration.
[545B C] 2.
None of the partners have entered into the witness box to deny the validity of the contract nor raised any objection that they had not authorised the partner (Satya Narain) to enter into the contract nor that they were bound by any acts done by him.
When the partner signed the tender, at that time no other partners raised objection regarding the signing of the tender by the partner on behalf of the firm.
In view of these facts it is clear that they ratified the contract.
[544 E F] 3.
The firm had entered into a binding contract with the corporation and contract contained the arbitration clause which binds the partners.
[544 G] 4.
The contract engrafts an arbitration clause and in terms thereof the dispute is to be referred to the arbitra tion.
Therefore, the reference made by the Addl.
District Judge under Sec.
20 of time is within the jurisdiction and in terms of the contract.
[545 D] Gopal Das vs Brij Nath & Ors., AIR 1926 Allahabad 238; Firm Radhakishan Chunnilal vs Firm Ashamal Ishardas, AIR 1926 Lahore 92; Rajendra Prasad vs Pannalal Champalal & Ors, AIR 1932 Calcutta 343; Mansabdar Khan vs M.T. Allah Devi & Or3 '.
, AIR 1934 Lahore 485; Sohanlal vs Firm Madhoram Ban warilal, AIR 1952 Punjab 240; and M/s. Alazappa Cotton Mills vs Indo Burma Trading Corporation, , referred to.
