The respondents, Section Officers in the offices of the Accountant General I, II and III, Allahabad, filed a writ petition before the High Court challenging the validity of administrative instructions contained in Circular No. 172 NGE 11/56 72 I dated 25th January, 1973 issued by the first appellant, regarding the reservations for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in relation to filling up of posts by promotion on the basis of seniority subject to fitness, and praying that the first appellant and two others be re strained from promoting three of the Section Officers, belonging to the Scheduled Castes to the post of Accounts Officer, contending that since the respondents were senior, those three Section Officers could not be promoted to the post of Accounts Officers through seniority quota before the respondents.
It was also contended that the promotion to the post of Accounts Officers was regulated by Indian Audit & Accounts Department (Administrative Officers, Assistant Accounts Officers and Assistant Audit Officers) Recruitment Rules 1963 made by the President in exercise of the powers conferred by proviso to Article 309 and clause (5) of Arti cle 148 of the Constitution after consultations with the Comptroller and Auditor General of India, which laid down that recruitment to the post of Administrative Officers, Assistant Accounts Officers and Assistant Audit Officers in the Indian Audit and Accounts Department was by promotion, that the rules did not contain any specific provisions for reservation for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and hat the administrative instructions contained in the circu lar could not be said to be rules made by the President after consultation with the first 483 appellant as contemplated by Article 148(5) of the Constitu tion.
Allowing the writ petition, the High Court held that there was no reservation for scheduled castes and scheduled tribes made under the rules, that the administrative in structions contained in the circular in question did not make provision for the proposed reservation in pursuance to the policy decision and that the statutory rules were not silent on the subject of promotion to the post of Assistant Accounts Officers, subsequently designated as Accounts Officers and, therefore, it was not open to the Government to supplement the statutory rules to fill up the gaps, which could be done by only amending the statutory rules in com pliance with the provisions of Article 148(5) of the Consti tution.
Hence the appeal by the Department.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.1 The High Court is not right in stating that there cannot be an administrative order directing reserva tion for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes as It would alter the statutory rules in force.
The rules do not provide for any reservation.
In fact, they are silent on the subject of reservation.
The Government could direct the reservation by executive orders.
No doubt, administrative orders cannot be Issued In contravention of the statutory rules, but they could be issued to supplement the statutory rules.
In fact, similar circulars were issued by the Railway Board introduc ing reservations for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes In the Railway Services both for selection and non selection categories of posts.
They were issued to Implement the policy of the Central Government.
[491 D F] Santram Shams vs State of Rajasthan and Anr., ; and Akhil Bhartiya Soshit Karamchari Sangh (Rail ways) vs Union of India & Ors., ; , referred to.
1.2 It is true that the President has not issued the circular in question but the first appellant has issued it.
There was, however, proper consultation between the Govern ment and the first appellant for issuing the circular.
The infirmity pointed out that it was not issued in the name of the President, therefore, relates only to the form and not with regard to the substance.
The circular, of course, ought to have been issued in the name of the President as required under.
Article 148(5) of the Constitution, as it 484 affects the service conditions of persons in the Audit and Accounts Department.
But since the Government has approved the circular and the circular was in accordance with the declared policy of reservation, the first appellant cannot be restrained from enforcing it.
[491 G H, 492 A B] The circular in question is valid and binding.
The circular by itself provides for reservation.
The authorities concerned must take that into account while effecting promo tions under the rules.
[492 B]
