The business being carried on by a HUF, of which the first appellant was the Karta, was converted into a partnership between the first appellant and one of his sons, who had earlier joined the business on monthly remuneration.
The deed of partnership executed in that behalf indicated that the son had been admitted as a working partner, having 35 per cent share in the profits and losses of the firm and the remaining 65 per cent share was held by the first appellant as the Karta of the HUF.
An 547 application made for registration of the firm was dismissed by the Income tax Officer on the ground that there was no valid partnership.
This was upheld in appeal by the Appel late Tribunal.
However, at the instance of the assessee the matter was referred to the High Court for its opinion.
The High Court also held that there was no valid partnership.
In the appeal before this Court, on behalf of the asses seeappellants, it was contended that the mere fact that the son had neither separated from the HUF nor brought in any cash asset as his capital contribution to the partnership but was contributing only his skill and labour, could not in law detract from a valid partnership being created.
On behalf of the respondent Revenue it was contended that Hindu Law did not recognise any contract among the coparceners inter se except in two cases, namely, where there was a partial partition and where a coparcener had separate property and brought in such separate property as capital towards consideration for becoming a partner and that skill and labour could not be treated as property.
Allowing the appeal by the assessee appellants, this Court, HELD: 1.1 It cannot be said that when a coparcener enters into a partnership with a karta of a HUF and contrib utes only his skill and labour, no contribution of any separate asset belonging to such partner is made to meet the requirement of a valid partnership.
The aim of business is earning of profit.
When an individual contributes cash asset to become partner of a partnership firm in consideration of a share in the profits of the firm, such contribution helps and at any rate is calculated to help the achievement of the purpose of the firm, namely, to earn profit.
The same purpose is, undoubt edly, achieved also when an individual, in place of cash asset, contributes his skill and labour in consideration of a share in the profits of the firm.
[562 D E] 1.3 Just like a cash asset, the mental and physical capacity generated by the skill and labour of an individual is possessed by or is a possession of such individual.
Indeed, skill and labour are by themselves possessions.
"Any possession" is one of the dictionary meaning of the word 'property '.
In its wider connotation, therefore, the mental and physical capacity generated by skill and labour of an individual and indeed the skill and 548 labour by themselves would be the property of the individ ual possessing them.
They are certainly assets of that individual and there is no reason why they cannot be con tributed as a consideration for earning profit in the busi ness of a partnership.
They certainly are not the properties of the HUF, but are separate properties of the individual concerned.
To hold to the contrary, would also be incompati ble with the practical, economic and social realities of present day living.
[562 E G] 1.4 Where an undivided member of a family qualifies in technical fields may be at the expense of the family he is free to employ his technical expertise elsewhere and the earnings will be his absolute property; he will, therefore, not agree to utilise them in the family business unless the latter is agreeable to remunerate him therefor immediately in the form of a salary or share of profits.
This, of course, will have to be the subject matter of an agreement between the HUF and the member, but where there is such an agreement, it cannot be characterised as invalid.
[562 H, 563 A B,C] 1.5 It is, therefore, illogical to hold that an undi vided member of the family can qualify for a share of prof its in the family business by offering moneys either his own or those derived by way of partition from the family but not when he offers to be a working partner contributing labour and services or much more valuable expertise, skill and knowledge for making the family business more prosper ous.
[563 C D] 1.6 In the instant case, it is not the case of Revenue that the partnership between the first appellant as karta of HUF and his son was fictitious or invalid on any other ground.
Hence, the judgment of the High Court cannot be sustained.
[563 F G] I.P. Munavalli vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Mysore, [1969] 74 ITR page 529; Ramchand Nawalrai vs Commissioner of Income Tax, M.P. [1981] 130 ITR page 826; Commissioner of Income Tex; Lucknow vs Gupta Brothers, ; approved.
Shah Prabhudas Gulabchand vs Cornmissioner of Income Tax; Bombay, [1970] 77 ITR page 870; Pitamberdas Bhikhabhai page 341; disapproved.
Lachman Das vs Commissioner of Income tax, Punjab, [ 1948] 16 ITR I 35; P.K.P.S. Pichappa Chettiar vs Chockalin gam Pillai, A.I.R. 1934 P.C. 192; 549 Finn Bhagat Ram Mohanlal vs Commissioner of Excess profits Tax; Nagpur, [1956] 29 ITR page 521; Jitmal Bhuramal vs CIT, ; and Jugal Kishore Baldeo Sahai vs CIT, [ 19671 S.C.; Commissioner of Income tax vs Sir Hukumchand Mannalal and Co., ; and Ratanchand Darbarilal vs Commissioner of Income Tax, ; referred to.
The definition of the term "learning" under Section 2 of the is very wide and almost encompasses within its sweep every acquired capacity which enables the acquirer of the capacity 'to pursue any trade, industry, profession of vocation in life".
The dic tionary meaning of "skill" inter alia, is: "the familiar 'knowledge of any science, art, or handicraft, as shown by dexterity in execution or performance; technical ability" and the meaning of "labour" inter alia is: "physical or mental exertion, particularly for some useful or desired end." Whether or not skill and labour would squarely fail within the traditional jurisprudential connotation of property e.g. jura in re propria, jura in re aliena, corpo real and incorporeal etc.
may be a moot point but it cannot be denied that skill and labour involve as well as generate mental and physical capacity.
This capacity is in its very nature an individual achievement and normally varies from individual to individual.
It is by utilisation of this capacity that an object or goal is achieved by the person possessing the capacity.
Achievement of an object or goal is a benefit.
This benefit accrues in favour of the individual possessing and utilising the capacity.
Such individual may, for consideration, utilise the capacity possessed by him even for the benefit of some other individual.
The nature of consideration will depend on the nature of the contract between the two individuals.
[562 A D] Mulla 's Hindu Law, referred to.
