Section 5A of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947, pro vided: " No police officer below the rank of a deputy Superintendent shall investigate any offence punishable under section 161, section 165 or section 165A of the Indian Penal Code or under section 5(2) of the Act without the order of a magistrate of the first class . . ".
(1) (1880) L.R. 7 I.A. 107.
26 202 On January 11, 1955, B, the manager of a company, gave information to the Sub Inspector of Police, Special Police Establishment, that the respondent, an Assistant Station Master, was demanding a bribe for sending the goods belonging to the company by rail.
The Sub Inspector, after assisting B to trap the respondent, came on the scene, questioned the latter, searched his person and recovered the marked notes and other articles from him.
The Sub Inspector filed an application before the District Magistrate, stating that he had been deputed to investigate the case and the permission might be given to him to do so under section 5A of the Act.
On the application the Magistrate passed the order "permission given.
" Neither the application nor the order made thereon disclosed that any material was placed before the Magistrate on the basis of which he gave permission.
A charge sheet was filed before the Special judge.
The respondent filed objections questioning, inter alia, the validity of the Magistrate giving permission to the Sub Inspector to make the investigation.
The Special judge disallowed the objection.
On revision, the High Court set aside the order of the Special judge with a direction that " in order to rectify the defects and cure the illegality " he should order the Deputy Superintendent of Police to carry on the investigation himself while the case remained pending on his file.
The State preferred an appeal against the order of the High Court by special leave: Held, that the statutory safeguards under section 5A of the Prevention of Corruption Act must strictly be complied with for they were conceived in public interest and were provided as a guarantee against frivolous and vexatious prosecutions.
A Magistrate cannot surrender his discretion to a police officer, but must exercise it having regard to the relevant material made available to him at the stage of granting permission.
He must also be satisfied that there is sufficient reason owing to the exigencies of the administrative convenience to entrust a subordinate officer with the investigation.
Where an officer other than the designated officer seeks to make an investigation, he should get order of a Magistrate empowering him to do so before he proceeds to investigate, and it is desirable that the order giving the permission should ordinarily on the face of it disclose the reasons for giving permission.
Where objection is taken by the accused that the order giving permission was invalid, the prosecution, at the earliest opportunity, must adduce evidence to support the contention that the Magistrate gave the permission only after having satisfied himself on the advisability of doing so on the material placed before him.
H. N. Rishbud & Inder Singh vs State of Delhi, ; and Viswabhusan Naik vs The State of Orissa, ; , relied on.
203 Held, further, that an investigation starts after the police officer receives information in regard to an offence, and that as under section 5 Of the Act attempt to obtain from any person any gratification is in itself an offence, any steps taken by the Sub Inspector after the information was given to him amounted to investigation.
