The petitioner 's husband was tried under Section 302, IPC for having killed his father and step brother.
The Sessions Judge convicted awarding sentence of death.
On appeal, the High Court confirmed the death penalty against which a special leave petition before this Court was filed and same was also dismissed.
The Review Petition filed by him was also dismissed.
His mercy petitions filed before the Governor of Jammu & Kashmir and the President of India, were rejected.
He chal lenged the order of the President of india rejecting the mercy petition before this Court in a writ petition under Article 32 of the Constitution, which was also dismissed.
Another writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitu tion was filed before the Jammu & Kashmir High Court for quashing the sentence imposed on him.
The High Court dis missed the same.
The husband of this petitioner, the condemned prisoner, was to be hanged on 26.10.1991.
The petitioner, filed the present petition under Article 32 of the Constitution challenging the validity of the capital punishment 104 with a prayer for the quashing of the sentence awarded to her husband.
The petition was entertained by a Division Bench on 25.10.91 and the matter was referred to the Constitution Bench for consideration staying the execution of the condem ned prisoner.
Petitioner contended that capital punishment was violative of Article 21 of the Constitution of India as the Article absolutely prohibits deprivation of a person 's life; that capital punishment did not serve any social purpose and the barbaric penalty of death should not be awarded to any person as it had no deterrent effect; that the penalty of death sentence had a dehumanising effect on the close rela tions of the victims and it deprived them of their fundamen tal rights under Article 21 of the Constitution, to a mean ingful life; that the execution of capital punishment by hanging was barbaric and dehumanising and it should be substituted by some other decent and less painful method in executing the sentence.
Dismissing the petition, this Court, HELD: 1.
The capital punishment as provided by the law is to be awarded in rarest of the rare cases.
The procedure established by law for awarding the death penalty is reason able and it does not in any way violate the mandate of Article 21 of the Constitution.
Hanging by neck was a scien tific and one of the least painful methods of execution of the death sentence.
[106 G, 107 F] 2.
The death penalty has a deterrent effect and it does serve a social purpose, having regard to the social condi tions in our country the stage was not ripe for taking a risk of abolishing it.
[107 C D] 3.
A judicial notice can be taken of the fact that the law and order situation in the country has not only not improvided since 1967 but has deteriorated over the years and is fast worsening today.
The present is, therefore, the most inopportune time to reconsider the law on the subject.
[107 E] Jagmohan Singh vs State of U.P.,[1973] 1 SCC 20; Bachan Singh vs State of Punjab, ; Deena alias Deen Dayal & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors. etc.
, [1983] 4 SCC 645, referred to. 105
