In Civil Appeal No.3519 of 1984, filed by the appel lants, who were appointed as doctors on adhoc basis in the Central Health Service on various dates between 1968 and 1977, praying for regularisation of their services with reference to their original dates of appointments, this Court, by its judgment dated 9.4.1987 and subsequent orders, gave certain directions.
Since the Union of India could not implement the directions, the appellants filed the civil miscellaneous petition for clarification of the earlier orders passed by this Court in the Civil Appeal.
Certain other doctors who fall in the category of the appellants (adhoc appointees) and who had not earlier filed writ peti tion before the High Court, filed writ petitions and inter vention applications before this Court praying for the benefits as granted to the appellants.
It was contended by the Union of India that if regulari sation was granted to all the appellants and the like cate gories of doctors, the doctors regularly appointed in Group A may get relegated to secondary position in view of the fact that the appellants were appointed much earlier on adhoc basis.
The regularly recruited doctors, not heard earlier, also filed intervention applications praying that any order of regularisation of the appellants and the similarly situated doctors should ensure that their interests were not preju diced.
The appellants and the other similarly situated doctors expressed their willingness to be considered for regular appointments 110 only from 1.1.1973, this being the date on which the Group B and Group A services were merged together by the Government of India.
They also agreed to give up monetary claims on account of revision of scales, regularisation or promotion to which they would be entitled till 31.10.1991.
Disposing of the matters, this court, HELD: 1.
Each of the appellants will be treated as regularised in Group A of the Central Health Service from 1.1.1973 or the date of his first initial appointment in the service (though as an adhoc Group B doctor) whichever is later.
[p. 113 B] 2.
In order to ensure that there is no disturbance in the seniority and the promotional prospects of the regularly recruited doctors there will be a separate seniority list in respect of the appellants and their promotions shall be regulated by such separate seniority list and such promo tions will only be in supernumerary posts to be created by the Government.
[p. 113 B C] 3(a).
Each of the appellants will be eligible for promo tion to the post of Senior Medical Officer or Chief Medical Officer or further promotional posts therefrom taking into account his seniority in the separate seniority list.
[p. 113 D] (b).The promotion of any of the appellants to the post of Senior Medical officer, Chief Medical Officer and further promotional post therefrom will be on par with the promotion of the regularly recruited doctor who is immediately junior to the concerned appellant on the basis of their respective dates of appointment, e.g. if a regularly recruited doctor, on the basis of the seniority list maintained by the Depart ment, gets a promotion as Senior Medical Officer or Chief Medical Officer or further promotion thereafter, then the appellant who was appointed immediately earlier to him will also be promoted as a Senior Medical officer or Chief Medi cal Officer or further promotion therefrom (as the case may be) with effect from the same date.
[p. 113 D F] 4.
In order to avoid any conflict or any possibilities of reversion, the post to which an appellant will be promot ed (whether as Senior Medical Officer or Chief Medical Officer or on further promotion therefrom) should only be to a supernumerary post.
Such number of supernumerary posts should be created by the Govern 111 ment as may be necessary to give effect to the above direc tions.
No promotion will be given to any of the appellants in the existing vacancies which will go only to the regular ly appointed doctors.
[pp. 113 F H, 114 A] All the writ petitioners and interveners, falling in the category of the appellants, would also be entitled to the same reliefs as the appellants for all purposes of seniority and promotion.
[p. 114 A C]
