The appellants, who belonged to the Reddi caste in an area of Andhra Pradesh, which originally formed part of the Madras Presidency filed their respective declarations under Section 8 of the Andhra Pradesh Land Reforms (Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings) Act, 1973.
Appellant No. 2 in his declaration claimed an increase in the ceiling unit permitted to be held by him on the ground that appellant No. 1, as his illatom son in law who had attained the age of majority, had a share in the proper ties.
In the inquiry held Appellant No. 2 deposed that appel lant No. 1 was entitled to a half share in his properties as his illatom son in law.
Both the appellants claimed that appellant No. 1 was entitled to a share under an agreement.
The Land Reforms Tribunal rejected the claim of the appellants and held that the declarant, appellant No. 2 held surplus holding and directed him to surrender the excess land.
Appellant No. 1 was declared as not holding any land in excess of ceiling limit.
The appellants preferred an .appeal to the Land Reforms Appellate 514 515 Tribunal, which was dismissed.
The appellants filed a Civil Revision Petition in the High Court, which was also dismissed.
This appeal by special leave is one of the appeals directed against the common judgment of the High Court.
The appellants contended that appellant No. 1 as an illatom sonin law of appellant No. 2, was entitled to a half share in the property of appellant No. 2; that an illatom son in law who had attained the age of majority was in the same position as a major son and hence, the ceiling area permitted to appellant No. 2 was liable to be increased by one ceiling unit as appellant No. 1 did not hold any land independently nor in any manner specified under Section 4A of the Ceiling Act.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
The institution of illatom adoption, that is, affiliating a son in law and giving him a share, is purely a creature of custom and judicial recognition has been given to it.
It prevails among the Reddi and Kamma castes in territories which earlier formed part of the then Madras Presidency.
[518 G, 517 F] 2.
An illatom son in law becomes entitled to a share in the property of his father in law as his heir, that is, on his death.
[521 C] 3.
Although an illatom son in law has some rights simi lar to those of a natural son born after the adoption of the illatom son in law, his rights are not identical to those of conferred by law on a son or an adopted son.
The illatom son in law does not succeed to the properties of his father in law by survivorship, but only on account of custom or an agreement giving him a share in the property of his father in law.
His position is not identical to that of an adopted son because he does not lose his rights in his ' natural family on being taken as an illatom son in law and continues to be entitled to a share in the property of his natural father.
It is not possible to equate an illatom son in law who has attained majority with a major son for the purposes of Section 4A of the Ceiling Act.
[520 F G, 521 E] 516 4.
The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Amending Act whereby Section 4A was inserted into the Ceiling Act indicate that an illatom son in law, who does not lose his fights in his own family, cannot be regarded as a major son of his father in law for the purposes of the Ceiling Act.
If he was so regarded, there would be a double benefit, because of his presence as the ceiling area of his father in law would be increased as well as the ceiling area of his natu ral father.
That Certainly could not have been the intention behind the amendment.
Since there is no custom of having an illatom among Muslims and Christians such a construction would lead to disparity between the position of Muslims and Christians on the one hand and Hindus on the other.
That would be contrary to the very purpose for which the amend ment was made.
[522A C] Nallun Kristnamma and another vs Kamepalli Venkatasub bayya and others, (1918 19) L.R. 46 I.A. 168; Hanumantamma vs Rami Reddi, (1882) L.R.4 I.A. Madras Series 272; Nara sayya and others vs Ramachandrayya and others, AIR [1956] 43 A.P. 209; Penumatsa Koti Ramachandra Raju vs State of A.P. (1980) 1 (H.C.) Andhra Pradesh Law Journal 307, referred to.
Peech Ramaiah vs Government of Andhra Pradesh, (1976) 2 (H.C.) Andhra Pradesh Law Journal 278, distinguished.
Mayne: Hindu Law and Usages, 13th Edition, Chapter VII, Paragraph 242, N.R. Raghavachariar; Hindu Law 8th Edition, Paragraph 176; Mulla: Hindu Law, 16th Edition, Para , referred to.
