The appellant, a Rigman in the Department of Mines and Geology, State of Karnataka, was initially appointed as a local candidate on the newly created post of Junior Engineer (Mechanical).
Later he was regularly selected by the State Public Service Commission and appointed on the said post on 4.5.1970 by the Director and was confirmed on the said post on 29.9.1972.
On 16.12.1974, he, alongwith respondents No. 3 to 7, who were drillers in the Department was promoted as Assistant Drilling Engineer and was shown senior to them.
However, in the revised provisional seniority list as well as in the final seniority list, he was shown junior to respondents No. 3 to 7 in the cadre of Assistant Drilling Engineer.
The appellant filed an application before the State Administrative Tribunal challenging the seniority lists which was rejected holding (i) the appellant 's appointment as Junior Engineer was irregular because it was not support ed by Recruitment Rules and the Director was not the ap pointing authority; (ii) since the appellant had not ac quired three years experience as regular incumbent he was not qualified to be promoted as Assistant Drilling Engineer;, his regular employment could only be related from the date of framing of the Recruitment Rules.
Accordingly, the Tribunal held that appellant 's service from 4th May, 1970 to 23rd August, 1973 could not be taken into considera tion for reckoning his seniority and hence he was junior to Respondents No3 to 7.
599 600 The appellant filed an appeal in this Court challeng ing the Tribunal 's order contending that (i) in view of his recruitment as a regular employe on selection by the Service Commission his employment was regular in nature; (ii) the post to which he was appointed was regularly created post and was higher than that of respondents even during the period there existed recruitment rules; in any case after his confirmation it was not open to the Tribunal to hold his appointment irregular;, and (iii) in view of the guidelines issued by the State Government, under which irregular ap pointments were regularised, even if it is assumed his initial appointment was irregular it has to be treated regular throughout.
Allowing the appeal and setting aside the order of the Tribunal this Court: HELD :1.
Rule 7(2) of the Karnataka Civil Services (Classification, Control & Appeal ) Rules, 1957 read with column 2 of Schedule 11 thereto clearly shows that the Director is the appointing authority for Junior Engineers.
The appellant was found qualified and was duly selected by the Public Service Commission and appointed as Junior Engi neer in 1970.
He worked on the post uninterruptedly till he was promoted to the next higher post of Assistant Drilling Engineer alongwith the respondents No. 3 to 7.
The Tribunal was, therefore, not right in holding that the appointment made was irregular and that the Director was not the ap pointing authority for Junior Engineers.
Accordingly his experience in the post of Junior Engineer from 1970 till his promotion to the next higher post could not be ignored.
[605 F, 604 G, 607 H, 608 A] 2.
Since the posts existed on the establishment and selection for appointment was made by the State Public Service Commission and the Director was competent to make the appointment, it cannot be said that the absence of recruitment rules made the appointment illegal or irregular.
Moreover, the irregular appointments were regularised by the Government Memorandum dated 5th July, 1976.
[606 B C] 3.
The appellant 's seniority which had stabilised over a period of time and on the basis whereof he was granted promotions by the Government could not be disturbed by doubting the regularity of the initial appointment after so many years.
It was not as if he had gained experience as an ad hoc employee in a stop gap arrangement that his experi ence as a Junior Engineer could be overlooked.
Therefore, his 601 seniority in the promotion post could not be upset on the ground that he did not possess the requisite experience.
[607 B C] Direct Recruit Class H Engineering Officers ' Associa tion vs State of Maharashtra & Ors.
; , fol lowed.
The appellant 's seniority over respondents No. 3 to 7 shall be restored and he shall be shown to be senior to them.
[608 B]
