A litigation regarding possession of a certain plot of land was pending in the civil court between the complainants and the accused persons.
On 16.12.1975 at about 8 a.m. the accused, armed with fire arms and sharp edged weapons, reached the outer house of the complainants and attacked them.
According to the prosecution case, accused No. 4 who was unarmed, raised an exhortation challenging deceased 1l, and caught hold of his long hair while accused 1 fired a rifle shot at him and accused No.7 gave two successive gandasa blows on his head.
Accused No.9 fired a shot at PW 15.
Accused nos.6 and 8 fired one shot each at deceased 2 who also succumbed to his injuries.
PW 16 was fired at by accused No. 2 hitting him at the left arm and flank.
Accused No. 3 and 5 gave blows from the reverse side of gandasa and spear to PW. 17 and another woman respectively.
On the side of the accused, a spear blow of accused No. 5 accidently his accused No. 9 and a shot fired by accused No. 6 accidently hit another man on the side of the accused who later on died.
Besides the members of the complainant 's family, the neighbours, PWs, 18 & 19 also witnessed the occurrence.
The accused were alleged to have run away taking a rifle and revolver belonging to the complainants.
The police investi gation culminated in the trial of the 9 accused.
576 The Trial Court acquitted four accused (nos.1 and 3 to 5 ) but convicted the appellants (accused nos.
2 and 6 to 9) of offences punishable under sections 148, 149, 302, 302/149, 307 and 307/149 and sentenced them to various terms of imprisonment.
The appeal filed by the appellant having been dis missed by the High Court, an appeal by special leave to this Court was filed.
It was contended on behalf of the appellants that the four accused having been acquitted despite the eye witnesses deposing to their participation in the alleged incident, no credence should be given to the prosecution witnesses in order to maintain the convic tion; and that the prosecution failed to explain the way the injuries were caused to the persons on the accused side.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD :1.
The large number of participants in the occurrence would, at some place or the other leave a place for entertaining some doubt.
But in the instant case the prosecution case as a whole remained strong supparted as it was by the independent evidence of P.Ws.18 and 19, the neighhours.
The occurrence took place in the Courtyard of the outer house of the complainant party.
Blood stained earth was collected from four places therein during investi gation.
In the totality of circumstances it cannot be said that the maximfalsus in uno falsus in omnibus was attracted.
[583 H; 584A,C] 2.
Exhortation is necessarily not a padding or over doing and has to be viewed in the correct perspective, in the facts and circumstances of each case.
[582E] In the instant case, the roles assigned to accused No. 4 who was acquitted, that he gave [an] exhortation, caught hold of the long hair of deceased 1 and carried away his rifle after the incident, were, according to the Sessions Judge, part of the overdoing.
The fact that the rifle was being carried by the accused at the time of his arrest was considered by him to be abnormal as otherwise in the normal course of events it was expected to have been kept con cealed.
The Sessions Judge held that he was not satisfied about the criminality of accused No. 4.
[582 C D] 577 Besides the exhortation, there were other factors avail able which could lead the Sessions Judge to take the view that he had, and that was a possible view which any cautious Judge could have taken.
But that per se does not mean that the witnesses who had deposed to the participation of the accused at the time of occurrence have to be dubbed as liars.
[582 E F] Jainul Haque vs State of Bihar, AIR 1974 SC 45, referred to.
3.1 With respect to acquitted accused No. 3, the SeS sions judge held that though PW 17 had received injuries from the reverse side of the gandasa from the accused still in the FIR the use of weapon was mentioned but not the manner in which it was used; and that it was normally ex pected of the accused to have given at least one gandasa blow to someone from the sharp side.
Besides his taking away the revolver from the victim after the occurrence did not inspire confidence.
In the circumstances, the act of remov ing the revolver was viewed with suspicion, more so, when its recovery was made as a result of the disclosure state ment after a span of eight days of the arrest of the ac cused.
The view of the Sessions Judge that the case against acquitted accused No. 3 did not stand beyond reasonable doubt was a possible view taken on a cautious approach, without telling on the veracity of the prosecution witness es.
[582 G H; 583 A B] 3.2 Acquitted accused No. 5 was said to have used a spear bluntwise but the concerned victim was not found to have any stab or punctured wound.
The recovery of the spear taking place after seven days of arrest of the accused was viewed with suspicion due to the time lag.
There was omis sion in the FIR of the specific manner in which the weapon had been used.
The finding of benefit of doubt to accused No.5 could be given by the Sessions Judge without causing least dent to the prosecution case.
Shifting the grain from the chaff does not mean loss of grain and gain of chaff.
Such a view of the learned Judge cannot cast a reflection on the case as a whole.
[583 C E] 3.3 As regards acquitted accused No.1, finding the description of the weapon being in discord with the medical evidence the Sessions Judge held the prosecution case not to have been proved against the accused.
Even though the Ses sions Judge did not extend the benefit of doubt to the accused in so many words, his approach was an exercise in that direction.
The acquittal of accused No.1 too would cause no affectation to the prosecution case as a whole.
[589 F G] 578 4.1 The first information report specifically mentioned that the injuries to the persons on the side of the accused were as a result of the doings of accused persons them selves; and all the eye witnesses cogently and consistently deposed to that effect.
[584 B C] 4.2 The time of the occurrence being 8.00 a.m. and the inmates of the 'house being busy with their daily chores, the complainant party would not anticipate an assault and be ready with fire arms to put them to use.
The fact that the licensed weapons of the complainant party were not shown to have been used by itself established that the injuries received by the persons on the side of the accused were accidental and suffered in the man ner as suggested by the prosecution.
[584 D E]
