This appeal by the plaintiffs is against an order of rever sal dtd.7/10th February, 1975 passed by the Gujarat High Court.
Plaintiff No.1 first appellant is the contractor and Plaintiffs Nos.
2 to 4, the other appellants.
are the jagir dars of the farmer State of chhota Udepur.
The Jagirdars sold some teak trees to plaintiff No.1, contractor.
With effect from 1.8.1954, the Bombay Merged Territories and Areas (Jagirs Abolition) Act, 1953 was made applicable to village Nalej,and no compensation was awarded to the Jagir dars in lieu of the trees, as they had sold them to appel lant No.1 (since dead) and now represented by his legal representatives.
The contractor made an application to the Collector of Baroda under Sourashtra Felling of Trees Act for permission to cut the trees in question, which was forwarded to Mamlatdar of Chhota Udepur who granted the same on 25.9.1961 as a consequence whereof the contractor started cutting the trees.
The Prant Officer, Chhota Udepur however, prevented the contractor from cutting the trees whereupon the contractor represented the matter before the Divisional Forest Officer and the State Government but was told that the Jagirdars had no right to the trees standing in the reserved forest area and in the waste land.
The Government sold the trees already cut for Rs. 15786 and also sold the other trees to some other persons.
The Jagirdars and the contractor filed a suit against the State of Gujarat and the Divisional Forest Officer.
Chhota Udepur, District, Baroda for rendition of accounts, for declaratio of the plaintiffs ' title to the trees, for a declaration of the right of the contractor to cut the trees and to remove the same, and for direction to the State to issue the necessary authorisation and transit passes for cutting and removing the trees in question in favour of the contractor.
Decree for the balance of the amount of Rs. 14518.18 after adjusting Rs. 1267.82 already received was also sought.
The trial court partly decreed the suit holding that the jagir dars were the full owners of the trees and as such the 564 565 contractor had also become the full owner thereof.
The State was also ordered to pay Rs. 14518.18 with proportionate costs and interest at 4 per centum per annum on this amount from the date of decree till realisation.
The State of Gujarat appealed against that order to the High Court of Gujarat contending (i) that under Forest Rules of Chhota Udepur State, Chotta Udepur State had exercised rights over three kinds of forest reserved, protected and open, the State of Gujarat was thus competent to issue notification under sec.
4 of the Indian Forest Act, 1947.
(ii) under the rules, Mahuda and teak trees were reserved trees and they are prohibited from being cut; (iii) under the Jagir Abolition Act, Section 5, the solid vested in the jagirdar and not the trees; hence Jagirdars could not have sold the trees and (iv) the agreement executed between the contractor and the Jagirdars was not enforceable at law; the contractor could not claim any right/interest under the same.
The High Court negatived all the contentions and the rights accruable to the contractor under the agreement and allowed the appeal of the State and dismissed the suit filed by the appellants.
Hence this appeal by the appellants.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court HELD: The trees in question stood on the area which was declared as reserved forest under the forest rules framed by the Chhota Udepur State.
[512 B] Once it is established that during the time of existence of erstwhile State of Chhota Udepur an area admeasuring 290 acres and 14 gunthas in village Nalej was declared as re serve forest and jagirdars had no right at all in the trees standing in such area of reserved forest, the Jagirdars cannot be considered to have acquired a greater right on 28.7.48 when the Forest Rules of Chhota Udepur State were repealed by the Application of Laws Order.
[514 C D]
