The petitioner applied for the post of assistant in the Life Insurance Corporation of India.
She was called for written test and also for interview and was successful in both the tests.
She had to file a declaration form which she submitted to the corporation on May 25, 1989.
On the same day she was also examined by a lady doctor who was on the panel of the corporation and found medically fit for the job.
Thereafter she underwent a short term training programme and given a letter of appointment dated September 25, 1989.
She was put on probation for a period of six months and was entitled to be confirmed in the service, subject to satis factory work report.
The petitioner took leave from December 9, 1989 till March 8, 1990.
She applied for maternity leave on December 27, 1989 followed by medical certificate dated January 6, 1990.
She delivered a full term baby on January 11, 1990 in Dr. Hira Lal 's Nursing Home and was discharged from there on January 19, 1990.
On February 13, 1990 the petitioner was discharged from the service during her period of probation.
No ground was assigned and the order seemed to be a discharge simplicitor.
The petitioner moved the High Court, and the High Court, refused to interfere with the termination since the peti tioner 's work during the period of probation.
was found to be not satisfactory.
Thereafter the petitioner appealed to this Court.
After preliminary hearing the court issued an interim mandamus directing 147 the respondent to put the petitioner back to service within 15 days from the date of receipt of the court order and also issued notice for final hearing.
The corporation upon service of notice, filed the coun ter seeking to justify the termination of petitioner 's services on two grounds: (1) that the petitioner had delib erately withheld to mention the fact of being in the family way at the time of filling up the declaration form before medical examination for fitness.
The same was revealed only when she informed the corporation that she had given birth to a daughter.
(2) Her work during the probation was not satisfactory.
So it was an order of discharge simplicitor.
The Corporation further made reference to Instruction No.16 as to the medical examination for recruitment of class 1II and IV staff, wherein for the purpose of appointment, if at the time of medical examination any lady applicant is preg nant, her appointment shall be considered three months after the delivery.
Granting the appeal, the Court, HELD: While we arc moving forward to achieve the consti tutional guarantee of equal rights for women, the Life Insurance Corporation of India seems to be not moving beyond the status quo.
In the instant case there is nothing on record to indicate that the petitioner 's work during the probation was not satisfactory.
The reason for termination was only the declaration given by her at the stage of enter ing the service, though the petitioner was medically exam ined by the lady doctor and found her medically fit to join the post.
[148 D, E, 151 C] The real mischief though unintended is the nature of the declaration required from a lady candidate specially the particulars required to be furnished under columns (iii) to (viii) which are indeed embarrassing if not humilating.
The modesty and self respect may perhaps preclude the disclosure of such personal problems.
The corporation would do well to delete such columns in the declaration.
If the purpose of the declaration is to deny the maternity leave and benefits to a lady candidate who is pregnant at the time of entering the service, the Corporation could subject her to medical examination including the pregnancy test.
[151 D F] The interim order already given is made absolute though the appellant is not entitled to the salary from the date of discharge till her reinstatement.
[151 G] 148
