The tenure holder of the land in dispute father of the appellants died on 20.8.1974, leaving behind, besides the four appellants, three other sons, three daughters and a widow as his legal heirs and representatives.
After his death a notice under section 10 of the Uttar Pradesh Imposition of Ceiling on Land Holdings Act, 1960, proposing to declare certain lands as surplus, addressed to him, was served on his son appellant No. 1 who filed objections.
The Prescribed Authority partly upheld the objections and by its judgment dated 29.4.1975 determined some land as surplus.
The appel lants filed an appeal before the Civil Judge.
Meanwhile the Ceiling Act was amended by the Uttar Pradesh Act 20 of 1976, section 31 (3) whereof provided for redetermination of surplus lands within two years from 10.10.1975 in cases where orders declaring lands as surplus had been made prior to that date, notwithstanding any appeal against the original order of determination of surplus land.
A fresh notice under section 10 (2) of the Act issued to appellant No. 1 proposing to declare certain lands as surplus.
After considering the appellant 's objection the Prescribed Authority by its order dated 22.12.1976 deter mined some land as surplus, holding that the said lands were surplus which were owned by the deceased as tenure holder on the appointed day.
The appeal against the said order was dismissed by the District Judge.
In the writ petition preferred by the appellants, the High Court held that previous determination of surplus lands by the Prescribed Authority did not operate as res judicata, and that the appellate 160 authority was justified in ignoring the sale deed dated 27.10.1971.
It, however, held that the determination about some plots of lands had not been properly made, and remanded the case to the appellate authority with the direction to it to issue notice to the other brothers of the appellants.
Aggrieved, the appellants filed the appeal by special leave to this Court.
It was contended on behalf of the appellants that the proceeding for re determination of ceiling land could not have been initiated by the Prescribed Authority until notice under section 9 (2) of the Act was issued to all the heirs of the deceased tenure holder; that since the redetermination proceedings were initiated after Act 20 of 1976 was en forced, the redetermination could only be made under the provisions of the Act as amended by Act 20 of 1976 and in view of the changes in the Ceiling Act there was no surplus land liable to be vested in the State; that as two years had elapsed from the enforcement of Act 20 of 1976, no redeter mination was permissible thereafter.
Disposing of the appeal and remanding the case to the Prescribed Authority, this Court, HELD: 1.
Section 31(3) of the Uttar Pradesh Imposition of Ceiling on Land (Amendment) Act, 1976 (Act 20 of 1976) authorised the Prescribed Authority to redetermine the surplus land in relation to the tenure holder if initiated within two years from October 10, 1975.
[p. 164 D E] In the instant case, the previous determination of ceiling was made before 10.10.1975.
Accordingly, under section 31(3) of U.P. Act 20 of 1976, the Prescribed Authority had jurisdiction to initiate the said proceedings and such jurisdiction did not depend on issuance of notice under section 9 (2) of the Act to the tenure holder and/or his successors in interest.
[p. 164 EF] Shantnu Kumar vs State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors, 1977 Allahabad Law Reports p. 564, referred to.
Although the Prescribed Authority had jurisdiction to initiate the proceeding for re determination of surplus land and he had in fact initiated such proceeding within two years as referred to in 31(3) of U.P. Act 20 of 1976, yet, such determination could not have been made without affording to the heirs and legal representatives of the tenure holder an opportunity of being heard and showing cause before the Prescribed Authori ty.
[p. 164 FG] The tenure holder had died in 1974 and the said fact was made known to the Prescribed Authority when the initial determination of surplus lands was made.
It was unfortunate that in spite of the said fact, the Prescribed Authority failed and neglected to ascertain the names of all the legal heirs and representatives of the deceased tenure holder and did not issue notice to them for redetermination of surplus land.
[pp. 164 GH; 165 A] 3.
While the High Court directed to issue notice to other brothers and remanded the case to the appellate au thority, it did not direct to issue notices to other heirs and legal representatives.
Morever, without giving other heirs and legal representatives an opportunity of being heard, adjudication of the case on merits by the concerned authorities or by the High Court was not warranted.
[p. 165 AB] 4.
The Prescribed Authority will decide the question of plus land in accordance with the existing provisions of the Ceiling Act applicable on the relevant date, after issuing notices to the heirs and legal representatives of the tenure holder and giving them a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
[P 165 DE]
