A common question of law that arises for determination in these appeals by special leave is whether the act of a member of a joint family by which he impresses his individu al property with the character of joint family property or "throws" it into the hotch potch of the joint family or "blends" it with the joint family property is a 'disposi tion ' within the meaning of the .
In Civil Appeal No. 1204 of 1979 the facts are: One Natesan Chetty who died on 1.3.1972, was the Karta of a Hindu Undi vided Family, consisting of himself and his four sons.
He owned five house properties in Madras, On 18.6.70 and 16.9.1970, he made declarations by which he impressed the properties with the character of joint family properties and further declared that they would thereafter belong to HUF of which he was the Karta.
Thereafter a partition was effected in the family in March 1971 in which two of the properties came to his share.
Sri Chetty had also borrowed Rs. 46,800 from HUF out of the rental income from the properties for his business purposes.
These borrowings were duly repaid in April, 1971.
In completing the assessment to estate duty of the estate passing on the death of Natesan Chetty, the Assistant Controller of Estate Duty held that the declarations made by the deceased on 18.6.70 and 16.9.70 were "dispositions" within the meaning of the said expression as defined in the second explanation to section 2(15) of the .
He further held that since the declarations were made with out consideration, they amounted to gift which had been made within two years of the date of death and hence liable to be assessed as part of the estate passing on death under sec tion 9 of the Act.
The two properties which had fallen to the share of the deceased passed on the death of the de ceased.
He accordingly included Rs. 1,22,500 the value of the other three properties also in 168 the principal value of the estate.
The Asstt.
Controller further held that a sum of Rs. 46,800 being the loan taken and discharged by the deceased should also be added back in computing the principal value of the estate by virtue of section 46(2) of the Act.
Dissatisfied with the conclusion of the Asstt.
Control ler, the accountable person preferred an appeal to the Appellate Controller of Estate Duty which was successful.
Thereupon the Department preferred an appeal to the Tribunal which, following the decision of the Madras High Court in Rajamani Ammal vs Controller of Estate Duty, held that the sum of Rs. 1,22,500 could not be included in the value of the estate passing on the death and consequently, that the add back of Rs. 46,800 was also not justified.
Thereupon the Controller of Estate Duty applied under Section 64 (1) of the Act for a reference to the Madras High Court for its opinion on the two questions.
The Madras High Court was of the opinion that the basic question at issue was covered by the earlier decisions of the Court in Rajamani Ammal vs Controller of Estate Duty and Control ler of Estate Duty vs Smt.
Mookammal, The High Court declined to call for a reference and dis missed the application for reference.
Hence the appeals by the Department.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court, HELD: "Blending" or "partition" will not be a 'disposi tion ' within the ordinary connotation of the expression but will be one if either of the Explanations to Section 2(15) are attracted.
[179 G] Unlike an unequal partition, the act of blending will not amount to a 'disposition ' attracting Ss. 9 and 27 of the Act.
[179 H 180 A] The High Court was right in holding that the acts of blending did not result in the 'gift ' of immovable proper ties within the meaning of the statute.
[180 C] Though a declaration of blending does not amount to a 'gift ' where the act of blending is followed up by a subse quent partition, the two transactions taken together do result in the extinguishment, at the expense of the de ceased, of his rights in the properties which go to the share of other coparceners at the subsequent partition and, if the two can be treated as parts of the same transaction the Explanation to Section 2 (15) may be attracted.
[180 D E] 169 Rajamani Ammal vs Controller of Estate Duty, ; Controller of Estate Duty vs Smt.
Mookammal, ; Rangabayaki Ammal vs CED, ; CED vs Kantilal Trikamlal, ; Stremann vs CIT, SC; Goli Eswariah vs CGT, ; C.G.T.v.
Getti Chettiar, ; Cherukuru Eswaramma vs
C.E.D, ; CED vs Jai Gopal Mehta, ; C.E.D., vs Laxmi Bai, ; C.E.D.v.
Babubhai T. Panchal, ; and C.E.D.v.
Satyanaravan Babulal Chaurasia, , referred to.
