The appellant and his co heirs mortgaged their two third interest in the property as security for a loan of Rs. 27,000 obtained from one Smt.
Biswas, the predecessor in interest of the plaintiffsrespondents.
After the death of the mortgagee, some of her heirs and legal representatives filed a mortgage suit on 13.3.1961 for the recovery of the mortgage money before the Subordinate Judge and seeking enforcement and sale of the mortgaged property.
The left out heir of the mortgagee, originally arrayed as a defendant was transposed.
as a co plaintiff.
On 25.7.1962, the trial court passed a preliminary decree for.
Rs.51,570 totalling the principal sum and inter est, and costs.
The 234 decretal amount was proportioned in as much as two third was ordered as payable to the original plaintiffs and the re maining onethird to the transposed co plaintiff.
The decre tal amount was to be paid by the mortgagors in 15 equal annual instalments and in default of any one of the instal ments, the mortgagee plaintiffs were at liberty to apply for making the decree final and in the event of such application being made the mortgaged property, or a part thereof, shall be directed to be sold.
Interest also was allowed on the sum due from the date of institution of the suit till the date of realisation of the entire sum.
On 18.12.1962, the proforma respondent no.8 filed an appeal against the preliminary decree in the High Court.
Prayer for stay of execution of the decree was rejected.
Though some deposits were made on the basis of the preliminary decree, there was a failure to deposit in terms thereof.
Therefore a final decree was passed by the trial court on 6.3.1963, when the appeal against the preliminary decree was pending in the High Court.
The decree holders representing two third interest and the decree holder representing one third interest filed two separate execution petitions for realisation of their shares under the decree.
Both the execution petitions contained identical prayers for sale of the mortgaged property and the execution petitions were consolidated and numbered.
On 10.8.1963, proclamation of sale was drawn.
The value of the mortgaged property was suggested as Rs. 75,000 and Rs. 3 lacs, by the decree holders and the appellant respectively.
On 4.3.1968, before the sale of the property, the appellant made a regular objection u/s 47, C.P.C.
The appel lant had also made some more deposits within the intervening period of 41/2 years.
The property was sold on 15.3.1968 on the proclamation of sale as was drawn on 10.8.1963 for Rs. 1,00,500 in favour of the auction purchasers [respondents nos.
6 & 7].
On 11.4.1968 the appellant filed an application under Order 21, Rule 90, C.P.C. for setting aside the sale and prayed for stay of its confirmation on the grounds that the judgment debtors had no 235 saleable interest in the mortgaged property; that legally two execution petitions could not be consolidated; and that the provisions of section 35 of the Bengal Money Lenders ' Act had been overlooked.
The application under Order 21 Rule 90 was treated as part of the original objection section 47, C.P.C. The executing Court on 11.4.1968 dismissed the objection u/s 47 C.P.C. against which the appellant preferred an appeal before the High Court.
Later the petition under Order 21 Rule 90, C.P.C. was formally dismissed in default.
On 14.9.1968 the auction sale was confirmed.
In the appeal against the preliminary decree, the par ties arrived at a settlement on 13.12.1971 before the High Court.
In the place of the preliminary decree dated 21.7.1962 a new preliminary decree on settlement between the parties was passed by the High Court, whereunder the secre tal amount was principally agreed not to exceed Rs.54,000.
The sums deposited by the appellant were adjusted and the final amount struck as unpaid was put at Rs.44,000.
Having cleared off the mortgage debt, the appellant in his appeal, preferred against the rejection of objection, raised the additional legal ground that after the displace ment of the original preliminary decree by substitution, the final decree as well as the auction sale did not survive.
The High Court rejected all the legal points otherwise raised, but certified as fit questions as raised to be answered by this Court without framing anyone of them as such.
Hence this appeal by certificate, involving the question of law as to whether a court sale held in execution of a final decree, passed in a suit for recovery of mortgage money can be upset under the provisions of section 47 of C.P.C., on the displacement of the preliminary decree upon which such final decree was based.
The appellant contended that the preliminary decree dated 25.7.1962 was a preliminary decree for sale passed in terms of Order 34 Rule 4 and the final decree dated 6.3.1963 was a final decree for sale under Order 34 Rule 5(3) of the C.P.C., that the 236 right to apply for the final decree arose from the terms of the preliminary decree and on the failure of the defendant making payments in terms thereof.
And since the preliminary decree of 25.7.1962 was displaced and substituted by the preliminary decree passed b) the High Court in appeal, which was instantly satisfied, the foundation under the final decree stood removed; that the plaintiff had lost the right to ask for a final decree, there was no compulsion for the purpose or the occasion to pass it; and that the auction had become non est having no legal foundation or sanction in law.
The respondents on the other hand contended that there could not be a reverse process when the final decree had factually been passed and an auction sale in terms thereof had taken place bringing in the rights of the stranger auction purchasers.
Allowing the appeal of the judgment debtor appellant, this Court, HELD: 1.
On the substitution of the preliminary decree, even though by consent, there is no denying the fact that the seal of adjudication gets affixed to it.
The court passing it has formally expressed the terms itself under its own authority, even though at the suggestion of the parties.
It conclusively determines the right of the parties with regard to the matters in controversy valid in the suit till the stage of passing of the preliminary decree.
In the field, the only preliminary decree is the one, which was passed by the High Court substituting the original prelimi nary decree of the Trial Court, and the final decree, if at all required, is to be passed in accordance therewith.
[244 B, G] 2.
The Explanation to Section 2(2) of the Code of Civil Procedure defining the word "decree", goes to say that a decree is preliminary when further proceedings had to be taken before a suit can be completely disposed of.
It is final where such adjudication completely disposes of the suit.
It may be partly preliminary and partly final.
[244 C] 3.
In the instant case the preliminary decree whether as originally made or as substituted in appeal, had not disposed of the suit completely.
It was to be enforceable on the terms it was drawn.
There were obligations for the defendants to fulfil and on the violation to observe the obligations, rights accrued to the plaintiffs.
It cannot be twistedly said that the obligations of the defendants may substitutedly be that as defined by the appellate prelimi nary decree, but the right of the plaintiffs kept accrued on the failure of non fulfilment of the 237 obligations of the defendants under the preliminary decree of the Court of first instance.
Such an interpretation or construction would render the substantive right of appeal redundant and choked defeating the ends of justice and would otherwise be ill fitted in the scheme of Order 34, C.P.C. [244 D F] 4.
For the purposes of Section 47, the auction purchas er deemingly is a party to the suit in which the decree is passed if he has purchased the property at the sale and execution of that decree.
[245 B] 5.
Instantly, the auction purchasers had purchased the property in execution Of the final decree and not in execu tion of the preliminary decree and on that basis can at best be deemed to be parties to the suit throughout only on the strength the final decree if obtained on the terms of the existing preliminary decree.
But the property was not put to sale in execution of the preliminary decree.
The auction purchasers cannot claim themselves to be parties to the suit at the time of or at any time prior to the passing of the preliminary decree.
The preliminary decree and final decree are passed under Order 34 of the Code of Civil Procedure in one and the same suit, in which two decrees may be required to be passed at separate stages.
And both being formal adjudications to the stage are formal expressions of deci sion of the Court.
At the stage of the preliminary decree there arises no question of the property under mortgage being put to sale in execution of the decree, and if that is so the ultimate auction purchaser cannot be held deemingly to be party to the suit upto the stage of the preliminary decree.
[245 B E] 6.
The converse interpretation that the auction pur chaser at a sale and execution of the final decree shall be deemed to be a party to the suit at and prior to the stage when preliminary decree is passed, unless sustaining, would be contrary to the spirit and scheme of Order 34 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
And since all questions arising between the parties to the suit in which the decree was passed, or their representatives, and relating to the execution dis charge or satisfaction of the decree are required to be determined by the Court executing the decree and not by a separate suit, the objection of the appellant judgment debtor with regard to the knocking out of the original preliminary decree was sustainable.
[245 E G] 7.
In terms of the preliminary appellate decree and fulfilment of the obligations of the defendants on payment of the sum as struck, there remained no occasion for enter taining, maintaining or 238 sustaining the application of the plaintiff mortgagees for sale of the property mortgaged and on that basis the auction sale in favour of the auction purchasers and confirmation of that sale automatically becomes non est.
The High Court went wrong in rejecting the objection of the appellant judgment debtor.
[245 G H] 8.
No compensatory sum is due to the auction purchasers under the strict terms of sub rule (2) of Rule 5 of Order 34.
In exercise of the Court 's inherent powers under the C.P.C. and powers otherwise under Article 142 of the Consti tution, to further the cause of complete justice, confining it to the facts of the case, and to be fair to the auction purchasers, the appellant is directed to burden himself in paying to the auction purchasers, interest on their blocked sum of Rs.1,05,000 the purchase money, lying in Court since 1963, which was quantified as equivalent to the sum deposit ed.
[246 D,E F] Hukumchand vs Bansilal & Ors., ; ; Janak Raj vs Gurdial Singh and Anr., ; and Sardar Govindrao Mahadik & Anr.
vs Devi Sahai & Ors., ; , referred to.
