The appellant, a Stage Carriage Operator, filed an appli cation for renewal of his permit under section 58(2) of the and his application was notified.
However, before the renewal could be granted the came into force.
The respondent had also applied for a fresh permit on the same route on which the appellant was operating his carriage.
The Regional Transport Authority allowed renewal of the appellant 's permit and rejected the respondent 's application.
On respondent 's appeal the State Transport Appellate Tribunal held that no appeal against renewal was maintainable.
The respondent filed a writ petition and the High Court allowed it by holding that right to seek renewal of a permit was not a vested right but was merely an incohate right which ripened into a right only on being granted; with the coming into force of 1988 Act, the 1939 Act was repealed as a result of which the appellant 's application for renewal ceased to exist and consequently the Regional Transport Authority was not empowered to grant a renewal of permit.
Against the decision of the High Court an appeal was filed in this Court.
Allowing the appeal and setting aside the order of the High Court, this Court, 306 HELD: 1.
The High Court committed a manifest error of law in rejecting the appellant 's application of renewal on the ground that the new Act had come into force.
[310 H] 1.1 Although section 58(2) of the uses the word 'may ' but read with proviso it creates a preference in favour of a permit holder to claim renewal if other conditions were equal.
A holder of a permit thus stands on a better footing.
The preference created by sub section (2) of Section 58 for consideration of the permit and its grant cannot be said to be a mere incohate right, or a right which does not exist in law.
It may not be a vested right or a fundamental right but it certainly is civil right which could be enforced in a court of law and any authority acting in contravention of it can be forced to act in ac cordance with it.
[310 B C] 1.2 The right accrued to appellant as he had already applied for renewal and his application had been notified.
The legal machinery was set in motion by him.
He therefore had a right to get his application for renewal processed and considered in accordance with 1939 Act.
It would be too technical to say that no right had accrued to him under 1939 Act.
By virtue of Section 6(c) of the the right of the appellant to get his application considered and decided in accordance with law was saved by subsection (4) of Section 217 of .
[310 D E] The Brihan Maharashtra Sugar Syndicate Ltd. vs Janardan Ramchandra Kulkarni & Ors, [1960] 3 S.C.R.85, followed.
Cheran Transport Co. Ltd. vs Kanan Lorry Service & ,Anr, ; ; D. Nataraja Mudsliar vs State Transport Authority, Madras , referred to. 2.
The objective of Section 6(c) of the is to ensure protection of any right or privilage ac quired under the repealed Act.
The only exception to it is legislative intention to the contrary.
That is, the repeal ing Act may expressly provide or it may impliedly provide against continuance of such right, obligation or liability.
[309 E] 3.
The new Act is a legislation on the same subject and Section 81 of the said Act specifically provides for renewal of permits.
The scheme of renewal having been continued even under new Act mere absence of preference clause in Section 81 of the new Act 307 could not be construed as destroying the claim for renewal set in motion under the old Act.
[311 B C]
