On 13.3.1976, it was found that the respondent sold adulterated cumin(Jira).
The Food Inspector purchased the Jira under the provisions of the Act and on analysis the Public Analyst found that it was adulterated.
The respondent was charged u/s.16(1)(a)(i) read with section 7(1) of the .
The Trial Court acquitted the respondent on the ground that his father was the owner of the shop and assuming that if that fact had been brought to the notice of the sanction ing authority section 20 of the Act, it would not have permit ted to prosecute the respondent, the son of the owner of the shop and relying on the Jagannath Sahu 's 252 case (1973)(2) Cuttack Weekly Reporter, 1536.
The High Court on appeal confirmed the acquittal order of the trial court.
On the question, whether it was necessary that the respondent should be the owner of the shop for being prose cuted for the offences section 16(1)(a)(i) read with section 7(1) of the Act, allowing the appeal filed by the State, this Court, HELD: 1.
The Act is a welfare legislation to prevent health hazards by consuming adulterated food.
The mens tea is not an essential ingredient.
It is a social evil and the Act prohibits commission of the offences under the Act.
The essential ingredient is sale to the purchaser by the vendor.
It is not material to establish the capacity of the person vis a vis the owner of the shop to prove his authority to sell the adulterated food exposed for sale in the shop.
It is enough for the prosecution to establish that the person, who sold the adulterated article of food had sold it to the purchaser (including the Food Inspector ) and that Food Inspector purchased the same in strict compliance with the provisions of the Act.
[256 BC] 2.
The sanctioning authority has to consider the mate rial placed before it whether the offence of adulteration of food was committed and punishable under the Act.
Once that satisfaction is reached and the authority is competent to grant the sanction, the sanction is valid.
It is not neces sary for the sanctioning authority to consider that the person sold is the owner, servant, agent or partner or relative of the owner or was duly authorised in this behalf.
[256 C D] 3.
Grant of sanction to prosecute for an offence under the Act is a condition precedent.
If no valid sanction was granted by the authority, certainly the accused is entitled to the benefit of statutory infraction, though it is techni cal and be acquitted of the offence.
The relevant criteria under section 20(1) is the competence of the officer to grant the sanction for the offence.
it does not postulate whether the person sold should be the owner or a servant or a person on behalf of the owner (son of the owner).
[255 A] 4.
No 'person ' shall himself or any person on his behalf manufacture for sale, or store or sell or distribute any adulterated food etc.
The phrase "himself or any person on his behalf" obviously included any other person like servant, son, father or agent irre 253 spective of the relationship legal or jural etc.
The person so sold during the course of business either the owner or the person that sold the adulterated food or article of food or both are liable to prosecution.
[255 B C] 5.
If the article sold by a vendor is not of the na ture, substance or quality demanded by the purchaser, who is to purchase, the article is adulterated.
If the quality or variety of the article fall below the prescribed standard of its constituents are present in quantities not within the prescribed limits of variability, is also adulterated.
The food or article of food is adulterated, if it is not of the nature, substance or quality demanded by the purchaser and sold by the seller and is to his prejudice, or contains any foreign substance in excess of its prescribed limit, so as to effect injuriously, the nature, substance or quality thereof.
The word 'adulterated ' was used widely.
[254 F] 6.
As 15 years have passed by from the date of the offence, the ends of justice may not serve to send the respondent to imprisonment.
Suffice that he bas undergone, all these years, the agony of the prosecution.
In the cir cumstances a sentence of fine of a sum of Rs.500 is imposed, in default the imprisonment for a period of one month.
[256 G] Jagannath Sahu vs Food Inspector, Jaipur Municipality, 1973(2) Cuttack Weekly Reporter 1556, overruled.
Sarjoo Prasad vs The State of U.P., [1961] 3 S.C.R. 324; Ibrahim Haji Moideen & Anr.
vs Food Inspector & Ant., 1976 (2) All India Prevention of Food Adulteration Cases 66, referred to.
