The appellant the Chief Editor of a leading daily newspaper was arrayed as an accused in the complaint case initated by the respondent no.2, an advocate, who was ag grieved by a news item published in the newspaper before the Additional Judicial Magistrate, sections 500 and 34 I.P.C.
The Magistrate issued summons to the accused appellant, who pleaded not guilty.
The appellant requested the Magis trate to drop the proceedings against him, before the evi dence was recorded, contending that there was no averment in the complaint that he had perused the material or edited before its publications or that it was published with his knowledge or consent.
The Magistrate dropped the proceedings against the appel lant.
The revision, moved by the complainant was allowed by the 365 High Court.
This appeal has been filed by special leave against the order Of the High Court.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
The power to drop proceedings against the accused cannot be denied to the Magistrate.
Section 204 of the Code indicates that the proceedings before the Magis trate commences upon taking cognizance of the offence and the issue of summons to the accused.
When the accused enters appearance in response to the summons, the Magistrate has to take proceedings under Chapter XX of the Code.
But the need to try the accused arises when there is allegation in the complaint that the accused has committed the crime.
, If there is no allegation in the complaint involving the ac cused in the commission of the crime, it is implied that the Magistrate has no jurisdiction to proceed against the ac cused.
[368 A C] 2.
It is open to the accused to plead before the Magis trate that the process against him ought not to have been issucd.
Magistrate may drop the proceedings if he is satis fied on reconsideration of the complaint that there is no offence for which the accused could be tried.
It is :his judicial discrction.
[368 C D] 3.
No specific provision required for the Magistrate to drop the proceedings or rescind the process.
The order issuing the process is an interim order: and not a judg ment.
It can be varied or recalled.
The fact that the process has already been issued is no bar to drop the proceedings if the complaint on the very face of its does not disclose any offence against the accused.
[368 D E] 4.
Section 7 of the Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867 has no applicability for a person who is simply named as 'Chief Editor '. 'The presumption under Section7 is only against the person whose name is printed as 'Editor ' as required under Section 5(1).
There is a mandato ry (though rebuttable) presumption that the person whose name is printed as 'editor ' is the editor of every portion of that issue of the newspaper of which a copy is produccd.
The Act does not recognize any: other legal entity for raising the presumption.
Even if the name of the Chief Editor is printed in the newspaper there is no Presumption against him under Section 7 of the Act.
[368 E G] 5.
No person should be tried without a prima ficie case.
For a Magistrate to take congnizance of the offence as against the Chief 366 Editor, there must be positive averments in the complaint of knowledge of the objectionable character of the matter.
The complaint in the instant case does not contain any such allegation.
In the absence of such allegation, the Magis trate was justified in directing that the complaint so far as it relates to the Chief Editor could not be proceeded with.
[369 B, A] State of Maharashtra vs Dr. R.B. Chowdhaty & Ors., ; ; D.P. Mishra vs Kamal Narain Sharma & Ors., [1971] 3 SCR 257; Nara Singh Charan Mohanty vs Suren dra Mohantv; , and Haji C.H.Mohammad Koya vs T.K. S.M.A.Muthukoya, ; , referred to.
