The appellant Corporation engaged the respondents con tractors to carry out work of excavation, conversion of over head electric lines and laying of underground cables under public roads and for repair and maintenance.
On 26.8.1975, the Regional Director of the Employees ' State Insurance Corporation noticed the appellant that the employees, whose wages were being paid through the respond ents contractors, would come under the provisions of Section 2(9) of the . 268 The appellant directed the representative body of the contractors respondents ' Association to comply with the provisions of the Act immediately, failing which a lumpsum of 7% would be deducted from their bills.
When the respond ents ' Association refused to carry out such obligation, the appellant started to deduct the E.S.I. contribution amount at the rate of 10% from their bills from 1984 and continued deducting till 1985.
The respondents contractors challenged the deductions from bills by filing a writ petition before the High Court, contending thai for carrying out their contracts, the re spondents were not supervised by the appellant, the princi pal employer and they were carrying out the allotted work under the contracts of sites outside the factory establish ment of the appellant and that the employees of the respond ents did not come within the definition of the term, 'em ployee ' under section 2(9) of the Act.
On 23.3.1984, the Single Judge of the High Court passed an interim order permitting the appellant to respond to the notice issued by the E.S.I.C. and staying the realisation of the E.S.I. contribution from the respondent contractors.
On 30.3.1985, under section 45 A of the Act, the Region al Director, E.S.I.C. held that the appellant was liable to pay the E.S.I. contribution in respect of the employees of its contractors and directed to pay the same.
The appellant challenged that order under Article 226 of the Constitution of India by filing another writ petition.
The Single Judge hearing both the writ petitions togeth er, dismissed them, holding that the ultimate supervision was that of the appellant and hence the Act was applicable.
Following the decision of this Court in M.G. Beedi Works case (AIR 1974 SC 1952), the Single Judge further held that the respondents contractors were agents of the appellant the principal employer, and that the appellant the principal employer could not escape the liability for the works of its agents the respondents contractors.
The Division Bench, in appeal, reversed the judgment of the Single Judge, against which the present appeals by special leave were made to this Court posing the question whether on the facts, the right of the principal employer to reject or accept work on 269 completion, on scrutinizing compliance with job require ments, as accomplished by a contractor, the immediate em ployer, through his employees, is in itself an effective and meaningful 'supervision ' as envisaged under section 2(9) of the E.S.I. Act, 1948?" The appellants contended that the High Court fell in error in giving a restricted meaning to the word, 'supervi sion ', occurring in section 2(9) of the Act and in taking out the final act of rejection or acceptance of work from the purview of that word.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court, HELD: Per Ranganath Misra, CJ. 1.
The legislative intention should have been brought out more clearly by undertaking appropriate legislation once this Court took a different view.
The legislation is benefi cial and if by interpretation put by the Court the intention is not properly brought out it becomes a matter for the legislature to attend to.
[278 E] Per M.M. Punchhi.
In whatever manner the word 'employee ' under Section 2(9) be construed, liberally or restrictidly, the construc tion cannot go to the extent of ruling out the function and role of the immediate employer or obliterating the distance between the principal employer and the immediate employer.
In some situations he is the cut off.
He is the one who stumbles in the way of direct nexus being established, unless statutorily fictioned, between the employee and the principal employer.
He is the one who in a given situation is the principal employer to the employee, directly employed under him.
If the work by the employee is conducted under the immediate gaze or overseeing of the principal employer, or his agent, subject to other conditions as envisaged being fulfilled, he would be an employee for the purpose of sec tion 2(9).
[284 B D] 2.
In the ordinary dictional sense "to supervise" means to direct or over see the performance or operation of an activity and to over see it, watch over and direct.
It is work under eye and gaze of someone, who can immediately direct a corrective and tender advice.
In the textual sense 'supervision ' of the principal employer or his agent is on 'work ' at the places envisaged and the word 'work ' can neither be construed so broadly to be the final act of 270 acceptance or rejection of work, nor so narrowly so as to be supervision at all times and at each and every step of the work.
A harmonious construction alone would help carry out the purpose of the Act, which would mean moderating the two extremes.
[284 G H] 3.
When the employee is put to work under the eye and gaze of the principal employer, or his agent, where he can be watched secretly, accidently, or occasionally, while the work is in progress, so as to Scrutinise the quality thereof and to detect faults therein, as also put to timely remedial measures by directions given, finally leading to the satis factory,completion and acceptance of the work, that would be supervision for the purposes of Section 2(9) of the Act.
It is the consistency of vigil, the proverbial 'a stich in time saves nine '.
The standards of vigil would of course depend on the facts of each case.
[284 H 285 B] 4.
Section 182 of the defines "agent" as a person employed to do any act or to represent another in dealing with third persons, the person for whom such act is done, or is so represented is called the "prin cipal".
Section 184 of the said Act further provides that as between Principal and the third person any person may become a, agent so as to be responsible to his principal.
[288 E] 5.
The agent has an identity distinct from his Princi pal in one sense and a fictional identity with his Principal in the other.
The agreement nowhere amalgamates the identity of the electrical contractor with that of the principal (C.E.S.C.) by undertaking to provide adequate supervision for the purposes of the Act, on behalf of the C.E.S.C.
The agreement no doubt provides that the electrical contractor would provide adequate supervision while carrying on with the work, the purpose dominant is to safeguard obtaining quality work and safety safeguards and to conform to the provisions of the Electricity Supply Act.
[288 E G] 6.
The creation or deduction of principal agent rela tionship throws one towards the statutory scheme of keeping distinct the concept of the principal and immediate employ er, because of diverse and distinct roles.
[285 D] 7.
The electrical contractor is obliged to provide competent supervision while carrying out the work.
The electrical contractor 271 is otherwise a licensee under the Indian Electricity Act and the Rules made thereunder.
[286 C] 8.
The principal employer can not delegate the function of supervision to his agent who in the eye of law is his second self, i.e., a substitute of the principal employer.
The immediate employer can by statutory compulsion never be the agent of the principal employer.
If such a relationship is permitted to be established, it would, not only obliter ate the distinction between the two, but would violate the provisions of the Act as well as the contractual principle that a contractor and a contractee cannot be the same per son.
[285 B C] 9.
Checking of work after the same is completed and supervision of work while in progress is not the same.
These have different perceptions.
Checking of work on its comple tion is an activity, the purpose of which is to finally accept or reject the work, on the touchstone of job specifi cations.
Thereafter if accepted, it has to be paid on the acceptance of the work.
This step by no means is supervision exercised.
It cannot be the terminating point of an agency when the interests of the so called principal and the so called agent become business like.
[288 H 289 B] 10.
Supervision rested with persons holding valid cer tificates of competency for which a register of supervision was required under the licence to be maintained.
[289 C] 11.
Under the contracts, the electrical contractors cannot in one breath be termed as agents of the C.E.S.C. undertaking supervision of the work of their employees and innately under the licence to have beforehand delegated that function to the holder of the certificate of competency.
[289 C D] 12.
Even if, the terms of the contract and the terms and conditions of the licence, the first being at the behest of the C.E.S.C. and the second being at the behest of the Government, be suggested to be complementing each other, still these cannot be so interplayed to mean that an agency, express or implied, has been created by the C.E.S.C. in favour of the electrical contractor appointing him to super vise work as envisaged under Section 2(9) of the Act, and thus to have established a direct link between the employee and the C.E.S.C. to the exclusion of the electrical contrac tor.
[288 C D] 13.
On the terms of the contract read with or without the terms of the licence, no such agency, factually or legally, stood ere 272 ated on behalf of the C.E.S.C. in favour of the electrical contractors, and none could be, as that would violate the statutory scheme of distinction well marked under Section 2(9) of the Act.
The supervision taken was to fulfil a contractual obligation simplicitor.
[289 D] 14.
The employees of the electrical contractors, on the facts and circumstances do not come in the grip of the Act and thus all demands made towards ESI contribution made against the C.E.S.C. and the electrical contractors were invalid.
[289 E F] M.G.
Beedi Works vs Union of lndia, AIR 1974 SC 1952; Royal Talkies vs E.S.I.C, ; ; Regional Director E.S.I.C. Trichur vs Ramanuja Match Industries, ; M/s. P.M. Patel & Sons & Others vs Union of India & Ors.
[1986]1 SCC 32; The Superintendent of Post Offices etc.
etc., vs
P.K. Rajamma etc.
; , , referred to.
Halsbury 's Laws of England (Hailsham Edition) Vol 1 at page 193, referred to.
Per K. Ramaswamy, J. (Dissenting) 1.
The seeks to serve the twin objects namely, social security, i.e., medi cal benefits in case of sickness, maternity and employment injury and other matters relating thereto and to augment the efficient performance of the duty.
[289 H 290 A] 2.
Section 2(9) of the Act encompasscs employees em ployed for wages in or in connection with the work of a factory or establishment to which the Act applies (i) who arc directly employed by the principal employer or (ii) employed by or through "an immediate employer"; and whose services are temporarily lent or let on hire to the princi pal employer by the person with whom the person is entered into a contract of service.
[293 B C] 3.
Clause 2(9)(ii) (applicable to the facts on hand) attracts a person employed by or through an immediate em ployer as an employee of the principal employer provided the f. flowing conditions are satisfied, namely, (1) the immedi ate employer employs an employee on the premises of the factory or establishment of the principal employer; (2) or "under the supervision of the principal employer".
(3) "his agent" on work which is ordinarily part of the 273 work of the factory or establishment or which is preliminary to the work carried out in or incidental to the purpose of the factory or establishment.
[293 C D] 4.
Article 39(2) of the Constitution enjoins the State to direct its policies to secure the health and strength of workers.
The right to social justice is a fundamental right.
Right to livelihood springs from the right to life guaran teed under article 21.
The health and strength of a worker is an integral facet of right to life.
The aim of fundamental rights is to create an egalitarian society to free all citizens from coercion or restrictions by society and to make liberty available for all.
Right to human dignity, development of personality, social protection, right to rest and leisure as fundamcntal human rights to common man mean nothing more than the status without means.
To the tillers of the soil, wage earners, labourers, wood cutters, rickshaw pullers, scavengers and hut dwellers, the civil and politi cal rights are 'mere cosmetic" rights.
Socio economic and cultural rights are their means and relevant to them to realise the basic aspirations of meaningful right to life.
[293 F H] 5.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights, Interna tional Conventions of Economic, Social and Cultural Rights rccognise their needs which include right to food, clothing, housing, education, right to work, leizure, fair wages, decent working conditions, social security, right to physi cal or mental health, protection of their families as inte gral part of the right to life.
Our Constitution in the Preamble and Part IV reinforce them compendiously as social economic justice, a bed rock to an egalitarian social order.
The right to social and economic justice is thus fundamental right.
[293 H 294 B] 6.
The term 'health ' implies more than an absence of sickness.
Medical care and health facilities not only project against sickness but also ensures stable man power for economic development.
Facilities of health and medical care generate devotion and dedication to give the workers ' best, physically as well as mentally in productivity.
It enables the worker to enjoy the fruit of his labour, to keep him physically fit and mentally alert for leading a success ful, economic, social and cultural life.
The medical facili ties, arc thcrefore, part of social security and like gilt edged security, it would yield immediate return in the increased production or at any rate reduce absenteeism on grounds of sickness, etc.
health is thus a state of complete physical, menial and social well being and nut merely the absence of disease or infirmity.
[294 E G] 274 7.
Right to health is a fundamental human right to workmen.
The maintenance of health is a most imperative constitutional goal whose realisation requires interaction by many social and economic factors.
Just and favourable condition of work implies to ensure safe and healthy working conditions to the workmen.
The periodical medical treatment invigorates the health of the workmen and harnesses their human resources.
Prevention of occupational disabilities generates devotion and dedication to duty and enthuse the workmen to render efficient service which is a valuable asset for greater productivity to the employer and national production to the State.
[294 H 29S B] 8.The aims at relieving the employees from health and occupational hazards.
The interpretation calls for in this case is of the meaning of the meanings 'supervision ' and 'agent ' in s.2(9)(ii) of the Act.
The legal interpretation is not an activity sui gener is.
The purpose of the enactment is the touch stone of interpretation and every effort would be to give effect to it.
The judge acts as a vehicle of communication between the authors and the recipients.
The end result is to promote rule of law and to enliven social order and humane rela tions.
[295 C D] 9.
In an attempt to construe the provisions of the statute, construction, as a balancing wheel, should be meaningful so as to make the statute workable and not to render it futile or sterile.
Whenever strict interpretation of the statute gives rise to unjust situation or results, the Judges can ensure their good sense to remedy it by reading words in, if necessary, so as to do what Parliament would have done had they had the situation in mind.
The meaning of the same words in a statute may be mended in the laborynth of interpretation and may be enlarged or restrict ed in order to harmonise them with the legislative intention of the entire statute.
The spirit of the statute would prevail over the literal meaning.
The jurisprudence and principle, therefore, in such a situation, would be the contextual interpretation to subserve the constitutional scheme and to alongate the legislative purpose, harmonising the individual interest with the community good so as to effectuate social transformation envisioned in the preamble of the Constitution.
[297 D F] 10.
The word "supervision" is not one of precise import and is broad enough to require either supervisor 's constant presence during work supervised or his devotion thereto if only time necessary to see that it complies with contract specifications, advise as to details, prepare necessary sketches and drawings, etc.
[298 C] 275 11.
The does not give its own definition of the word "supervision".
Therefore, it must be construed in the context the ultimate purpose the Act aims to serve and the object behind the Act, i.e. to extend sickness benefits and to relieve the employee from occupa tional hazards consistent with the constitutional and human rights scheme.
Under the Electricity Act and the Rules, the Corporation, licencee, is enjoined to perform the acts and duties contemplated thereunder to lay overhead lines, under ground cables, their repairs and maintenance there of, etc.
It authorised, under the contract, the immediate employer to perform, on its behalf, those acts and duties.
The immediate employer would get the work done through their employees employed for that purpose.
It is not a sporadic work but a constant and an ongoing process, so long as the licencee generates, transmits and supplies electrical energy to the consumers of their supply area.
Had the principal employer performed those acts and duties through its employees, indisputably, their employees would be covered under the Act, though the work was got done at highways or at places other than the factory or the establishment.
When the prin cipal employer authorises the respondents as its contractors under contracts the need for constant supervision is obviat ed relegating that function to its immediate employers.
Otherwise the need for contracts would be redundant.
The Corporation retained, under the contract, the power of acceptance or rejection of the work done or supervision effected in maintenance of the work got done by the immedi ate employer, subject to overall supervision by the Electri cal Inspector, on behalf of the State Government.
The super vision in the fact situation is not the day to day supervi sion but legal control, i.e. right to accept or reject the work done or maintenance effected.
The exercise of right of acceptance or rejection is the supervision as envisaged in the contract between the principal employer and the immedi ate employer.
It would supply the needed unifying or con necting thread between the constitutional creed of social justice i.e., social security under the Act and supervision of the acts or duties by the principal employer vis a vis the employees of the immediate employer under the contract who ultimately perform them on behalf of the principal employer.
Undoubtedly in a bilateral contract between the corporation and the respondents qua their rights and liabil ities under the contracts, strict interpretation of the words cngrafted therein, be of paramount relevance and call for attention as per Contract Act.
[301 C 302 B] 12.
In the context of the statutory interpretation of "supervision" under the Act of the works undertaken under the contract, the 276 interest of the workmen or the welfare schemes for the employees under the Act interposed and call attention to and need primacy.
In its construction the courts must adopt contextual approach to effectuate the statutory animation, namely, social security.
The literal interpretation would feed injustice in perpetuity denying to the employees of sickness benefit etc.
under the Act, which would be avoided, lest the purpose of the Act would be frustrated.
[302 B C] 13.
The application of the golden rule to the word "agency" under the between the respond ents and the corporation, perhaps, does not encompass agency in strict sense under the Act.
But public policy of the Act, the constitutional and human right 's philosophy to provide social security to protect the health and strength of the workers must be kept at the back of the mind to construe the word "agent" under section 2 (9) (ii) of the Act, in contradis tinction with the bilateral stipulations under the contract.
In this regard public policy interposes and plays a vital role to read into the contracts the extended meaning of agency to bring about connecting links between the respond ents and the licencee corporation.
Lest the contract, if intended to deny welfare benefits to workmen, would be opposed to public ' policy and would become void under section 23 of the .
Such an intention would be avoided by reading into the contract the extended meaning of agency but not fiduciary.
[302 E G] 14.
The contractors, respondents, knew at the date of the agreements that the Corporation, as principal employer, is under statutory obligation to execute or keep executed the works and keep them repaired and maintained as an inte gral activity of generation, transmission and distribution of the electrical energy to the consumers within their area of supply.
On authorisation, the respondents execute and keep executed the works and repairs or kept them repaired and the maintenance thereof effected through their employ ees, which in law is on behalf of the Corporation, principal employer.
The genesis and aim of the transaction was to act on behalf of the Corporation.
The agency of the respondent with the Corporation, thus, springs into being.
The prohibi tion of the qualified supervisors, while in service of the respondents, to disengage themselves with third parties in terms of the contract was only to extract unstinted and exclusive devotion to duty and no further.
It stands no impediment to construe that/he respondents are agents to the Corporation as immediate employers.
[303 F H] 277 15.
The employees working under the respondents perform their duties in execution of the works, repairs and mainte nance thereof in connection with the generation, transmis sion and distribution of the electrical energy by the Corpo ration licensee.
The Corporation is the principal employer.
The respondents ' immediate employers execute the work etc.
under the supervision of the Corporation as its agents.
Their employees, in law, work under the supervision of the principal employer, corporation.
They are covered under s.2(9) (ii) of the Act entitling to the sickness benefits, etc.
envisaged therein and the respondents are liable to make their contribution to the Employees ' Insurance Fund.
[304 A B] Senior Electric Inspector & Ors.
vs Laxmi Naravan Chopra Muddala Veeramallapa & Ors., ; at p. 313; Massachusetts Bonding & Insurance Co. vs United States of America, ; , ; Atma Ram Mittal vs Ishwar Singh Punia, ; ; Owen vs Evans & Owen (Build ers) Ltd., 1962(1) Weekly Law Reports 933; Regional Direc tor, E.S.I.C vs South India Flour Mills (P) Ltd., ; A.P. State Electricitv Board vs
E.S.I.C, Hydera bad, ; Regional Director.
E.S.I.C, Bangalore vs Davangere Cotton Mills, ; E.S.I.C Chandigarh vs Oswal Woolien Mills Ltd., &H) (F.B.); Birohichand Sharma vs First Civil Judge, Nagpur & Ors., ; ; D.C Dewan Mohideen Sahib & Sons vs The Industrial Tribunal.
Madras, ; ; Nagpur Electric Light & Power Co. Ltd. vs Regional Director E.S.I.C, [1967] 3 SCR Reprint 92; Kirloskar, Pneu matic Co. Ltd. vs
E.S.I.C, ; Royal Talkies, Hyderabad & Ors.
E.S.I.C; , ; M/S. P.M. Patel & Sons & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; , Superintendent of Post Office vs
P.K. Rajamma; , ; Prenn vs Simmonds, 1971 (1) Weekly Law Reports 1381 (H.L.), referred to.
World Labour Report 2, at Chapter 9 (Safety and Health); Lawyer Oct. ; Report of the Committee on Labour Welfare, 1969 in paragraph 5.77 of Chapter 5; Webster Comprehensive Dictionary (International Edition) at page 1260, in Vol, 1I; Corpus Juris Secundum, Vol. 83 at page 900; The Words and Phrases.
Permanent Edition, Vol.
40A; Halsbury 's Laws of England (Hailsham Edition); Chitty on Contracts, 26th Edition, paragraph 2502 at page 4, A.G.Guest:Anson 's Law of Contract, 26th Edition, at page 308 referred to.
