This application is in public interest seeking relief for issuing appropriate directions of this Court to Cinema, exhibition hails to exhibit slides containing information and messages on environment free of cost.
Further directions for spread of information relating to environment in nation al and regional languages vide broadcast thereof on the All India Radio, exposure thereof on television in regular and short term programmes with a view to educating the people of India about their social obligation in the matter of the upkeep of the environment in proper shape and making them alive to their obligation not to act as polluting agencies or factors.
It is further prayed that environment should be made a compulsory subject in schools and colleges in a graded system so that there would be a general growth of awareness.
Till 1972 general awareness of mankind to the environ ment for the well being of mankind had not been appropriate ly appreciated.
In 1975 the Constitution underwent an amend ment by incorporating an Article 51A with the heading "Fundamental Duties" Clause (g) thereof requires every citizen to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers and wild life and to have compassion for every living creature.
In 1974 Water Pollu tion Central Act came on the statues book.
In 1981 Air Pollution (Central Act) and finally in 1986 the Environment Protection Act were enacted.
Law is a regulator of human conduct but no law can indeed effectively work unless there is an element of ac ceptance by the people in society.
379 There has been an explosion of human population, over the last 50 years.
Life has become competitive so the age old norms of good living are no longer followed.
It has therefore, become necessary that people be made aware of vice of pollution and its level of consequenceS. Keepingg the citizen informed is an obligation of the Government as well as the responsibility of society to adequately educate every component of it so that social level is kept up.
Disposing of the matter, the Court, HELD The principle on which the praayer is made is accepted and the following directions are issued 1.
That the Cenaral Governmeent, the State Government and Union Tcrritories should invariably enforce as a condi tion of license of all cinema halls, touring Cinemas and video parlours to exhibit.
free of cost at feast two slidcs/messages on environment in each show undertaken by them.
The Ministry of Environment should within two months from.
now come out with appropriate slide material on var ious aspect of environment and pollution.
This material should be circulated to the collectors who arc the licensing authori ties for compliance without any further directions and failure to comply with the Court order should be treated as a ground for.
cancellation of the licence by the appro priate authorities.
[382 A C] 2.
The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting of the Government of India should without delay start pronouncing information films of short duration on various aspects of environment and pollution bringing out the benefits for society on the environment protection and hazardous involved in environment pollution.
[382 D] 3.
The national network, the State Door Darshan Cen tres, All India Radio, Television should take proper steps to exhibit such films and interesting programmes on the subject.
There should be regular compliance of these direc tions be followed from February 1, 1992.
[382 G H] 4.
The principle that through the medium of educational awareness of the environment and its pollution problems should be taught as a compulsory subject at every level of education.
University Grants Commission should prescribe a course on environment in a graded manner as a compulsory subject in college education.
The compliance of this re quirement be done in the next academic year.
[383 A C] 380 Since there is a general acceptance throughout the world as also in our country that protection of environment keeping free of pollution is an indispensable necessity of life to survive on earth so everyone must turn his immediate attention to the proper care to sustain environment in a decent way.
