These matters relate to admission in post graduate courses in the Medical Colleges in Uttar Pradesh.
On a Writ Petition, which later turned out to be fake, the High Court had ordered that admission could be effected on the basis of the MBBS Examination.
This has been disputed in appeal before this Court.
In another Writ Petition, pending hearing, the High Court directed that provisional admission be given to two candidates, one in MS (Surgery) and another in MD (Medicine).
The Principal of the Medical college and others preferred an appeal against the High Court 's order.
It was contended that granting admission, though provi sional, at an interlocutory stage in a pending proceeding creates a lot of adverse consequences and indiscipline in the system of imparting education.
Dismissing the matters, this Court, 385 HELD: 1.1 It transpires that the proceedings before the High Court were totally fraudulent and no one by the name given in the petition as petitioner could really be identi fied.
This Court had clearly indicated that no admission should be permitted on the basis of the MBBS results.
Noth ing survives now, as the High Court 's order has already been reversed.
[386 F,G] 2.1 It is already settled that admission for 25 per cent of the seats in post graduate courses should be regulated on the basis of all India selection and in regard to the re mainder of 75 per cent the States were left to decide the procedure for admission.
[387 E] 2.2 Unless there is a sincere and thorough educational discipline to be gone through as a precondition to the grant of the requisite certificate the lives of citizens would be at peril.
The Indian Medical Council has prescribed a rea sonable period of study, on expert advice, and upon taking into consideration the experience over the years as to how much study is necessary for the requisite qualification to be gathered.
This Court has also indicated the dates of admission and commencement of the courses of study.
These are prescriptions for a purpose and are not intended to be empty formalities to be violated.
[387 G, H; 388 A] Dr. Pradeep Jain & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, [1984] 3 S.C.C. 654, relied on.
It is a well known rule of practice and procedure that at an interlocutory stage, a relief which is asked for and is available at the disposal of the matter, is not (generally) granted.
To have it granted at the threshold creates a lot of difficulties.
In a case where the petition er ultimately loses in a case of this type a very embarrass ing situation crops up.
If he has by then read for two to three years, there is a claim of equity raised on the plea that one cannot reverse the course of time.
In a case of this type, equities should not be claimed or granted.
Unless there is any special reason to be indicated in clear terms in an interlocutory order, as a rule no provisional admis sion should be granted and more so into technical courses.
[388 C, D] 4.1 The order of the High Court in the instant case should be reversed but this is not being done so, on account of the fact that nine similarly placed medical graduates have already been given admission pursuant to such interloc utory orders by the respondents 386 without even raising a challenge.
The order was made as early as in February, 1991 and for nine months no steps have been taken by the appellants to comply with the order and they are in fact facing a contempt proceeding.
[388 F] 4.2 Notice had been issued to the Principals of the seven medi cal colleges who have appeared and given written undertakings to the Court by way of affidavit that there was some misunderstanding in regard to the requirement of a selection test for post graduate admission.
Though there was hardly any scope for being misled, the benefit of doubt is being given to the Principals.
The contempt proceedings are discharged, but their undertakings are kept on record.
[388 G, H; 389 A]
