By an agreement dated 3.7.1973 the respondent sold two plots to the appellant for a consideration of Rs. 15,000.
By another agreement, entered into between the parties on the same day, the appellant agreed to reconvey the said proper ties to the respondent against payment of Rs. 15,000 within two years.
Within the stipulated period the respondent (Plaintiff) instituted a suit for specific performance alleging that despite offer of performance and tendering the price, the Appellant (Defendant) refused reconveyance of the properties.
The Trial Court dismissed the suit by holding that the Respondent was not ready and willing to perform the con tract, and 568 that the time was essence of the reconveyance agreement.
The first Appellate Court dismissed the respondent 's appeal.
The respondent preferred second appeal before the High Court.
Relying upon the two notices issued by the Respondent to the appellant before filing of the suit which contained the averments that he was willing and ready to perform the contract, the High Court reversed the findings of the two courts below and allowed the appeal and held that Respond ent Plaintiff was willing to perform the contract and that the Appellant was the party in breach.
Accordingly it passed a decree of specific performance of an agreement for sale of land.
During the pendency of the Second Appeal, suit proper ties were acquired by the State for public purposes and the High Court rejected the plea that after the land has been acquired by the State corpus of the Land had ceased to exist and no decree for specific performance can be granted.
In defendant 's appeal to this Court it was contended on his behalf (1) that the High Court erred in reappreciating the evidence in second appeal and in disturbing the concur rent findings of fact that Respondent was not willing and ready to perform the contract; (2) that in view of the acquisition of the suit properties the contract itself became incapable of specific performance and to such a case the power to give compensation as an alternative to specific performance did not extend.
Modifying the decree of the High Court, this Court, HELD:1.
Where the findings by the Court of facts are vitiated by non consideration of relevant evidence or by an essentially erroneous approach to the matter, the High Court is not precluded from recording proper findings.
[572 H] 1.1 The notices issued by the respondent to the appel lant containing the averments that he was ready and willing to perform the contract which were not actually served on the appellant because of his refusal to accept them must be presumed to have been served as contemplated by Section 27 of the General Clauses Act.
Therefore the High Court was right in relying upon the averments in the notices which could be treated as part to the plaint.
Accordingly the finding of the High Court that Respondent was willing and ready to 569 perform the contract and that it was the Appellant who was in breach is accordingly confirmed.
[572 F G, 578 H, 579 A] 2.
Section 21 of the enables the Plaintiff in a suit for specific performance also to claim compensation for its breach either in addition to or in substitution of, such performance.
However, when the plaintiff by his option has made specific performance impos sible, Section 21 does not entitle him to seek damages.
That position is common under the English and Indian Law namely under Section of Lord Cairn 's Act, 1858 and Section 21 of the .
But under the Indian Law the explanation to sub section (5) of Section 21 makes a specif ic departure and the jurisdiction to award damages remains unaffected by the fact that without any fault of the plain tiff, the contract becomes incapable of specific perform ance.
[574 D, 577, H C] Piarey Lal vs Hori Lal, [1977] 2 S.C.R. 915, distin guished and held inapplicable.
Mohamad Abdul Jabbar & Ors.
vs Lalmia & Ors., A.I.R. (34) 1947 Nagpur 254, disapproved.
Ardeshir H. Mama vs Flora Sessoon, A.I.R. 1928 Privy Council 208, explained.
However, so far as the proviso to sub section (5) of Section 21 is concerned, two positions must to kept clearly distinguished.
If the amendment relates to the relief of compensation in lieu of or in addition to specific perform ance where the plaintiff has not abandoned his relief of specific performance the Court will allow the amendment at any stage of the proceeding.
That is a claim for compensa tion failing under section 21 of the and the amendment is one under the proviso to sub section (5).
But different and less liberal standards apply if what is sought by the amendment is the conversion of a suit for specific performance into one for damages for breach of contract in which case Section 73 of the Contract is invoked.
This amendment is under the discipline of Rule 17, Order 6, C.P.C. The fact that sub section (4), in turn, invokes Section 73 of the Indian Contract Act for the prin ciples of quanlification and assessment of compensation does not obliterate this distinction.
[575 B C] 570 3.1 In the instant case, assuming that the Respondent had not specifically sought for compensation in lieu of specific performance the amendment is permitted in order that complete justice is done.
[578 B] 3.2 The measure of the compensation is by the standards of Section 73 of the Indian Contract Act.
Here the English Rule in Bain vs Fothergill that the purchaser, on breach of the contract, cannot recover for the loss of his bargain is not applicable.
[578 C] Bain vs Fothergill, 1874 L.R. 7 House of Lords 158, held inapplicable.
Pollock & MuHa on Contract (10th edn.) p.663; Nagardas vs Ahmedkhan, , referred to. 3.3 In the instant case, the quantum of the compensation is ascertainable with reference to the determination of the market value in the land acquisition proceedings.
The com pensation awarded may safely be taken to be the measure of damages subject, of course, to the deduction therefrom of money value of the services, time and energy expended by the appellant in pursuing the claims of compensation and the expenditure incurred by him in the litigation culminating in the award.
[578 G] 4.
Accordingly there will be a decree awarding to the Respondent compensation in lieu and substitution of one for specific performance which but for the acquisition Respond ent would have been entitled to; the quantum and the measure of the compensation being the entire amount of compensation determined for the acquisition of the suit properties to gether with all the solatium, accrued interest and all other payments under the law authorising the acquisition less a sum of rupees one lakh fifty thousand only which shall go to the Appellant towards his services, time and amounts spent in pursuing the claims for compensation as well as the consideration stipulated for reconveyance.
[579 E F]
