The appellants in Civil Appeal No.3012 of 1990 were Directors of a Company, which was owning a Jute mill.
Due to lock out and strike in the Jute industry, the Company de faulted in the payment of the provident fund dues.
The appellants applied under Section 633 of the for being relieved of liability for delayed as well as non payment of the provident fund and other ancillary dues.
A Single Judge of the High Court passed a consent order, allowing the outstanding provident fund dues to be paid in monthly instalments of Rs.50,000 each until the entire liability was paid oH. As the Provident Fund authorities accepted this course, summons were not served on the Regis trar of Companies, since what was sought to be recovered were the dues under the Provident Fund Act.
The Single Judge also granted an injunction restraining the respondents from initiating any criminal procccdings against 339 the appellants or any of them for non payment or delayed payment of the provident fund.
On appeal by the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner, the Division Bench held that any proceeding referred to in section 633 of the Act would mean only under the provisions of the Act, and that section 633 of the Act had no applica tion in respect of any liability under any other Act.
Hence the appeal.
Applications claiming relief under section 633 were dismissed in the connected cases also, resulting in the appeals, and Special Leave Petition, being filed before this Court.
On behalf of the appellants in Civil Appeal No. 3012 of 1990, it was contended that section 633 was very wide in its amplitude and there was no justification to restrict its application to only proceedings arising under the Act, that when proceedings were taken in relation to breach of trust, which was an offence under Indian Penal Code, against an officer of a company, it would be opentn him to plead before the concerned Magistrate that he had acted honestly and reasonably, and if the Court came to the conclusion that he should fairly be excused it would relieve him; that under sub section (2), it was an anticipatory action, and the High Court also exercised a similar power as it was exercising power under subsection (1), and if it was restricted only in respect of any liability under the , then the protection extended under section 633 was last, and that similarly, under section 32 of the , which dealt with offences by Companies under that Act the burden was upon the person concerned to prove that the offences were committed without his knowledge or consent and, but for that proof, the statute deemed him to be guilty; therefore, if protection was not afforded against such a sweeping provision, the entire purpose of Section 633 would be rendered nugatory.
On behalf of the appellants in one of the connected appeals it was contended that the definition of "Court" contemplated with respect to any matter relating to a compa ny, and that the Court having respective jurisdiction as provided under Section 2(11) was with respect to any offence under the Act, the Court of a first class Magistrate or, as the case may be, a Presidency Magistrate having jurisdiction to try such offence, that this section would show that where like the appellants they were not working directors, they could not be subject to prosecution and that was where Section 633 stepped in and afforded protection, even if it were a liability arising 340 under any other Act, for instance, like delayed payment or nonpayment of provident fund.
On behalf of the respondent Regional Provident Fund Commissioner it was contended that any proceeding occurring under Section 633 could not relate to a proceeding other than one arising out of , that each one of the other Acts not only defined penalty but also laid down the penalty, and therefore, merely because the appellants were officers of the company, it could not mean that section 633 could be availed of; otherwise, the consequences would be disastrous and the penal provision of all other Acts would be rendered ineffective, that Section 14 of the laid down the penalty for the offences of companies and was dealt with in Section 14 A, and the explanation to the said sec tion also talked of as to what a company would mean for the purpose of the section, and, therefore, where an elaborate procedure was contemplated under those sections for recovery of the dues and the Provident Fund Act, being a social welfare legislation, that could not be rendered illusory by extending the benefit under Section 633 of the ; similarly, Section 86 of the Employees ' State Insurance Act, providing for prosecution also dealt with Companies, and, the explanation under that Section specifically stated as to what would be a Company or Director for the purpose of that section and hence, no interference was called for.
Dismissing the cases, this Court, HELD: 1.1 Under Section 633 of the , relief cannot be extended in respect of any liability under any Act other than the .
[354 C] 1.2 The expression 'any proceeding ' occurring under Section 633 cannot be read out of context and treated in isolation.
It must be construed in the light of the penal provisions.
Otherwise, the penal clauses under the various other Acts would be rendered ineffective by application of Section 633.
Again, if Parliament intended Section 633 to have a coverage wider than the Act, it would have specifi cally provided for it.
Moreover, it is a sound rule of construction to confine the provisions of a statute to itself.
[349 D E] 1.3 While referring to any proceeding under sub section (2) of Section 633 the Parliament intended to restrict it only to the proceeding arising out of negligence, default, breach of trust, misfeasance or breach of duty in respect of dutics prescribed under the provi 341 sions of the .
Further, examining the sub section with reference to the context and the placement of the sub section, the only conclusion that is possible is the proceedings for which relief under this sub section could be claimed or the proceedings against the officer of a company for breach of the provisions of the .
Sub section (2) cannot apply to proceedings instituted against the officer of the company to enforce the liability arising out of violation of provisions of other statutes.
[349 F G] 1.4 Sub section (3) requires notice to be given to the Registrar of Companies.
This indicates that powers under sub section (2) must be restricted in respect of proceedings arising out of the violation of the Companies Act 1349 H] 1.5 Merely because section 32 of the contains a stringent provision, it cannot be held that Section 633 of the Companies Act could be invoked for of fences under Section 32 of the Industrial Disputes Act.
1354 D] Customs and Exicise Comrs.
vs Hedon Alpha LId.
, 2 ALL ER 697 CA.
referred to.
Halsbury 's Laws of England, (Fourth Edition) 7(1) Companies, para 652; Pennington 's Company law.
4th Edn., 1979, P.548, 23rd Edn. 1982, Vol.
I p. 881 and 5th Edn.
1985 p.679 680, referred to.
2.1 The authority to take action under the Provident Fund Act as seen from Section 14 of the said Act is a Com missioner while the procedure so far as the Companies Act is concerned, under Section 621 it is on a complaint in writing of the Registrar or of a shareholder of a company, or of an officer authorised by the Central Government in this behalf that action can be taken.
Since ii is mandatory for the Court to givc notice to the Registrar of Companies or such other person, if any, as it thinks necessary.
as required under sub section (3) of Section 633, if Section 633 is interpreted so as to include proceedings under Acts other than the Companies Act it will be open to the Court to give such relief under this Section without giving notice to the authority competent to prose cute in respect of liabilities under the other laws or upon giving notice to other concerned and not the Registrar.
Thus, the mandatory requirement of sub section (3) can easily be bye passed.
Further, if relief under Section 633 is extended, officers who would be deemed to have committed the offence under Section 14 A of the 342 Provident Fund Act, because sub section (1) states that every person who was responsible to the company as well as the company shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and liable for such offence would get the benefit and escape the rigour of Scction 14 A.
The explanation also makes it abun dantly clear that all companies covered by the Companies Act would be companies within the meaning of explanation.
On the contrary, those companies failing under the explanation to Section 14 A would not be companies under the Companies Act.
[355 C F] 2.2 Thus in the case of a company falling under the explanation to Section 14 A of the Provident Fund Act which does not come within the purview of the Companies Act, the liability of the persons would be governed only by section 14A(1) and (2) of the Provi dent Fund Act.
They will not be entitled to any relief under Section 633.
The benefit avail able under a social welfare legislation, namely, the Employ ees ' Provident Fund Act cannot be defeated in this manner.
1355 G HI
