The appellant 's contract with Indian Airlines included the construction and fabrication of air craft testing cen tre/engine repair centre in Delhi.
For getting that work done, the appellant entered into a contract with the re spondent 1.
As per the contract, respondent 1 was required to provide performance bond equal to 30 per cent of the total value of contract price, which was to be split up into two performance bonds partly to be released on completion of the project, and the balance upon the expiration of the warran ty, and to furnish a Bank guarantee to secure the mobilisa tion advance of 25 per cent of contract value.
Respondent II, instead of furnishing the two perform ance bonds, wrote a letter for a revised proposal, which was accepted by the appellant.
As the respondent 1 failed to complete the project within the stipulated time, as per contractual specifica tions, despite repeated opportunities, the appellant termi nated respondent 1 's right to continue the project and sought for encashment of the Bank guarantee for Rs. 1,06,12,500, which was issued to the appellant by the Bank.
The respondent I filed a suit for injunction against the appellant and the Bank in the High Court and obtained an ex parte injunction from the Single Judge, restraining the Bank and the appellant from encashing the Bank guarantee.
When the ex parte injunction was vacated, respondent I preferred an appeal to the Division Bench of the High Court.
The Division 413 Bench allowed the appeal, staying the encashment Of the Bank guarantee till the disposal of the respondent 's suit.
On the question, whether the Court was justified in restraining the Bank from paying the appellant under the Bank guarantee at the instance of respondent I, allowing the appeal of the appellant company, this Court, HELD: 1.
In the instant case, the High Court has miscon strued the terms of the Bank guarantee and the nature of the inter rights of the parties under the contract.
The mobili sation advance is required to be recovered by the appellant from the running bills submitted by the respondent.
If the full mobilisation advance has not been recovered, it would be to the advantage of the respondent.
Secondly, the Bank is not concerned with the outstanding amount payable by the appellant under the running bills.
The right to recover the amount under the running bills has no relevance to the liability of the Bank under the guarantee.
The liability of the Bank remained intact irrespective of the recovery of mobilisation advance or the non payment under the running bills.
The failure on the part of the appellant to specify the remaining mobilisation advance in the letter for encash ment of Bank guarantee is of little consequence to the liability of the Bank under the guarantee.
The demand by the appellant is under the Bank guarantee and as per the terms thereof.
The Bank has to pay and the Bank was willing to pay as per the undertaking.
The Bank cannot be interdicted by the Court at the instance of respondent I in the absence of fraud or special equities in the form of preventing irre trievable injustice between the parties.
The High Court in the absence of prima facie case on such matters has commit ted an error in restraining the Bank from honouring its commitment under the bank guarantee.
[421E 422A] U.P. Cooperative Federation Ltd. vs Singh Consultants and Engineers (P) Ltd., , Followed.
