The A.P. Engineering Subordinate Service Rules were amended in 1972 by way of Government order.
It provided that supervisors who acquired B.E./A.M.I.E. degree while in service would be entitled to count 50 % of the services rendered as Supervisors prior to acquiring the said qualification subject to a maximum of four years.
However, this was subject to certain conditions, the Chief among them was that they should be considered to have been placed below the last of the Junior Engineer of the year, after giving such weightage.
Order dated 10.6.76 required that the Supervisors who acquire the degree qualification while in service would be appointed, as Junior Engineers with immediate effect.
The abovesaid order was amended on 8.11.76 giving benefit of the weightage to only those who acquired the degree qualification prior to 28.2.72.
In 1977, by another order of the State Government, the post of Junior Engineer was made Gazetted post.
In separate petition before the Andhra Pradesh Administrative Tribunal, the Supervisors upgraded as Junior Engineers including those who acquired the degree qualification after 28.2.72, as well as the State of A.P. agitated the issue regarding inter se seniority between the upgraded Junior Engineers and the direct recruit Junior Engineers.
The Tribunal heard all the matters together and gave a finding that there was no bar to the retrospective regularisation 296 of the directly recruited Engineers from the dates of their initial appointments.
The Tribunal also upheld the action of the Government in giving the benefit of the notional date of appointment to the upgraded Junior Engineers and the benefit of the date of regularisation of their services from the dates of their notional appointments subject to maintenance of order or ranking given by the Public Service Commission.
The Tribunal also ordered that the ranking given by the Public Service Commission in respect of directly recruited Junior Engineers his to be maintained and each of them would be entitled to count has seniority from the date on which his service has been regularised or from the date of regularisation of the service of the person immediately below in the order of ranking given by the Public Service Commission, whichever was earlier.
In respect of upgraded Junior Engineers who acquired degree qualification after 28.2.1972, the Tribunal gave a specific direction that their seniority has to be fixed on the basis of specific notional date of appointment given to them by interspersing their names among regular Junior Engineers as arranged in chronological order of dates from which such regular Junior Engineers are entitled to count their seniority.
Aggrieved against the Tribunal 's order, the State Government and the supervisors upgraded as Junior Engineers, preferred the present appeals.
On behalf of the State, it was contended that the direction of the tribunal particularly interspersing was not workable, since the upgraded Junior Engineers have put in long years of service and were discharging the same duties as the directly recruited Junior Engineers and this factor should be taken into account in fixing the notional date of appointment and inter se seniority.
On behalf of the upgraded Junior Engineers, it was contended that in G.O. Ms No.559 it is specifically laid down that Supervisors who have acquired graduate qualification may be appointed as Junior Engineers after 28.2.75 and the weightage of four years should be reckoned from the date of acquiring the degree qualification i.e.28.2.72 or thereafter; and their seniority should not be fixed from the date of the order of appointment.
On the order hand, the direct recruit Junior Engineers contended that the upgraded Junior Engineers can under no 297 circumstances be treated as seniors to the directly recruited Junior Engineers for the appointment of Junior Engineers was suspended for some time and in view of the exigencies the degree holders were appointed on temporary basis and they have served for a number of years; the Government decided to make regular appointments and accordingly a Special Qualifying Test was held in which they qualified and they were given the appointments; and a seniority list strictly on the basis of performance in the test and on merit was prepared by the Public Service Commission and a retrospective effect was given.
It was further contended that so far as the upgraded Junior Engineers are concerned all the relevant G.O.Ms.
make it clear that the crucial date has to be reckoned on the basis of the actual date of appointment and not on the date of acquiring the degree.
Disposing of the matters, this court, HELD: 1.1.
The weightage of four years in respect of upgraded Junior Engineers as provided in G.O.Ms.
No.559 has to be reckoned from the date of appointment and not the date of their acquiring the degree qualification.
On the basis of that notional date, their inter se seniority has to be fixed.
[311 B C] 1.2.G.O.
Ms. No. 559 makes it abundantly clear that the appointments of the upgraded Junior Engineers who acquired the graduate qualification while in service, would be prospective only and that they would be entitled to the weightage of four years of service rendered before the appointment.
It does not anywhere indicate that the weightage should be from the date of acquiring the degree qualification.
It is only after acquiring such degree qualification that a Supervisor is appointed as Junior Engineer and having regard to the service rendered by him, the Government, as a policy, decided to give weightage of four years for the purpose of considering the eligibility for promotion as Assistant Engineer.
[308 C D] 2.1.The regularisation of the degree holders Junior Engineers who passed the Special Qualifying Test by giving restrospective effect cannot be held to be illegal, and their seniority among themselves shall be subject to the order of ranking given by the Public Service Commission on the basis of the Special Qualifying Test.
[311 D] 2.2.
The degree holders were appointed temporarily because of a ban and later the Government again, as a policy decision, decided 298 to make regular appointments by direct recruitment but enabled the degree holders who were in temporary service to appear in a Special Qualifying Test.
Here again, as a matter of policy, the Government decided to give some weightage to the service rendered by them before the appointment by selection.
Thus, the Governement, in fixing the seniority for the purpose of future promotion of the appointees both the upgraded Junior Engineers as well as those selected by the Public Service Commission in the Special Qualifying Test has taken into account the past service rendered by them.
[308 E F] 3.
In the case of upgraded Junior Engineers weightage of four years service was given and in the other case two years, weightage was given.
As a matter of policy, the Government gave weightage to both the categories discharging the same duties.
The upgraded Junior Engineers who having got the benefit of four years` service, therefore, cannot say that similar weightage should not be given to the direct recruits who, prior to the selection, were working on temporary basis.
B, F] Devi Prasad and Ors.
vs Government of Andhra Pradesh and Ors.
, AIR 1980 SC 1185, relied on.
M. Nirmala and Ors.
vs State of Andhra Pradesh and Ors.
; , ; Ashok Gulati and Ors.
vs B.S.Jain and Ors., [1986] Sup.
SCC 597; Direct Recruit Class II Engineering Officers Association vs State of Maharashtra and Ors.
, ; ; Masood Akhtar Khan and Ors.
vs State of Madhya Pradesh and Ors., , referred to.
The Tribunal has rightly pointed out that under Rule 23 A of the A.P State and Subordinate Service Rules, 1962 if a person having been appointed temporarily under Rule 10 to a post borne on the cadre is subsequently appointed in the service in accordance with the rules, he shall commence his probation from such subsequent date or the earlier date as the appointing authority may determine.
The Tribunal was also right in holding that there was no bar to the retrospective regularisation of the service of the direct recruit Junior Engineers.
[308 G H; 309 A] 5.
In the light of this Judgment, the State Government shall prepare a common seniority list of the degree holder Junior Engineers and the upgraded Junior Engineers and that list shall be the 299 basis for all the subsequent promotions.
Any promotion already given shall be reviewed and readjusted in accordance with the said seniority list.
[311 D E] 6.
Since this litigation has been pending for about two decades, it is high time a finality has to be reached by resolving the controversies and in this context the approval of the Public Service Commission in respect of these appointments need not be sought, if the Government has not already obtained the approval of the Public Service Commission.
[311 A B]
