Consequent upon the announcement of his M.B.B.S. Examination result on 12.12.1990, the petitioner alongwith other 166 students, applied for revaluation of answer books under University of Poona Ordinance 134A.
When the revaluation results were declared, certain students made representation to the University Authorities for their answer papers being revalued from the same set of examiners.
The University on consideration of that representation appointed a Committee for scrutiny and to reasses theory papers of the students acquiring more than 20% marks after revaluation, from senior teachers of the Faculty.
After scrutiny, it was found out that the marks are closer to the original marks in Medicine, Surgery and Preventive and Social Medicine.
The Committee therefore recommended that the entire revaluation of the papers should be cancelled.
The Executive Council by a resolution cancelled the result of the revaluation and directed fresh revaluation and the second revaluation was done through the examiners outside the State and the result declared on the basis thereof.
The peritioner and others challenged the aforesaid decision of the Executive Council cancelling the earlier revaluation and directing a second revaluation by means of writ petitions.
It was contended before the High Court on behalf of the petitioners that the action of the Executive Council was arbitrary in as much as there was no malpractice, fraud or anything objectionable to the revaluation as the examiners were chosen by the Vice Chancellor as enjoined under the Ordinance.
Hence the cancellation of revaluation was not proper.
The High Court repelled the two contentions advanced before it and dismissed the writ petitions.
Hence this Petition for Special Leave to appeal.
Dismissing the Petition for special leave to appeal, this Court, HELD: In deciding the matters relating to orders passed by authorities of educational institutions, the Court should normally be 387 very slow to pass orders in its jurisdiction because matters falling within the jurisdiction of educational authorities should normally be left to their decision and the Court should interfere with them only when it thinks it must do so in the interest of justice.
[390 B] Under Ordinance 134A, the Vice Chancellor shall use his discretionary power to decide as to whether all the applications received from the candidates, considered for revaluation or not.
If as a result of revaluation of answer books, the marks obtained by the candidate increase over the original marks by 10% or more then only the result of revaluation will be accepted by the University.
[388 C D] Ordinance 146 is comprehensive enough to include revaluation also for further action.
The fact that two examiners were also the members of the Committee which recommended for revaluation cannot result in any bias even if they had been directly concerned with the original evaluation.
It is true that in the second revaluation also there had been some changes between the original valuation and the revaluation results.
However, it is not so glaring or demonstrably unconscionable as seen in the first revaluation.
[390 D]
