The deceased along with his father and brother was living in the house owned by the accused appellant 's father.
There was dispute between the accused and the complainant party regarding a piece of land which according to the accused, the complainant party was forcibly occupying.
On May 11, 1969 at about 2.45 p.m. appellant 's father had an altercation with deceased 's brother.
Thereafter he went to deceased 's house and abused the complainant party and started dismantling the tin shed on the disputed land.
The prosecution 's case was that the deceased 's brother was sent to police station to lodge a report.
The deceased came at the spot and gave a push to appellant 's father.
He fell down.
Getting up, immediately, shouted for appellant and asked him to bring the rifle and kill the complainant party.
The appellant brought a gun and fired a shot hitting the deceased.
The appellant fired the second shot which hit another.
The deceased fell down and thereafter the deceased 's father took out a lathi and gave beating to appellant 's father.
The deceased succumbed to the gunshot injury.
Appellant was charged under Section 302, 307, 451 IPC and also under section 25 A of Arms Act.
The father of appellant was charged under sections 109/302, 451 IPC and 29 of the Arms Act.
The appellant and its father denied the commission of the 467 crime.
Appellant 's plea of alibi was rejected by the trial court.
It also did not believe the prosecution case in toto.
The appellant 's father was acquitted of all the charges by the trial court.
It convicted the appellant under section 302 IPC and he was sentenced to imprisonment for life, but he was acquitted of the other charges.
The High Court allowed the State 's appeal convicting the appellant under section 307 IPC and section 25 A Arms Act also.
He was sentenced to five years and one year rigorous imprisonment respectively for the offences.
The appellant filed this appeal before this Court by way of special leave.
On the question, whether on the facts of the case, the appellant accused can claim right of private defence, allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD:1.
It is established on the record that the appellant 's father was being given lathi blows by the complainant party and it was at that time that gun shot was fired by the appellant to save his father from further blows.
A lathi is capable of causing a simple as well as a fatal injury.
Whether in fact the injuries actually caused were simple or grievous is of no consequence.
It is the scenario of a father being given lathi blows which has to be kept in mind.
In such a situation a son could reasonably apprehend danger to the life of his father and his firing a gun shot at that point of time in defence of his father is justified.
The appellant fired the gun shot to defend the person of his father.
[470 E G] 2.
Using the licensed gun of his father under the circumstances of the case cannot be considered possessing an arm without a licence.
The High Court grossly erred in setting aside the acquittal of the appellant under section 25 A of the Arms Act.
[471 A B]
