The appellant company was registered under the .
It obtained the consent of the Government of India to 482 issue 7,20,00,000 equity shares of Rs. 10 each at par and 33, 90, 000 fourteen per cent secured redeemable non convertible debentures of Rs. 100 each at per.
One of the conditions attached to the consent order was "The company shall scrupulously adhere to the time limit of 10 weeks from the date of closure of the subscription list for allotment of all securities and despatch of allotment letters/certificates and refund orders." On 12.7.1990 the company issued prospectus for the issue of the shares and debentures, stating therein that the company had sought the permission of the stock exchanges at Indore, Ahmedabad, Bombay, Calcutta and Delhi for dealing in equity shares and debentures in terms of the prospects; that interest at the rate of 15 % per annum on the excess application money would be paid to the applicants as per the guidelines issued by the Ministry of Finance on July 21, 1983 and September 27, 1985; that the public issue would open on August 20, 1990 and close on August 23, 1990; and that it would not be extended beyond August 31, 1990.
The issue opened on August 20, 1990.
The company received 26,32,894 applications for equity shares together with an aggregate sum of Rs. 225,25,51,247 in respect of a public issue of Rs. 25 crores.
The shares issue was close on 23rd August 1990.
On October 15,1990 the Board of Directors of the company approved the allotment of shares.
Prior to 1.11.1990, it secured the requisite permissions of the stock exchanges at Indore, Ahmedabad, Bombay Calcutta and Delhi to deal in the shares offered in the prospects.
The company had to despatch 25,50,604 refund order, which were printed in Bombay and they were meant to be despatched from Delhi.
The company despatched 8,55,226 refund orders from New Delhi at the rate of approx.
1,00,000 refund orders per day.
On 26th October, 1990 a consignment of 6,69,999 refund orders were despatched from Bombay to Delhi.
As a result of a fire that broke out on the way, many refund orders were destroyed and about 50 % of the consignment was missing after the accident.
In consultation with the Madhya Pradesh Stock Exchange and the Company 's Bank, instructions were issued by the Company to 483 stop payment of all refund orders with a view to avoiding any possible fraud or misuse.
As a result of the countermanding of all the refund orders and the printing of new refund orders, delay occurred in the despatch of newly printed orders.
For issuing the refund orders, at the request of the company, the Madhya Pradesh Stock Exchange granted extension of time till November 30,1990 and further extended till 19th December, 1990.
The Bombay Stock Exchange refusing the grant extension of time informed the company that it was bound to pay interest by reason of the delay in the despatch of refund orders.
The refund orders were not despatched until 12th November, 1990.
The Government of India and the Securities and Exchanges Board of India Respondents Nos. 1 and 2 respectively, insisted that the company should pay interest to the investors for the period of the delay in making the refund in accordance with the provisions of section 73 of the from 1st November (the expiry date of the period of 10 weeks from the date of the closure of the subscription lists) till the date of posting of the refund orders.
The company filed a writ petition in the High Court apprehending that the Government might direct the stock exchanges to delist the shares of the company by reason of its failure to pay interest and also initiate actions against it.
In the High Court, the respondent No. 1 submitted that the liability to pay the excess amount arose on the expiry of 10 weeks from the date of closure of the subscription lists.
The respondent No. 2 contended that the liability arose on the date of allotment.
The company the appellant contended that on the facts of the case, the liability arose on at the end of the period as extended by the Stock Exchanges at Indore in terms of the prospectus.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition, holding that the company was liable to pay interest at the prescribed rates for the period of delay and the liability for same arose on the expiry of 8 days from the date of allotment of the shares, and not from the date of expiry of 10 weeks, where allotment was made earlier to that date.
484 This appeal was filed by the Company against the High Court 's judgment by special leave, on the question, whether the High Court was right in discarding, for computation of interest, the time limit of 10 weeks running from the date of closure of the subscription lists, notwithstanding that the allotment had been made prior to the date of expiry of 10 weeks.
The appellant contended that the company was entitled to retain the excess amount for the period mentioned in the prospectus and consequently no liability to pay interest could arise until the expiry of that period; that as the Madhya Pradesh Stock Exchange had extended time for refund till 19th December, 1990, the liability of the company to repay the excess amount did not arise until then; that the interest became payable only after 8 days from the expiry of the period as extended by the Madhya Pradesh Stock Exchange; and that the interest was payable as a penalty and therefore a reasonable and rational construction of the statute to be made in regard to the commencement of the liability of the company to repay the excess amount by taking into account of the relevant circumstances which caused the delay.
The respondents submitted that the liability to repay the excess amount arose on the date of allotment of the shares, that the liability arose forthwith and any delay beyond the period of 8 days from the day on which the liability arose attracted interest that the expression `forwith ' had to be understood as an immediate liability ascertainable with reference to the date of allotment, but subject to a period of grace of 8 days.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD : 1.01 As per Dr. Justice T.K. Thommen : A public limited company has no obligation to have its shares listed on a recognised stock exchange.
But if the company intend to offer its shares or debentures to the public for subscription by the issue of a prospectus, it must, before issuing such prospectus, apply to one or more recognised stock exchanges for permission to have the shares or debentures intended to be so offered to the public to be dealt with in each such stock exchange in terms of section 73.
[496 G] 1.02 Sub section (1) of section 73, as amended by the 485 Companies (Amendment) Act, 1988 has application only to a company intending to offer shares or debentures to the public for subscription by the issue of a prospectus.
Until this sub section was inserted, listing of public issues was not compulsory.
[497 B C] 1.03.
Sub section (1A) of Section 73 as amended by the Companies (Amendment) Act, 1988 makes it necessary for the company to state in its prospectus the name of each of the recognised stock exchanges whose permission for listing has been sought by the company.
[497 G] 1.04.
Any allotment of shares will become void if permission is not granted by the stock exchange or each such stock exchange, as the case may be, before the expiry of 10 weeks from the date of the closing of the subscription lists.
The validity of the allotment is made dependent on securing the requisite permission of each stock exchanges whose permission has been sought.
[497 G 498 A] 1.05.
The liability to repay the application money arises only upon refusal of the stock exchange to grant the permission sought by the company before the expiry of 10 weeks from the date of closing of the subscription lists.
[498 A] 1.06 There is a deemed refusal if permission is not granted by the stock exchange before the expiry of 10 weeks from the date of closing of the subscription lists, and upon the expiry of that date, any allotment of shares made by the company becomes void.
[498B] 1.07.
Sub section (1A) postulates that any allotment made becomes void at the end of 10 weeks from the date of the closing of the subscription lists if by that time the requisite permission of the stock exchange has not been obtained.
But this consequence is postponed till the dismissal of any appeal preferred under section 22 of the .
Nevertheless, the permission, if not obtained with 10 weeks, is deemed not to have been granted.
[504 F G] 1.08.
It is the legislative intent to delay the result postulated under sub section (1A) i.e., rendering the allotment void, until the period of 10 weeks has expired or until the dismissal of the appeal.
The liability to repay the excess money in the present case arose on 1.11.1990 which was admittedly the date of expiry of 10 weeks from the date of the closing of the subscription lists, and consequently the liability to pay interest at the rate specified in sub 486 section (2A) arose on the expiry of 8 days from 1.11.1990.
[498 C D] 2.01.
From the decision of the stock exchange refusing permission, an appeal will lie under section 22 of the Securities Contracts (Regulation)Act, 1956.
[498 C] 2.02.
Pending the decision in appeal, the allotment made would not be void, and the decision of the concerned stock exchange is made dependent on the result of the appeal.
[498 C] 2.03.
The fact that an appeal is pending does not postpone the result contemplated in sub section (2) in regard to the liability to repay the amounts and the interest accruing thereon if the amounts are not repaid within 8 days after the liability arose.
[505 A] 3.01 Sub section (1A) of Section 73 postulates two circumstances in which interest becomes payable, namely, where the permission has not been applied for before issuing the prospects and the company has thus acted in violation of the law or where permission, though applied for, has not been granted.
In the former case, apart from the other consequences which may flow from the company 's disobedience of the law, the liability to pay interest arises as from the date of receipt of the amounts, for the company ought not to have received any such amount in response to the prospectus issued by the company in disobedience of the requirements of subsection (1).
In the latter case, the liability to pay interest does not arise until the expiry of 8 days after the company became liable to repay the amounts received by reason of its failure to obtain the necessary permission as referred to in sub section (1A).
[499 C D] 3.02.
Section 73, as it stood prior to 1975, contained no specific provision compelling the company or its directors to repay the amounts received in excess of the aggregate of the application money relating to the shares or debentures in respect of which allotments have been made.
Sub section (2A) was inserted by the Companies (Amendment)Act, 1974 inserted to cover cases where permission of the stock exchange has been obtained, but the shares or debentures have been over subscribed and the company is consequently in possession of excess amounts.
The amended sub section made the company liable to repay the excess amounts forthwith, but did not made the company liable to pay interest on such excess amounts.
But a liability was cast on the directors.
If the excess amount was not repaid within 8 days from the day the company became liable to 487 repay it, the directors were made jointly and severally liable to repay such amount with interest.
The proviso to sub section (2A), which like the proviso to sub section (2), as they stood prior to 1988, provided that a director was not liable to repay the money with interest if he proved that the default in payment of the money was not on account of any misconduct or negligence on his part.
[500 C E] 3.03.
Owing to the absence of a specific provision imposing liability on the company to pay interest on the over subscribed amounts, and also owing to the absence of any provision to exempt directors who were not directly in charge of the administration of the company and the need to make listing of public issues compulsory, further amendments to the section became necessary.
Accordingly the Amendment Act of 1988 introduced several amendments to section 73, one of them being the substitution of a part of sub section (2A) making the company and every director of the company who is `an officer in default ' jointly and severally liable to repay the excess money with interest.
[500 F H] 3.04.
A `director of a company who is an officer in default ' appearing in sub section (2A) must be understood with reference to the definition of `an officer who is in default ' contained in section 2 (31) read with section 5.
This definition includes the managing director or the whole time director of a company.
[500 H 501 A] 3.05.
The liability imposed under sub section (2A) on a director of the company falls only upon a director who is `an officer in default ', as defined under section 2 (31) read with section 5(a) (b), and not upon any other director.
The nominees of the Government of financial institutions on the board of directors of the company, but not directly in charge of its administration as full time directors, are exempted from personal liability.
[501 A B] 3.06.
Sub section (2A) provides for the accrual of interest and the rates thereof.
Unlike sub section (2B) providing for punishment by imposition of fine or imprisonment, sub section (2A) speaks only of interest which is in contra distinction to punishment and is not penal in character.
It merely provides a mode of calculation of the amounts payable.
Any consideration with reference to a penal provision is of no relevance to the liability of the company of its directors to pay interest in terms of sub section (2A).
[503 E] 488 3.07.
Sub section (2B) concerns solely with default of compliance with the requirement of sub section (2A) namely, repayment of excess money.
Failure to repay the excess money as required by sub section (2A) visits the company and every officer of the company who is in default (as defined under section 5) with the stipulated punishment.
This is, of course, in addition to the payment of interest prescribed under sub section (2A).
[503 H 504 A] 3.08.
The interest provided under sub section (2) is payable to the applicants in terms of that sub section unless the money is returned to them within the specified time, notwithstanding the pendency of an appeal mentioned in the proviso to sub section (1A).
Subsection (3) has to be so understood to be in harmony with the other provisions of section 73.
[506 C] 3.09.
If the permission for listing sought under sub section (1) is not granted, the interest payable under sub section (2) is attracted.
Sub section (2) says that the liability to repay the money received from applicants arises forthwith either where the permission has not been sought or, having been sought, it has not been granted.
[504 H 505 A] 3.10.
The accrual of interest under sub section (2) is not dependent or consequent on the nullity postulated insub section (1A).
[505B] 4.01.
The expression `forthwith ' does not necessarily and always mean instantaneous.
The expression has to be understood in the context of the statue.
Where, however, the statute prescribes the payment of money and the accrual of interest thereon at certain points of time, the expression `forthwith ' must necessarily be understood to be immediate or instantaneous, so as to avoid any ambiguity or uncertainty.
The right accrues or liability arises exactly as prescribed by the statute.
[502 H 503 A] 4.02.
When `forthwith ' is used for determining the time and mode of payment of the principal and interest, a liberal or reasonable construction not to be adopted.
The legislature intended the expression `forthwith ' to refer to a particular day on which the liability to repay the principal amount arose and that is the day from which the period of 8 days has to be computed, and on the expiry of that period, interest begins to accrue.
[503 B C] 489 Keshav Nilkanth Joglekar vs The Commissioner of Police, Greater Bombay, ; and Salim vs State of West Bengal, ; , distinguished.
The right or obligation of the company to keep the money in the bank is only for the period preceding the decision of the stock exchange on the company 's request for permission to list.
Once the permission is expressly or impliedly refused, the money has to be returned to the applicants, notwithstanding the pendency of the company 's appeal.
The earlier part of the sub section about depositing the money in the bank is controlled by the latter provision in the sub section for return of the money as required by sub section (2).
This is particularly so by reason of the penalty specially provided in sub section (3) in the event of default of compliance with the requirement of that sub section.
[505 H 506 B] 5.02.
The money credited to the separate bank account can be utilised for only two purposes: (1) for adjustment against allotment of shares where listing is permitted; or (2) for repayment where listing is not permitted or the company is otherwise unable to allot shares.
The company has no right to deal with the money in any other manner or keep it longer than permitted by the section.
[506 G H] Palmer 's Company Law, 24th ed.
para 24.31; 1955(1) WLR 1080, referred to.
Interest does not begin to run under sub section (2) until 8 days have elapsed from the date of expiry of the period of 10 weeks commencing on the date of closure of the subscription lists.
The fact that the legislature has so provided in cases where permission has been refused expressly or by reason of the deeming provision is sufficient indication of the legislative intent to give the company reasonable time to repay the money.
[507 B C] 6.02.
Companies generally make allotments as soon as practicable after the necessary application has been made to the recognised stock exchange for permission for listing.
Upon the issue of the prospectus after making such application, amounts are received from the public in consideration of which allotments are made in anticipation of the requisite permission.
Greater the reputation of the company, larger are the amounts likely to be received.
If permission is not granted, the entire amounts received from the public 490 have to be forthwith repaid.
On the other hand, if permission is obtained, but the amounts received from the public are in excess of the aggregate of the application money relating to the allotted shares or debentures.
Such excess amounts are forthwith repayable.
Whether or not permission will be obtained cannot be ascertained until the period prescribed for the purpose has expired, namely, 10 weeks from the date of closing of the subscription lists.
Until the expiry of those 10 weeks, neither the subscribing public nor the company will be in a position to decide whether or not the allotments made are valid.
This is a period of uncertainty and it is for that reason that the legislature has, been is a case of refusal to grant permission, provided that the liability to repay the application money arises upon the expiry of 10 weeks.
[507 D G] 6.03.
The possibility of an appeal being allowed is, not a ground to delay repayment.
It should make no difference whether it is as a result of the permission having been refused, or permission having been granted and excess amounts are received by reason of over subscription, that repayment of money has to be made by the company.
It either event, the liability to repay the amounts arises forth with on the expiry of 10 weeks from the date of closure of the subscription lists, and the interest will begin to accrue thereon on the expiry of 8 days therefrom.
This construction is, just and reasonable from the point of view of both the investor and the company, and has the advantage of certainty, uniformity and easy application.
[507 G 508 A] 7.
The section 73 is not free from ambiguities and doubts.
Having been amended in several respects, it has not finally emerged with the clarity that admits of easy construction.
But the contemporaneous construction placed upon an ambiguous section by the administrators entrusted with the task of executing the statute is extremely significant.
This construction is, perfectly consistent with the language and the object of the statute.
It is a practical and reasonable construction, particularly because it affords the company reasonably sufficient time to complete the formalities for despatch of the refund orders.
And the investor who has responded to the invitation contained in the prospectus is not unduly kept waiting for the return of the excess amounts due to him.
[508 E G] Desh Bandu Gupta & Co. & ors.
vs Delhi Stock Exchange Association Ltd.; , and K.P. Varghese vs Income Tax Officer, Ernakulam & Anr., ; , referred to.
491 Crawford 's Interpretation of Laws, 1989 Ed.
referred to.
As per Mr. Justics section Mohan (Concurring) 1.01.
Sub section (2A) of Section 73 of the comes into operation only where permission has been granted by the recognised stock exchange or exchanges.
The words, "where permission has been granted" are of great significance.
Therefore, the contention that on the date of allotment the liability to pay interest arises may not be correct.
Nor again, it would be correct to contend that the mechanics of refund liability to pay arises on the date of allotment since there is a failure of consideration in respect of shares not allotted.
[519 B C] 1.02.
The liability of the company to repay the excess amount under Section 73 (2A) will arise only on the expiry of 10 weeks from the date of the closure of subscription lists.
The interest begins to accrue thereupon at the end of 8 days.
[526 A] 2.01.
The word "due" in the section 73 has been substituted for the word "payable" in order to make it clear that a mortgagor cannot redeem within the term of the mortgage.
The right of redemption arises when the principal money secured by the mortgage has become due and may be exercised at any time thereafter, subject of course to the law of limitation.
[520 C D] 2.02. "Due", means payable immediately or a debt contracted but payable at a future time.
"A debt is said to be `due 'the instant that it has existence as a debt; it may be payable at a future time" it cannot be contended on the strength of Section 530 `due ' and `payable ' is one and the same even under section 732 (a).
[522 E F] Black 's Legal Dictionary, (5th Edition 488), Venkataramiah 's Law Lexicon and Legal Maxims Vol.
I, 713 714; Wharton 's Law Lexicon, 14th Edition; Buckley on the Companies Acts, 14th Edition, Volume I, referred to.
Bhaktawar Begum vs Husaini Khanam, (1914)36 All. 195; 41 I.A. 84; ; Bir Mohammad V. Nagoor, ; (which over ruled Rose Ammal vs Rajarathnam, ; Baroda Board & Paper Mills Ltd. vs Income Tax Officer, Circle I, Ward E, Ahmedabad and others, 1976 (46) company cases 492 25; Union of India vs Air Foam Industries (P) Ltd., ; & 1271 (Para 7) referred to.
"Forthwith ' is not susceptible of a fixed time definition, and the surrounding facts and circumstances must be taken into consideration in determining the question, and forthwith may be minutes, hours, days or even weeks.
It cannot be said that "forthwith" means E.O. instanti.
[526 E F] Dickerman vs Trust Co., ; 176 U.S. 193, , , 4 Tyrwh.
837; Edwards vs Ins.
Co., ; Seammon vs Ins.
Co., 101, III 621; ; ; Bennect vs Ins ; Pennsylvanis R.Co.
vs Reichert, 58 Md. 261; Meriden Silver Plate Co. vs Flory , 193, Soutern Reporter, 339 and 16 Soutern Reporter 33 @ 35 Col. I., Laws 1035, Ex Secs C. 10, referred to.
Bouvier 's Law Dictionary Referred to. 4.
It cannot but be held that the payment of interest is only compensatory and not penal.
Merely because clause 10 uses the word "penal" it cannot be amount to penalty.
[526 F] Mahalaxmi Sugar Mills Co. Ltd vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Delhi, New Delhi, ; , referred to.
In view of the clear terms of the statute the administrative inconvenience cannot be pleaded.
[528 B C] Sanjeev Coke Manufacturing Co vs Bharat Cooking Coal Ltd. & Another, ; 1029, referred to.
