In exercise of its power under section 68 D of the the Government of Andhra Pradesh approved a draft scheme framed under section 68 C relating to the route Anantapur to Dharamavaram via Mamillapalli.
However, exemption was granted to persons holding permit for the routes namely (a) Kodikonda to Anantapur via Dharmavaram; (b) Bukkapatnam to Anantapur via Dharmavaram; (c) Interstate route Virechal to Dharmavaram via Anantapur; (d) Anantapur to Puttaparti via Dharmavaram and the partial exemption of these routes from the scheme was upheld by the Andhra Pradesh High Court.
Thereafter, the respondents filed a writ petition in High Court for a direction for exemption from the operation of the scheme, and the High Court held that exclusion of the respondents was discriminatory, Accordingly it directed the State Govt.
to consider the respondent 's case and pass appropriate orders to accord exemption from the operation of the scheme.
Against the decision of the High Court the Andhra Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation filed an appeal in this Court.
It was contended on behalf of the respondents that since the State Government exempted four routes from the operation of the scheme they are entitled to parity and denial offends their right to equality under Article 14 of the Constitution.
831 Allowing the appeal and setting aside the order of the High Court, this Court.
HELD: 1.
Section 68 C of the , whose constitutional validity can no longer be questioned, gives power to the State Transport Undertaking to exclude the private operators completely or partially from an area or route or part thereof in the draft scheme.
It gives exclusive power to offer transport service in that area or route or part thereof.
[833H, 834A] 2.
The statute itself gives power to the State to exercise discretion for formulating a scheme for an area or route or part thereof and necessarily has the effect of excluding the existing or potential private operators from the fields to render transport service in that partially prohibited area etc.
while retaining similar private operators in other area, route or part thereof.
The exclusion completely or partially is allowable under the statute itself and is writ large.
The discretion need not necessarily be discriminatory.
Section 68 C left the choice to the State Transport Undertaking and so discrimination in that sense is discernible from the section which itself authorises the State Transport Undertaking, based on factual matrix, eliminate in its choice of a partial exclusion of private operators in an area or route or part thereof.
Opportunity has been given to an affected party to file his or their objections and of a right of hearing before the State Govt.
approved of the draft scheme and publication thereof in the gazette.
The exercise of discretion by the State Transport Undertaking in its selective application of partial prohibition is controlled and regulated by the statute in Ss.
68 D and 68 E of the Act.
[834B D] Ram Nath Verma vs State of Rajasthan, [1963] 2 S.C.R. 152.
referred to.
Giving primacy to the contention of violation of Article 14 would be fraught with insidious effect of upsetting the very scheme itself since anyone of the existing or potential operators would always contend that he too is similarly situated with that of the exempted operators of other area, route or part thereof and unequal treatment has been meted out in the grant of permit to offer transport service offending his right under Article 14.
[834H, 835A] 4.
It is now settled law that even on a partial overlapping approved 832 scheme private operators have been totally prohibited to have corridor shelters and could no longer enter into the frozen area, route or part thereof and obtain permit to render transport service to the travelling public.
When that be so, the partial exclusion does not offend Article 14 of the Constitution.
[835 E]
