The appellant was an Advocate practising in Bombay.
Respondent No.1 (the complainant) made a complaint to the Bar Council of Maharashtra alleging professional misconduct against the appellant.
His case was that he was a proprietor of a firm engaged in a business of manufacturing.
He was in need of financial accommodation and a financier impressed upon him that on examination of his papers by a solicitors ' firm run by the appellant, he would be given loan.
He was also told that the appellant was also one of the investors.
The complainant on such representation agreed to get loan through the financier.
On inspection of properties of the complainant the financier told him that a loan upto Rs.7 lakh would be advanced to him provided he would pay at the rate of 5 1/2% on the advance of amount of loan towards legal and other expenses.
In a meeting held at the residence of the appellant in connection with the proposed loan the appellant told the complainant that he was an advocate of a certain firm and he worked only for the genuine financiers and would look to the interests of the loan seekers.
He also told that he was himself a member of the internal group of the financiers.
The appellant induced the complainant to part with certain money for legal expenses and in formed him 688 that out of 5 1/2% of the amount of loan required to be paid by him by way of legal expenses the appellant would keep 3 1/2% for the stamp duty payable to the Government.
He also told that the disbursement could be expedited only if the complainant paid cash to the financier before certain date.
On the stipulated date the complainant paid RS.25,000 to the financier.
He also paid the balance of Rs.13,500 to the appellant.
Thereafter the appellant made all attempts to delay the disbursement and asked the complainant to pay Rs.10,000 more which the latter paid.
However, the proposed loan was not disbursed and instead of it, the financier made a complaint against the complainant in the Social Security Branch.
The complainant made a complainant to the CID Branch of Bombay Police against the financier and the appellant.
The financier was chargesheeted.
On the advice of the police the complainant made an application to the Maharashtra Bar Council.
He also alleged that the appellant had indulged in fraudulent activities in respect of other persons and at tached a list of witnesses to the complaint.
The appellant challenged the proceedings before the High Court, but the Write Petition was dismissed and the proceedings before the State Bar Council continued.
The complaint before the State Bar Council could not be disposed of within the statutory period and the case stood transferred to the Disciplinary Committee of the Bar Council of India.
Meanwhile the financier died.
The Disciplinary Committee analysing the evidences dispassionately and considering the affidavits filed on behalf of both the parties as also the affidavits filed by some witnesses alleging that they had also become the victim of fraudulent action and cheating by the financier and the appellant, held that there was a racket for defrauding and/or cheating to aspirant loanees, and the financier and the appellant advocate were parties to such racket; that the appellant in connivance with the financier defrauded the complainant in receiving large sum of money on the pretext of legal expenses and other incidental costs for advancing the proposed loan to the complainant, but such loan was never advanced to him; that the appellant had received Rs.10,000 from the complainant; that a case of professional misconduct under section 35 of the had been established against the appellant.
The Committee, therefore, ordered the name of the appellant to be removed from the State Roll of the Bar Council of Maharashtra.
689 In the appeal to this Court,it was contended on behalf of the appellant that he had no role in the matter of alleged fraudulent activities of cheating by the financier and/or some other persons as he was engaged by the financier for preparing the document of mortgage after inspection of records of the complainant for advancing the proposed loan and he had only rendered the professional service as an advocate in a fair and proper manner; that the appellant had only received his professional fees from the financier and did not receive any amount from the complainant; that the finding of the Disciplinary Committee that the appellant had been a member of the racket and had taken part in defrauding and cheating the complainant was based on surmises and conjectures; and that the Disciplinary Committee committed a grave error in law in considering the evidence of witnesses who were total strangers to the case of alleged fraud and cheating.
Dismissing the appeal, this court, HELD: 1.1.
The appellant advocate has not only misused the trust reposed in him but has played an active part in defrauding or cheating the complainant who on the basis of the false representation of the appellant had to part with substantial amount to his serious loss and prejudice.
[p.704 E G] 1.2 A perusal of the entire evidence placed on record leads to the irresistible conclusion that the appellant was not only having full knowledge about the racket but was also an active member of such racket and was getting substantial financial advantage.
The appellant was not a silent spectator merely giving his legal advice, but was an important link in the modus operandi of running a racket by the financier.
[p. 704 C D] 1.3.
The evidence of many other applicants seeking loan showing that they were also duped and met the same fate as the complainant, speaks volumes against the conduct of the appellant.
[p. 704 B] 1.4.
An advocate indulging in such nefarious activities is not entitled to continue as a member of legal profession which is based on the implicit faith and confidence in the mind of the client.
[p. 704 B C] 690 1.5.
It is not the case of a lapse to take appropriate steps by and advocate and/or a case of negligence in discharging the duties so that any lenient view may be taken against the concerned advocate.
[p. An advocate enrolled under the , having a licence to represent the case of litigants is expected to maintain a high standard of morality and unimpeachable sense of legal and ethical propriety.
[p.704E] 2.
The complainant specifically alleged that there was a racket to which the appellant and the financier were parties.
He indicated the modus operandi by which he became victim of the fraudulent activities of the said members of the racket.
To bring home the case of racket, the deposi tions of other persons who had also approached the financier for advancement of loan and had been dealt with by him and the appellant in similar manner and though they had to part with substantial amount towards legal and other expenses for getting the proposed loan, such loan had not been ultimately sanctioned to them, became relevant and necessary to be looked into.
[p. 701 B D] 3.1.
It is always permissible to draw reasonable infer ence from the facts established in a proceeding and such reasonable inference cannot be termed as finding based on surmises and conjectures.
There is no manner of doubt that in any proceeding, judicial or quasi judicial, there is requirement of proof and such requirement cannot be substi tuted by surmise and conjecture.
But proof may be estab lished directly on the basis of the evidence adduced in the proceeding or the allegation of fact may be established by drawing reasonable inferences from other facts established by evidence.
[p. 703 B D] 3.2.
In the instant case, the Committee, has referred to the admitted facts and also the facts established in evidence and on a proper analysis of the facts so established and/or admitted, it has drawn reasonable inference.
The Committee was alive to various aspects of the case and has taken care in meticulously scrutinising and analysing the evidence on record and the materials, and the Committee has based its finding by giving cogent reasons and the inferences drawn from the established facts also appear quite reasonable.
The Disciplinary Commit tee deserves commendation in disposing of the complainant 's case fairly and dispassionately.
In the matter of imposition of punishment, the Disciplinary Committee 691 has referred to the relevant decisions of this Court and has imposed the penalty by recording good reasons for the same.
[p.703 A; D E] Re: P an Advocate ; and M. Veerbhadra Rao vs Tak Chand, ; , referred to.
