Regulation 47 of the Bank of India (Officers ') Service Regulations, 1979 provided that every officer was liable for transfer to any office or branch of the Bank of India or to any place in India.
The respondent was posted as a clerk in the appellant Bank at Chandigarh.
At the time of his promotion to the Junior Management Grade Scale 1, he gave an undertaking for posting anywhere in India, and was consequently posted as Branch Officer in the State of Bihar.
Thereafter, he filed a writ petition in the High Court claiming his transfer to Chandigarh Zone on the ground of his wife being employed at Chandigarh.
The writ petition was allowed.
The Bank filed appeal by special leave to this Court.
It was contended on behalf of the respondent that para 4 (vi) of Memorandum dated 3.4.1986 of the Government of India contained guidelines for posting of husband and wife at one station which were meant to be followed also by all the Public Sector Undertakings, and, according to the provisions of the Banking Compa 493 nies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act 1970 and the Bank of India (Officers ') Service Regulations, 1979 made thereunder, the bank was bound to follow the guidelines and directions issued by the Central Government.
Allowing the appeal of the Bank, this Court, HELD: 1.
Although the guidelines require the two spouses to be posted at one place as far as practicable the desirability of such a course being obvious yet that does not enable any spouse to claim such a posting as of right if the departmental authorities do not consider it feasible; nor does it mean that their place of posting should invaria bly be one of their choice even though their preference may be taken into account while making the decision in accord ance with the administrative needs.
The only thing required is that the departmental authorities should consider the feasibility of a suitable posting along with the exigencies of administration and enable the two spouses to live togeth er at one station if it is possible without any detriment to the administrative needs and the claim of other employees.
[pp 495 E; 496 BC] 2.
After accepting a promotion or any appointment in an All india Service, subordinating the need of the couple living together at one station, they cannot as of right claim to be relieved of the ordinary incidents of the serv ice and avoid transfer to a different place on the ground that the spouses thereby would be posted at different places.
While choosing the career and a particular service the couple have to bear in mind this factor and be prepared to face such a hardship particularly when they belong to different services.
They have to make their choice at the threshhold between career prospects and family life.
[pp 495 F H; 496 A] 3.1 In the instant case, the respondent voluntarily gave an undertaking that he was prepared to be posted at any place in India and on that basis got promotion and thereaf ter sought to be relieved of that necessary incident of an All India Service on the ground that his wife had to remain at Chandigarh.
[p. 496 AB] 3.2 In the face of Regulation 47 of the Bank of India (Officers ') Service Regulations, 1979 according to which every officer is liable for transfer to any office or branch of the Bank of India or to any place in India and the clear provision for such transfer in the policy read with the notice dated March 28, 1988, the High Court 's order cannot be sustained.
[p. The High Court was in error in overlooking all the relevant aspect as well as the absence of any legal right in the respondent to claim the relief which it granted as a matter of course.
[p. 496 CD]
