The appellant 's father let out the disputed building wherein the tenant respondent carried out the hotel business.
The appellant landlord filed an eviction petition on 15.1.81 before the Rent Controller stating that after his retirement from service on 30.9.1981, he wanted to settle down in that town and as he had no other house to reside, the disputed building was required by him bona fide for his occupation; that the respondent tenant was using the property in such a manner as to materially and permanently reduce its value, utility and purpose.
The respondent contended that the building was not suitable for residential purposes; that the appellant had a house and plot in his wife 's name within the town; that there was a lot of vacant land on the back side of the tenanted building, which was suitable for house construction and that the property was not being used in such a way as to reduce its utility.
The trial court dismissed the eviction petition of the landlord, holding that as he failed in proving his bona fide need of the building, the landlord was not entitled to an order of eviction under Section 11(3) of the 71 Kerala Buildings (Lease & Rent Control) Act, 1965 and as the landlord failed to prove that the tenant was using the building in such a way to destroy its value and utility, he was not entitled to an order under section 11(4)(ii) of the Act.
On appeal, the Appellate Authority reversed the order of the Rent Controller.
The High Court in revision set aside the order of the Appellate Authority, against which the present appeal by special leave was filed before this Court by the landlord.
On the question, whether the respondent was liable to be evicted on the ground of bona fide need of the appellant for his personal occupation under section 11(3) of the Act, this Court allowing the landlord 's appeal, HELD:1.1.
The scope of the revisional jurisdiction conferred under section 20 is wider than that conferred under section 115 CPC.
But at the same time, a revision under section 20 cannot be equated with an appeal.
[75 C] 1.2.
The revisional power conferred on the High Court is essentially a power of superintendence and despite the wide language employed, the High Court should not interfere with the findings of fact of the subordinate authority merely because it does not agree with the said findings.
[75 E] Dattonpant Gopalverao Devakate vs Vithabrao Maruthirao Janagaval, [1975] Supp.
SCR 67; M/s. Sri Raja Lakshmi Dyeing Works & Ors.
vs Rangaswamy Chettiar, AIR 1980 SC 1253, followed.
The revisional court must be reluctant to embark upon an independent reassessment of the evidence and to supplant a conclusion of its own,so long as the evidence on record admitted on and supported the one reached by the court below.
[75 F] Rajbir vs section Chokesiri & Co., at p.37, followed.
The question whether the building is required bona fide by the appellant for his own residence is primarily one of fact and the finding recorded by the Appellate Authority after considering the evidence on 72 record could not be interfered with by the High Court in exercise of the revisional jurisdiction under Section 20 of the Act because it could not be said that the said finding recorded by the Appellate authority was not supported by the evidence on record.
[77 E] 2.2.
The fact that the appellant has been living with his son in the house belonging to him (son) cannot head to the inference that the claim of the appellant that he want to live in a house of his own is false and not bona fide.
The same is true about the building in question not having the requisite facilities and being not in a fit condition for residence because the appellant can make suitable repairs and alterations in the same to make it fit for residential purposes.
[78 B C] 2.3.
The claim of the landlord that he needs the building bona fide for his personal occupation cannot be negatived on the ground the the building requires repairs and alterations before the landlord can occupy the same.
[78 D] 2.4.
There is no prohibition that a landlord must occupy the house for residence without making any alterations in it.
[78 H 79A] Devaky vs Krishnankutty, , approved.
Ramniklal Pitambardas Mehta vs Indradaman Amratlal Sheth, ; , followed.
Before passing a decree for eviction on the ground of bona fide need of the landlord under section 11(3) of the Act, it was necessary for the Appellate Authority to consider whether the tenant was entitled to the benefit of the second proviso to sub section (3) of section 11 of the Act which precludes the passing of an order for eviction of a tenant who is depending for his livelihood mainly from the trade or business carried on in such building and there is no other suitable building available in the locality for him to carry on such trade or business.
[79 C] 3.2.
Since the Appellate Authority has omitted to consider the matter from this angle the matter should be remanded to the Appellate Authority for considering the question whether the respondent can invoke the protection of the second proviso to section 11(3) of the Act.
[79 G 80A] 73
