A document purporting to be a receipt and bearing a four anna revenue stamp was executed by M in favour of the respondent and recited, inter alia, as follows: " I have this day given 108 to you the land described below which is owned by me.
Now you have become occupancy tenant of the same.
You may enjoy the same in any way you like from generation to generation.
My estate and heirs or myself shall have absolutely no right thereto.
You shall become the owner of the said land from date 1 6 44.
I will have absolutely no right thereto after the said date. .
The estate. has been given to you in lieu of your Rs. 8,700 due to you, subject to the condition that in case your amount has not been paid to you on date 1 6 44, You may fully enjoy the estate in any way you like from generation to generation.
" The respondent instituted a suit against M for the specific performance of a contract to lease alleging that under the document he had contracted to lease to her in perpetuity in occupancy right his lands in consideration of the debt of Rs. 8,7oo and as the amount was not paid within the due date, he was liable to perform and give effect to the said contract.
M contended, inter alia, that the document was an agreement to lease under section 2(7) of the Indian , and that as it was not registered it was inadmissible in evidence.
Held, that an agreement to lease under section 2(7) of the Regis tration Act, 1908, must be a document which effects an actual demise and operates as a lease.
An agreement between two parties which entitles one of them merely to claim the execution of a lease from the other without creating a pre sent and immediate demise in his favour is not an agreement to lease within the meaning of section 2(7) of the Act.
Held, further, that on a construction of the document in question, it was not intended to, and did not, effect an actual or present demise in favour of the respondent and consequently it was not an agreement to leaseunders.
2(7) Of the Act.
Accordingly, the document did not require registration and was admissible in evidence.
Hemanta Kumari Devi vs Midnapuy Zamindari Co., Ltd., (1919) L.R. 46 I.A. 240, relied on.
Panchanan Bose vs Chandya Charan Misra, Cal. 808, approved.
Narayanan Chetty vs Muthia Servai, Mad. 63, Purmananddas jiwandas vs Dharsey Kirji, Bom.
101, Balram vs Mahadeo, I.L.R. and Poole vs Bently, ; ; , distinguished.
