The Government of Kerala issued a Notification dated 18.9.1974 under Section 1 (5) of the extending the provisions of the Act to six kinds of establishments viz. Hotels, Restaurants, Shops, Road Transport Motor Establishments, Cinemas and Newspaper Establishments.
The appellant Company, carrying on the business of clearing and forwarding at the port of Cochin, received notice for payment of its contribution under the Act.
Denying its liability to pay, it filed an application before the Employees ' Insurance Court under Section 75 of the Act, contending that the Notification was not applicable to it because its establishment was not a shop, but the same was dismissed.
On appeal a Division Bench of the High Court held that the establishment of the appellant falls within the purview of the term `shop '.
In appeals to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that (1) though `shop ' would take within it other establishments like hotels or restaurants yet they have come to be specifically mentioned.
In view of that enumeration of other establishment in contradistinction to shops the 910 word `shop ' must be held to relate to a place where commercial activity of buying and selling merchandise takes place otherwise the enumeration of other establishment becomes meaningless; (2) in view of the fact that the notification specifically enumerates the other establishments, the intention has been clearly brought out not to give a wider meaning of the term `shop ' as otherwise the term `shop ' itself would be enough to cover other establishments like hotels, restaurants, cinema etc.
From this point of view, the activity carried on by the appellant merely processing the document at the customs clearing house without rendering any service to the customers at the appellant 's office of establishment cannot be said to fall within the meaning of `shop '.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court HELD: Per Sharma, J.
In view of the consistent interpretation of the notification which has been followed in the country, the question should not be reopened for fresh consideration.
[912 B] Per Mohan, J. (For Himself and Venkatachala, J.) Concurring: 1.
The Employee 's State Insurance Act is an Act to provide certain benefits to employees in case of sickness, maternity and employment injury and makes provision for certain other matters in relation thereto.
Under Section 1(4), in the first instance, it is made applicable to all factories.
But the Act envisages the extension of benefit to the employees in other establishments or class of establishments, industrial commercial, agricultural or otherwise.
The extension of benefit is to be done by means of a notification by the Appropriate Government.
Thus the benefits conferred by the Act cover a large area of employees than what the Factories Act and the akin legislations intended.
The conclusion is inescapable that it is a welfare legislation.
The endeavour of Court should be to place a liberal construction so as to promote its object.
The object is to envelop as many establishments as possible without leaving any room for doubt.
That is precisely what the Notification intends to do.
[915D, E,F,920 A] 2.
The Notification catalogues six establishments one of which is `shop '.
Merely because other establishments which are akin to shop are enumerated, it does not, in any manner, oblige the Court to give a narrow 911 meaning to the word `shop ' nor does it any way dilute the meaning of `shop '.
The appellant is carrying on stevedoring, clearing and forwarding operations.
Clearing the documents, even it be in the custom house, is necessary for the export or import of goods.
These services form part of the carriers job.
It cannot be gainsaid that the appellant is rendering service to cater the needs of exporters and importers and others who want to carry the goods further.
Therefore, it is a shop carrying on a systematic economic or a commercial activity.
This would be enough to bring the appellant without specifically enumerating the specific activities carried on by the appellant.
[913H, 919H, 920A B] Hindu Jea Band, Jaipur.
vs Regional Director Employees ' State Insurance Corporation, Jaipur, ; and M/s International Ore & Fertilizers (India) Pvt. Ltd. vs Employees ' State Insurance Corporation; , , relied on.
Wharton 's Law Lexicon, 14th Edn. 929 and Words and Phrases Legally defined, 2nd Edn. 73, referred to.
