The appellants and the private respondents were Sub Engineers in Public Health Engineering Department of the Government.
The minimum period for Sub Engineer to qualify for promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer was 12 years for diploma holders and 8 years for such Sub Engineers who obtained the degree of graduation in the course of service.
By an executive order dated 7.2.1989, quota of direct recruitment was reduced to 50 per cent and the quota by promotion from the Sub Engineers, Draftsman, increased to 50 per cent.
The 50 per cent quota by promotion was sub divided.
The promotion quota for category of the Graduate Sub Engineers completing 8 years of service was 10%.
The principle of counting the seniority was from the date of their continuous officiation irrespective of the date on which such diploma holder Sub Engineer acquired degree of graduation in engineering.
The Departmental Promotion Committee considered the cases of 30 Graduate Sub Engineers for promotion to the post of Assistant Engineers and by order dated 4.12.1989 it prepared a panel of 18 Graduate Sub Engineers found suitable for promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer.
On 6.12.1989 the Government promoted one M.B.Joshi and six others as Assistant Engineer, who are appellants in appeal arising out of Special Leave Petition No.2507 of 1992.
The Private respondents in the appeal, filed and application in the State Administrative Tribunal challenging the orders dated 4.12.1989 and 6.12.1989.
They contended that the seniority for the purpose of promotion to the post of Assistant Engineers in 10 per cent quota of Graduate Sub Engineers completing 8 years of service ought to have been considered from the date of attaining the graduate degree of engineering and not from the date of attaining the graduate degree of engineering and not from the date of appointment as Sub Engineer.
The Tribunal allowed the petition placing reliance on its earlier decision in Sanaulla Sunzani V. State of M.P. & Ors., T.A. No. 771/88.
The Tribunal held that the applicants (private respondents in the appeal) having secured the degrees in engineering prior to respondents 3 to 9 ( the appellants in the appeal) would rank higher in the graduation list of Graduate Sub Engineers.
It directed the State Government and Engineer in Chief, Public Health Engineering Department to convene a special D.P.C. to consider the applicants for promotion to the post of Assistant Engineers as on 4.12.1989 and if found suitable for promotion, promote them and give them seniority over respondents 3 to 9.
Identical questions of law were involved in all the appeals (C.A. Nos. 4255 57 of 1992), which were preferred against the judgments of the Tribunals.
The appellants contended that so far as the post of Sub Engineers was concerned, the minimum qualification prescribed was diploma holder and the seniority was determined on the basis of the date of appointment on the post of Sub Engineer irrespective of the fact that the person joining such post was a degree holder or a diploma holder; that the scale of pay was similar and the diploma holder and degree holder Sub Engineers stood on the same footing and their gradation list was prepared on the basis of length of service in the cadre of Sub Engineers that in the service jurisprudence where the rules were silent, the seniority was always determined on the basis of length of service amongst the employees appointed on a similar post in the same cadre; that obtaining a degree during the continuation of service as Sub Engineer simply accelerated the entitlement to promotion for the post of Assistant Engineer from 12 years to 8 years but it did not in any manner disturb the seniority which was already settled on the basis of length of service on the post of Sub Engineer; and that the D.P.C. rightly prepared the panel of selection and the Government took a correct decision in issuing the order dated 6.12.1989.
2 The respondents contended that it was necessary to obtain the degree of engineering for being qualified for promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer within a period of 8 years instead of 12 years; that the period of 8 years to be counted from the date when the diploma holder Sub Engineer acquired the degree of engineering and not prior to said date.
Allowing the appeals, this Court, HELD: 1.1.
It is a well settle principle of service jurisprudence that in the absence of any specific rule, the seniority amongst persons holding similar posts in the same cadre has to be determined on the basis of the length of service and not on any other fortuitous circumstance.[12 B] 1.2.
The Government itself has been adopting the practice and making promotion as contended by the appellants.
Such practice is upheld by the Court.
[12 A] 1.3.
The Rules do not contemplate any equivalence of any period of service with the qualification of acquiring degree of graduation in engineering.
The Rules clearly provide that the diploma holders having obtained a degree of engineering while continuing in service as Sub Engineer shall be eligible for promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer in 8 years of service and quota of 10 per cent posts has been earmarked for such category of persons.
[11 C D] 1.4.
If the period of 8 years is counted from the date of acquiring degree then this incentive of adding the qualification during the continuation of service and getting the advantage of acceleration in promotion in 8 years would for all practical purposes become nugatory and of no benefit.
[11 G H] 1.5.
The Tribunal was wrong in determining the seniority from the date of acquiring degree of engineering and it ought to have been determined on the basis of length of service on the post of Sub Engineer and the State Government was right in doing so and there was no infirmity in the orders passed by the Government.
[12 D E] N. Suresh Nathan & Anr.
vs Union of India & Ors., [1992] Supp.1 SCC 584, explained.
