The appellants assessees in the first set of appeals were selling agents of appellants in the second set of appeals.
For the assessment year 1996 70, they were assessed to sales tax on taxable turn over of Rs. 2,37,66,245 which included an amount of Rs. 29,71,527 representing freight charges.
The assessee claimed exclusion of freight charges in computing the taxable turnover on the ground that freight had been independently charged in the invoices.
This was rejected by the assessing authority, the appellate authority as well as Tribunal.
Aggrieved, the assessee preferred revisions to the High court.
The High court held that in cases arising under the Central sales Tax Act, the freight, packing charges and excise duty on packing materials had to be included in the sale price for the computation of sales tax, that in cases arising under the Tamil Nadu General sales Tax Act and Tamil Nadu Additional sales Tax Act, freight, packing charges and excise duty on packing materials were not liable to be included in the sale price for the computation of the sale price, and that the assessees were not liable to pay additional sales tax on freight, packing materials and excise duty on packing materials in the cases arising under the Tamil Nadu Additional sales Tax Act.
Aggrieved, both the as well as well as the state Government filed appeals before this Court.
On behalf of the state it was contended that the High court, having held that the amounts in question were liable to the included in the turnover for purposes of Central sales Tax Act, ought to have also held that these amounts were liable to be included in the taxable turnover for purposes of Tamil Nadu General sales Tax Act and the Tamil Nadu Additional sales Tax Act also, and relief granted for purposes of the local sales tax was erroneous.
On behalf of the assessees, it was contended that, even for the purpose of C.S.T., the freight charges, the cost of packing materials and the excise duty on the packing materials should have been excluded in the computation of the taxable turnover, that the Cement Control order, under the terms of which sales of cement were effected during the relevant period by all cement manufacturers, had no relevance to the question at issue, that all that the cement control order laid down was that Cement could not be sold at a price higher than a price fixed by the cement control order on terms described " as free on rail (F.O.R) , destination ', that the order did not stand in the way of cement manufacturers charging a price less than the ceiling fixed under the order, nor did it preclude individual contracts by the cement manufacturers with various purchasers that the latter should bear the freight charges that the assessees had and that the assessees had entered into contract with the purchasers which clearly stipulated that the freight would be payable by the latter, as per terms and condition of sale, the instant case was one where, despite the terms of the control order, the assessees chose to sell the goos free on rail at the point where the goods were loaded on rail and that the liability to pay freight was entirely that of the purchasers , and that these contracts were not inconsistent with or repugnant to the terms of the cement control order and therefore, the assessees were entitled to exclude the amounts of freight as not forming the part of the turnover at all.
Allowing the appeals of the state and dismissing those of the appellant dealers, this court, HELD: 1.
The freight charges should be included in arriving at the taxable turnover for purposes of Central sales Tax as Tamil Nadu sales Tax Act; and the packing charges and excise duty thereon should also be included in arriving at the tax able turnover or purposes of both central sales Tax and Tamil Nadu sales Tax.
[94 D,E] 2.1 The whole purpose of the cement control order was that cement should be available for sale at all places in the country at a controlled price.
No. doubt, the price was described as a maximum beyond which the sale price could not go but the intention, which was also carried out by all the suppliers, was that cement was to be sold at what may be described as a controlled price on terms 'free ' on rail destination '.
In other words, the producer was entitled to the controlled price irrespective of the amount of freight which might have been incurred in respect of the transaction.
Having regard to the fact that the freight on consignments to places near the factory and consignments places far away from the factories could show a lot of variation the control order created a machinery by which all freight charges were credited to a common account and any particular cement manufacturer incurring more than a specified amount was entitled to the reimbursed for the excess freight incurred by him.
The whole control order proceeds on the footing that the freight charges are to be met by the producer and that he was entitled to a consolidated price irrespective of the freight he may have incurred.
Hence the sale price, on the terms of the Central sales Tax Act, could only be the controlled price as fixed by the Cement control order.
[87 F H; 88 A C] Hindustan Sugar Mills Ltd. vs State of Rajasthan, (1979) 43 S.T.C.13, relied on.
Hyderabad Asbestos Cements products Ltd. vs State of Andhara Pradesh, (1969) 24 S.T.C.487, distinguished.
2.2 The High court was, therefore, fully justified in denying the benefit of deduction of freight charges from the controlled price to arrive at the turnover of the assessee for ter purpose of the central sales Tax Act.
[89 C] 3.1.
In coming to the different conclusion in respect of the local Act, from that reached in respect of the Central Act , viz., that since freight was one of the items specified in clause (i) of Rule 6 (c) of Tamil Nadu General sales Tax Rules, 1959, and since the assessees had specified and charged for freight separately in their invoices, they were entitled to the deduction of the freight in the computation of the taxable turnover, the High court has over looked the significance of the inclusion of the words " without including them in the price of the goods sold" in clause (c) of the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Rules.
These words make it clear that the freight charges are not to be deducted in the computation of the taxable turnover merely because they are specified and charged for separately by the dealer.[90 G,H; 91 A] 3.2.
A further pre requisite for their deduction is that these charges should not have been included in the price of the goods sold.
Once it is concluded that freight has been included as part of the price sold and that the liability to pay the freight remains with the dealer, though permitted to be set off against the sale price by the purchaser or consumer, it follows that the deduction of the freight as separate item in the computation of taxable turnover is not permissible.
Rule 6(c) will apply only in cases where the sale price charged does not include the freight charges and the dealer separately collect freight from the consumer without including the same in the sale price.
The High court was, therefore, in error in excluding freight charges from the taxable turnover for the purpose of the Tamil Nadu Act.
[91 A C; 93 F] Tungabhadra Industries Ltd. vs Commercial Tax officer, Kurnool, (1990) 11 S.T.C. 827; Dyer Meakin Breweries Ltd. vs State of Kerala , (1970) 26 S.T.C 248; Johar & sons (p) Ltd. vs sales Tax officer, Ernakulam, (1971) 27 S.T.C.120; C.C.T. V. Ashok Marketing Ltd., (1973) 32 S.T.C.411; State of Mysore vs Panyam cements and Mineral Industries Ltd., (1974)33 S.T.C. 407; State of Tamil Nadu vs Parry and company,(1976) 38 S.T.C.122; State of Tamil Nadu vs Chettinad cement Corporation Ltd., (1976) 38 S.T.C.519 and premier Breweries Ltd. vs state of Karnataka, (1984) 56 S.T.C. 14, relied on.
The position in regard to packing charges as well as the excise duty thereon is also no different.
Packing charges from part of " sale price" because the expression " any sum charged for anything done by the dealer in respect of the goods" used in the definition in Section 2(h) of the central sales Tax Act.
Nor will, the assessee be in a position to claim a deduction in respect of these charges by virtue of Rule 6(c) of the Sales Tax Rules.
Therefore, the packing charges and excise duty thereon cannot also be deducted in computing the taxable turnover for the purpose of the Tamil Nadu Acts.[93 G, H; 94 A C] Hindustan Sugar Mills Ltd. vs State of Rajasthan & ors.
, (1979) 43 S.T.C. 13 and Commissioner of sales Tax vs Rai Bharat Das & Bros.,(1988) 71 S.T.C. 277 (SC), relied on.
State of Tamil Nadu vs Vanniaperumal & Co., (1990) 76 S.T.C.203; Dalmia Cement (Bharat) Ltd. vs State of Tamil Nadu, (1991) 81 S.T.C. 327; Dalmia Cement (Bharat) Ltd. vs State of Tamil Nadu, (1991) 83 S.T.C.442, approved.
