35 posts in super time grade of Central Health Services were sanctioned and proposals were sent to the Union Public Service Commission(UPSC) for convening departmental Promotion Committee (DPC) meetings for selection of candidates.
UPSC approved to amend Rule 4(6) of Central Health service Rules of 1982.
It also approved the method recruitment, field of selection and principles of seniority to fill up the 35 posts as one time measure in the absence of notified recruitment rules.
The Commission also stipulated that these 35 posts were to be treated as common posts to be included in the category of floating posts for the teaching and non teaching sub cadres mentioned in Rule 4(6) of Central Health Services Rules, 1982.
The eligibility condition stipulated was three years as Professor failing which 17 years of regular service in Group `A '.
The Communication of UPSC together with the eligibility list of Professors was circulated and errors/objections etc.
were to be intimated to the Ministry within one month.
The DPC met and selected candidates.
Respondent No.1 was assigned 14th rank and Respondent No.3 was assigned 4th rank.
The selected candidates were promoted and appointed.
Respondent No.1 filed an application before the Central Administrative Tribunal claiming that he was senior to respondent No.3 and others doctors and since the promotion was only on the basis of seniority and directed that Respondents arrayed in the application before it.
Being aggrieved by the Tribunal 's order, Union of India preferred the first of the two appeals.
Respondent No.3 in that appeal has preferred the other appeal.
On behalf of the appellants/respondent No.3, it was contended that Rule 4(10)(ii) and (iii) as amended merely prescribed the procedure for preparation of eligibility test; that the procedure has not been prescribed in any other Rule as the posts were created as floating posts: that the posts did not pertain to any particular super speciality or sub cadre if Professor/Director and so the criteria for preparation of eligibility list gad to be prescribed for determining inter se ranking between the sub cadres; that merely because Rule 4(10)(iii) contained the word `suitability ' it did not supersede, alter or amend the criteria for selection and that the word `suitability ' has to be understood in the light of the guidelines of DPC.
Allowing the appeals, this Court, HELD: 1.1.
If there is to be an assessment of merit, the principle of selection is involved.
on the contrary, if it were merely a seniority cum fitness there is no need to associate the Union public Service Commission as pointed out in the guidelines.
All these lead only to one conclusion that these are selection posts.
That is dealt with apart from Rule 4, sub rule (10), clause (iii), and also under paragraph 6.1.2 of the guidelines issued by the Government of India.
According to the guidelines the Departmental Promotion Committee is to devise its own method and procedure for objective assessments of suitability of candidates.
It is note worthy in Paragraph 6.3.1 that the procedure for the preparation of the panel for promotion by the Departmental promotion Committee is delineated.
[51 C,D] 1.2.
Paragraph 7 of the guidelines deals with non selection method and it dispenses with the requirement to make a comparative assessment of the records.
In such a case what is required is to categorise the officers as fit or not yet fit for promotion on the basis of assessment of the record of service.
Therefore, the word "suitability" in Rule 4(10)(iii) having regard to the nature of the post and grade could only mean suitability for the purposes of being selected to the said post.
[51 G, H; 52 A] 2.
It is a common case between the parties that these 35 floating posts were created by sub rule 10 of rule 4 in a addition to the authorised strength.
If as per the rule, for the post falling under authorised strength the method of selection is adopted it must equally apply to the post created in addition to the authorised strength.
A careful reading of Rule 8(4)(ii) reveals that departmental promotion to higher post in the respective special cadres and specialities within the sub cadre concerned shall be made on the basis of selection on merit.
It implies that, should vacancy arise in a particular speciality , this method is to be adopted.
In contradistinction to this, under Rule 4(10)(iii) even though one of the floating or common posts may be held by a particular person of a particular speciality, the said post can go to a person not belonging to that speciality.
Comprises of 29 specialities.
Thus it follows the word "selection" used in Rule 8 (4)(ii) is with reference to inter se merit of persons belonging to a particular speciality with regard to the vacancy occurring in that speciality.[52 D H] 3.
The first respondent was served with a copy of letter dated 3.11.1988 in which the appellant clearly stated that the 20 posts of Director/Professor of super time grade are to be filled by selection method viz. merit with regard to seniority.
Therefore, the decision of Government of India had been conveyed to the first respondent and he should have immediately voiced his protest.
Of course, the failure to protest would not deprive him of a legitimate right if he is entitled to in law.
[53 A,B] 4.
After examination of the character roll of the senior most eligible officers the committee assessed the officers.
The first respondent was rated as "very good" while the rating for respondents 2 to 5 was outstanding".
So they go en bloc above the first respondent since the first respondent is merely "very good".
This is because of the application of clause Ii of paragraph 6.3.1.
of the guidelines.
It was on this basis the Departmental Promotion Committee assigned rank No. 14 to the first respondent.
Pursuant to this the President of India issued the order of promotion dated 17th January, 1990.
Paragraph 3 of the order clearly states that the promotions will be personal to the officers concerned and the posts presently held by them will stand upgraded to the super time grade in the scale in terms of the Ministry 's order dated 15.3.1989.
Hence the Tribunal was in error in merely adopting seniority as the basis of promotion and not merit.
[53 C G]
