This Court, by its order dated 20.11.1986, while disposing of Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 1061 of 1982, gave comprehensive directions for rehabilitation of Adivasis/landholders affected by the Rihand Super Thermal Power Project to be set up by the National Thermal Power Corporation Limited (NTPC), and appointed a Board of Commissioners to supervise the implementation of the said directions.
Since then this Court was monitoring the project.
Disposing of the proceedings and the monitoring process so far as the NTPC was concerned, this Court, HELD: In order to ensure that the rights of the oustees are determined in their respective holdings and they are properly and adequately compensated, the NTPC shall take, in collaboration with the State Government, the following measures to rehabilitate the evictees who were in actual physical possession of the lands/houses etc.
: (i) The NTPC shall submit a list of the evictees claimants to the District Judge, Sonebhadra who shall be the final authority to finalise the list.
(ii) One plot of land measuring 60 ' x 40 ' to each of the evictee families be distributed for housing purposes through the district administration.
(iii) Shifting allowance of Rs. 1500 and in addition a lumpsum rent of Rs. 3000 towards housing be given to each of the evictee families.
858 (iv) Free transportation shall be provided for shifting.
(v) Monthly subsistence allowance equivalent to loss of net income from the acquired land to be determined by the District Judge Sonebhadra subject to a maximum of Rs. 750 for a period of 10 years.
The said payment shall not be linked with employment or any other compensation.
(vi) Unskilled and semi skilled posts in the project shall be reserved for the evictees.
(vii) The NTPC shall give preference to the oustees in employment in class III and IV posts under its establishment.
(viii) The evictees be offered employment through the contractors employed by the NTPC.
(ix) Jobs of contractors under the administration of the NTPC be offered to the evictees.
(x) The shops and other business premises within the NTPC campus be offered to the evictees.
(xi) The NTPC shall operate for the benefit of the evictees selfgenerating employment schemes such as carpentry training (free tools to be provided after completion of training) carpet weaving training, sericulture, masonary training, dairy farming, poultry farming and basket weaving training etc.
(xii) The NTPC shall provide facilities in the rehabilitative area such as pucca roads, pucca drainage system, handpumps, wells, portable water supply, primary school, adult education classes, health centre, Panchayat Bhavan, sports centres, electricity connections, bank and sulabh Sauchalaya complex etc.
The Deputy Commissioner Sonebhadra shall supervise and ensure that the rehabilitation measures are fully complied with.
(xiii) As regards compensation for crops and land, the provisional compensation at the rate of Rs. 850 per acre per year for crops and Rs. 10,000 per acre for the land be paid to the oustees.
[pp.861B H; 862A H; 863A B] 859 The District Judge Sonebhadra shall be the authority to determine the compensation.
The orders passed by the District Judge shall be treated as orders under section 17 of the Indian Forest Act, as amended by U.P. Act 25 of 1965.
[p.863B,F]
