A residential house was let out to the petitioner by the respondent.
The respondent was initially employed as Accounts Officer with the Finance Department of the Government.
In 1969, he went on deputation with the Haryana Agricultural University.
While he was employed on the post of Comptroller in the University he retired from service with effect from February 28, 1991.
Claiming to be a "specified landlord" within the meaning of Section 2(hh) of the East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act, 1949, the respondent moved a petition seeking eviction of the petitioner under section 13A of the Act before the Rent Controller.
The petition was dismissed by the Rent Controller on the view that the respondent did not fall within the ambit of the definition of "specified landlord", since he failed to show that he was holding or had held an appointment in a public service or post in connection with the affairs of the Union or of the State.
The respondent filed a revision petition before the High Court under section 18 A(8) of the Act, which was allowed by the High Court on March, 1992.
The High Court held that the respondent, at the time of his retirement from the post of Comptroller in the University, was holding an appointment in connection with the affairs of the State and hence he was a specified landlord within the meaning of section 2(hh) of the Act and that the respondent had fully satisfied the conditions as contained in section 13 A of the Act and he was entitled to recover the possession of the premises in dispute from the petitioner.
The High Court allowed one month 's time for the petitioner to vacate the premises subject to his paying the entire arrears of rent within 15 days from the date of the order and filing an undertaking that he would hand over the vacant possession of the premises on the expiry of the aforesaid period.
On March 16, 1992, the petitioner moved a petition in the High Court under section 151 CPC seeking three months ' time to vacate the house and for waiving the requirement of filing of an undertaking.
The High Court rejected the petition.
Thereafter, the petitioner submitted an undertaking dated March 20, 1992 before the Rent Controller wherein the petitioner referred to the direction contained in the order of the High Court dated March 6, 1992.
On March 21, 1992, the petitioner filed the special leave petition under Article 136 of the Constitution in this Court and succeeded to get an order staying dispossession on March 26, 1992.
In response to the notice issued on the Special Leave Petition, the respondent filed a counter affidavit raising an objection that in view of the undertaking given by the petitioner, the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 136 of the Constitution could not be invoked.
The respondent landlord submitted that in view of petitioner tenant 's having taken the benefit of direction contained to the order of the High Court allowing him one month 's time to vacate the premises on his filing an undertaking that vacant possession of the premises would be handed over on the expiry of the period and his having submitted a written undertaking in accordance with the direction, the petitioner was precluded from assailing the judgment of the High Court by invoking the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 136 of the Constitution.
The petitioner tenant submitted that he did not take any undue advantage by giving the undertaking; that prior to the undertaking, he had moved an application for extension of time before the High Court wherein he had clearly indicated that he intended to file a special leave petition in this Court against the order of the High Court dated March 6, 1992 and that it was also expressly stated in the undertaking filed in the Court wherein it is mentioned that the undertaking was subject to his right to file the special leave petition in this Court against the order of eviction.
Dismissing the special leave petition, this Court, HELD: 1.01 Law does not permit a person to both approbate and reprobate.
This principle is based on the doctrine of election which postulates that no party can accept and reject the same instrument.
[263 F] 1.02 The petitioner, having given an undertaking in pursuance to the directions given by the High Court in the judgment dated March 6, 1992 and having availed the protection from eviction on the basis of the said undertaking, cannot be permitted to invoke the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 136 of the Constitution and assail the said judgment of the High Court.
[264 H] 1.03 The statement in the undertaking, that it was subject to the rights of the petitioner to file special leave petition in this Court against the order of eviction, does not have any effect on the legal consequencew flowing as a result of the filing of the undertaking by the petitioner.
[263 D] Verschures Creameries Ltd. vs Hull and Netherlands Steamship Co. E Ltd., at p. 612; Thacker Hariram Motiram vs Balkrishan Chatbrabhu Thacker & Ors., [1989] Supp.
2 SCC 655 and Vidhi Shanker vs Heera Lal 1987 Supp.
SCC 200; Ramchandra Jai Ram Randive vs Chandanmal Rupshand & Ors., [1987] Supp.
SCC 254, referred to.
Halsbuly 's Laws of England, 4th Edn.
16, para 1508, referred to.
