: Section 21 Power to add to amend or vary or rescind any notification Whether could be invoked to reconstitute the Commission of Inquiry by replacement of substitution of the existing members, though not provided in the scheme of the Act.
Pursuant to the direction given by the State High Court, the appellant State by a Notification dated 24.2.1989, constituted a Commission of Inquiry under the (Commission of Inquiry) Act, 1952, to investigate into the affairs of the children 's Welfare Society, of which Respondent No.1 was an office bearer and appointed a sitting Judge of the High Court of another State as the sole member of the Commission.
The inquiry was to be completed within a period of six months, but the period was extended from time to time.
Meanwhile, the sole member became due to retire as a Judge of the High Court on attaining the age of superannuation and, therefore, he wrote a letter dated 19 3.1991 to the Chief Secretary of the appellant State drawing attention to this fact and requesting that the necessary modalities be worked out well in time for his continuance as Commission of Inquiry, in the light of the guidelines issued by the Government of India for the benefits and emoluments payable to a Judge on his retirement in such a situation.
The Judge also mentioned some of the facilities he expected, to which be would not be entitled from the State Government on his retirement.
The Chief Secretary sent a reply dated 9.4.1991 to the Judge promising to give an early reply and requesting him to continue with the inquiry so that the same could be completed early.
However, without further reference to the Judge, the State Government issued a notification dated 10.7.1991, replacing him by a retired Chief Justice of another High Court.
This appointment was challenged before the High Court, which, by an interim order dated 30.7.1991 stayed the operation of the notification.
During the pendency of the writ petition, the new member tendered his resignation.
Consequently, the High Court dismissed the writ petition as infructuous on 5.9.1991.
Thereafter, the Chief Secretary to the Government sent a letter dated 12.9.1991 to the original appointee expressing the State Government 's inability to accept the terms and conditions of the Judge, and informing him of the appointment of retired Chief Justice of another High Court, who had since resigned.
Thereafter the State Government issued another notification dated 9.1.1992 appointing a retired Judge of another High Court as a single member of the Commission.
This was challenged before the High Court on the ground that during the continuance as the single member of the Commission of Inquiry of the original appointee, there was no power in the State Government to replace him, and there being no vacancy in the office, the power under Section 3(3) of the , which was available only to fill any vacancy, could not be invoked and there was no other source of power available to the State for the purpose and, therefore, the appointment first of the retired Chief Justice and then, on his refusal, of another retired Judge, being without any authority, was invalid.
The High Court allowed the writ petitions and quashed the notification dated 9.1.1992.
It held that there was no vacancy in the office of the single member of the Commission to empower the State Government to fill the vacancy under Section 3(3) of the .
It also held there was neither any valid reason or ground nor any power available in the State Government to replace the original member by another person as was purported to be done by first appointing one member and then another member, both of whom were also retired Judges .
In the appeals, by special leave, on behalf of the State Government, it was contended that aid of Section 21 of the was available to the State Government for exercising its powers under the 'to add, to amend or vary ' the notification issued initially appointing the sitting Judge as the sole member of the Commission which enabled the State Government to reconstitute the Commission by replacing that Judge with any other person in the circumstances of the case, though the power to rescind any notification was not available, since this was provided in Section 7 of the .
Reference was also made to Section 8 A of the to support the Contention that Government 's power to reconstitute the Commission even during the availability of the person so appointed even though it was submitted that Section 8 A was not the source of power for reconstitution of the Commission.
It was also contended that the Government 's power to extend the time specified in the initial notification for Completing the work of the Commission was not to be found in any express provision in the .
but was exercised by amendment of the initial notification only under Section 21 of the .
and that though there was no express provision in the empowering the Government to replace or substitute the sole member of a Commission with another person during the continuance of the Commission.
this was implicit in the power to appoint a Commission and designate its personnel under Sub sections (1) and (2) of Section 3 of the read the power to amend or Vary any notification available under Section 21 of the .
It Was submitted on behalf of the petitioner in the Public Interest Petition that Sections 14 and 16 of the were also available to support the notifications under challenge issued by the State Government.
On behalf of respondent No.1 it was submitted that the scheme of the did not permit invoking Section 21 of the except for enlargement of the period for completion of the inquiry by amendment of the notification only to that extent since the only situations in which reconstitution of the Commissions could be made were provided in the itself, that Section 8 A of the was enacted for an entirely different purpose namely to ensure continuity of the Commission 's work and had nothing to do with its reconstitutions that the scheme of the enactment showed that the appropriate Government could not interfere provide expressly in the statute for the Government 's power to fill any vacancy after the initial constitution After its insertion the scheme of the enactment excludes the power of reconstitution of the Commission in a manner not expressly provided therein.
In view of sub section (3), it is not permissible to construe sub sections (1) and (2) of Section 3 in any other manner.
If the scheme of the enactment gave such wide power to reconstitute a Commission after its initial constitution and permitted replacement or substitution of the existing member of a Commission with another person sans sub section (3) of Section 3 the power to fill any vacancy was not required to be provided separately and expressly.
It is also significant that in the amendment so made the power is limited only to filling any vacancy without conferring any power to reconstitute the Commission by replacement or substitution of the existing member which indicates that no such power of replacement or substitution of the existing member was contemplated in the scheme of the Act or intended to be conferred on the Government even after the amendment.
[298 H: 299 A C; 300 A] 2 7.
Section 8 A was simultaneously inserted by amendment to provide that the procedure does not require interruption of the inquiry by reason of change in the constitution of the Commission due to filling any vacancy or decrease in the number of members.
The expression 'or by any other reason ' in sub section (2) of Section 8 A cannot be widened to include the reason of reconstitution of the Commission by replacement or substitution of the existing member since that power is not available to the Government in the scheme of the Act and, therefore.
this expression in Section 8 A(2) cannot be read as conferring any additional power or giving any such indication.
The expression or by any other reason following `vacancy having been filled ' in Section 8 A(2) must therefore.
mean any other reason such as decrease in the number of members when the initial number is more than one and the vacancy remains unfilled.
It cannot mean substitution of the existing member with another person, since no such power exists.
Section 8 A(2) is not the source of an additional power, but merely an indication of the power to reconstitute the Commission.
The indication is of the power of reconstitution being available only in the manner indicated.
The only situation in which the Government can rescind the notification issued under Section 3 constituting the Commission is laid down in Section 7 the Act, which provides that the Commission would cease to exist when the appropriate Government by notification with the working of the Commission after its constitution except in the manner expressly provided in the Act and Section 7 was a clear indication that interference with the functioning of the Commission was not permissible in any other manner, and, therefore, Section 21 of the was not available to support the Government 's action in the instant case.
Dismissing the appeal, this court, HELD: 1.
The power under Section 3(3) of the Commissions of the Inquiry Act, 1952, was not available to the State Government in the facts of the instant case to appoint any other person replacing the original member as the sole member of the Commission of Inquiry.
The power under sub sections (1) of (2) of Section 3 read with Section 21 of the or even Section 14 or Section 16 thereof was also not available for the purpose.
Accordingly, the notifications dated 10.7.1991 and 9.1.1992 issued by the State Government appointing the retired Chief justice and another retired Judge were both invalid.
The high Court was, therefore, right in quashing the notifications dated 10.7.1991 and 9.1.1992.
The appellant state should, in view of the retirement of the original member as a judge of the High Court in the meanwhile, take necessary action to finalise his terms and conditions in accordance with the guidelines issued by the Government of India in this behalf.
Such action should be taken promptly to avoid any undue delay in completion of the commission 's task.
[304 C F] 2.1.
The power of the Government to appoint a Commission of Inquiry and name the person or persons constituting it is in sub section (1) of Section 3.
It is not as if sub section (1) deals with the mere appointment of the Commission of Inquiry without clothing it with its personnel and the power to appoint the member/members thereof is to be found only in sub section (20 That apart, there is nothing in any of these provisions to suggest that the Government has the power to reconstitute the commission after its appointment by replacing the existing sole member with another person.
Sub Section (3) of Section 3, inserted by the Amendment Act of 1971, deals expressly with the Government 's power to fill any vacancy which may have arisen since the constitution of the Commission.
The question of replacement of a member appointed initially is beyond its scope.
The insertion of sub section (3) became necessary to declares that 'the continued existence of ' the Commission is unnecessary '.
The scheme of the enactment is that the appropriate Government should have no control over the Commission after its constitution under Section 3 of the Act except for the purpose of filling any vacancy which may have arisen in the office of a member of the Commission apart from winding up the Commission by issuance of a notification under section 7 of the Act if the continued existence of the Commission is considered unnecessary.
The vacancy in the office of a member of the Commission may arise for several reasons, including resignation by the member, when the Government power to fill the vacancy under Section 3(3) of the Act can be exercised.
[300 A E & G] 2.4.
The context as well as the scheme of the clearly indicate that Section 21 of the General clauses Act 1897 cannot be invoked to enlarge the Government 'section power to reconstitute the Commission constituted under Section 3 of the Act in a manner other that that expressly provided in the .
There being no express power given by the Commissions of inquiry Act to the appropriate Government to reconstitute the Commission of Inquiry constituted under Section 3 of the Act by replacement or substitution of its sole member and the existence of any such power being negatived by clear implication, no such power can be exercised by the appropriate Government.
[302 C F] 2.5.
Section 21 of the can be invoked only if, and to the extent.
if any the context and the scheme of the so permits.
The general power in Section 21 of the is 'to add, to amend vary or rescind any notifications ' etc.
In the context of reconstitution of the Commission the power to fill any vacancy in the office of a manner of the Commission is expressly provided in sub section (3) of Section 3 of the Similarly the power to discontinue the existence of the Commission when it becomes unnecessary can be exercised by issue of a notification in accordance with Section 7 of the Act which results in rescinding the notification issued under Section 3 constituting the Commission.
Thus the power to rescind any notification conferred generally in Section 21 of the is Clearly inapplicable in the scheme of the Commissions of inquiry Act which expressly provides for the exercise of his power in relation to Commission constituted under Section 3 of the Act.
The only other material general powers in Section 21 of the are the power to 'amend ' or vary any notification.
The extent to which the constitution of the Commission can be amended or varied by filling any vacancy in the office of a member as provided in the is also obviously excluded from the purview of Section 21 of the which cannot be invoked for this purpose.
In a case like the instant one where the scheme of the does provide for amendment and variation of the notification issued under Section 3 for the purpose of reconstitution of the Commission in the manner indicated even that power to amend or vary any notification by virtue of Section 21 of the must be taken as excluded by clear implication in the sphere of reconstitution of the Commission.
Moreover, the power to amend or vary cannot include the power to replace or substitute the existing Composition of the Commission with an entirely new composition.
The aid of Section 21 of the for enlargement of time does not conflict with the context or scheme of the Commissions of Inquiry Act.[301 A E] 2.6.
The rule of Construction embodied in Section 21 of the cannot apply to the provisions of the relating to reconstitution of a Commission constituted there under since the Subject matter.
context and effect of such provisions are inconsistent with such application.
Moreover.
this construction best harmonises with the subject of the enactment and the object of the legislation.
Restoring public Confidence by constituting a Commission of Inquiry to investigate into a 'definite matter of public importance ' is the purpose of such an exercise.
It is therefore, the prime need that the Commission functions as an independent agency free from any govern mental control after its constitution.
It follows that after appointment the tenure of members of the commission should not be dependent on the will of the Government to secure their independence.
A body not so independent is not likely to enjoy the requisite public confidence and may not attract men of quality and self respect.
In such a situation the object of the enactment would be frustrated.
[302 H. 303 A C] Minerva Mills Ltd. v, There Workers, ; distinguished.
The State of Bihar vs D. N. Ganguly.; , , relied on.
