In the year 1972 the Karnataka Legislature passed a resolution under Article 252 of the Constitution imposing a ceiling on urban immovable property and the acquisition of such property in excess of the ceiling is limit for public purposes and all the matters connected therewith shall be regulated in the State by Parliament by law.
On 1.4.74 the Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act was enacted and under the Act the tenant of the land covered by the Act was entitled to the grant of occupancy rights after making an application under the Act.
The Act came Into force with effect from 2.1.85.
But for the purpose of grant of occupancy rights, 1.4.74 was the relevant date.
In the year 1975 the Karnataka Urban Agglomeration Ordinance was passed, whereunder all lands between the periphery of 8 K.Ms.
of the municipal limits of Hubli Dharwad were declared as urban agglomeration land.
The Parliament passed the Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1976 for imposition of ceiling on urban properties and the Ceiling Act was made applicable to Karnataka also in view of the resolution passed by the State Government.
The lands involved in the present cases were covered by the development plan by the Belgaum City Town Planning authority as per the Master Plan and they were included and declared as urban agglomeration in the City of Hubli under the provisions of the Ceiling Act.
The owners of the agglomeration lands challenged the order of the Land Tribunal under the Land Reforms Act conferring occupancy rights on the tenants before the High Court.
They contended that the lands involved in the cases were within the purview of the Ceiling Act and therefore the provisions of the Land Reforms Act had no application to such lands on the ground that the provisions of the Ceiling Act.
The writ petitions were dismissed by the High Court.
The owner 's writ appeals were also dismissed by a common judgment by the Division Bench of the High Court.
The Division Bench held that there was no conflict between the two enactments.
The judgment of the Division Bench was challenged in S.L.P. (Civil) No. 16041 42/88.
Many of the similar writ petitions that were pending before the High Court were transferred to the Land Reforms Appellate Tribunal.
The Appellate Tribunal dismissed the petitions by a common order following the judgment of the Division Bench of the High Court.
Several Civil revision petitions filed by the land owners against the order of the Appellate Tribunal were dismissed by the High Court.
Some of the special leave petitions were filed against the order of the High Court in the said civil revision petitions.
The petitioners land owners contended that when in pursuance of the resolution of the State Legislature passed under Article 252 of the Constitution the Parliament legislated in respect of the topic covered by the resolution.
The Parliamentary law repealed or superseded the existing State legislation on the topic and therefore such law could not be enforced thereafter; and that vesting of tenanted land in the State and conferment of occupancy rights under the provisions of the State Act directly fall under the subject of imposing ceiling on land holding and other matters incidental or ancillary to the main topic of imposing ceiling and therefore they were fully covered by the Ceiling Act passed by the Parliament and the same superseded the State enactment in respect of such lands.
The respondents submitted that "imposition of ceiling" was a distinct and separately identifiable subject and the Parliament was empowered to legislate; that the power of the State to legislate in respect of the remaining part of the subject matter was unaffected; that when two distinct powers came into existence, vesting law making competence in the State and Parliament, the pith and substance of the laws made by each of them had to be examined to see whether any one of them encroached the field set apart as falling within the competence of the other body; that in any event the provisions of Chapter III of the Karnataka Land Reforms Act had nothing to do with the imposition of ceiling on the urban land and that conferring of occupancy rights etc.
to the tenants under Chapter III of the Karnataka Land Reforms Act did not come under the category of "the matters connected therewith or ancillary or incidental to the imposition of ceiling" on urban immovable property.
Dismissing the special leave petitions, this Court, HELD: 1.01.
Article 252 empowers the Parliament to legislate for two or more States on any of the matters with respect of which the Parliament has no power to make law except as provided under Articles 249 and 250.
This power to legislate is vested in the Parliament only if two or more State Legislatures think it desirable to have a law enacted by Parliament on such matters in List II, i.e. with respect to which the Parliament has no power to make law for the State.
The passing of the resolutions by the State Legislatures is a condition precedent for vesting the Parliament with such power.
[339 C D] 1.02.
The scope of Entry 18 is very wide and the land mentioned therein may be agricultural or non agricultural and may be rural or urban.
The subject matter carved out of Entry 18 under the resolutions passed by The various State Legislatures related to only "urban immovable property" and by virtue of the resolution the law that can be enacted by the Parliament should be a law "imposing a ceiling on such urban immovable property." [340 B, C] 1.03.
From the resolution it is clear that the subject matter that was resolved to be entrusted to the Parliament was the one imposing a ceiling on urban immovable property and acquisition of such property in excess of the ceiling.
This subject matter is the topic that falls within Entry 18 of List II of Schedule VII to the Constitution and the subject matter of Entry 18 has been originally kept apart for the State Legislature to make law and Parliament had no competence in respect of those matters falling under the wide scope of Entry 18.
By virtue of this resolution a part of the area falling under Entry 18 is transferred to the domain of Parliament to make law relating to the matters within the transferred area.
[339 G, H; 341 A] 2.01.
The primary object and the purpose of the Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1976 is to provide for the imposition of ceiling on vacant land in urban agglomeration and for acquisition of such lands in excess of the ceiling limit and to regulate the construction of buildings on such lands and for matters connected therewith.
[340 H; 341 A] 2.02.
The Karnataka Land Reforms Act as amended in 1974 is a welfare legislation.
The object of the Act was to have a uniform law in the State of Karnataka relating to agrarian reforms, conferment of ownership on tenants, ceiling on land holdings and for certain other matters contained therein.
[342 D] 2.03.
In respect of imposing ceiling on the land under urban agglomeration the provisions of the Ceiling Act alone are applicable and to that extent the provisions of Chapter IV of the Karnataka Land Reforms Act which also deal with the imposition of ceiling would not be applicable.
[344 C] 2.04.
The land in the instant case comes under the urban agglomeration the imposition of the ceiling should naturally be under the provisions of the Urban Ceiling Act and not under the Karnataka Land Reforms Act.
[344 B, C] 2.05.
Imposition of ceiling on urban land is a distinct and independent subject as compared to imposition of ceiling on owning or to hold agricultural land or any other kind of property which do not attract the Urban Ceiling Act.
These are two distinct powers and therefore the law making competence can be in two different legislative bodies.
Consequently it is difficult to hold that the provisions of Chapter III of the Karnataka Land Reforms Act are outside the legislative competence of the State Legislature.
[350 C, D] 2.06.
The one topic that is transferred in the resolution passed under Article 252 as distinct and separately identifiable and does not include the remaining topics under Entry 18 in respect of which the State alone has the power to legislate.
[351 D] 2.07.
The legislative power of the State has to be reconciled with that of the Parliament and that in their respective fields each is supreme.
Even assuming that the State enactment has same effect on the subject matter falling within the Parliament 's legislative competence that by itself will not render such law invalid or inoperative.
[350 G H] 2.08.
There is no conflict between the Ceiling Act and the State Act.
The imposition of ceiling on urban immovable property is an independent topic and cannot be construed as to nullify the other subject left in the domain of the State Legislature under Entry 18 inasmuch as imposition of ceiling is a distinct and separately identifiable subject and does not cover the other measures such as regulation of relationship of landlord and tenant in respect of which the State Legislature has competence to legislate.
[351 C D] 2.09.
There is a ceiling provision under Section 45(2) of the Karnataka Land Reforms Act providing for computation of the area in respect of which the tenant may be granted occupancy rights.
But it is clear that ceiling on the area in this context is only for the purpose of Section 45.
[351 F] 2.10.
Provisions in the Chapters II, III, V, VI to XI of the Karnataka Land Reforms Act deal with the conferment of occupancy rights on the respective tenants and they do not in any way conflict with the subject matter transferred to the Parliament by the resolution passed under Section 252.
[351 E,F] Thumati Venkaiah and others vs State of Andhra Pradesh and of others; , ; Union of India and others vs Valluri Basavaiah Chowdhary and others; , ; Calcutta Gas Company (Proprietory) Ltd. vs State of West Bengal and others, and Kannan Devan Hills Produce Company Ltd. vs The State of Kerala etc.; , referred to.
