A large number of doctors employed in the State Health Services of the appellant State were leaving India for higher studies, after obtaining leave for a couple of years, and thereafter, they were neither returning to India, nor were sending any further applications for extension of leave.
This was causing considerable hardship to the public.
As this trend persisted, the state authorities wanted to take appropriate corrective steps.
Since the absentee doctors had not informed the department of their addresses, personal service of notice on such doctors could not be effected.
A general notice was published and press communique was issued in newspapers in India and abroad calling upon them to offer their explanations for remaining absent from service for more than five years, within the specified time and indicating that on their failure to do so, the services of 320 doctors would be terminated with the concurrence of the State Public Service Commission and the approval of the State Cabinet.
Services of doctors were, accordingly, terminated.
The respondent filed a Public Interest Litigation before the High Court stating that the particular doctor was unwell and was in need of financial help.
The services of this doctor had also been terminated along with others.
The details as to how she was taken ill and admitted in a hospital outside the country and then brought back to India for further treatment in the State, were given.
The High Court directed the appellants to pay the post retirement benefits to the medical officer doctor concerned.
Earlier the High Court had also directed payment of Rs.2,000 to the respondent writ petitioner as relief to the doctor concerned.
Allowing the appeal of the State, this Court, HELD: 1.1.
It is not known how the respondent writ petitioner became so interested in the beneficiary, who was being taken care of in the hospital and receiving attention of eminent doctors, and who had atleast a brother with whom she was staying for sometime.
The respondent writ petitioner could not tell about the other family members and relations of the beneficiary or how and why in this background the respondent chose the beneficiary for showering her benevolence in preference over the far more needy old and sick persons who are, unfortunately, in large number in the appellant State.
The judgment under challenge also does not indicate any reason.
[360 B D] 1.2.
Since there is no reason at all in the order under challenge or in the writ petitioner which may justify the relief granted in the present case, the writ petition should have been dismissed.
[360 H; 361 A] 1.3.
There is also no reason to accede to the request made on behalf of the respondent that the cheque for Rs. 2000, mentioned in the first paragraph of the High Court 's orders, drawn in the name of the beneficiary, may be directed to be drawn in the name of the respondent writ petitioner for the beneficiary 's fingers had since become stiff and hence the cheque could not be encashed.
There is no suggestion to the effect that the beneficiary has no relation of her own, who can look after her needs.
[361 B] 2.
There is no doubt that the State should strive to promote the welfare of its people so that at least the bare necessities of life are met and the needy and the sick are properly looked after.
This can be done only by adopting a welfare scheme in the interest of the general public; and since the resources of the State are not unlimited, the State is not expected, in absence of relevant reasons, to choose an individual for special treatment at the cost of the others.
Ordinarily, therefore, it is desirable for the State authorities to take up the individual cases coming to their notice and do their best in accordance with the policy decision of general application.
This will ensure equal treatment to all of course in accordance with the individual needs.
Unless all relevant materials are placed by an applicant, it will be onerous task for the Court to take upon itself to determine the extent of help a particular individual has to get.
The circumstance that a particular person is smart enough to approach the Court or is so fortunate to get somebody to do that on his or her behalf, cannot be a valid ground to divert the State funds to his or her advantage at the cost to corresponding disadvantage to others.
A judicial process should not be allowed to be used for the satisfaction of an individual 's whims, pious, though, they may apparently look.
[360 E, F, G]
