The dispute between the appellant and the respondent in respect of their Interests In certain properties, was referred to arbitration by this Court and a retired Chief Justice of a High Court was appointed as the sole Arbitrator with direction to make a speaking award, and the Arbitrator submitted his Award.
Against this award the appellant objector filed objections under Section 30 of the , contending that the Arbitrator had misconducted himself in that he did not take into consideration several documents which were placed on record before him to support the objector 's case and, hence, the award was invalid under clauses (a) and (c) of Section 30.
Disposing of the Appeal, this Court HELD : 1.1.
There is no infirmity on the face of the award which would entitle this Court to exercise jurisdiction under Section 30 of the .
The Arbitrator has made a speaking award setting out his reasons for the conclusions reached by him and has thus complied with the direction of this Court given earlier.
[56D, 55E] 12.
The documents in question mainly relate to the rights and interests of the parties In the properties situate in that part which now belongs to the Dominion of Pakistan.
Since they were refugees they had made certain claims under the law governing rehabilitation of displaced persons in respect of the properties left behind by them.
The claim was sanctioned in the joint same of the objector 's predecessor in Interest and the respondent in respect of the properties left behind by the family.
On the strength of that 52 claim, one of the houses was purchased in the said name.
The Arbitrator, however, came to the conclusion, that the property in question was purchased from the funds contributed by the objector 's predecessor in interest and the respondent.
The share of the objector was held to be 1/7th in the share of the predecessor in interest, since deceased.
Since the contribution made for payment of the price was not equal, the Arbitrator allotted a larger share to objector 's predecessor in interest and consequently, the objector has got a share on the basis thereof, when inheritance opened on the death of the predecessor in interest.
[55B D.H, 56A] 1.3.
It is clear from the award that the Arbitrator did not go into the rights and interests of the parties including the HUF in the properties left behind in the Dominion of Pakistan.
That was not necessary because the fact that the claim was sanctioned in the joint name of the Objector 's predecessor in interest and the respondent was never in dispute.
The short question, which the Arbitrator was required to consider, was as regards the title of the properties, which were the subject matter of the reference, which included a house purchased on the strength of that claim.
It is not necessary for the Court to go into the question of the rights and interests of the parties in the properties left behind in the Dominion of Pakistan since the Arbitrator was right that he was called upon to decide the interest of the parties in respect of two houses alone, which were the subject matter of the reference.
Therefore, the Arbitrator had not misconducted himself by refusing to enumerate all those documents in question in his award because he was bound by the scope of the reference which was limited to the two houses and not the properties left behind in the Dominion of Pakistan by the parties.
[55F, 56B C] 2.
In order to interfere with an award, the Court must rind out whether the Arbitrator has misconducted himself or there was any infirmity in the procedure, such as, the Arbitrator having travelled beyond the terms of the reference or there being an error apparent on the face of the award.
It is not misconduct on the part of an Arbitrator to come to an erroneous conclusion on a disputed issue.
The Court does not sit in appeal and does not reassess the evidence.
Even if the Court feels that had it been left to it, it would have assessed the evidence differently that would not be a valid ground for setting aside the award.
[56E, G] 3.
Therefore, in the facts and circumstances of the case, there is no reason to interfere with the award, which is made the rule of the 53 Court.
[56H, 57A B] Food Corporation of India vs
Joginder pal Mohinderpal & Anr., [1989]2 S.C.C. 347 and Hind Builders vs Union of India, [1990] 3 S.C.C. 338, relied on.
