The petitioners challenged before the High Court the levy of excise duty on the weight of the yarn sized for the purpose of weaving them into fabrics.
The High Court held that no duty could be levied on the weight of the sizing material contained in yarn, and directed that the duty should be refunded since it has been levied not on the basis of yarn at the spindle stage, but on the weight of the sized yarn.
After the said judgment, the Central Government by Notification dated 20.2.1982 amended Rules 9 and 49 of the and Section 51 of the Finance Act, 1982 with retrospective effect.
In accordance with the said Notification, Central Excise Department issued show cause notices to the petitioners.
The constitutional validity of these amendments are challenged by the petitioners in the present Writ Petitions filed before this Court.
On behalf of the petitioners, it was contended that their cases were covered by the decision of this Court in J.K. Cotton Spinning and Weaving Mills Ltd. & Anr.
vs Union of India and Ors., ; and that excise duty could be levied on the weight of the unsized yarn and not on the basis of the weight of the sized yarn.
Allowing the petitions, this Court HELD: 1.1.
The Vires of Rules 9 and 49 of the Central Excise Rules, 1944 as well as section 51 of the Finance Act, 1982 and the retrospective 143 application of the same has already been upheld by this Court.
[145E] 1.2.
The sized yam which is actually put into the integrated process will not again be subjected to payment of excise duty, for the unsized yam which is sized for the purpose, does not change the nature of commodity as yarn.
Thus excise duty cannot be levied on the weight of the yarn after the yarn is sized for the purpose of weaving the same into fabrics.
[145G] 13.
Practically nine years have gone by since the show cause notices were issued by virtue of the same directives which were subject matter of J.K Cotton Mills case.
In view of this peculiar fact it would not be in the interest of justice if the petitioners are directed to contest the individual show cause notices issued by the respondents.
In order to avoid multiplicity of proceedings involving time and expense, the show cause notices in all these cases are quashed.
[148F G] J.K Cotton Spinning and Weaving Mills Ltd & Anr.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; , applied.
