The suit premises was let out by the appellant landlord to the respondent on a monthly rent of Rs. 550 solely for residential purpose.
In a part of the premises, the respondent 's husband, a lawyer established his office and started using the same for that purpose.
Teh appellant landlord riled a petition before the Rent Controller seeking eviction of the respondent tenant.
The Rent Controller made an order of eviction of the respondent tenant on the ground of change of user under section 13(2) (II) (b), of the East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act, 1940.
The tenant 's appeal was dismissed by the appellate authority, against which a revision to the High Court was preferred.
The Single Judge of the High Court allowed the revision and set aside the eviction order, holding that the building let out as a 'residential building became a 'scheduled building ' by use of a part thereof as lawyer 's office by the tenants husband; and therefore, the ground of eviction was not available.
Hence this appeal by the landlord by special leave, contending that the ground of change of user contained in section 13(2) (II) (b) was clearly made out from the facts and the High Court erred In setting aside the order of eviction.
172 The respondent tenant submitted that the landlord waived the ground of change of user by acquiescence to use of a part of the premises as lawyer 's office; that the ground in section 13(2)(ii)(b) was not available unless the change of user was of substantial, if not the entire building and, therefore, mere use of a small part of the residential building as lawyer 's office does not constitute such change.
Allowing the appeal of the landlord, this court, HELD : 1.01.
Use of the building for a purpose other than that for which it was leased, without the written consent of the landlord is a ground of eviction.
Ile object dearly is that the parties must remain bound by the terms on which the building is let out, including the condition relating to Its use for the purpose for which it was leased.
In other words, breach of the covenant regarding the kind of user of the building let out is the ground of eviction contained in section 13(2) (ii) (b) of the East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act.
[177A B] 1.02.
If the change in user of the building is of the kind that it makes the residential building let out for residential purpose alone change its character and become a 'scheduled building ' as defined in section 2(h) of the Act without the written consent of the landlord, the ground of eviction under section 13(2) (ii) (b) is made out.
[177C] 1.03.
This test is fully satisfied In the present case and the order of eviction was made by the Rent Controller and affirmed by the appellate authority on this basis.
The High Court misconstrued the provisions to take the contrary view.
[177D] Telu Ram vs Om Parkash Garg , approved.
Sant Ram vs Rajinder Lal and Ors., ; Dr. Sewa Singh vs Smt.
Ravinder Kaur and another, , distinguished.
Even though a 'scheduled building continues to be a residential building as defined in section 2(g), a residential building of which even a part is used for a scheduled purpose, becomes and is called a 'schedule building when user of the building is significant or the criterion.
[176F] 2.02 Where user of a building is of significance, a distinction is made In the Act between a residential building which is not a scheduled building and 173 that which is a scheduled building.
This is so in section 4 of the Act dealing with determination of fair rent wherein fixation of rent is made on the basis of user and for that purpose a 'scheduled building ' is treated differently from a residential building which is not a scheduled building.
[176G]
