The appellant and the fourth respondent along with others were applicants for a stage carriage permit.
The Regional Transport Authority after hearing the applicants granted the permit to the appellant.
On appeal by the fourth respondent the Central Road Traffic Board set aside the order of the Regional Transport Authority and granted the permit to the fourth respondent.
The appellant moved the State Government in revision but to no effect.
He thereafter moved the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution for a writ of certiorari quashing the orders of the Central Road Traffic Board and the State Government.
The single judge who heard the matter quashed 228 the said orders and directed the State Transport Appellate Tribunal, which was constituted in place of the Central Road Traffic Board, to dispose of the appeal according to law.
On a Letters Patent appeal by the fourth respondent, the Appellate Bench of the High Court set aside the order of the single judge and restored the order of the Central Road Traffic Board.
Hence this appeal by special leave.
The point for determination in the appeal was whether the order granting the permit to the appellant made by the Regional Transport Authority on the basis of an order issued by the State Government under section 43A of the , as amended by the Motor Vehicles (Madras Amendment) Act, 1948, could be set aside on the basis of another order imposing new restrictions issued thereunder while the appeal was pending before the Central Road Traffic Board and thus involved the question as to whether an order or direction issued by the State Government under section 43A of the Act had the force of law, so as to create a vested right in the appellant.
Held (per jafer Imam and Subba Rao, jj.), that section 43A of the , as amended by the Motor Vehicles (Madras Amendment) Act, 1948, properly construed, must be given a restricted meaning and the jurisdiction it conferred on the State Government must be confined to administrative functions.
An order or direction made thereunder by the State Government, therefore, could not have the status of law regulating rights of parties and must partake of the character of an administrative order.
C. section section Motor Service, Tenkasi vs The State of Madras, I.L.R. and Gopalakrishnan Motor Transport Co., Ltd. vs Secretary, Regional Transport Authority, Krishna District, Vijayawada, , approved.
Consequently, in the instant case, the appellant could not be said to have acquired a vested right that was defeated by a new law enforced pending the appeal and the order of the Central Road Traffic Board could not be set aside merely on the ground that it had decided the appeal on the basis of an order issued subsequent to the grant of the permit if such order was otherwise in public interest.
Per Sarkar, J. It could hardly be said that the rule that a court hearing an appeal from a decision should not ordinarily take into consideration a law passed subsequent to that decision had application where a quasi judicial tribunal heard an appeal from another such tribunal.
Consequently, in the instant case, it could not be said that there was an error of law apparent on the face of the record so as to attract a writ of certiorari and the appeal must fail on that ground.
No applicant for a permit under the could have a substantive right to the permit vested in him and 229 the granting or refusal of a permit by the Regional Transport Authority could not operate as res judicata.
It was unnecessary for the purpose of the present case to decide what kind of orders could be issued by the State Government under section 43A of the Act, for whatever its nature, administrative or otherwise, if an order under that section entitled a person to its observance, and there was hardly any doubt as to that, it would be a law a mistake of which would justify the issue of a writ of certiorari at his instance.
The Mayor of Rochester vs The Queen, (1858) EL.
& E.L. ; , referred to.
Nagendra Nath Bora vs The Commissioner of Hills Division and Appeals, Assam, ; , distinguished.
