The present Contempt Petition has been filed complaining that the Respondents had allotted certain flats in favour of third parties in violation of this Court 's order dated 1.8.91.
The Petitioners ' interest has been in respect of two flats on the 8th floor.
They claimed that the said flats had been allotted to third parties in January, 1992, long after this Court 's order dated 1.8.91.
It was also contended that the agreement to sell was a fabricated document.
The Respondents contended that the said flats were allotted on 26.4.91 itself, though possession of the flats was handed over on 17.8.1991, and sale deeds were executed and registered in March 1992.
It was further contended that inasmuch as the agreement for sale was entered into long before the orders of this Court were issued, there was no question of disobedience of the orders of this Court.
Finding the Respondent guilty of Contempt of Court, this Court, HELD : 1.1.
Even assuming that the agreement of sale dated 26.4.1991 is true, the respondents have committed gross contempt of this Court by their brazen violation of the order dated 1.8.1991.
By the said order this Court directed the respondents 1 and 2 not to make "any further allotment of any other flats in the building in dispute with effect 751 from today".
The word "allotment" must be understood reasonably and having regard to the context The first respondent is not like a Government Department or Public Corporation where an allotment order or allotment letter is issued from the office in pursuance of which other steps are taken.
There is no such thing as "allotment" in this case.
According to the Respondents there was first an agreement of sale, then delivery of possession and finally a registered sale deed.
In the context and circumstances of the case, the word "allotment in the said order means making over of the flats; it means delivery of possession and registration of the sale deeds.
An agreement of sale, that too unregistered, has no significance in the context, difficult as it is to verify its truth and correctness.
This court could not be presumed to have interdicted such an uncertain thing.
Admittedly the respondents had represented to this Court, at the time the said order was passed, that they have already entered into agreements of sale in respect of the flats and yet this Court chose to pass the said order.
In the circumstances, it cannot mean anything else than delivery of possession of flats and their sale.
It may also mean an agreement of sale but its meaning is certainly not confined to an agreement of sale.
To say so is to rob the order of any meaning or content.
There could not have been any doubt in the mind of the Second Respondent with respect to the meaning of the order.
In case of any doubt the least he could have done was to ask for a clarification of the said Order.
He could well have represented that be had already entered into an agreement of sale on 26.4.1991 in respect of these flats and that he may be permitted to deliver possession and/or execute sale deeds in respect of the said flats in favour of third parties.
He did nothing of the sort Having placed a highly restrictive and unwarranted interpretation upon the order of this Court, he went ahead and not only delivered possession of the flats to third parties subsequent to the said order but also registered sale deeds in their favour.
He thus rendered the said order nugaptory.
[755E H, 756A E] 1.2.The conduct of the second respondent as evidenced from the material on record establishes beyond doubt that he was trying to play with this Court and was consistently flouting its orders.
[758H, 759A] 2.
So far as the apology tendered by the second respondent is concerned it is not really an unconditional apology.
While tendering apology the second respondent has tried to defend his action.
Even if it is 752 considered as unconditional apology this Court is not inclined to accept the same having regard to the conduct of the respondent Accordingly, the apology tendered by Respondent No.2 is rejected.
[759E G] 3.
The second respondent is guilty of Contempt of this Court Having regard to the facts and circumstances of this case, a sentence of one month 's imprisonment in addition to a fine of Rs. 2,000 is imposed upon him.
The fine shall be paid into this Court within two weeks and in default thereof the second respondent shall undergo a further imprisonment of two weeks.
[760A B]
