The petitioners in the writ petition challenged the constitutional validity of chapter III C read with Section 58B(5A) of the introduced by the Banking Laws (Amendment) Act, 1983.
Along with the writ petition were had several civil appeals, where the appellants had unsuccessfully challenged the aforesaid provisions as violative of Articles 14 and 19 of the Constitution, in the High Court of Delhi, which upheld their validity, and granted a certificate to appeal to this Court vide Kanta Mehta vs Union of India, The newly incorporated Section 45S of the provided that no individual or firm or an unincorporated association of individuals shall, at any time, have deposits from more than the number of depositors specified against each in the table mentioned therein.
It was further provided that where at the commencement of the Act, the deposits held were not in accordance thereof,a period of two years was prescribed for bringing down the number of depositors within the relative limits specified in the Act, and contravention thereof was rendered penal. 'These provisions were brought into force on February 15, 1984.
On behalf of the petitioners it was submitted that Section 45B was 833 violative of the fundamental rights under Article 19(1) kg) of the Constitution as it restricts the number of depositors and the rate of interest under Section 4(2)(iii) of the Kerala Moneylenders Act, 1958, that the two year period prescribed under Section 42 is unreasonable, and that under the Kerala Act with effect from 15110185 only 149% interest alone could be charged.
It was further submitted that while receiving deposits it was not an offence and making it a criminal liability and directing payment, would amount to ex postfacto law offending Article 20(1) of the Constitution.
The writ petition and appeals were contested by submitting on behalf of the Reserve Bank of India that it was open to the Government to regulate economic activities, and that while examining the validity of such provisions courts a laws have regard to the wisdom of the Legislature as it alone has the necessary information and expertise pointing to the needs for such a legislation.
Attention was also drawn to the provisions of the Non Banking Financial Companies (Reserve Bank) Directions of 1966 which came into force on January 1, 1969 which specifically provided that deposits shall be reduced to 25% of the paid up capital for which a two years period was prescribed and that similar directions knows as Non Banking Financial Companies Reserve Bank Directions, 1977 came to be issued with effect from 1st of July, 1977, Dismissing the writ petition and the appeals, this Court, HELD: 1.
The impugned legislation no doubt places restrictions on the right of the appellants to carry on business, but what is essential is to safeguard the rights of various depositors and to see that they are not preyed upon.
[844G] 2.
The Reserve Bank of India, right from 1966, has been monitoring and following the functioning of non banking financial institutions which invite deposits and utilise those deposits either for trade or for other various industries.
A ceiling for acceptance of deposits and to requires maintenance of certain liquidity of funds as well as not to exceed borrowings beyond a particular percentage of the net owned funds have been provided in the corporate sector.
But for these requirements, the depositors would be left high and dry without any remedy.
[844H, 845A] 3.
Even the corporate sector was not free from blame.
It had done damage to the economy and brought ruination to small depositors.
Ex 834 perience had shown that In many cases deposits taken by the companies had not been refunded on the due dates, either the companies had gone in liquidation or funds are depleted to such an extent that the companies were not in a position to refund the deposits.
It was accordingly considered necessary to control the activities of the companies when accepting deposits from the 'the public".
That was why Section 58A in the Companies Act of 1956 came to be introduced.
[845B, C D] 4.
The danger of allowing deposits to be accepted without regulation is so acute and urgent, that to bind the hands of the Legislature that only one course alone is permissible and not to permit a play of joints would be to totally make it ineffective in meeting the challenge of the social evil.
The mechanics of any economic legislation has necessarily to be left to the judgment of the executive and unless it is patent that there is hostile discrimination against a class, the processual basis has to be accepted 5.
May be, Kerala Moneylenders Act restricts the rates of Interest under Section 4(2)(iii) but that cannot enable the writ petitioners to disregard these provisions introduced by the Banking laws (Amendment) Act 1983 being the non banking financial institutions.
[846D] 6.
Section 45 (1) (bb) of the Reserve Bank Act defines 'deposit.
If there are enough sources of deposit there is no reason why the appellants and the writ petitioners cannot reduce the deposits.
The prescription of the two year period for reduction is therefore reasonable.
[847D] 7.
Moreover, similar directions cam to be issued as Miscellaneous Non Banking Companies (Reserve Bank) Directions.
If, therefore, this was the position, it cannot be contended that suddenly the companies like the appellants and the writ petitioners are called upon the reduce deposits.
Even otherwise, the interests of the depositors is the prime concern.
[847G, 849B] Kanta Mehta vs Union of India and others, Company Cases Vol.
62 1987 page 769, approved.
Chiney Bottling Co. Pw. Ltd. vs Assistant Registrar of Companies, Madras, page 770, disapproved.
DCM Ltd. vs U. O.I., ; ; Srinivasa Enterpries vs Union 835 of India; , ; State of West Bengal vs Swapan Kumar Guha ; ; R.K Garg vs Union of India ; and Fatehchand Himmatlal and others vs State of Maharashtra ; , referred to, Reserve Bank of India vs Peerless General Finance and Investment Co. Ltd, ; ; Peerless General Finance and Investment Co. Ltd vs Reserve Bank of India, @ 354; Delhi Cloth and General Mills vs Union of India; , at page 468 and Reserve Bank of India vs Timex Finance and Investment Co. Ltd., at page 354, referred to.
