The petitioner In his Writ Petition Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India, challenged the constitutional validity of the Representation of the People (Amendment) Ordinance, 1992 (Ordinance No. 1 of 1992), and the Representation of the People (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 1992 (Ordinance No.2 of 1992) on the grounds of violation of Articles 14, 19 and 21 of the Constitution of India.
The provisions of Section 52 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 as they stood before amendment provided for countermanding the election In either of two contingencies: (1) If a candidate whose nomination was found valid on scrutiny under section 36 or who has not withdrawn his candidature under section 37 died and a report of his death was received before the publication of the list of contesting candidates under section 38, (II) If a contesting candidate died and a report of his death was received before the commencement of the poll.
By Ordinance No. 1 of 1992, the area attracting the provisions of countermanding in section 52 had been narrowed down by confining the provisions only to such cases where a candidate of a recognized political party dies.
787 Section 30 of the Representation of People Act, 1951 dealt with appointment of dates for nomination, scrutiny and the holding of poll, and in clause (d) it was provided that the date of poll shall not be earlier than the twentieth day after the last date for the withdrawal of candidatures.
With a view of expedite the whole process, the words 'twentieth day ' have been substituted by the words 'fourteenth day ' in clause (d) of Section 30 by the Second Ordinary viz. Ordinance No. 2 of 1992.
On behalf of the petitioner it was contended that the distinction made by the impugned amendment between a candidate set up by a recognised political party and any other candidate is artificial, inconsistent with the spirit of the election law and discriminatory, that the Con stitution does not confer on a candidate set up by a registered political party any special right, and treats all candidates similarly, and does not any categorisation, that the difference being introduced by the impugned amendment was contrary to the scheme of the Constitution and violative of the equality clause in Article 14, and that it also infringed the guarantee under Article 19(1) (a).
In respect of the Second Ordinance the objection was that the period of 14 days substituted by the amendment was too short, and the reduction from the period of 20 days was arbitrary and prejudicial to the larger interest for which elections are held.
The Petition was contested on behalf of Union of India by stating that on account of increase in terrorism and physical violence in several parts of the Country combined with the phenomenal increase in the number of independent candidates, the danger of disruption of the election process had been fast growing and the problem was, therefore, taken up, examined and it was considered that the amendments were essential to curb the danger of disruption of the election process.
Dismissing the Writ Petition, this Court, HELD : 1.
The right to vote or to stand as a candidate for election is neither a fundamental right nor a civil right In England also it has never been recognised as a common law right [791D] Jyoti Basu & Ors.
vs Debi Ghosal & Ors, ; and 986, referred to. 2.
The Cabinet system of Government has been envisaged by our 788 Constitution, and the same is on the British pattern.
In England, where democracy has prevailed for longer than in any other country in recent times, the Cabinet system of Government has been found to be most effective.
In other democratic countries also the party system has been adopted with success.
[792C D] Shamser Singh vs State of Punjab, ; at 827, referred to.
3.For a strong vibrant democratic Government, it is necessary to have a parliamentary majority as well as a parliamentary minority, so that the different points of view on controversial issues are brought out and debated on 'he floor of the Parliament.
This can be best achieved by the party system, so that the problems of the nation may be discussed, considered and resolved in a constructive spirit.
To abolish or ignore the party system would be to permit a chorus of discordant notes to replace an organised discussion.
[792E] Sir Ivor Jennings 'Cabinet Government 2nd Edn.
p.16, referred to.
4.Our Constitution has dearly recognised the importance of the party system, which was further emphasized by the addition of the 10th Schedule to it The Election Symbols (Reservation and Allotment) Order is also a step in that very direction.
[792F] 5.That candidates set up by political parties constitute a class separate from other candidates has been recognised in numerous cases by this Court which has also emphasized the vital role of political parties in a parliamentary form of democracy and expressed anxiety about the growing number of independent candidates.
[792H, 793C] Dr. P.N. Thampy Terah vs Union of India ; and D.M.L. Agarwal vs Rajiv Gandhi, ; , referred to.
6.The Representation of the People (Amendment) Ordinance, 1992 and theRepresentation of the People (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 1992 are constitutionally valid.
[789C]
