Some of the proprietors of the former State of Madhya Pradesh granted to the several petitioners rights to take forest produce, mainly tendu leaves, from the forests included in the Zamindaris belonging to the proprietors.
The agreements conveyed to the petitioners in addition to the tendu leaves other forest produce like timber, bamboos, etc., the soil for making bricks, and the right to build on and occupy land for the purpose of their business.
These rights were spread over many years, but in the case of a few the period during which the agreements were to operate expired in 1955.
Some of the agreements were registered and the others unregistered.
After the coming into force of the Madhya Pradesh Abolition of Proprietary Rights (Estates, Mahals, Alienated Lands) Act, 1950, the Government disclaimed the agreements and auctioned the rights afresh, acting under section 3 of the Act under which " all proprietary rights in an estate . . in the area specified in the notification, vesting in a proprietor of such estate. or in a person having interest in such proprietary right through the proprietor, shall pass from such proprietor or such other person to and vest in the State for the purposes of the State free of all encumbrances".
The petitioners filed petitions under article 32 of the Constitution of India challenging the legality of the action taken.
by the Government on the ground that it was an invasion of their fundamental rights.
They contended (1) that the Government stepped into the shoes of the quondam proprietors and was bound by the agreements into which the latter had entered, before their proprietary rights were taken over by the Government, (2) that the petitioners were not proprietors as defined in the Act and therefore sections 3 and 4 of the Act did not apply to them, (3) that the agreements were in essence and effect licenses granted to them to cut, gather and carry away the produce in the shape of 340 tendu leaves, or lac, or timber or wood, (4) that the agreements granted no 'interest in land ' or 'benefit to arise out of land ' and that object of the agreements could only be described as sale of goods as defined in the Indian Sale of Goods Act, and (5) that the interest of the petitioners was not proprietary right but only a right to get goods in the shape of leaves, etc The petitioners relied on the decision in Firm Chhotabhai jethabai Patel and Co. vs The State of Madhya Pradesh; , Held : (1) that the agreements required registration and in the absence of it the rights could not be entertained.
Srimathi Shantabai vs State of Bombay, ; , followed.
(2)that in cases where the period stipulated in the agree ment had expired, the only remedy, if any, was to sue for breach of contract and no writ to enforce expired agreements could issue.
, (3) that on their true construction the agreements in question were not contracts of sale of goods.
(4) that both under the Act in question and the Central Provinces Land Revenue Act, 1917, the forests and trees in the Zamindari area belonged to the proprietors and they were items of proprietary rights.
Consequently, the rights conveyed to the petitioners under the agreements were proprietary rights, which under sections 3 and 4 of the Act, became vested in the State.
(5)that assuming that the agreements did not amount to grant of any proprietary right by the proprietors to the petitioners, the latter could have only the benefit of their respective contracts or licenses.
In either case, the State had not, by the Act, acquired or taken possession of such contracts or licenses and, consequently, there had been no infringement of the petitioners ' fundamental rights which alone could support a petition under article 32 of the Constitution.
Chhotabai jethabai Patel and Co. vs The State of Madhya Pradesh, ; , not followed.
Ananda Behera vs The State of Orissa, [1955] 2 S.C.R. gig, followed.
