Dr. H. Borobabu Singh, the first respondent in the Contempt Petition held the office of Speaker of Manipur Legislative Assembly.
This Court having held that the Speaker while deciding the question of disqualification of a Member of the Legislative Assembly under the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution acts as a statutory authority, in which capacity the Speaker 's decision is subject to judicial review by the High Court and this Court, made certain orders quashing the disqualification of certain members of the Manipur Legislative Assembly.
In spite of the clear decision of this Court it was submitted, the contemner continued to resist the Implementation of such orders made by this court.
petitioner In the contempt petition 1.
Manilal Singh was then the of the Manipur Legislative Assembly, and as the Secretary be took steps to implement this Court 's orders.
The allegation made by him was that the contemner Dr. H. Borobabu Singh got annoyed with him for his attempt to secure obedience and implementation of this Court 's orders and, therefore, as an act of reprisal, the contemner had made an 769 770 order of his compulsory retirement.
The petitioner challenged the aforesaid order of his compulsory retirement, alleging that it was mala fide being an act of reprisal by the contemner for the petitioner 's obedience of this Court 's orders.
This Court stayed the operation of the order of compulsory retirement as well as the order of suspension passed by the contemner.
The petitioner then complained that the contemner was not permitting him to function as the Secretary of the Manipur Legislative Assembly, and was also not paying him his salary and other dues; and that another person had been appointed by the contemner to function as the Secretary.
On July 22, 1992, this Court made an order reiterating that the petitioner shall be allowed to function as the Secretary of the Manipur Legislative Assembly without delay and that all concerned will enable him to so function.
Further directions were also given.
As a result of the grievance made by the petitioner that in spite of the orders of this Court, he was neither allowed to function as the Secretary nor paid his salary etc.
another order was made on August 4, 1992 directing the Chief Secretary of the State to ensure that the direction given for payment of dues was promptly obeyed.
On August 25, 1992 the Court after recording that the action to retire the petitioner from service on August 31, 1992 as Joint Secretary appeared to be prima facie in violation of the Court 's order, stayed the operation of the order, expression its concern at the apathy exhibited towards obedience of the mandate under Article 144 of the Constitution, and after hearing all the counsel made an order directing that the Chief Secretary, Deputy Secretary of the legislative Assembly and the contemner should be per sonally present in Court at the next hearing in September 9, 1992.
On the aforesaid date the Chief Secretary and the Deputy Secretary were personally present, but on behalf of the contemner his Counsel sought an adjournment till September 22, 1992 on "he ground that the Manipur Legislative Assembly was in session, which was granted.
On September 25, 1992 the contemner did not appear in person but his Counsel filed an affidavit that he is immune from the directions of the Court in view of his constitutional position as Speaker.
The Court heard 771 the Counsel and rejected the contention and adjourned the matter to 20, 1"2 the contemner to give a written undertaking before be left the country as a member of the Indian parliamentary delegation that he would appear in the court.
The contemner did not give the aforesaid undertaiking and when the matter was taken up on November 12, 1M, the contemner was not present and the only thing done by him was to Me an affidavit dated November 6, 1992 indicating that he would not personally appear before the Court In the aforesaid circumstances and having regard to the attitude adopted by the contemner It became necessary for the Court to consider the making of necessary consequential orders to secure the presence of the contemner.
It accordingly heard arguments on December 8, 1992.
The Attorney General of India submitted that the undisputed and the unequivocal stand taken by the contemner left no doubt about his wilful and contumacious disregard and disobedience of the Court 's orders which is without any doubt by Itself sufficient to constitute criminal contempt of this Court.
That, apart from the power which this Court has under the and the Rules framed thereunder, the powers of this Coon under several provisions of the Constitution of India is wide enough to indicate that the procedure available to It for ensuring compliance of it,; orders Includes the taking of all steps considered necessary to ensure compliance of this Court 's orders which is a constitutional obligation of the Court, to uphold the role of law , and that the Court also had the power to direct the Government of India to take the necessary steps to produce the contemner in the Court if the ordinary course of requiring a Magistrate to produce him In the Court Is considered inappropriate.
The Solicitor General of India on behalf of the Government of India; and the Counsel for the Chief Secretary and the petitioner supported the submissions of the Attorney General, while the Counsel for the contemner reiterated the stand taken by the contemner, that by virtue of the office of the Speaker which he holds, he is immune from the Court 's process even in a contempt matter which does not relate to his function as Speaker inside the House.
Directing the production of the contemner Dr. H. Borobabu Singh before the Court on March 23, 1"3.
HELD : 1.
The undisputed facts expose the conduct of the contemner, Dr. H. Borobabu Singh, in refusing to obey the orders of this Court 772 directing him to appear in person in this Court to enable the hearing of the contempt proceedings against him, after the tentative opinion formed by this Court that his wilful and contumacious violation of this Court 's orders and deliberate obstruction of the persons acting in the aid of this Courts orders coupled with his act of reprisal against the Secretary of the legislative Assembly for obeying the orders made by this Court, make out a prima facie case of ' contempt, as recorded in the orders made and known to him.
[780G H, 781A] 2.The contemner 's repeated and categorical refusal to appear in person in this Court in spite of this Court 's orders and grant of considerable indulgence to him is clear from the statements made in his affidavits and through his counsel, who has appeared for him throughout [782B] 3.
From the documents filed by the Union of India, it is evident that even the Union Home Minister has strongly advised the contemner to desist from the course he has chosen to adopt and to obey the orders of this Court, which is his constitutional obligation.
[783C] 4.
Articles 141, 142 and 144 of the Constitution are well known and they are mentioned for the benefit of the contemner who has wilfully and deliberately refused to obey and ignored not merely the orders of this Court but has also chosen to ignore the provisions in the Constitution itself, to which he must have sworn allegiance before taking his sent as a Member of the Manipur Legislative Assembly.
[782H] 5.
The immunity given by Article 361 of the Constitution is not to a Speaker and no other provision supports the submission made by the contemner.
It is unfortunate that a person who holds the constitutional officer of Speaker of a Legislative Assembly has chosen to ignore the constitutional mandate that this country is governed by the 'rule of law, and what the law is, is for this Court to declare in discharge of Its constitutional obligation which bind all in accordance with Article 141 of Constitution of India, and Article 144 then says that all authorities a are to act in aid of the orders made by this Court.
The contemner has chosen to ignore also the obvious corollary of rule of law that no person is above law.
[782F G] 773 7.
Having doen its best to make the contemner see reason and be present by granting indulgence repeatedly, to the extent that the Attorney General said that the indulgence and leniency was being construed as the weakness of the Court, this Court is constrained to now take the only appropriate and logical course to which the Court is driven in these circumstances, viz. to require the production of the contemner Dr. H. ' Borobabu Singh in person before this Court It is the constitutional duty ' of this Court to uphold the majesty of law and justify the confidence of the people, that no one in this country is above the law and governance is not of men but of the 'rule of law '.
[783B D] 8.The Government of India is directed to produce Dr. H. Borobabu ' Singh in person in this Court on the next date of hearing taking such steps as are necessary for the purpose.
The Government of India would be entitled to take all steps, which are necessary including the use of minimum force which may be required for compliance.
[784H, 795A] 9.
A copy of the order to be sent forthwith by the Registrar (judicial) to Home Secretary, Government of India for prompt compliance.
The next, date of hearing fixed for March 23, 1993.
[785B]
