Section 2(a) of the U.P. Krishi Utpadan Mandi Adhiniyam of 1964 defined 'agricultural produce '.
The words 'gur, rab, shakkar, Khandasari and jaggery ', were added in the said definition by U.P. Act No. 10 of 1970.
A Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court referred the question whether gur lauta and raskat and rab salawat are liable to the law, of market fee under the U.P. Krishi Utpadan Mandi Adhiniyam of 1964 to a Full Beach.
The Full Bench held that gur lauta and raskat and rabgalawat and salawat were not an 'agricultural produce ' within the meaning of the Act, and other Benches followed the Full Bench.
In the appeals to this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellants that when gur khandsari and shakkar have been added in the definition of 'agricultural produce ' rab galawat.
or rab salawat being the inferior forms of the rab are necessary an agricultural produced within the definition of agricultural produce.
On behalf of the respondents it was contended that the Full Bench was right in taking the view that molasses are a different product which looses its original character and being a residual article after solidification of the natural article i.e., sugarcane juice, it cannot be said to be an agricultural produce, that molasses itself being not an agricultural produce, gur lauta and raskat prepared from molasses cannot be held to be an agricultural produce.
Allowing the appeals, this Court, HELD: 1.
A persual of the definition of agricultural produce ' under Section 2(a) of the Act shows that apart from items of produce of agriculture, horitculture, viticulture, apiculture, sericulture, pisciculture, 1037 1038 animal husbandry or forest as are specified in the Schedule, the definition further 'includes admixture of two or more such items ' and thereafter it further 'includes taking any such item in processed from ' and again for the third time the words used are land further includes gur, rab, shakkar, khandsari and jaggery.
[1041C] 2.
It is a well settled rule of interpretation that where the legislature used the words 'means ' and 'includes ' such definition is to be given a wider meaning and is not exhaustive or restricted to the items contained or included in such definition.
[1041D] 3.
The meaning of 'agricultural produce ' in the above definition is not restricted to any products of agriculture as specified in the Schedule but also includes such items which come into being in processed form and further includes such items which are called as gur, rab, shakkar, khandsari and jaggery.
[1041E] 4.
Gur lauta or raskat and rab salawat made from sugarcane or from molasses shall fall within the definition of 'agricultural produce ' as contained in Section 2(a) of the Uttar Pradesh Krishi Utpadan Mandi Adhiniyam, and are exigible to market fee.
The view taken by the Full Bench of the High Court is not correct [1042C, 1043D] Rathi Khandsari Udyog etc.
vs State of U.P. & Ors. etc.
; , ; Kishan Lal and Ors.
vs State of Rajasthan & Ors.
, [1990) 2 S.C.R. 142; and Bharat Trading vs State of U.P. & Ors., WP (C) No. 9982 decided on 31st March, 1992, referred to.
