The prosecution case was that the appellant and the deceased were intimate friends.
The appellant nursed a grudge against the deceased, as he misbehaved with the wife of the appellant.
On July 8, 1979 in the morning the deceased accompanied the appellant to Mohali, where the appellant wanted to do business.
At Mohali, the appellant went to the brother of his wife (P.W. 11) and borrowed a bicycle, leaving the deceased at a shop.
later both left the shop on the bicycle.
The deceased was pedalling the bicycle while the appellant was sitting behind on the carrier of the bicycle.
P.W. 5 saw them going by the side of the Gurdwara, Sahib Singh Sabha.
At about 2.45 P.M. on the same day, P.W. 5 when went to the Gurdwara, one Om Parkash came there and told P.W.5 that an injured Sikh gentleman was lying on the ground in the campus of the Gurdwara.
P.W. 5 accompanied by one Balwinder Singh came to the spot.
He identified the victim lying on the ground bleeding profusely.
The members of the Gurdwara Committee were summoned.
The members who were available reached.
The victim succumbed to the injuries in the meantime.
P.W. 5 accompanied by one Chatter Singh lodged the First Information Report at 4.00 p.m., the same day.
The prosecution case was based solely on the circumstantial evidence and it could prove the chain events beyond reasonable doubt by the evidences of its witnesses.
The appellant was convicted under section 302 of the Indian Penal Code and was sentenced to undergo imprisonment for life by the trial Court.
1027 1028 Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD : 1.01.
It is said that men lie but circumstances do not.
Under the circumstances prevailing in the society today, it is not true in many cases.
Sometimes the circumstances which are sought to be proved against the accused for purpose of establishing the charge are planted by the elements hostile to the accused who find out witnesses to fill up the gaps in the chain of circumstances.
[1031D] 1.02.
In countries having sophisticated modes of investigation, every trace left behind by culprit can be followed and pursued immediately.
Unfortunately it is not available in many parts of this country.
That is why Courts have insisted (i) the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should in the first instance be fully established; (ii) all the facts so established should be consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused and should be such as to exclude every hypothesis but the one sought to be proved; (iii) the circumstances should be of a conclusive nature; and (iv) the chain of evidence should not have any reasonable ground for a conclusion consistent with the innocence of the accused.
[1031E F] 1.03.
If at a trial the prosecution adduces direct evidence to prove the charge, the Court is primarily concerned whether the witnesses who have testified about the role of the accused are reliable.
Once the Court is satisfied that the witnesses who Pre said to have seen the occurrence are trustworthy and inspire confidence, the finding of guilt has to be recorded, if otherwise the accused has to be acquitted.
But in a case based on circumstantial evidence neither the accused nor the manner of occurrence is known to the persons connected with the victim.
[1031B C] 1.04.
Suspicion and conjecture should not take place of legal proof.
It is true that the chain of events proved by the prosecution must show that within all human probability the offence has been committed by the accused, but the Court is expected to consider the total cumulative effect of all the proved facts along with the motive suggested by the prosecution which induced the accused to follow a particular path.
The existence of a motive is often an enlightening factor in a process of presumptive reasoning in cases depending on circumstantial evidence.
[1032C D] 1.05.
The evidence adduced on behalf of the prosecution is clear, 1029 unambiguous and in unmistakable terms establish that the appellant is the perpetrator of the crime and nothing has been brought to Court 's notice which leaves any gap in the circumstances to establish the guilt of the appellant [1036B] Reg vs Hodge, (1838) 2 Lewin 227; Hanumant Govind Nargundkar vs State of Madhya Pradesh AIR 1952 SC 343; Deonandan Mishra vs The State of Bihar, ; ; Govinda Reddy vs State of Mysore, AIR 1960 SC 29; Sharad Birdhichand Sarda vs State of Maharashtra, ; Ashok Kumar Chatterjee vs State of Madhya Pradesh, AIR 1989 SC 1890 and State of U. P. vs Ashok Kumar Srivastava, , referred to.
