Neptune Paper Mills (N.P.M.) was directed to be wound up by the Company Court on August 4, 1987.
The Official Liquidator took possession of the assets of the company under the orders of the Court N.P.M. had borrowed huge amounts from several financial institutions including Industrial Finance Corporation of India, I.C.I.C.I., W.B.I.D.C. and I.D.B.I. on security of its assets.
In view of the default committed by it in repayment, the financial institutions (F.Is.) recalled their loans in April, 1988 with the result all the loans in their loans in April, 1988 with the result all the loans in their entirety became due at once.
On August 8, 1988 the F.Is. were granted leave to rile a suit under Section 446 of the A suit was filed by them in September 1990 in the Calcutta High Court wherein a direction was given to the official liquidator to function as a receiver too.
In January 1990, the company court directed the sale of the assets of the company in liquidation.
Before making the said order the court had obtained a valuation of the said assets.
The valuation was at Rs. 4 crores.
Sale notices were published from time to time in response to which certain offers were received, the highest of them being Rs. 6.90 crores.
For one or the other reason, no offer was accepted and sale notice was published again.
The sale notice would state that (1) the said company in liquidation will be sold as a going concern on "as is where is and whatever there is basis", (2) the bids will start from 690 crores, (3) the successful bidder must deposit 10% of his bid at the time of the sale, (4) the balance amount of the sale price may be paid by instalments as would be fixed by tile 1064 Hon 'ble Court, Calcutta i.e., deferred payment of instalments will be considered and (5) and purchaser shall have to enter into an agreement and understanding with the employees union on the same lines as has been entered into previously by one of the bidders.
In pursuance of the said sale notice, certain offers were received including the one by Buxa.
Its offer was in a sum of Rs. 6 crores subject to certain terms and conditions stipulated therein.
In short, it proposed to pay the said amount in instalments @ Rs. 45 lakhs per annum with a moratorium of one year immediately following the confirmation of sale.
On the date of sale before the learned company Judge only two parties remained in the field.
They were asked to raise their bids.
Buxa raised its offer to Rs. 8 crores, the higher of the two.
The learned Judge accepted its offer subject to the condition that the balance consideration (after deducting 10% earnest money which was to be deposited immediately) shall be paid in instalments prescribed by him.
It was directed that for the first two years following the sale, Rs. 60 lakhs shall be paid each year.
Thereafter, half yearly instalments of Rs. 30 lakhs shall be paid until the entire earnest money is paid off.
No interest was stipulated.
It was provided that on default of payment in any one instalment yearly or half yearly the official liquidator shall forthwith take possession of the assets and the earnest money paid shall stand forfeited.
Complaining that the terms settled by the learned Company Judge were too liberal to the purchaser and pre judicial to the interest of the F.Is., an appeal was preferred by them before the Division Bench.
The Division Bench finding that it would be inappropriate to set aside the sale, effected modifications in the terms of sale thereby providing some more safeguards to protect the interest of the F.Is.
Aggrieved by the order of the Division Bench, F.Is.
approached this court by way of a Special Leave Petition (S.L.P. 14929/90).
This Court, taking the view that the allegations made on behalf of F.Is. can be dealt with by the High Court if it is moved again declined to interfere with the order of the High Court.
But with a view to secure the interest of the Financial institutions it passed an order on 19.11.90 that until the High Court makes its order the Purchaser shall be taken to be the receiver and shall be accountable as a receiver.
Accordingly the financial institutions filed an application before the Division Bench requesting it to reconsider its order with a prayer that the 1065 sale in favour of Buxa be set aside or in the alternative Buxa be directed to deposit the entire balance consideration of Rs. 7.2 crores at once.
They further submitted that they have a charge for Rs. 8 crores on the assets of the company in liquidation and that granting a period of 10 years for paying the balance consideration in instalments and not taking adequte security from Buxa for proper payment of balance consideration, was prejudicial of their interest.
The Division Bench disposed of the said application by its order dated 20 2 1992, holding that (1) the F.Is.
(Secured creditors) by their acts and conduct have come within the winding up and. therefore, the assertion of their right as secured creditors outside winding up proceedings cannot be accepted or sustained at that stage.
(2) the purchaser Buxa has taken possession of the assets sold, has re employed the workmen after entering into an understanding with them and has also invested substantial amounts in recommencing the production in the factor%?.
(3) In the above circumstances, the F.Is.
cannot insist upon repayment of the entire money due to them under the deeds of hypothecation executed by the company in liquidation.
However, it passed directions curtailing the time for payment and providing for payment of interest by the purchaser.
In these appeals by special leave it was contended for the Appellants that (a) the procedure followed by the High Court for selling the assets of the company in liquidation is not fair and proper and that it has caused grave prejudice to the interest of financial institutions, (b) By granting liberal instalments, the "present price" of the assets sold is no more than Rs. 4 crores, whereas the total amount.
due to the financial institutions is more than Rs. 12 crores, (c) either the sale should be set aside and a fresh sale be held or the instalments prescribed should be drastically reduced coupled with a provision for reasonable interest on the balance consideration.
On the other hand the purchaser/Respondent submitted that it is not open to this court at this stage to effect any modification in the terms of the sale; that though with a view to save its investment which it had already made by the date of the judgment of the Division Bench, it agreed to certain further modifications being made by the Division Bench; it is not now agreeable to any further modification since in such a case it would not be possible for it to run the industry or to pay the consideration and 1066 that as the purchaser has invested huge sums of money and has reemployed almost all the workers; it is not in a position to bear any further financial burden.
Modifying the order and dismissing the appeal, the Court, HELD: 1.
Though there is no standard or uniform pattern to be followed with respect to the terms of the sale notice issued by the Court, it would be appropriate for the court to adopt such procedure as would avoid a situation where the court is put to the task of negotiating the terms of sale with the parties.
That would also give room for avoidable criticism and comment.
It would have been better if the sale notice itself had prescribed the number of instalments which would he granted to the purchaser, besides other terms and conditions and then invited offers on that basis.
Alternately, the court could have invited the offers subject to such conditions as the offerers may prescribe and then have them evaluated by a qualified person and select the most appropriate one.
If none of them are found acceptable and if the court thought it appropriate, it could also allow the bidders to submit revised offers and then have them evaluated.
These are not the only two methods.
But it has to be emphasised that any method devised should be such as to obviate the necessity or occasion for the court to negotiate the terms and conditions of sale with the party or parties.
The sale notice in this case.
merely stated that the balance consideration may be paid in instalments as would be fixed by the court The number and duration of instalments and other allied terms like bank guarantee, nature and terms of default clause, payment of interest on instalments were all left to be determined by the Court.
In this case the bid of Rs. 6 crores was got enhanced to Rs. 8 crores, with lesser number of instalments than offered by the purchaser all as a result of persuasive efforts by the Company Judge.
But it has given room for the argument that had it been known before hand that so many instalments would be granted without stipulation of interest, several higher offers could have been received.
[1073G H, 1074A D] 2.
The contention that the Supreme Court has no power at this stage to modify the number of instalments is untenable.
Nor there is any basis for Buxa to take up the stand that, either the existing terms should be affirmed by this court or it should be allowed to walk out of the deal altogether along with its investment.
This it cannot do for the following 1067 reasons; Firstly, the sale notice itself stated that "the balance amount of the sale price may be paid by instalments as would be fixed by the Hon 'ble Court, Calcutta i.e., deferred payment of instalments will be considered".
what the High Court of Calcutta could do, can equally be done by this Court sitting in appeal.
Secondly, the purchaser has repeatedly submitted before the Calcutta High Court that it is prepared to abide by such conditions as may` be imposed by the Court.
[1074E F] 3.
Having considered and taken into account all the relevant facts and circumstances of the case including the interest of the financial institutions, the interest of the workers who have since been re employed by the purchaser and the fact that the purchaser has already invested substantial amount to revive the company, the following modification was made in the number of instalments in which the balance consideration has to be paid: [1075F G] The total balance consideration of Rs. 5.80 crores, remaining due after payment of Rs. 52 lakhs due in the year 1992 shall be paid in full by the end of the year 1996 in equal bimonthly instalments.
The instalments shall be payable by the last day of February, April, June, August, October and December in each year.
Each instalment excepting the last instalment shall be in a sum of Rs. 24, 16,000.
The last instalment shall be in such sum as to make up the total short fall payable on that date i.e. Rs. 20,16,000.
[1077C]
