The appellant who was an Assistant Engineer in Public Works Department was transferred on deputation to the Bangalore City Corporation under the City Bangalore (Cadre and Recruitment) Regulation, 1971 which permitted 75% of vacancies in the cadre to be filed in by deputation from P.W.D.
In 1977, the Karnataka Municipal Corporation Rules were framed and the appellant was absorbed in the Corporation.
On being challenged in a Writ Petition the High Court struck down the Rules and set aside the absorption of the appellant in the Corporation.
The Government issued an ordinance removing the infirmity in the Rules.
It was replaced by the Karnataka Municipal Corporation Amendment Act, 1981.
In course of time the appellant was promoted as Executive Engineer, Superintending Engineer and Addl.
Chief Engineer.
Ile earlier Writ Petitioners approached the High Court by way of a Contempt Petition against the non implementation of its order.
Faced with this situation, the Government repatriated the appellant to his parent department,just a few months before his retirement.
The appellant approached the Administrative Tribunal, which dismissed his application as infructuous in view of the fact that the matter was pending before the High Court and in any case the appellant would get his pension either from the State Government or the Corporation.
Hence these appeals.
55 Allowing the appeals, this Court, HELD: Under the Karnataka Municipal Corporation Amendment Act, 1981 the basis on which the Karnataka Municipal Rules, 1977 were declared void was removed and appointments made or continued before the commencement of the Amendment Act were declared to be valid and were always be deemed to have been validly made for all purposes as if the said appointments had been made under the Principal Act as amended by the Act.
It is not in dispute that the State Legislature is competent to make the Act.
When the Act was made and it validated past acts done or proceedings taken, it was valid Act and removed the defects declared by the Court.
It must be deemed and shall always be deemed that the appointment of the appellant as Addl.
Chief Engineer is legal and valid.
Unfortunately, the Act was not brought to the notice of the High Court when the direction to repatriate the appellant was made by the High Court.
But the failure to bring to the notice of the court does not have the effect of nullifying the valid action legislatively taken.
Consequently the appellant must be deemed to have been retired from service as Addl.
Chief Engineer of the Corporation.
The appellant is entitled to all the consequential benefits, all pensionary benefits etc.
from the Corporation.
[58H; 59 A D] Shri Prithvi Cotton Mills Ltd. & Anr.
vs Broach Borough Municipality & Ors.
, ; Janapada Sabha, Chhindwara, etc.
vs Central Provinces Syndicate Ltd. & Anr., etc.
; , and Yadlapati Venkateswarlu vs State of Anadhra Pradesh & Anr., [19901 Suppl.
1 SCR 381, relied on.
