Ballarpur, a public limited company undertook to set up a caustic soda/chlorine manufacturing plant.
It entered into an agreement with a French concern for purchase of certain machinery and equipment.
In another agreement with Ballarpur, the French concern agreed to provide services of certain personnel and Ballarpur agreed to pay salaries and other emoluments free of any Indian tax or duty to the personnel.
The French concern entered into an arrangement with a Swiss concern for supply of certain machinery and to make available services of certain personnel.
The assessee appellant was one such person.
He came to India and started working in connection with the setting up of the plant.
In addition to daily allowances and other facilities, the assessee appellant was paid Rs. 3,82, 481 and Rs. 67,200 for the assessment years, 1974 75 and 1975 76, respectively.
Before the Income Tax Officer, the assessee contended that he was not liable to pay tax.
The I.T.O. did not agree.
Ballarpur paid the tax amount of Rs. 3,23,400 and Rs. 35,546 for the assessment years respectively.
The Income Tax Officer treated the tax amount paid by Ballarpur as a perquisite and added the same to the salary amount of the assessee.
The assessee questioned the action of the I.T.O. in appeal before the A.A.C., which was dismissed.
28 The appeal flied before the Tribunal was also dismissed, whereupon the assessee obtained a reference to be answered by the High Court.
The High Court answered the reference, "whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case the amount of tax paid by Ballarpur on behalf of the assessee in assessment years 1974 75 and 1975 76 is income taxable under the heading 'other sources '," against the assessee.
Hence these appeals by the assessee contending that the amount paid by way of tax could not be treated as 'Income ' of assessee; that as the assessee did not receive the said amount from Ballarpur, it could not constitute his income.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court, HELD: 1.01.
The definition of 'Income ' in clause (24) of Section 2 of the Act is an inclusive definition.
It adds several artificial categories to the concept of income but on that account the expression 'income ' does not lose its natural connotation.
It is repeatedly said that it is difficult to define the expression 'income ' in precise terms.
Anything which can properly be described as income is taxable under the Act unless, of course, it is exempted under one or the other provision of the Act.
[31D] 1.02.
The amount paid by Ballarpur by way of tax on the salary amount received by the assessee can be treated as the income of the assessee.
The said amount is nothing but a tax upon the salary received by the assessee.
By virtue of the obligation undertaken by Ballarpur to pay tax on the salary received by the assessee among others, it paid the said tax.
The said payment is, therefore, for and on behalf of the assessee.
It is not a gratuitous payment But for the said agreement and but for the said payment, the said tax amount would have been liable to be paid by the assessee himself.
He could not have received the salary which he did but for the said payment of tax.
The obligation placed upon Ballarpur by virtue of Section 195 of the Income Tax Act cannot also be ignored in this context.
It would be unrealistic to say that the said payment had no integral connection with the salary received by the assessee.
[31E G] 1.03.
Inasmuch as the assessee is not an employee of Ballarpur, which made the payment, it cannot be brought within the purview of Section 17 of the Act.
It must necessarily be placed under sub section (1) 29 of Section 56, 'income from other sources '.
According to the said sub section, income of every kind which is not to be excluded from the total income under the Act shall be chargeable to income tax under the head 'income from other sources ', if it is not chargeable to income tax under any of the other heads specified in Section 14, Items A to E. [32A B] N 4.
Modi vs S.A.L., Narayana Rao, SC; C.L T., Bombay vs Smt.
T.P. Sidhwa, and Mrs. Sheela Kaushish vs C.I. T. Delhi 131 [TR 435 SC, distinguished.
