Six accused persons were arrayed by the investigating agency for offences punishable under Sections 302, 324, 323, 341, 148 read with Section 149 IPC, for an occurrence that took place on 24th December, 1986 in which one Suku succumbed to injuries as a result of the assault during the occurrence.
They were put on trial, and the prosecution sought to establish its case by examining as many as six eye witnesses besides other evidence, documentary and oral.
According to the prosecution case, all the six accused persons were armed with weapons like chopper, iron rod, knife, cycle chain and torches and that the accused had held PW.2 George and while the first accused kicked him, the third accused inflicted injuries on him with a cycle chain.
So far as Suku deceased was concerned, all the accused except the first accused caused him injuries with a torch, a cycle chain and a knife.
The first accused was alleged to have caught hold of Suku by the collar and inflicted injuries on his hands, arms and legs with a chopper.
The assault took place in front of an arrack shop.
It was alleged that enmity between the two groups on account of suspicion of information being passed on to the Excise Officials, regarding illicit distillation was the cause of the occurrence, but no evidence was led in support of this allegation and no motive for commission of the crime was established at the trial.
85 At the trial, four eye witnesses PW3, P.W. 6, PW.7, the salesman and his assistant in the arrack shop and PW.8 turned hostile and did not support the prosecution case.
The prosecution case was sought to be proved by the ocular testimony of PW.4 and PW.5 both aged about 13 years, at the time of the occurrence and other evidence.
Both these eye witnesses supported their statements recorded under section 161 Cr.
P.C. during their testimony in Court.
The trial court on the basis of prosecution evidence found accused No. 1, Subran, guilty of an offence punishable under Section 302 IPC and sentenced him to suffer rigorous imprisonment for life.
Accused Nos. 2 to 6, namely, Rajan, Preman, Viswan, Sura and Shajan, were found guilty of an offence under Section 326/149 IPC and each one of them was sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for three years Besides, accused 1 to 4 were convicted for an offence under Section 148 and sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment for one year.
All the accused were also convicted for offences under Sections 14, 341, 323,324 read with Section 149 IPC but no separate sentences were awarded on any of those counts.
On appeal to the High Court, the conviction and sentence awarded to accused 1 to 3 and 5 were confirmed, while accused 4 and 6 were acquitted and the conviction and sentence recorded against them by the Sessions Judge was set aside.
Ile participation of the 6th accused and the role assigned to him by the prosecution was doubted by the Judges of the High Court and he was given the benefit of doubt and acquitted.
Similarly, the High Court disbelieved the role assigned to accused No. 4 and doubted his participation in the commission of the crime. ]Me accused appealed to this Court by Special Leave.
After preliminary hearing it was ordered that the appeal be heard on the limited question regarding the nature of the offence and the quantum of the sentence only.
On the question : Whether after the acquittal of the two accused, could the High Court Convict appellant No. 1 for the substantive offence under Section 302 IPC an offence with which he had not been charged, and appellants 2 to 4 for an offence under section 326/149 IPC, Partially allowing the appeal, the Court, HELD: 1.
A combined reading of Section 141 and Section 149 IPC 86 show that an assembly of less than five members is not an unlawful assembly within the meaning of Section 141 and cannot, therefore, form the basis for conviction for an offence with the aid of Section 149 IPC.
[92F] 2.
The existence of an unlawful assembly is a necessary postulate for invoking Section 149 IPC.
Where the existence of such an unlawful assembly is not proved, the conviction with the aid of Sections 149 IPC cannot be recorded or sustained.
The failure of the prosecution to show that the assembly was unlawful must necessarily result in the failure of the charge under section 149 )PC.
[92H,93A] 3.
A person charged for an offence under Section 302 IPC read with Section 149 cannot be convicted of the substantive offence under Section 302 IPC without a specific charge having been framed against him as envisaged by law.
Conviction for the substantive offence in such a case is unjustified because an accused might be misled in his defence by the absence of the charge for the substantive offence under Section 302 IPC.
[93D] 4.
The conviction of appellants 2 to 4 for an offence under Section 326/149 IPC cannot be sustained and the same would be the position with regard to the conviction of all the appellants for other offences with the aid of Section 149 IPC also.
[93B] 5.
The High Court failed to draw the distinction between an offence under clause (b) and (c) of Section 299 IPC and the one failing under clause (3) of Section 300 IPC.
[93G] 6, The effect of the acquittal of the two accused persons by the High Court and without the High Court finding that some other known or unknown persons were also involved in the assault, would be that for all intent and purposes the two acquitted accused persons were not members of the unlawful assembly.
Thus, only four accused could be said to have been the members of the assembly but such an assembly which comprises of less than five members is not an unlawful assembly within the meaning of Section 141 IPC.
[92G] 7.
Appellant No. 1 Subran not having been charged for the substantive offence of murder under Section 302 IPC, even the trial court, which tried the six accused persons, was not justified in recording a conviction against him for the substantive offence of murder punishable under Sec 87 tion 302 IPC after framing a charge against him for the offence under Section 302 read with Section 149 IPC only.
[93C] 8.
Appellant No. 1, Subran, was never called upon to meet a charge under Section 302 IPC simplicitor and, therefore, in defending himself, he can not be said to have been called upon to meet that charge and he could very well have considered it unnecessary to concentrate on that part of the prosecution case during the cross examination of the prosecution witnesses.
Therefore, the conviction of the appellant No. 1 for an offence under Section 302 was not permissible.
[93E] 9.
The intention to cause murder of Suku deceased, could not be attributed to appellant No. 1 and the medical evidence also shows that the injuries attributed to him were not sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause the death of the deceased.
The conviction of appellant No. 1 for the substantive offence under Section 302 IPC is therefore unwarranted and cannot be sustained.
That Suku deceased died as a result of injuries inflicted on him by all the four appellants is not a matter which is in doubt.
From the ocular evidence read with the medical evidence, it stands established that the injuries on the deceased had been caused by all the four appellants and that the death of Suku had occurred due to the receipt of multiple injuries.
[93H, 94A B] 10.
On a consideration of the circumstances of the case, the type of weapons with which the accused were armed and the nature and seat of the injuries, it is not possible to hold that all the four appellants had shared the common intention of causing such bodily injuries on the deceased as were likely to cause the death of Suku or were sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause his death.
The appellants would, therefore be liable for the offence committed individually by each one of them.
[94D E] 11.
The case of appellant No. 1 therefore, falls within Section 299 I PC punishable under Section 304 Part 1 [PC.
He is accordingly, convicted for the said offence and sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment for a period of seven years and to pay a fine of Rs. 2,000 and in default of payment suffer further rigorous imprisonment for one year.
Fine if realised to be paid to the heirs of the deceased.
[94G H] 12 (a) With regard to the three other appellants their conviction for 88 an offence under Section 326 with the aid of Section 149 is not sustainable in law, it is accordingly set aside and they are convicted under Section 326/149 IPC.
They would be responsible for their individual acts.
The injuries caused by appellants 2 and 3 were with a torch, iron rod and a cycle chain.
None of the injuries caused by them according to the post mortem report were on any vital part of the body, though some of the injuries caused by blunt weapons were grievous in nature.
Each of them are convicted for an offence under Section 325 IPC and sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment for two years each.
[95B C] 12 (b) Appellant No. 4 caused grievous injuries to the deceased with a knife, the offence would therefore, fall under Section 326 IPC.
He is therefore convicted for the said offence and sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment for a period of three years and to pay a fine of Rs. 500/ and in default of payment to suffer rigorous imprisonment for a period of three months.
The fine, if realised shall be paid to the heirs of the deceased.
[95D] 12 (c) The conviction of all the appellants for the offence under Section 324 as recorded by the High Court as also for the other offences are maintained but without the aid of Section 149 IPC.
