The suit plot was let out to the appellant as a monthly tenant for an automobile garage.
The respondent plaintiff issued a notice on 10th July, 1975 determining the lease in favour of the appellant with effect from 31st July, 1975, and filed a suit for eviction.
The trial Court dismissed the said suit on the finding that as the appellant was using the suit premises for manufacturing purposes, a six months ' notice was required before the lease could be determined, and as the notice issued to the defendant appellant under section 106 of the Transfer of Property Act had purported to determine the tenancy with 15 days ' notice, the suit in question could not have been riled.
On appeal by the respondent, the Assistant Judge came to the conclusion that the premises in question had not been let out for any manufacturing purpose but for a motor workshop and as such the notice under section 106 of the Act was valid, and the respondent was entitled to the possession of the plot in dispute, and passed an order for possession.
The second appeal filed on behalf of the appellant was dismissed in limine by the High Court saying that no substantial question of law was involved.
In the appeal to this Court, the finding recorded by the Court of Appeal below and affirmed by the High Court that the respondent was entitled to a decree for possession, and that the appellant was liable to be 168 evicted was not questioned.
However, a new stand was taken on behalf of the appellant that in view of the subsequent events the decree of eviction passed against the appellant could not be given effect to.
It was submitted that by C.P. and Berar Letting of Houses and Rent Control (Second Amendment) Order, 1989 a new clause 13A has been introduced and that was during the pendency of the present appeal, and that though clause 13 A had been introduced not with retrospective effect still it shall be applicable to proceedings pending before any Court including this court and in view of the bar imposed by the said clause 13 A no decree for eviction could be passed by this court in the present appeal against the appellant unless the respondent landlord produces a written permission of the Controller as required by sub clause (1) of Clause 13 of the Order.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1. Article 136(1) of the Constitution confers on this Court overriding and extensive powers of granting special leave to appeal.
Article 136 does not confer a right to appeal which is in the discretion of this Court.
The discretionary power under Article 136 cannot be construed as to confer a right of appeal where none exist.
Although the power under Article 136(1) is unfettered, it cannot be held that after having entertained a special leave petition against any final or interlocutory order, this court converts itself into a court of appeal for the hearing of the dispute involved and as such when the appeal is dismissed the decree passed by the High Court merges into the decree of this court, and in that situation amounts to passing a decree for eviction.
[175G H,176A] Gyan Chand vs Kunjbeharilal, ; , referred to.
[176B] 2.
The bar placed by clause 13 A of the Order shall be applicable only to a suit or proceeding which was pending in any court under provisions of any special Act or under the provision of the Code of Civil Procedure, as the case may be.
It shall not become applicable to a special leave petition pending or an appeal registered before this court on the basis of leave granted under Article 136 of the Constitution.
This Court while exercising its discretionary power under Article 136 of the Constitution even while dismissing the appeal shall not be deemed to have passed any decree for eviction.
[177C D] 3.
The matter would have been different if clause 13 A instead of only 169 imposing a bar on passing a decree for eviction had also prescribed a bar on passing any order for recovery of possession of any premises or on initiation of execution proceedings on basis of any decree passed earlier.
In that event, this Court could have taken note of subsequent change in the law and in exercise of its discretionary power could have passed an order directing the respondent not to recover possession of the premises on the basis of the decree for eviction passed in his favour or to pursue the execution proceedings without complying with the requirement of clause 13 A. [177E F] H. Shiva Rao vs Cecilia Pereira, ; M/s East India Corporation Ltd. vs Shree Meenakshi Mills Ltd., JT ; Amarjit Kaur vs Pritam Singh, ; and Sadhu Singhi vs Dharam Dev.
AIR 1980 SC 1654, referred to.
[172F, 173G] (During the hearing it was brought to the notice of the Court, that the amended definition of 'Premises ' and clause 13 A which had been inserted by C.P. and Berar Letting of Houses and Rent Control (Second Amendment) Order, 1989, have been struck down by a Division Bench of the Bombay High Court on 23.6.1992.
But the Counsel neither produced a copy of the said judgment, nor could inform whether any special leave to appeal against the said judgment was pending before this Court.
As such, the effect of clause 13 A of the Order, has been considered, so far as the present appeal was concerned.) [177H, 178A]
