The assessee appellant in the appeal is a non resident company having its place of business at Coven" in the United Kingdom.
It entered into a collaboration agreement with an Indian company in November, 1939 the assessee being entitled to royalty of 5% on all sales effected by the Indian Company, and this amount less the Indian tax had to be remitted by the assessee in Sterling currency.
The assessee 's accounting year was the year ending 30th September and with respect to its Indian income, it was filing its returns through the Indian Company.
The aforesaid collaboration agreement expired in the year 1965, but it was renewed and the renewed agreement also expired in November, 1970.
For the assessment years 1967 68 and 1968 69 the assessee riled returns in which it stated that it was maintaining its accounts on mercantile basis, and did not dispute its liability to assessment.
In these returns, it disclosed a royalty income of Rs. 7,21,600 and Rs. 4,57,311 respectively.
When it came to the filing of the return for the assessment year 1969 70 the assessee admitted a royalty of Rs. 9,25,357 but filed a nil return saying that it was maintaining its accounts on cash basis and not on mercantile basis, that no part of the royalty amount had been received by it and, therefore, nothing was taxable.
For the next assessment year 1970 71 as well, the same stand was taken by the assessee.
The Income Tax Officer completed the assessment for the first two 97 assessment years on the basis of the returnes, but for the assessment years 1969 70 and 1970 71, he refused to accept the plea of the assessee; and held that the assessee maintaining its accounts on mercantile basis alone and that the royalty amount disclosed be brought to tax.
The assessee filed appeals against the assessments relating to all the four years, taking the stand that even with respect to the accounting year relevant to the assessment years 1967 68 and 1968 69, it had been maintaining accounts on cash basis and since it did not actually receive any income in all these 4 years no tax was payable.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner dismissed the appeals holding that the assessment orders for the past years reveal that the method of accounting was mercantile, that for the assessment year 1967 68, the assessee never contested its liability to be taxed on the amounts disclosed and further it was not open to the assessee to change the method of accounting to suit its convenience, without the approval of the Income Tax Officer.
The assessee carried the matter In further appeals to the Tribunal and contended that it was not following any particular method of accounting regularly in the past years that it was the Indian Company which was finally filing the returns of income on behalf of the assessee by incorporating the figures as per its profit and loss account, that the Indian Company was not aware of the assessee 's system of accounting in regard to royalty and that, therefore, it had committed a mistake in filing the returns for the assessment years 1967 68 and 1968 69, that as soon as the mistake had been noticed, it was corrected and returns for the assessment year 1969 70 on correct basis showing that the method of account cash receipt basis was filed. 'Me appeals were allowed the Tribunal which held that as the assessee had not been following any particular method of accounting regularly over the past years, the question of the method of accounting adopted by the assessee must be examined afresh and for that purpose remanded the matters to the Income Tax Officer.
On a reference made at the instance.
of the Revenue, the High Court answered the reference in favour of revenue and against assessee.
The High Court held that it was 'immaterial whether the assessee was keeping his accounts in regard to a particular income regularly on the cash basis; that even if the assessee was keeping his accounts on the cash basis in regard to his income the assessee was liable to tax under Section 5 (2) (a); to hold 98 otherwise would be to take the income outside the purview of taxation under the Act, though such income had accrued in India to a non resident, and under Section 5(2)(b) the charge to tax had taken effect; and, therefore, there is no possibility of Section 5(2)(b) ever coming into operation and that Section 145(1) cannot be given such an overriding effect so as to defeat the charge and the provisions of Section 5(2)(b).
The assessee appealed to this Court contending that so far as the royalty income was concerned, the assessee was maintaining its accounts at Coventry in the United Kingdom on receipt basis, that the accounting year was the year ending 30th September of each year, whereas the accounting year for the Indian Company was the Calendar year and that notwithstanding the stipulation in the collaboration agreement for half yearly remittances, the practice was that the Indian Company was determining the amount of royalty at the end of its accounting year and that this amount was credited to the account of the assessee in the account books of the Indian Company and that receipt is only when the amount is remitted to the United Kingdom in accordance with the Company.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court, HELD: The collaboration agreement between the assessee and the Indian Company was as old as 1939.
The assessee had been riling its income tax return in India through the Indian Company.
Though the collaboration agreement contemplated the royalty amount being remitted in Sterling Currency to U.K., it cannot be said that until it was so remitted to and received in the U.K., the assessee had not received the income.
The practice evidently was that the Indian Company was maintaining an account pertaining to the assessee in its Books.
After it made up its accounts at the end of the calender year and determined the royalty amount payable to the assessee, the Indian Company was crediting the said amount to the account of the assessee in its Books, and this was recorded as income by the assessee over all these years.
The returns riled by the assessee even with respect to the assessment years 1967 68 and 1968 69 were based upon this premise.
In the said returns, the assessee declared a particular amount of income and offered the same for taxation.
It did not take the stand that the said credit entry in the Books of the Indian Company did not give rise to income in India nor did it ever say that the receipt in U.K. in the shape of sterling pounds alone constitutes 99 income or for that matter receipt of income.
It can also be noticed that in its returns relating to the assessment years 1967 68 and 1968 69, the assessee stated that it was maintaining its accounts on mercantile basis, and that only in the returns relating to the assessment year 1968 69, did it raise the plea that it was maintaining its books, with respect to the said royalty amount, on cash receipt basis.
[105E H] The receipt of the said income in the U.K., is immaterial.
It may happen that a non resident assessee may choose not to repatriate his income/profits to his parent country; he may choose to plough back the said amount in India for such purposes as he may choose.
It, therefore, cannot be said in such a situation that he has not received the income in India.
[106H] Raghava Red& vs C.I.T, Andhra Pradesh, ; relied on.
[107A] The credit entry to the account of the assessee in the Books of the Indian Company does amount to receipt by assessee and is accordingly taxable.
It is immaterial when it was actually received in U.K. [108C] The method of accounting adopted by the assessee for the relevant accounting years Is really irrelevant.
Thi very concept of 'receipt" as espoused by the assessee is untenable and unacceptable.
The order of remand made by the Tribunal was unnecessary.
It is not necessary to express any opinion either on the question whether there is any conflict or inconsistency between Section 5(2) and Section 145 of the Act or on the view expressed by the High Court that in the case of a non resident assessee like the appellant clause (a) of sub section (2) of Section 5 has no application whatsoever and that Section 5(2)(b) governs it irrespective of the fact whether it maintains its accounts on cash basis or mercantile basis.
The question referred did not really arise in the facts and circumstances of the case and need not have been answered.
The Tribunal shall complete the assessments in question.
[108D F] C.I. T. vs Machillan & Co., ; and Keshav Mills Ltd. vs C.I T., Bombay, , distinguished.
[108G]
