The appellant and his wife went to sleep in the back varandah of their house on the fateful night of 25th/26th July, 1976 while the appellant 's brother alongwith his wife and children went to sleep separately in their bed room in the same house.
The Police Control Room was informed over the telephone by a neighbour Sulekh Chand Jain at 4.55 A.M. that an incident had taken place in the house and on receiving the telephone message, the S.I. made a record of it in the daily diary and passed on the information to the duty officer at the police station, who deputed an A.S.I. to proceed to the spot for investigation.
After reaching the spot, the A.S.I. informed the police station on telephone that a murder had taken place.
The information was recorded and the SHO immediately left for the spot alongwith S.I.
The police party arrived at the spot at about 5.35 a.m. and took charge of the investigation.
The appellant was present near the dead body and on interrogation, the appellant informed the police party that his brother and family had retired for the night in their bed room at about 10.00 P.M. and he alongwith his wife had slept in the back verandah, and that when he got up at 3.45 A.M. he noticed that his wife had been murdered by somebody by strangulation while committing the theft of the gold chain, eartops and golden bangles that she was wearing.
The crime team as well as the dog squad were summoned.
Both the 227 dogs of the dog squad were first let loose and after picking up the smell from the lock lying in the corner of the back courtyard and from the spot, went to the room where the appellant was sitting and each of the dogs pointed towards him by turn.
That raised a suspicion against the appellant.
The SHO then asked the appellant to remove his shirt and found that the appellant had injuries in the nature of bruises etc.
on the front part of his, body, on the chest, as well as on his back, The appellant was thereafter taken for further interrogation to the police station, and in the presence of the Sub Inspector, PWI and PW2 he made a disclosure statement to the effect that he had concealed the golden chain and the bangles in his bathroom and in pursuance of the disclosure statement, the appellant led the police party to the bathroom of his house and after removing the cover from the drain hole, took out the golden chain and the bangles and handed them over to SHO.
The appellant was placed under arrest.
After the disclosure statement was made the case which was originally registered under Section 460 IPC was converted into one under Section 302 read with section 203 IPC.
After completion of the investigation, the challan was filed against the appellant and he was tried for offences under Section 302/203 IPC in the Court of the Additional Sessions Judge.
The prosecution sought to establish the case against the appellant on the basis of circumstantial evidence, there being no eye witness of the occurrence.
The circumstances set up by the prosecution were : (i) information to the police at 4.55 A.M given by a neighbour and not the appellant; (ii) that information that a murder had taken place was not given but intimating the happening of an incident; (iii) The accused having slept at night in the verandah with tile deceased after having locked the collapsable door of the verandah from inside; (iv) The deceased and accused were last seen together; (v) The dogs of the dog squad having pointed out to the accused after picking up scent from the lock; (vi) The ornaments which were on the person of the deceased while she was sleeping, and found missing when she was discovered dead, were recovered from the drain hole of the bath room attached to the bed room of the accused in consequence of and in pur suance to the disclosure statement made by the accused; (vii) injuries found on the person of the accused in the nature of abrasions, contusions, and (viii) the accused having given false information to the police by means of his statement Ext.
228 The Sessions Judge after carefully analysing the aforesaid circumstances held that the prosecution has entirely failed to prove any of the circumstances set up against the accused, much less to establish the chain of circumstances, so as to bring out a nexus between the crime and the accused, and acquitted the appellant for the offences under Section 302/203 IPC.
The State appealed to the High Court and a Division Bench reveresed the order of acquittal of the appellant.
The High Court held that the circumstances formed a chain and the sequences were so complete by themselves that one was left in no manner of doubt that the appellant alone had committed the crime.
The appeal was allowed, the order of acquittal was set aside, and the appellant was sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for life under Section 302 IPC, and also to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of one year under Section 203 IPC.
In the appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that the approach of the High Court was totally erroneous and that a well considered and well reasoned judgment of the Trial Court was upset by the High Court by drawing inferences which were not available from the record and by ignoring material discrepancies and infirmities in the prosecution evidence, which not only did not establish various circumstances but which also showed that the chain of circumstantial evidence was wholly incomplete.
It was further contended that the appellant had been roped in on the basis of misguided suspicion and that the circumstances relied upon by the prosecution were not exclude the hypothesis, other than that of the guilt of the appellant.
The appeal was contested by the State submitting that some of the circumstances like the pointing out of the appellant by the dogs of the Dog Squad, the disclosure statement and the recovery of ornaments as a consequence thereof.
and the presence of injuries on the person of appellant, were of such a conclusive and clinching nature that they left no doubt that the appellant had committed the crime, and this was fortified when the appellant had made the attempt to mislead the investigating officer by giving a false version with a view to screen himself.
Allowing the appeal, and setting aside the judgment of the High Court convicting the appellant, this Court, HELD : 1.
The High Court did not properly appreciate the prosecu 229 tion evidence while reversing the well considered judgment of the Sessions Judge.
On independent appraisal of the evidence, the prosecution evidence relating to the disclosure statement and the recovery of ornaments is not only discrepent and contradictory but also suffers from glaring infirmities and improbabilities rendering it unsafe to rely upon the same.
[244H, 245B] 2.
The Sessions Judge was perfectly justified in acquitting the appellant of all the charges and the reasoning given and the findings recorded are sound, cogent and reasonable.
The High Court was not justified to set aside those findings on surmises and conjectures.
The finding of guilt recorded against the appellant by the High Court is not sustainable in law and the prosecution has not established the case against the appellant beyond a reasonable doubt.
[249B] 3(a).
In a case based on circumstantial evidence, motive assumes pertinent significance as existence of the motive is an enlightening factor in a process of presumptive reasoning in such a case.
The absence of motive, however, puts the court on its guard to scrutinise the circumstances more carefully to ensure that suspicion and conjecture do not take place of legal proof.
In a case based on circumstantial evidence, the settled law is that the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is drawn should be fully proved and those circumstances must be conclusive in nature.
Moreover, the established facts should be consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused alone and totally inconsistent with his innocence.
[238E F] 4.
No motive has been established by the prosecution for the appellant to commit the murder of his wife and the evidence of Tara Chand father of the deceased as well as the sister of the deceased and the tenants living in the same house disclose that the relations between the husband and wife were cordial.
[238E] 5.
The circumstance (of the disclosure statement and the consequent recovery pursuant thereto of the ornaments belonging to the deceased is of such an incriminating nature that if found established by reliable and trustworthy evidence, it would go a long way to furnish proof of the guilt of the appellant and connect him with the crime and if the evidence in 230 support of that circumstance is found to be not reliable, the entire chain of circumstantial evidence will snap so badly as to affect the credibility of the prosecution case as a whole.
[238G H) 6.
According to the prosecution after the appellant had been taken to the police station by the investigating officer he was interrogated after being placed under arrest.
He voluntarily made a disclosure statement exhibit
The disclosure statement was recorded by the SHO and has been attested by Kuldip Kaul PWI, SI Dalip singh PW6 and Harnaik Singh PW2.
Pursuant to the disclosure statement, the appellant is alleged to have led the police party to the recovery of the ornaments from a drain hole in his bathroom.
The recovery memo EX.PF was prepared at the spot and was attested by PW6.
PWl and PW2 besides the Investigating Officer.
[239A B] 7.
According to the appellant, however, he had made no disclosure statement nor led the police party to the recovery of the ornaments as alleged, and according to the defence version, the missing ornaments had in fact been recovered by the police party around 11 A.M. during search from the service lane, from underneath a slab, near the boundary wall and at that time the appellant and Jagminder Dass Jain were also present.
This defence version is supported by the evidence of DW2, Tara Chand, father of the deceased.
[242D E] 8.
The Sessions Judge carefully considered the evidence led by the prosecution with regard to the disclosure statement and the recovery of ornaments.
It was found that the evidence of Harnaik Singh PW2, who according to DW11 Sunder Lal constable of police station Defence Colony, had been earlier also cited as a witness for the prosecution in a case investigated by Harmit Singh the then Sub Inspector of police and the present Investigation Officer was not reliable and that the Investigating Officer had not told the truth when he had deposed that he did not know Harnaik Singh earlier.
The Sessions Judge also found the evidence of PW1 Kuldip Kaul as not reliable or trustworthy and disbelieved his testimony by giving cogent reasons after properly appreciating the evidence led by the prosecution.
The defence version with regard to the recovery found as more probable and it was opined that the investigating officer had created false cluses and fabricated false evidence.
[243H, 244A B D] 9.
The High Court on the other hand did not deal with the various discrepancies and contradictions appearing in the prosecution evidence 231 relating to the making of the disclosure statement and the recovery of the ornaments, but place reliance on the testimony of Kuldip Kaul PWl and Harnaik Singh PW2 to hold that the disclosure statement and the recovery had been made in the manner suggested by the prosecution.
[244G] 10.
There is contradiction between the evidence of Kuldip Kaul PWl and the I.O. as to the place where Kuldip Kaul signed the recovery memo.
According to the I.O. it was signed at the spot while according to Kuldip Kaul PW1, he had returned to the police station and there signed the recovery memo.
After carefully analysing the evidence, it is found that Kuldip Kaul PWl was a convenient witness and his evidence does not appear to be trustworthy.
[245B C] 11.
As regards the recovery of ornaments also, there is a very serious infirmity which emerges from the testimony of Harnaik Singh PW2.
Contrary to what the I.O. and the other witnesses stated, Harnaik Singh PW2 deposed that the ornaments were taken out by the Sardarji I.O. from the drain hole and not by the appellant.
This probabilises the defence version that the ornaments had been recovered during the search and were with the I.O. when the ritual of the recovery under Section 27 of the Evidence Act was performed.
The contradictions in the evidence of the I.O. and S.I. Dalip Singh PW6 as to who had weight the ornaments after their alleged recovery also casts doubt on the correctness of the prosecution story and the bonafides of the investigation.
[245G H] 12.
Having regard to the serious discrepancies, contradictions and the attempt of the Investigating Officer to create false clues and fabricate false evidence, the Sessions Judge was perfectly justified in rejecting the prosecution evidence relating to the disclosure statement exhibit PC and the consequent recovery of the ornaments.
[247C] 13.
The prosecution has failed to establish that the appellant did make the disclosure statement as alleged by the prosecution or led to the recovery of the ornaments belonging to the deceased in the manner suggested by the prosecution.
This piece of circumstantial evidence, therefore, has not at all been established, much less conclusively.
[247D] 14.
Though with the ruling out of the circumstance relating to the recovery of the ornaments as not having been established conclusively, the chain of the circumstantial evidence snaps badly, there are some other 232 circumstances also in the prosecution case which militate against its correctness.
Admittedly, the nail clippings of the nails of the deceased had been taken by the police.
Were was also recovery of the hair from near the cot where the dead body was lying and the removal of the hair from the scalp of the appellant by the I.O. for the purpose of their comparison.
The report of the chemical examiner has not connected the hair recovered from the cot with those of the appellant.
There is no material on the record either to show that the nail clipping had any blood, which could have tallied with the blood group of the appellant.
Thus, both the nail clippings and the hair have failed to connect the appellant with the crime.
[247F H] 15.
The possibility that the entire case was built up on suspicion after the dogs of the dog squad pointed towards the appellant connot be ruled out.
Since, the appellant had slept in the verandah near the cot where the dead body of his wife was found; had locked the collapsable door with the recovered lock before going to sleep and had himself been close to the dead body before the police came, the picking up of the smell by the dogs and pointing towards the accused could not be said to be a circumstance which could exclude the possibility of guilt of any person other than that of the appellant or be compatible only with hypothesis of guilt of the appellant.
The pointing out by the dogs could as well lead to a misguided suspicion that the appellant had committed the crime.
[248E F] 16.
The explanation of the appellant regarding the injuries on his person as having been caused by the police is also quite plausible because according to the father of the deceased, the sister of the deceased, the tenants of the house and other neighbours who had reached the spot, the appellant was wearing only a vest and the pyjama and no shirt and there were no marks of injuries on his body before he was taken to the police station.
The prosecution case regarding the presence of injuries on the person of the deceased also therefore, is quite doubtful.
[248G H]
