The appellant State by resolution dated 10.7.1972, trifurcated the services, in the Electrical Engineering Branch of the Public Works Department into three cadres, namely, (1) Junior Engineers, (2) Supervisors and (3) Over seers, w.e.f. 1.5.1972.
At the relevant time there was only one Overseer and he stood retired.
Therefore, In substance it was a bifurcation between Junior Engineers and Supervisors the former being graduates and the latter being diploma holders.
In a writ petition before the High Court exercise of the State was challenged.
The High Court directed the State to provide for a criterion for promotion from the three independent cadres, for working out the trifurcation.
In compliance of the order of the High Court, the appellant adopted a Resolution dated 26.9.1975 introducing a quota rule effective from May 1, 1972 at the ratio of 2:1 for Junior Engineers and Supervisors respectively for promotion to the posts of Deputy Engineers.
The respondents challenged the trifurcation and also the quota rule in a writ petition before the High Court.
384 The High Court struck down the ratio of 2:1 holding it to be unjustified as also the disparity in qualifying service from both the channels.
Hence this appeal by special leave by the State, being aggrieved against a mandamus issued by the High Court not to impose the ratio of 2:1 while working out the quota rule.
As the appellant was unsuccessful in obtaining a stay of operation of the High Court 's judgment, it had to obey the mandate of the High Court and the ratio of 2:1 could not be enforced.
This Court on 18.12.1980 ordered the Government to frame a fresh quota rule consistent with the High Court judgment for the purpose of making promotions during the pendency of the appeal and under Article 309 of the Constitution, a Rule was framed.
Earlier the appellant had framed the Deputy Engineer (Electrical) Recruitment Rules, 1978 under Article 309 of the Constitution, which were not brought to the notice of the High Court nor the Rules, 1978 were challenged.
Allowing this appeal, this Court, HELD:1.01.
The matter in the High Court proceeded on the as sumption that an executive action of the State was under challenge.
The necessary assumptions and presumptions, well known to law and the placement of onuses went unnoticed.
In this background and facing the situation so arising the State Government issued a Notification on April 12, 1982 by causing a substitution in the earlier Rules of 1978 by fixing the promotional ratio from both sources at 1:1, but subjected them to the result of the instant litigation emerging from this Court.
[387D E] 1.02.
The High Court judgment is silent as to the basis on which it was persuaded to strike down the ratio of 2:1 for Junior Engineers and Supervisors respectively.
The tenor of the judgment of the High Court does however suggest that the executive flexibility, with which the Government works could not justify the fixation of the ratio of 2:1.
The High Court could not and did not substitute what was the right ratio in the circumstances and left it to the Government to devise another ratio.
Had the factum of the legislation on the subject i.e. the Rules dated 4.7.1978, been brought to its notice, perhaps the High Court 's angle of vision would have been different [387F G] 385 1.03.
The State has no doubt compulsively carried out the mandate but has done so with reservation so as to meet the eventuality.
No such measure can ever be permanent that would hold good for all times, to meet not only the present needs but also future exigencies as well.
Hands of the State cannot be so tied down. 'Mat would be a step retrograde to the growth and working of a democracy.
[387H, 388A] 1.04.
It was on the Writ petitioner 's (now respondents) to lay data before the High Court and bear the onus to show that the legislative measure was unfair and arbitrary, violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
No such data appears to have been placed before the High Court.
[388B] 1.05.
On these circumstances the case is remanded to the High Court for reconsideration.
[388C] Roop Chand Adlakha & Om vs Delhi Development Authority & Ors., [1989] Supp I SCC 116, referred to.
[388D]
