The Public Works Department of Government of Haryana consists of three wings viz., Irrigation, Roads and Buildings and The Engineering Service in the Irrigation Branch comprises both Class I service consisting of Assistant Executive Engineers, Executive Engineers and Superintending Engineers and Class II service including Assistant Engineers.
While the Assistant Executive Engineers are recruited by direct recruitment only, the Executive Engineers are recruited by (i) direct recruitment; (ii) by transfer; (iii) by promotion from Class II service.
, The cadre strength of Assistant Engineers, fixed under tie Rules is very large 354 as compared to the cadre strength of Assistant Executive Engineers.
For the purposes of promotion to Executive Engineers both Assistant Executive Engineers and Assistant Engineers are eligible for which inter se quota is fixed under the Rules.
The Haryana Public Service Commission issued a notification in 1985 inviting applications for selection to the posts of Assistant Executive Engineers for all the three wings of the P.W.D.
Although the requisition from the Government was to select Assistant Executive Engineers only for two wings viz. Public Health and Buildings and Roads yet the Commission notified the vacancies with respect to Irrigation Branch also stating that posts in the said category are also likely to be filled from the suitable candidates from this very advertisement after the receipt of demand from the Government.
On the basis of written test and interview selections were made for Public Health and Buildings and Roads wings but no selections were made for the Irrigation wing because even by the date of finalisation of selections, no requisition or demand had come from the Government.
The appellants, who were not selected, filed writ petitions in the Punjab and Haryana High Court for a direction to respondents to fill up vacancies of Assistant Executive Engineers and others falling to the quota of direct recruits from amongst the applicants who had applied in pursuance to the advertisement and for a further direction to the State of Haryana to send requisition to the Commission to fill up all vacancies which are meant for direct recruits.
The High Court dimissed all the petitions.
In appeals to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellants that (1) the Government acted arbitrarily in not sending the requisition, inspite of the fact that vacancies in Irrigation Branch existed for a number of years; (2) when the rules created a particular category and the cadre strength was also fixed therefor and more particularly when a quota was reserved for them in the channel of promotion to the category of Executive Engineers, it was not open to the Government to nullify the spirit and object behind the Rules by refusing to make appointment to the said category , (3) the procedure adopted by the Haryana Public Service Com mission was contrary to Rules because under the Rules a candidate obtaining 50 per cent marks in the written test is entitled to be called for viva voce, but the Commission arbitrarily prescribed a threshold of 65 per 355 cent which resulted in denial of opportunity of selection to the appellants.
The stand taken by the Government of Haryana was that the decision not to send requisition for filling up the vacant posts of Assistant Executive Engineers in Irrigation Branch was bona fide and actuated by relevant considerations because a large number of Assistant Engineers, who can be posted only as Sub Divisional Officers/Sub Divisional En gineers, are in surplus over and above the cadre strength and if the Assistant Executive Engineers are also appointed as demanded by the appellants, they will be in further surplus inasmuch as they too can be posted only as Sub Divisional Officers/Sub Divisional Engineers.
Allowing the appeals in part, this Court, HELD:1.
The Public service commission had no authority to include the vacancies in the Irrigation Branch in the notification issued by it when the Government had not asked for it.
May be the Commission did so bona fide.
Even so,, the fact remains that none were selected against the vacancies in the Irrigation Branch, evidently because no demand/requisition ever arrived from the Government.
Indeed, it is not as if the appellants appeared only for the vacancies in Irrigation Branch.
It was a composite notification for all the three wings.
The appellants do not say that they confined their applications to Irrigation wing alone.
nose selected for the other two wings had admittedly scored more marks at the selection.
Therefore, the mere appearance at the selection does not clothe them with the right to selection or appointment.
[366G H, 367A C] State of Haryana vs Subhash Chandra Marwaha, [1974] 3 S.C.C. 220 and LJ.
Divakar vs Government of Andhra Pradesh, A.I.R. , relied on.
Where the Rules have created a particular category, fixed its cadre strength and have also prescribed a quota for such categroy in the matter of promotion to the higher category, the Government would not be justified in not making appointments to such category for over a decade unless there are very strong and good reasons therefor.
The Government would not be justified in nullifying though not in word, but in spirit the Rules in this manner.
[367C D] 2.1.
There is no reason why the Government did not think it fit to 356 make some ad hoc.
appointments to the category of Assistant Executive Engineers when it was recruiting such a large number, on ad hoc basis, to the category of Assistant Engineers.
At the same time, the Courts have to think twice before adding the numbers to the already over loaded service.
It is not so much a question of 'punishing ' the errant but one of what to do with the surplus personnel and the consequent unwarranted burden upon the public exchequer.
On balancing the contending rights and equities, the Court is of the opinion that at least part of the cadre strength of Assistant Executive Engineers in the Irrigation Branch should be riled up in the near future.
[367E G] 3.
The selection held in which the appellants had appeared, cannot be directed to be finalised.
The only direction that can properly be made herein is to direct the Government to take steps for filling up the vacancies existing in the category of Assistant Executive Engineers in the Irrigation Branch as early as possible.
Atleast half the vacancies therein should be filed within a period of one year from today.
[367H, 368A B] I.J. Divakar vs Government of Andhra Pradesh, A.I.R. 1982 S.C. 1555, distinguished.
A reading of the first proviso to Sub.
Rule (2) of Rule 7 shows that it prescribes a minimum percentage of marks in the written test both for appointment as well as for being called for interview (viva voce).
It does not create a right in the candidate, who has obtained the prescribed percentage of marks, to be called for interview.
[363A] Ashok Kumar Yadav vs State of Haryana, A.I.R. 1987 S.C. 454, relied On.
Umesh Chandra vs Union of India, ; ; Nilima Shangla vs State of Haryana, ; and P.K Ramachandra Iyer & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; , referred to.
