The prosecution alleged that the appellant borrowed a sum of Rs. 450 from the deceased and had executed two hand notes exhibit 7 and exhibit 8, promising to repay the amount on 21.3.1976.
On the said date the deceased accompanied by his nephew, PW.3 proceeded to the village of the appellant and as he was getting late, PW.3 carried with him a torch light.
The distance of the house of the deceased from that of the appellant was about one furlong.
The appellant was present in the fields in front of his house and on being asked as to why he had not come to return the money, he asked them to wait there and proceeded towards his house When the appellant did not return for some time, the deceased alongwith PW.3 proceeded towards the house of the appellant when they found him and his two brothers coming towards them variously armed, one had a crowbar while the others had a crooked dao and a kupi dao with them.
PW.3 apprehended some danger from the appellant and his brothers, but his uncle told him that since they had done no wrong, they need not be afraid of any assault.
On coming near the deceased and PW.3, one of the brothers gave a blow with a crowbar, while the other two brothers assaulted the deceased thereafter.
PW.3 pulled the deceased towards his house and implored the accused not to assault him.
At the asking of his uncle PW3 ran away to his house and gave the information to the wife of the deceased and also narrated the occurrence to PW.4.
The wife of the deceased went to PW.6, and after telling him as to what had been told to 390 her by PW3 she requested him to accompany her to the place of occurrence.
On reaching the place of occurrence, they found him lying on the spot with injuries on his person but he was still alive.
Two of the PWs brought a bullock cart and PW.7 after lifting the body with some difficulty brought it to his house and kept it in the verandah.
However, before any medical aid could be provided, the deceased succumbed to the injuries at night.
The first information report was lodged at the police station at 12.30 p.m. by PW.2.
During the investigation, some weapons including an axe were seized from the house of the accused and on the same day one of the brothers was arrested at 6.45 p.m. and the other two brothers surrendered subsequently in the court.
The Investigation Officer prepared a sketch of the place of occurrence and sent the body for postmortem examination.
The appellant alongwith his brothers were tried for offences under section 302/34 IPC for the murder of the deceased, and the Sessions Judge convicted all the three brothers for the said offence and sentenced them for life.
On appeal by the three brothers the Division Bench of the High Court upheld the conviction and sentence of all the three.
The instant SLP was admitted as regards one petitioner only and notice was issued.
The S.L.P. of the second petitioner was dismissed while the third brother did not file any appeal.
Allowing the appeal and acquitting the appellant, this court, HELD: 1.
Conviction can be based on the testimony of a single eye witness and there is no rule of law or evidence which says to the contrary provided the sole eye witness passes the test of reliability.
So long as the single eye witness is a wholly reliable witness the courts have no difficulty in basing conviction on his testimony alone.
However, where the single eye witness is not found to be a wholly reliable witness, in the sense that there are some circumstances which may show that he could have an interest in the prosecution, then the courts generally insist upon some independent corroboration of his testimony, In material particulars, before recording conviction.
It is only when the courts find that the single eye witness is a wholly unreliable witness that his testimony is discarded in toto and no amount of corroboration can cure that defect.
[393E F] 391 2.
The instant case, the medical evidence is consistent with the theory that the deceased had been assaulted only by one person and not by all the three brothers as alleged by the prosecution.
The possibility, therefore, that Mahendra accused alone had caused injuries on the deceased cannot be ruled 'Out.
May be on account of the recovery of the two bonds Ext.
7 and Ext 8, from the house of Anil, he was also implicated.
[395G] 3.
The origin of the fight is totally obscure, and the prosecution has not explained the genesis of the origin of the fight either.
It is not even the case of the prosecution that Anil had refused to repay the loan or that any hot words or abuses had been exchanged between Anil and the deceased when the later had demanded from him the repayment of the loan.
[395H, 396A] 4.
In view of the infirmities of the prosecution evidence it would not be safe to rely upon the testimony of Ajoy PW.3, the sole eye witness, without looking for independent corroboration and as already noticed, the corroboration furnished by the prosecution, unlike in the case of Mahendra the appellant 's brother, is negative in character in so far as the involvement of Anil appellant is concerned.
[396B] 5.
The appellant, was held entitled to the benefit of doubt and granting him that benefit, his conviction and sentence for the offence under Section 302/34 IPC were set aside.
[396C]
