The appellant defendant was in occupation of a flat as its tenant in a storeyed building comprised of a large number of flats occupied by different tenants.
When the owner of that building mortgaged with possession the said building in favour of respondents plaintiffs, the appellant defendant and other tenants in different flats of that building became tenants under respondents plaintiffs (usufructuary mortgagees) and continued as such tenants on payment of monthly rents to them.
But by a quit notice dated July 3, 1967 the respondents plaintiffs determined the monthly tenancy of the appellant respecting the premises in his occupation and sought to recover from him the possession of the premises by instituting a suit in the court of Small Causes at Bombay on the very ground on which his tenancy was terminated, that is, that the defendant had been guilty of conduct which was a nuisance or annoyance to the adjoining or neighbouring occupiers, under clause (c) of sub section (1) of Section 13 of the Bombay Rents Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act.
The trial court, on an appraisal of the oral and documentary evidence adduced by the parties, recorded its findings on issues in favour 471 472 of the respondents plaintiffs.
Consequently it decreed the suit of the respondent plaintiffs for recovery of possession of the premises.
The appellate court before which the decree of the trial court was appealed against by the appellant defendant, on its re appraisal of the evidence, affirmed the findings of the trial court and dismissed the appeal.
The findings as to the acts of nuisance and annoyance attributable to the appellant and the persons who were residing in the premises are (i) that the appellant erected a Textile Printing Mill on the terrace of the storeyed building and ran it during nights so as to make the occupiers of the adjoining and neighbouring tenements suffer the vibrations and noise in the building arising on account of the running of the Mill and loose their quiet and sleep during nights; (ii) that he unauthorisedly utilised the water stored.
in the common over head tanks on the terrace, meant for domestic use of all the occupiers of the tenements in the building, for running his Mill a non domestic purpose; (iii) that the appellant and the persons residing with him in the premises had often removed the radio aerials and T.V. antenas of the occupiers of the adjoining and neighbouring tenaments which had been fixed above the common terrace of the building , (iv) that they were wrongly preventing the respondents plaintiffs and their workers in reaching the common terrace for repairs of radio aerials, T.V. antenas, telephone lines and the like of the occupiers of the neighbouring tenaments in the building by blocking its staircase.
Feeling aggrieved by the decree of the trial court and its affirmation by the appellate court, the defendant impugned the same by filing a writ petition under Article 227 of the Constitution before the High Court of Bombay, but that writ petition was rejected in limine.
In appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellants (a) that an usufructuary mortgage of tenanted premises cannot rile a suit for recovery of its possession from the tenant under section 13(1) (c) of the Act; (b) the findings of the appellate court recorded respecting acts of nuisance and annoyance not having been based on the evidence on record, become unsustainable; (c) the acts found to have been committed by the appellant defendant and the persons residing with him in the premises, even if are true, they could not have been regarded as acts amounting to nuisance or annoyance under section 13(1) (c) of the Act.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, 473 HELD 1.
The expression 'landlord ' in sub section (1) of section 13 of ' the Act includes an usufructuary mortgagee where the tenanted premises is the subject of usufructuary mortgage.
Section 13(1) contains nothing repugnant in its subject or context which would disentitle an usufructuary mortgagee, as a landlord of the tenanted premises to recover its possession from the tenant on the ground envisaged under clause (c).
[482A, 480B] S.B. Abdul Azeez (By Lrs.) vs M. Maniyappa Setty and Ors., ; , relied on.
V. Dhanapal Chettiar vs Yesodal Ammal, A.I.R. 1979 S.C. 1745, referred to.
Nanalal Girdharlal and Anr.
vs Gulamnabi Jamalbhai Motorwala and Ors., 1972 (13) Gujrat law Reporter 880, referred to as no longer good law.
1.1 Under the definition of 'usufructuary mortgage ' in clause (d) of Section 58 of the an usufructuary mortgagee is a transfer of a right to possession of the mortgaged property and the right to receive the rents and profits accruing from such property.
When a lessor of a leased property creates an usufructuary mortgage in respect of such property what he transfers under Section 109 of the T.P. Act as a mortgagor in favour of the usufructuary mortgagee includes his right to possession of such property and the right to receive the rents and profits accruing from it.
Thus Section 109 of the T.P. Act entitles the usufructuary mortgagee from the lessor, as against the lessee, for all rights which the lessor had against such lessee.
From this, it follows that tenanted premises, if is mortgaged by the landlord by way of usufructuary mortgage, the usufructuary mortgagee thereunder would become entitled to receive the rents and profits accruing from such property in his own right and on his own account.
[479E G] 2.
It cannot be said that the findings of the lower appellate court are not supported by the evidence on record of the case.
In fact, some of the findings are, to a great extent, based on the facts which were admitted by the appellant himself.
Besides, the findings receive support from the evidence given in the case by the occupiers of the adjoining and neighbouring tenaments of the same building.
Therefore, as seen from the judgment of the appellate court, its findings in relation to the acts of the appellant 474 and persons residing with him in the premises are based on appreciation of ample evidence that was on record and the same cannot be said to have been based on no evidence, or even improper appreciation of evidence.
Thus, there is no justification to interfere with such findings of facts recorded by the appellate court virtually affirming the findings of fact recorded by the trial court.
[484D, G H, 485A] 3.
There are no statutory definitions of 'nuisance ' or 'annoyance ' which under section 13(1) (c) of the Act constitute a ground for recovery of possession by landlord of a premises in the occupation of a tenant.
However, the acts of the appellant or persons residing with him in the tenanted premises which are found as acts causing nuisance or annoyance to adjoining or neighbouring occupiers, cannot fall short of being acts of nuisance or annoyance if regard is had to their nature, intensity and duration and the consequential ill effects which might have been produced by them on the normal living of such occupiers.
They cannot make the Court to think that they were not clear acts of nuisance or annoyance envisaged under section 13(1) (c) of the Act.
Therefore, the courts below have rightly found them as acts of nuisance or annoyance envisaged under section 13(1) (c) of the Act.
[485D G] Dhabhi Lalji Kalidas vs Ramniklal Somchand Mehta, 1975 (16) Gujarat Law Reporter 824; Gaurishanker @ Babulal Govindji vs Bhikhalal Chhaganlal & Ors., 1977 (18) Gujarat Law Reporter, 805, held inapplicable.
Even otherwise, the acts, said to have been committed by the defendant and persons residing with him in the premises when are, as stated, found by the fact finding courts to have amounted to acts of nuisance or annoyance entitling the plaintiff under section 13(1) (c) of the Act to recover possession of the premises from the defendant and when the High Court has refused to interfere with such finding in exercise of its writ jurisdiction there could be no justification whatever for this Court to interfere with the same in appeal under Article 136 of the Constitution.
[485H, 486A B]
