The appellant Shri Chiranjilal Shri Lal Goenka was involved in several suits, one of which was the present appeal.
He died on November 25, 1985 leaving behind his last Will dated October 29, 1982 in which he appointed his younger daughter Mrs. Sushila N. Rungta as the sole executrix Radhey Shyam, the natural son of Shri Mangal Chand Kedia and Mrs. Sita daughter of Shri C.S. Goenka; claimed to be the adopted son of Shri C.S. Goenka.
The applicant, executrix; Radhey Shyam and his wife filed substitution applications under Order 22 Rule 3 CPC setting up rival claims.
When the dispute arose as to who should represent the estate of Shri C.S. Goenka by order dated October 7, 1991 this Court brought all the three on record as legal representatives; and by a further order dated November 1, 1991 by consent of parties appointed a retired Chief Justice of the Bombay High Court as an Arbitrator to settle the dispute as who would be the legal heirs to the estate of late Chiranjilal Shri Lal Goenka.
The arbitrator entered upon the reference and on the riling of pleadings by the parties framed diverse issues.
Issues No. 1 and 2 related to the two Wills and were : (1) Does the claimant No. 1 prove.
execution of the Will dated 29th Oct. 1982 and prove the same to be the last and genuine Will of Shri G.S. Goenka.
(2) If not does she prove the execution of the Will dated 4.7.78 and prove the same 455 to be the last and genuine Will of the late Shri G.S. Goenka.
Simultaneous proceedings in the probate suit were being pursued in Bombay High Court, and a Single Judge expressed doubt whether the arbitrator had jurisdiction to decide the probate suit.
Similarly, on an application made before the arbitrator seeking clarification, he too stated that with his appointment as arbitrator all the pending suits in the schedule should be assumed to have been referred for arbitration and that includes the probate suit as well, but that he cannot give any clarification in that behalf.
An Interlocutory Application was, therefore, moved in this Court for clarification, and it was contended on behalf of the applicant that the probate court had exclusive jurisdiction to grant probate of the Will to the applicant for due implementation of the directions contained in the Will as the executrix, and that this issue cannot be referred to arbitration and the arbitrator thereby is devoid of jurisdiction to decide Issue Nos. 1 and 2 that had been framed by him, and that the applicant had not consented to refer the probate suit for arbitration.
The application was contested on behalf of the respondents by contending that proceeding the order of the Court dated November 1, 1991 the counsel for the respondents addressed a letter to the counsel for the petitioner including the probate suit for reference to arbitration, and this was to obviate the litigation pending in all the courts as to who were the legal heirs of Shri C.S.Goenka, and thereafter this court appointed the arbitrator, ' that with a view to put an end to the litigation in all the suits pending in different courts, this Court appointed the arbitrator to decide all the disputes in pending suits.
It is, therefore, desirable that the arbitrator should decide Issue Nos. 1 and 2 that have been framed.
Disposing of the Application, this Court, HELD : 1. Section 2(11) of Code of Civil Procedure 1908 defines "legal representatives" to mean a person who in law represents the estate of a deceased person; and includes any person who intermeddles with the estate of the deceased and where a party sues or is sued in a representative character the person on whom the estate devolves on the death of the party so suing or sued.
Order 22 rule 3 says that if one or two or more plaintiffs dies and the right to sue survives, the Court on an application made in this behalf, shall cause the legal representatives of the deceased plaintiff 456 to be made a party and shall proceed with the suit.
Mutatis Mutandis by operation of Order 22 Rule 11 this rule applies to the appellants at the appeal stage.
Similarly, Order 22 Rule 4 applies in the case of death of one of several defendants or of sole defendant and in case of a dispute under Rule 5 such a question shall be determined by the Court.
[460H, 461A B] 2.
Inheritance is In some sort a legal and fictitious continuation of the personality of the dead man, for the prepresentation is in some sort identified by the law with him who he represents.
The rights which the dead man can no longer own or exercise in propria persona and the obligations which he can no longer in propria persona fulfil, he owns exercises, and fulfils in the person of a living substitute.
To this extent, and in this fiction, it may be said that legal personality of a man survives his natural personality, until his obligations being duty performed, and his property duly disposed of, his representation among the living is no longer called for.
1461D] 3.
The grant of Probate by a Court of competent jurisdiction is in the nature of a proceeding in rem.
So long as the order remains in force it is conclusive as to the due execution and validity of the will unless it is duly revoked as per law.
It binds not only upon all the parties made before the Court but also upon all other persons in all proceedings arising out of the Will or claims under or connected therewith.
The decision of the Probate.
Court, therefore, is the judgment in rem.
The probate granted by the competent court is conclusive of the validity of the Will until it is revoked and no evidence can be admitted to impeach it except in a proceeding taken for revoking the probate.
[465D] Slieoparsan Singh vs Ramnandan Prasad Singh, Cal.
694 PC and Narbharam Jivram vs Jayvallabh Harjiwan, AIR 1933 Bom.
469, approved.
[465E F] 4.
It is settled law that a decree passed by a court without jurisdiction on the subject matter or on the grounds on which the decree made which goes to the root of its jurisdiction or lacks inherent jurisdiction is a corum non judice.
A decree passed by such a court is a nullity and is nonest.
Its invalidity can be set up whenever it is sought to be enforced or is acted upon as a foundation for a right, even at the stage or execution or in collateral proceedings.
The defect of jurisdiction strikes at the very authority of the court to pass decree which cannot be cured by consent or 457 waiver of the party.
[467D] A.R. Antulay vs R.S. Naik, ; ; Bahadur Singh & Anr.
vs Muni Subrat Dass & Anr ; Smt.
Kaushalya Devi and Ors.
vs KL.
Bansal, AIR 1970 SC 838; Ferozi Lal Jain vs Man Mal & Anr, AIR 1979 SC 794 and Sushil Kumar Mehta vs Gobind Rain Bohra (dead) through his Lrs, JT 1989 (suppl.) SC 329.
In the instant case, the applicant had consented to refer for arbitration the dispute in the pending probate proceedings, but consent cannot confer jurisdiction nor an estoppel against statute.
The other legatees in the Will were not parties to it.
The Probate Court has been conferred with exclusive jurisdiction to grant probate of the Will of the deceased annexed to the petition (suit); on grant or refusal thereof, it has to preserve the original will produced before it.
The grant of probate is final subject to appeal, if any, or revocation if made in terms of the provision of the Succession Act It is a judgment in rem and conclusive and binds not only the parties but also the entire world.
The award deprives the parties of statutory right of appeal provided under section 299.
Thus the necessary conclusion is that the Probate Court alone has exclusive jurisdiction and the Civil Court on original side or the Arbitrator does not get jurisdiction, even if consented to by the parties, to adjudicate upon the proof or validity of the Will propounded by the executrix, the appellant [468D F] 6.
The executrix was nominated expressly in the Will as a legal representative entitled to represent the Estate of the deceased but the heirs cannot get any probate before the Probate Court.
They are entitled only to resist the Claim of the executrix of the execution and genuiness of the Will.
The grant of probate gives the executrix the right to represent the estate of the deceased, the subject matter in other proceedings.
This exposition or the law is only for the purpose of finding the jurisdiction of the arbitrator and not an expression of opinion on the merits in the probate suit.
[468G] 7.
The Arbitrator cannot therefore proceed with the probate suit to decide the dispute in Issue Nos. 1 and 2 framed by him.
The High Court is to proceed with the Probate suit, the Judge to fix the date and proceed day to day till it is concluded and decide the matter within six months.
Till 458 then the Arbitrator is not to decide Issue Nos. 1 and 2, but at liberty to proceed with the other issues, to await the decision of the probate Court and depending upon the result thereon, conclude the findings on issue Nos.1 and 2 and then make the award and take the proceedings according to law.
[469H, 470A B]
