Recruitment to the Andhra Pradesh Higher Judicial Service is governed by "The Andhra Pradesh State Higher Judicial Service Special Rules".
Rule 1 constitutes the service.
Category 1 consists of District and Sessions Judges 1st grade and Category 11 consists of District and Sessions Judges, Second Grade.
Appointment to Category 1 is from Category 11.
Appointment to Category 11 is from two sources by transfer from amongst the Subordinate Judges and by direct recruitment from the Bar.
The petitioner were direct recruits whereas respondents 4 to 16 were promoted from the Subordinate judiciary.
The respondents were Initially appointed on temporary basis in the yew 1978/1979 but they were made substantive in the year 1983.
The petitioners who were appointed substantively in the year 1981 claimed seniority over the said respondents, and riled the Writ Petition under Article 32 of the Constitution of India for relief.
It was contended on their behalf that: (1) The Service consists of only permanent posts, there is no provision under the Special Rules for adding temporary posts to the cadre, consequently the appointment of respondents 4 to 16 to the post of District and Sessions Judges, Second Grade on temporary basis can at best be treated under Rule 10(a)(i) of the Andhra Pradesh State and Subordinate Service Rules.
(2) The temporary service rendered by the respondents 4 to 16 being outside the cadre cannot be counted towards seniority.
(3) Porviso to Rule 2 and Rule 6 of the Special Rules have to be read together, and as such the permanent vacancies having been made available for them in the year 1983 their service 548 prior to that date cannot be counted towards seniority.
The respondents constested the writ petition by contending that the petitioners were appointed in the year 1981 and since then till the year 1988, twelve seniority lists have been published showing the petitioners below respondents 4 to 16, and at no point of time they challenged the seniority lists in the Court.
Even when the Writ Petition T.H.B. Chalapathi & Ors.
vs High Court of Andhra Pradesh & Ors., was pending in the High Court they did not intervene.
The petitioners were thus guilty of gross delay and latches and as such are not entitled to get relief in the Writ Petition.
Dismissing the writ petition, this Court, HELD: 1.
(i) Rule 1 has to be interpreted to mean that the service under the Special Rules consists of all the posts permanent and temporary which have been designated as District and Sessions Judge Second Grade.
Even otherwise in the absence of any prohibition under the Special Rules, the State Government can always create temporary posts as addi tions to the cadre.
[554 B] (ii) Rule 10(a)(i) of the Andhra Pradesh State and Subordinate Service Rules has no application to the Andhra Pradesh Higher Judicial Service which is governed by the Special Rules.
Rule 10(a)(i) provides for emergency appointments made on stop gap basis to meet a temporary exigency.
Apart from that the temporary appointments under the said Rules are made without following the procedure prescribed under the Rules governing the relevant Service.
[554 C D] In the instant case, the appointments of respondents 4 to 16 were made under Rule 2 of the Special Rules by the State Government in consultation with the High Court.
The Special Rules provide a complete scheme for the appointment and seniority of the members of the Service.
[554 D] 2.
Temporary posts of District and Sessions Judges Second Grade being part of the Service, the seniority has to be counted on the basis of length of service including the service against the temporary posts.
[554 F] 3.
Rule 6 of the Special Rules is in no way dependent on the proviso to Rule 2 of the Special Rules.
Both are to be operative independently.
In 549 the scheme of the rules, the seniority rule is not dependent on the quota Rule.
Quota has been provided for the direct recruits only against permanent posts.
The seniority rule permits the counting of total period of service from the date a person is on duty against a post in the category.
[554 G H] In the instant case, even though the petitioners were appointed substantively to the service earlier to respondents 4 to 16 but in view of Rule 6 they cannot be declared senior on the basis of continuous length of service.
Respondents 4 to 16 have been rightly given seniority above the petitioners.
[555 A]
