The appellant, a Public Limited Company issued prospectus Inviting public subscriptions of equity shares and preference shares.
The prospectus stated that application was being made to the Stock Exchange for enlisting the shares of the Company for official quotation.
Though the application was rejected by the Stock Exchange, the share money collected from different investors was held by the appellants and the share holders were neither informed of the rejection by the Stock Exchange nor paid back the share money.
Further, the money was transferred to another account of the Company.
The Secretary, Industrial Development and Company Affairs lodged a complaint with the CBI against the Company.
CBI started investigations and submitted a charge sheet against the appellant along with some others for trial for the offence under s.409 IPC.
The Special Judicial Magistrate, CBI cases, rejected the prayers made before it discharge the appellants.
The validity of the said order was challenged by the appellants by filing an application under S.482 Cr.
P.C. and the High Court rejected the same.
Hence these appeals.
It was contended that the provisions of the Companies Act took care of the investors by putting restrictions on the misbehavior of the promoters and the Directors of the Company for any lapse on their part In such matters and they could not be summoned to stand trial for offenses under the Penal Code.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court, 700 HELD:1.1.
The modern share holder in many companies has simply become supplier of capital.
The savings and earnings of individuals are being utilised by persons behind such corporate bodies, but there is no direct contact between them.
The promoters of such companies are not even known to many investors in shares of such companies.
In some cases later it transpires to the investors that the promoters had the sole object to form a bogus company and foist it off on the public to the latter 's detriment and for their own wrongful gain.
In this process, the public becomes victim of the evil design of the promoters who enrich themselves by dishonest means without there being any real intention to do any business.
[703 D G] 1.2.From time to time amendments have been introduced in the Companies Act to safeguard the interest of the share holders and to provide regulatory and penal provisions for misuse of the power by those who are in charge of the management of such companies.
The persons managing the affairs of such company cannot use the juristic entity and corporate personality of the company as a shield to evade themselves from prosecution for offenses under the Penal Code, if it is established that the primary object of the incorporation and existence of the company is to defraud public.
[703 G H; 704 A B] 2.1.While taking cognizance of alleged offenses in connection with the registration, issuance of prospectus, collection of moneys from the investors and the misappropriation of the fund collected from the shareholders which constitute one or the other offence under the Penal Code, court must be satisfied that prima facie an offence under the Penal Code has been disclosed on the materials produced before the court.
[704 C] 2.2.In the present case, the prosecution has to prove that the appellants as promoters or directors had dishonest intention since the very beginning while collecting the moneys from the applicants for the shares and debentures or that having collected such moneys they dishonestly misappropriated the same.
[704 G] 2.3.The prosecution pending against the appellants cannot be quashed only on the ground that it was open to the applicants for shares to take recourse to the provisions of the Companies Act.
[705 D] 3.The power under section 482 Cr.
P.C. has been vested in the High Court to quash a prosecution which amounts to abuse of the process of 701 the court.
But that power cannot be exercised by the High Court to hold a parallel trial, only on the basis of the statements and documents collected during investigation or enquiry, for the purpose of expressing an opinion whether the accused concerned is likely to be punished if the trial is allowed to proceed.
[705 G H] 4.It will be for the trial court to examine whether on the materials produced (in behalf of the prosecution it is established that the appellants had issued the prospectus inviting applications in respect of shares of the Company with a dishonest intention or having received the moneys from the applicants they had dishonestly retained or misappropriated the same.
That exercise cannot be performed either by the High Court or by this Court.
[705 E F]
