Petitioner 's son, aged about 22 years was taken from his home In police custody at about 8 a.m. on 1.12.1987 by respondent No.6, Assistant Sub Inspector of Police of the Police Outpost in connection with the investigation of an offence of theft.
He was detained at the Police outpost On 2.12.1987, at about 2 p.m. the petitioner came to know that the dead body of her son was found on the railway track There were multiple injuries on the body and his death was unnatural, caused by those injuries.
The petitioner alleged in her letter dated 14.9.1988, which was treated as a writ petition under Article 32 of the Constitution, that it was a case of custodial death since her son died as a result of the multiple injuries inflicted to him while he was in police custody and thereafter his dead body was thrown on the railway track.
It was prayed in the petition that award of compensation be made to her, for contravention of the fundamental right to life guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution.
The defence of the respondents was that petitioner 's son managed to 582 escape from police custody at about 3 a.m. on 2.12.1987 from the Police.
Outpost, where he was detained; that thereafter he could not be apprehended in spite of a search and that his dead body was found on the railway track on 2.12.1987 with multiple injuries, which indicated that he was run over by a train.
The respondents denied the allegation of custodial death and their responsibility for the unnatural death of petitioner 's son.
On 4.3.1991, this Court directed the District Judge to hold an inquiry into the matter and to submit a report.
After hearing the parties and appreciating the evidence the District Judge submitted the Inquiry Report dated 4.9.1991.
The District Judge found that petitioner 's son died on account of multiple injuries inflicted to him while he was in police custody at the Police Outpost.
The correctness of the finding of the District Judge in his report was assailed in this Court.
The respondents contended that petitioner 's son managed to escape from police custody at about 3 a.m. on 2.12.1987; that he was run over by a passing train and sustained the fatal injuries; that the responsibility of the respondents for his safety came to an end the moment he escaped from police custody; and that the factual foundation for State 's liability for payment of compensation for violation of the fundamental right to life under Article 21 was absent.
Allowing the petition, this Court, HELD: (per LS.
Verma, J. on his behalf and on behalf of N. Venkatachala, J) 1.01.
There is no cogent independent evidence of any search made by the police to apprehend petitioner 's son, if the defence of his escape from police custody be true.
On the contrary, after discovery of the dead body on the railway track in the morning by some railwaymen, it was much later in the day that the police reached the spot to take charge of the dead body.
This conduct of the concerned police officers is also a significant circumstance to assess credibility of the defence version.
[591 G H] 1.02.
The medical evidence comprising the testimony of the doctor, who conducted the postmortem, excludes the possibility of all the injuries to the deceased being caused in a train accident while indicating that all of 583 them could result from the merciless beating given to him.
[594 H 595 A] 1.03.
An inquiry under Section 176 Cr.
P.C. is contemplated independently by a Magistrate and not jointly with a police officer when the role of the police officers itself is a matter of inquiry.
There was hand cuff on the hands of the deceased when his body was found on the railway track with rope around it.
It is significant that the Report dated 11.3.1988 of the Regional Forensic Science Laboratory mentions that the two cut ends of the two pieces of rope which were sent for examination do not match with each other in respect of physical appearance.
This finding about the rope negatives the respondents ' suggestion that the petitioner 's son managed to escape from police custody by chewing off the rope with which he was tied.
1595 G H] 1.05.
It is a case of custodial death, and the deceased died as a result of the injuries inflicted to him voluntarily while he was In police custody at the Police Outpost.
[596 A] 2.01.
Award of compensation in a proceeding under Article 32 by this Court or by the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution is a remedy available in public law, based on strict liability for contravention of fundamental rights to which the principle of sovereign immunity does not apply, even though it may be available as a defence in private law in an action based on tort.
This is a distinction between the two remedies to be borne in mind which also indicates the basis on which compensation is awarded in such proceedings.
[596 G] 2.02.
Enforcement of the constitutional right and grant of redress embraces award of compensation as part of the legal consequences of its contravention.
[602 A] 2.03.
A claim in public law for compensation for contravention of human rights and fundamental freedoms, the protection of which is guaranteed in the Constitution, is an acknowledged remedy for enforcement and protection, of such rights, and such a claim based on strict liability made by resorting to a constitutional remedy provided for the enforcement of a fundamental right is distinct from, and in addition to, the remedy in private law for damages for the tort resulting from the contravention of the fundamental right.
The defence of sovereign immunity 584 being inapplicable, and alien to the concept of guarantee of fundamental rights, there can be no question of such a defence being available in the constitutional remedy.
It is this principle which justifies award of monetary compensation for contravention of fundamental rights guaran teed by the Constitution, when that is the only practicable mode of redress available for the contravention made by the State or its servants in the purported exercise of their powers, and enforcement of the fundamental right is claimed by resort to the remedy in public law under the Constitution by recourse to Articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution.
[602 B D] 2.04.
The Court is not helpless and the wide powers given to this Court by Article 32, which itself is a fundamental right, imposes a constitutional obligation on this Court to forge such new tools, which may be necessary for doing complete justice and enforcing the fundamental rights guaranteed in the Constitution, which enable the award of monetary compensation In appropriate cases, where that is the only mode of redress available.
[603 D] 2.05.
The power available to this Court under Article 142 is also an enabling provision in this behalf The contrary view would not merely render the court powerless and the constitutional guarantee a mirage, but, may, in certain situations, be an incentive to extinguish life, if for the extreme contravention the court is powerless to grant any relief against the State, except by punishment of the wrongdoer for the resulting offence, and recovery of damages under private law, by the ordinary process.
[603 E F] 2.06.
If the guarantee that deprivation of life and personal liberty cannot be made except in accordance with law, is to be real, the enforcement of the right in case of every contravention must also be possible in the constitutional scheme, the mode of redress being that which is appropriate In the facts of each case.
This remedy in public law has to be more readily available when invoked by the havenots, who are not possessed of the wherewithal for enforcement of their rights in private law, even though its exercise is to be tempered by judicial restraint to avoid circumvention of private law remedies, where more appropriate.
[603 G] 2.08.
The principle of which the Court 's power under Articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution is exercised to award monetary compensation for 585 contravention of a fundamental right.
[604 B] Rudul Sah vs State of Bihar and Another, [1983] 3 S.C.R. 508; Sebastian M. Hongray vs Union of India and Others, ; and ; ; Bhim Singh vs State of J. & K, [1984] Supp.
S.C.C. 504 and ; Saheli, A Women 's Resources Centre and Others vs Commissioner of Police, Delhi Police Headquarters and Others, ; ; State of Maharashtra and Others vs Ravikant section Patil, ; Maharaj vs Attomey General of Trinidad and Tobago, (No.2), ;, Khatri and Others (IV) vs State of Bihar and Others, and Union Carbide Corporation and Others vs Union India and Others, ; , referred to.
Kasturilal Ralia Rain Jain vs The State of Uttar Pradesh ; , distinguished.
Ratanlal & Dhirajlal 's Law of Torts, 22nd Edition, 1992, by Justice G.P. Singh, at pages 44 to 48, referred to.
In the present case, on the finding reached, It Is a clear case for award of compensation to the petitioner for the custodial death of her son.
[604 D] 2.10.
The deceased was aged about 22 years and had a monthly income between Rs.1200 to Rs.1500.
A total amount of Rs.1,50,000 would be appropriate as compensation, to be awarded to the petitioner in the present case.
[604 E] 2.11.
The respondent State of Orissa is directed to pay the sum of Rs.1,50,000 lo the petitioner as compensation and a further sum of Rs.10,000 as costs to be paid to the Supreme Court Legal Aid Committee.
The mode of payment of Rs.1,50,000 to the petitioner would be, by making a term deposit of that amount in a scheduled bank in the petitioner 's name for a period of three years, during which she would receive only the Interest payable thereon, the principal amount being payable to her on expiry of the term.
The Collector of the District will take the necessary steps in this behalf, and report compliance to the Register (judicial) of this Court within three months.
[604 H, 605 A] 2.12.The State of Orissa is expected to take the necessary further action to ascertain and fix the responsibility of the Individuals responsible 586 for the custodial death of petitioner 's son and also take all available appropriate actions against each of them.
[605 C] Per Dr. A.S. Anand, J. (Concurring) 1.01.
Convicts, prisoners or under trials are not denuded of their fundamental rights under Article 21 and It is only such restrictions, as are permitted by law, which can be imposed on the enjoyment of the fundamental rights by such persons.
It is an obligation of the State, to ensure that there is no infringement of the indefeasable rights of a citizen to life, except in accordance with law while the citizen is in its custody.
[607 E] 1.02.
The precious right guaranteed by Article 21 of the Constitution of India cannot be denied to convicts, under trials or other prisoners in custody, except according to procedure established by law.
[607 E] 1.03.
There is a great responsibility on the police or prison authorities to ensure that the citizen in its custody is not deprived of his right to life.
His liberty is in the very nature of things circumscribed by the very fact of his confinement and therefore his interest in the limited liberty left to him is rather precious.
The duty of care on the part of the State is strict and admits of no exceptions.
wrongdoer is accountable and the State is responsible if the person in custody of the police is deprived of his life except according to the procedure established by law.
[607 G] 1.05.The death of petitioner 's son was caused while he was in custody of the police by police torture.
A custodial death is perhaps one of the worst crimes in a civilised society governed by the Rule of Law.
The defence of 'sovereign immunity"in such cases is not available to the State.
[607 G] 2.01.
Adverting to the grant of relief to the heirs of a victim of custodial death foe the infraction or invasion of his rights guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of India, it is not always enough to relegate him to the ordinary remedy of a civil suit to claim damages for the tortious act of the State as that remedy in private law indeed is available to the aggrieved party.
[608 A] 587 2.02.
The citizen complaining of the infringement of the indefeasable right under Article 21 of the Constitution cannot be told that for the established violation of the fundamental right to life, he cannot get any relief under the public law by the courts exercising writ jurisdiction.
[608 B] 2.03.
The primary source of the public law proceedings stems from the prerogative writs and the courts have, therefore, to evolve 'new tools ' to give relief in public law by moulding it according to the situation with a view to preserve and protect the Rule of Law.
[608 C] 2.04.
The old doctrine of only relegating the aggrieved to the remedies available in civil law limits the role of the courts too much as protector and guarantor of the indefeasable rights of the citizens.
The courts have the obligation to satisfy the social aspirations of the citizens because the courts and the law are for the people and expected to respond to their aspirations.
[608 H, 609 A] 2.05.
The public law proceedings serve a different purpose than the private law proceedings.
The relief of monetary compensation, as exemplary damages, in proceedings under Article 32 by this Court or under Article 226 by the High Courts, for established infringement of the indefeasable right guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution is a remedy available in public law and is based on the strict liability for contravention of the guaranteed basic and indefeasable rights of the citizen.
[609 B] 2.06.
The purpose of public law is not only to civilize public power but also to assure the citizen that they live under a legal system which aims to protect their interests and preserve their rights.
Therefore, which the court moulds the relief by granting" compensation in proceedings under Article 32 or 226 of the Constitution seeking enforcement or protection of fundamental rights, it does so under the public law by way of penalising the wrongdoer and fixing the liability for the public wrong on the State which has failed in its public duty to protect the fundamental rights of the citizen.
1609 C] 2.07.
The payment of compensation in such cases is not to be understood, as it is generally understood in a civil action for damages under the private law but in the broader sense of providing relief by an order of making 'monetary amends ' under the public law for the wrong done due to breach of public duty, of not protecting the fundamental rights 588 of the citizen.
[609 D] 2.08.The compensation is in the nature of the exemplary damages ' awarded against the wrong doer for the breach of its public law duty and is independent of the rights available to the aggrieved party to claim compensation under the private law in an action based on tort, through a suit instituted in a court of competent jurisdiction or/and prosecute the offender under the penal law.
[609 E] 2.09.
This Court and the High Courts, being the protectors of the civil liberties of the citizen, have not only the power and jurisdiction but also an obligation to grant relief in exercise of its jurisdiction under Articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution to the victim or the heir of the victim whose fundamental rights under Article 21 of the Constitution of India are established to have been flagrantly infringed by calling upon the State to repair the damage done by its officers to the fundamental rights of the citizen, notwithstanding the right of the citizen to the remedy by way of a civil suit or criminal proceedings.
[609 F G] 2.10.
The State, of course, has the right to be indemnified by and take such action as may be available to it against the wrongdoer in accordance with law through appropriate proceeding.
Of course, relief in exercise of the power under Article 32 or 226 would be granted only once it is established that there has been an infringement of the fundamental rights of the citizen and no other form of appropriate redressal by the court in the facts and circumstances of the case, is possible.
[609 H, 610 A] 2.11.
Law is in the process of development and the process necessitates developing separate public law procedures as also public law principles.
It may be necessary to identify the situations to which separate proceedings and principles 'apply and the courts have to act firmly but with certain amount of circumspection and self restraint, lest proceedings under Article 32 or 226 are misused as a disguised substitute for civil action in private law.
[610 D E] "Freedom under the Law.
By Lord Denning First Hamlan Lecture, 1949, referred to.
Rudul Sah vs State of Bihar and Anr., ; , referred to.
In the facts of the present case the mode of redress which 589 commends appropriate is to make an order of monetary amend, in favour of the petitioner for the custodial death of her son by ordering payment of compensation by way of exemplary damages.
The State of Orissa should pay a sum of Rs.1,50,000 to the petitioner and a sum of Rs.10,000 by way of costs to the Supreme Court Legal Aid Committee.
[610 G]
