The visually handicapped constitute a significant section of our society.
As it is necessary to encourage their participation in every walk of life.
The Central Ministry of Welfare has been undertaking various measures to utilise their potentialities.
The Governments have launched schemes to educate, train and provide them with useful employment.
The Central Government has provided 3% reservation in Group C and D posts for physically handicapped including blind and partially blind, while demand is growing for reservations in Group A and B posts.
The Standing Committee of the Ministry of Welfare undertook identification of jobs in these categories and submitted its report on October 31, 1986.
Para 8 thereof related to the blind.
It took note of reading and writing deficiency and suggested the provision of allowance.
And found that the specified 416 posts in Group A and B are suitable for blind and partially blind.
So, the Ministry of Personnel issued office memorandum dated November 25, 1986 a accepting the report and took policy decision regarding identification of jobs for the physically handicapped persons in Group A and B posts filled to be by direct recruitment in Central Govern ment Services and Public Sector Undertakings.
This court examined the memorandum and found that the Government had taken cognizance of the identified jobs; that the Government had 557 decided about the recruitment of handicapped lessons to these posts; that the departments would supplement the list further; that the Ministries/Departments would inform the UPSC about preferential treatment to handicapped candidates; that the UPSC had agreed in principle to give preference; and that the Department of Personnel and Training would be issuing general instructions for the purpose.
However, the decisions were not implemented for seven years.
So the petitioner approached this Court seeking a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the Union of India and the UPSC to permit the blind candidates to compete for the IA.S. and Allied Services and to provide them facility of writing the civil services examination either in Braille Script or with the help of a scribe.
On hearing the counsel for the petitioner, himself visually handicapped, this Court, HELD: The performance of the counsel for the petitioner before us has amply proved the point that the visually handicapped persons can perform the jobs entrusted to them with equal efficiency.
However the question of giving preference to the handicapped in the matter of recruitment to the identified posts is a matter for the Government of India to decide.
The Government of India is commended to decide the question of providing preference/reservation to the handicapped in Group A and B Posts.
[564 C D E] This Court further held that there are number of post which are required to be filled through the civil services examinations and other competitive examinations conducted by the Commission, so the observations of the UPSC that the posts identified as suitable to be held by the physically handicapped persons, particularly those identified for the blind were not required to be filled on the basis of competitive examination conducted by the Commission, appeared to be incorrect.
[565 D] Group A and B posts in the category of Administrative Officers are necessarily to be filled as a result of civil services examination held by the UPSC.
If some of the identified posts in the Indian Administrative Service and other Allied Services can be filled from amongst the visually handicapped persons, there was no reason why they should not be permitted to sit and write the civil services examination.
[565 E] 558
