The State of Kerala issued Notification RSO 415 of 1971 under Section 10 of the Kerala General Sales Tax Act providing for an exemption in respect of tax in regard to the turn over of the sales of newsprint for a period of two years from the date of starting production of the newsprint plant.
The appellant entered into an agreement with the State Government in 1974 giving the said exemption.
A major portion of the newsprint manufactured at the factory located within the State was sold in the course of inter state trade and commerce, and during the assessment years relevant to the period of the two years from the date of the commencement of the production, the appellant claimed exemption not only from the State Sales Tax, by virtue of the 1971 Notification and the 1974 agreement but also from the Central Sales Tax under and by virtue of sub section (2A) of Section 8 of the .
The Sales Tax Officer accepted the claim under the State Sales Tax Act but rejected the claim under the .
Appeals preferred by the appellant to the Appellant Assistant Commissioner and the Sales Tax Appellant Tribunal were dismissed, and when the appellant approached the High Court by way of revision under Section 41 of the State Sales Tax Act the High Court also dismissed the revisions petitions.
656 In the appeals to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant relying on Pine Chemicals Limited vs Assessing Authority, [199] 2 S.C.C. 683 that the exemption granted to It by the 1971 State Government notification Issued under the Kerala Sales Tax Act Is a general exemption within the meaning of Section 8(2A) and, therefore, the inter state sales effected by it are equally exempt from Central Sales Tax by virtue of Section 8(2A).
The State contested the appeals by contending that the exemption granted to the appellant under the State Sales Tax is not a general exemption but a conditional one, and that the exemption operates only in certain specified circumstances, and that the provision contained in Section 8(2A) does not go to exempt the inter state sales of the appellant.
On the question whether the exemption granted under the 1971 State notification exempting the produce of the appellant factory manufacturing newsprint from the State Sales Tax for a period of two years from the date of commencement of production in the factory can be called An exemption from tax 'generally '.
Allowing the appeals, this Court, HELD:1.
The inter state sales effected by the appellant are those failing under Section 3(a) of the Central Sales Tax Act.
The liability to pay Central Sales Tax on inter state sales arises by virtue of sub section (1) of Section 6.
Sub section (2A) of section 8 seeks to provide exemption to a dealer with respect to his turnover.
The explanation appended to the sub section is couched in negative terms and seeks to define the words 'exempt from tax generally", and indicates when a sale or purchase of any goods shall not be deemed to be exempt from tax generally under the State Sales Tax Law.
[659 B, 660 B C] 2.An inter state sale or purchase of a commodity shall not be deemed as exempt from State Tax generally if the exemption is given only (1) in specified circumstances or under specified conditions or (2) the tax is leviable on the sale or purchase of such goods at specified stages or (3) otherwise than with reference to the turnover of the goods.
These conditions or limitations are with reference to the transaction of sale or purchase.
[663 F G] 657 3.The existence or otherwise of the aforesaid three limitations on claiming exemption the explanation under Section S(2 A) of the will have to be tested with reference to the transaction of sale or purchase as the case may be of the dealer who claims the exemption in respect of his intrastate sale or purchase of the same goods.
[663 H, 664 A] 4.The facts which the dealer has to prove to get the benefit of the government orders are intended only to identify the dealer and the goods in respect of which the exemption is sought and they are not conditions or specifications of circumstances relating to the turnover sought to be exempted from payment of tax within the meaning of Section 8(2 A).
[664 E] 5.The conditions relating to identity of the goods and the dealer are always there in every exemption and that cannot be put as a condition of sale.
[664 G] Pine Chemicals Limited vs Assessing Authority, ; , explained and followed.
[660 H] Indian Aluminum Cables vs State of Haryana, 38 S.T.C. 108, Industrial Cables Corporation vs Commercial Tax Officer 35 S.T.C. 1, distinguished.
[662 A]
