In 1931 the respondent, a registered firm, was appointed the sole selling agents and distributors for the Hyderabad State of 376 cigarettes manufactured by V (a limited company)/ under the terms of a resolution of the Board of Directors, the agency commission being a discount of 2% on the gross selling price.
In 1939 another arrangement was made whereby the respondent 's agency was extended to the rest of India.
By a resolution dated June 16, 1950, the agency of 1939 was terminated on payment of Rs. 2,26,263 to the respondent by way of compensation, but the respondent continued to be distributors for the Hyderabad State.
For the assessment year 1951 52 the Income tax Officer included the aforesaid sum in the respondent 's total income and taxed it as a revenue receipt under the head of " business ".
The respondent claimed that it did not carry on business of acquiring and working agencies, that the agency acquired in 1931 was a capital asset of its business of distributing cigarettes in the Hyderabad State, that the expansion of territory outside the Hyderabad State in 1939 was an accretion to the capital asset already acquired by it, that the resolution Of 1950 was in substance a termination of the agency qua territory outside the Hyderabad State which resulted in the sterilisation of the capital asset qua that territory, that the sum of Rs. 2,19,343 received by it in the year of account was by way of compensation for the termination of the agency outside Hyderabad State and being therefore compensation for the sterilisation Pro tanto of a capital asset of its business was a capital receipt and therefore was not liable to tax.
It was contended on behalf of the Incometax Authorities that the sole selling agency which was granted by the company to the assessee in the year 1931 was merely expanded as regards territory in 1939 and what was done in 1950 was to revert to the old arrangement, that the structure or the profit making apparatus of assessee 's business was not affected thereby, that the expansion as well as the restriction of the assessee 's territory were in the ordinary course of the assessee 's business and were mere accidents of the business which the assessee carried on and that the sum of Rs. 2,19,343 received by the assessee as and by way of compensation for the restriction of the territory was a trading or an income receipt and was therefore liable to tax.
It was also urged that the agency agreement between the respondent and the company was terminable at the will of the latter and so it could not be considered as an enduring asset.
Held (per Bhagwati and Sinha, JJ., Kapur, J., dissenting) that the agency agreements in question did not constitute the business of the respondent, but formed a capital asset, being the profit making apparatus of its business of distribution of the cigarettes manufactured by the company within the respective territories, and, consequently, any payment made by the company as compensation for terminating the agency would only be a capital receipt in the hands of the respondent.
Commissioner of Income tax vs Shaw Wallace & Co., (1932) L.R. 59 I. A. 206, relied on.
377 Commissioner of Income Tax and Excess Profits Tax, Madras vs The South India Pictures Ltd., Karaikudi; , and Commissioner of Income tax, Nagpur vs Rai Bahadur jairam Valji, [1959] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 110, distinguished.
Case law reviewed.
Held, further, that the fact that the agency agreements were terminable at will, or that only one of them was terminated, would not make any difference because in either case, when the agency was terminated and the amount was paid as compensation for such termination it resulted in the sterilisation of the capital asset Pro tanto and it was received as a capital receipt in the hands of the respondent.
Glenboig Union Fire Clay Co., Ltd. vs The Commissioners of Inland Revenne, , relied on.
Per Kapur, J. The true effect of the facts of the present case was that in 1939 the respondent 's area of distribution was increased from the State of Hyderabad to the whole of India and in 1950 it was again reduced to the original area of 1931, so that the respondent did not lose its agency.
Consequently, the termination of the agency in 1950 did not affect the trading activities of the respondent and, therefore, viewed against the background of the respondent 's business Organisation and profitmaking structure the compensation for the termination of the agency was no more than that for the loss of future profit and commission.
The compensation therefore was in the nature of surrogatum and in this view of the matter it was revenue and not capital.
The answer to the question, as applied to agencies, whether the compensation is capital or revenue, is that it will be a capital receipt if it is received as the value of the agency, i. e., it is a price of the business as if it is brought to sale.
On the other hand it is revenue receipt if it is paid in lieu of profits or commission.
In view of the decision The Commissioner of Income tax vs The South India Pictures Ltd., Karaikudi; , , and the observations of Bose, J., in the case of Raghuvanshi Mills Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, ; , the authority of Commissioner of Income tax vs Shaw Wallace considerably shaken.
