The appellant 's father executed on 1.1.1964, three deeds of settlements (trust deeds) in the United States of America.
The terms in them all were identical.
The object of these trusts was to provide for the education, maintenance and up keep of the members of the settlor 's family and their descendants.
He also executed two settlements in U.K. with the very same object.
The settlor (appellant 's father) was riling returns of his income in India including therein whole of the income arising from the trusts.
For the assessment years 1964 65 to 1969 70, he filed the returns.
Since he died on 22 8 1969, i.e. in the middle of the accounting year (relevant to the assessment year 1970 71), two returns were filed, one up to the date of his 938 939 death and the other from the date of his death to the end of the accounting year, by his eldest son, the appellant, including the whole of the income from the trusts.
The appellant filed appeals against the assessment orders pertaining to the assessment years 1965 66 and 1966 67 contending that the income from U.S. trusts was not taxable in India either in the hands of settlor or in his hands and that the inclusion of the said income in the returns by the settlor and by the appellant was a mistake.
The appellant preferred revisions against other assessment orders, where appeal was barred, taking the plea of non taxability with respect to the income from U.K. trusts and from the U.S. trusts.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner allowed the appeals.
, The Revenue 's appeals to the Tribunal were allowed holding that the A.A.C. acted contrary to Rule 46(2) of the Income Tax Rules in admitting the additional grounds and in looking into new material.
The Tribunal remitted the appeals back to A.A.C.
At that stage the appellant approached the settlement commission under Chapter XIX(A) of the Income Tax Act, 1961.
The Settlement Commission went into all the aspects of the matter and computed the taxable income of appellant 's father and his income for the assessment years 1964 65 to 1970 71 and 1970 71 to 1982 83.
It directed the I.T.O. to compute the total income for each of the said assessment years accordingly and raise demand for the tax due.
The appellant preferred two sets or appeals before this Court against the two orders of the Settlement Commission.
C.A.s. 4301 07 of 1991 related to the assessment years 1964 65 to 1970 71 and C.As.12881300 of 1991 related to the assessment years 1970 71 to 1982 83.
The appellant contended that the settlement Commission erred in law in holding that the U.S. trusts were revocable trusts within the meaning of Section 63 of the Act; that for attracting Section 63, the deed of transfer must give the transferor a right to retransfer directly or indirectly whole or any part of the income or assets to the transferor or it must give him a right to reassume power directly or indirectly over the whole or any part of income or assets; that in the present case such power was not given to the transferor; that U.S. trusts were discretionary trusts and 940 therefore the assessment could be made only upon the trustees and not upon the beneficiaries recipients; that the revenue could not take advantage of the mistake of law on the part of the settlor or the appellant; that with the death of the settlor, the U.S. trusts ceased to be revocable trusts and the appellant could not be taxed on the income received by him from the said trust, because only the trustee could be taxed; that the U.K. trusts were also discretionary trusts and not specific trusts as held by the Settlement Commission and the assessment could be made only upon the trustees and not upon the beneficiaries recipients; that the Settlement Commission committed a legal error in including the income from the U.K. trusts in the total income of the settlor and the appellant even though it was not paid out by the trustee nor received by the assessees in India; that in the U.S.A and U.K, tax was levied upon the respective trust incomes under the laws of those countries; that levying tax over again in India on the very same income amounted to double taxation and therefore the tax levied in India was to be waived.
The Revenue submitted that even if any principles were decided by the Settlement Commission, they did not bind the Income Tax authorities in proceedings relating to subsequent years; that the order of the Commission was relevant to and was confined I only to the assessment years to which it related; that this Court under Article 136 of the Constitution would not be able to go into the merits of the order, that the Settlement Commission 's interpretation on the U.S. and U.K. trusts was perfectly in order and did not call for any interference by this court; that during his life time, the settlor had declared that he had received income from the U.K. and U.S. trusts and had included the same in his returns of income for each of the assessment years relevant herein; that the appellant too acted similarly and therefore the argument of not receiving the income from UK trusts was a mere after thought and should not he given any credence; that a trustee or the trustees was/were expected to act reasonably and in furtherance of the object of the trusts; that they were to apply the income for the purposes specified, because they could not just accumulate it; that applying the test of reasonableness, it was to be held that ordinarily, the trustee ought to distribute the income each year; and that it was to be held that the income from the UK trusts had rightly been taken into account by the Commission while passing its orders.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court, 941 HELD: 1.01.
The finality clause contained in Section 245 1 does not and cannot bar the jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226 or the jurisdiction of this court under Article 32 or under Article 136, as the case may be.
But that does not mean that the jurisdiction of this court in the appeal preferred directly in this court is any different than what it would be if the assessee had first approached the High Court under Article 226 and then come up in appeal to this court under Article 136.
A party does not and cannot pin any advantage by approaching this Court directly under Article 136, instead of approaching the High Court under Article 226.
This is not a limitation inherent in Article 136; it is a limitation which this court imposes on itself having regard to the nature of the function performed by the Commission and keeping In view the principles of judicial review.
[955 D E] 1.02.
The scope of enquiry, whether by High Court under Article 226 or by this Court under Article 136 is also the same whether the order of the Commission is contrary to any of the provisions of the Act and if so, has it prejudiced the petitioner/appellant apart from ground of bias, fraud & malice which, of course, constitute a separate and independent category.
[956 B] 1.03.
The appellant power under Article 136 is similar to power of judicial review, where the appeal is directed against the orders of the Settlement Commission.
Sri Ram Durga Prasad vs Settlement Commission, 176 I.T.R. 169 and Chief Constable of the N. W. Police vs Evans,[1982] 1 W.L.R. 1155, referred to.
[956 D] 1.04.
The only ground upon which this Court can interfere in these appeals is that the order of the Commission is contrary to the provisions of the Act and that such contravention has prejudiced the appellant.
[956 E] 1.05.
The main controversy in these appeals relates to the interpretation of the settlement deeds though it is true, some contentions of law are also raised.
The commission has interpreted the trust deeds in a particular manner.
Even if the interpretation placed by the commission on the said deeds is not correct, it would not be a ground for interference in these appeals, since a wrong interpretation of a deed of trust cannot be said to be a violation of the provisions of the Income Tax Act.
[956 F] 942 1.06.
The interpretation placed upon the said deeds by the Commission does not bind the authorities under the Act in proceedings relating to other assessment years.
[956 G] 1.07.
Though it is not necessary, strictly speaking, to go into the correctness of the interpretation placed upon the said deeds by the commission, and it is enough if this court confines itself to the question whether the order of the Commission is contrary to the provisions of the Act, yet, for the sake of completeness, the Court examine whether the order of Commission is vitiated by any such wrong interpretation.
[956 H, 957 A] 2.01.
A discretionary trust is described as a trust where the trustees have been vested with a discretion in the matter of distribution of trust income among the specified class of beneficiaries.
In the case of such trusts, the trustees have a discretion to pay whole or part of the income to such member or members of the designated class as they think fit and in such proportion as they deem appropriate.
[957 C D] Snell 's Principles of Equity, 25th Edn.
(1965) page 129, referred to.
[957 E] 2.02.
The US settlement deed empowers the trustee to hold, manage, invest and reinvest the principal of the trust fund, to collect and receive the income thereof and to pay or apply so much of the net income as the trustee shall in his absolute and uncontrolled discretion deem advisable to or to the use of one of more members of the settlor 's family, It is thus a discretionary trust.
Para 1(2) of the U.S. Deed empowers the settlor/transferor and the trustee, acting together to direct the trustee, at any time, to pay over the entire income and/or entire corpus or a part thereof to such member of the settlor 's family or their descendants as they may direct.
The said power cannot be exercised by the settlor acting Alone.
[958 B] 2.04.
The power, properly construed, is given to the settlor to, be exercised together with the trustee and not to the trustee to be exercised together, with the settlor.
The trustee is anyhow vested with an absolute discretion to distribute the income of or the principal of the trust to such member of the family, as he thinks appropriate, under the clause preceding and paras following para 1(2).
If so, there was no point in saying that 943 he can, together with the settlor, be empowered to pay over part or whole of income/principal to "such one or more members of a class composed of the family members living. ' It cannot also be forgotten that the trustee in this case is a Bank one of the largest in the U.SA.
and not an individual acquaited with the affairs of the settlor 's family.
[958 H, 959 A] 2.05.
Section 63 does not say that the power of revocation vesting in the transferor should be absolute or unconditional.
[959 B] 2.06.
Section 63(1) also does not say that the deed of transfer must confer or vest an unconditional or an exclusive power in the transferor to give the power/direction of the nature contemplated by it.
Merely because the concurrence of the trustee had to be obtained by the transferor/settlor for giving the said direction it cannot be said that the deed does not contain a provision giving the transferor a right to reassume power directly or indirectly over the whole or any part of income or assets within the meaning of Section 63(a)(ii) of the Act.
[960 B C] 2.07.
During the lifetime of the settlor, the entire income arising from the three U.S. trust deeds was bound to be and was rightly included in the income of the settlor by virtue of Section 63 read with Section 61.
[961.B] 2.08.
With the death of the settlor, Section 63 ceased to apply even though the aforesaid clause empowers not only the settlor but also the Maharaja for the time being to exercise the said power.
[961 C] 2.09.
Section 63 is attracted only where such power is given to the transferor and the appellant (the son of the settlor) is not and cannot be called the transferor.
It is not denied that so far as the income from the U.S. trusts is concerned, it was indeed received by the appellant.
[961 D] 2.10.
The trustees in the case of a trust declared by a duly executed instrument in writing are treated as representative assessees (Section 160(1)(iv)).
It is equally true that in the case of a discretionary trust, trustees are liable to be taxed in respect of the income received by them at the rate specified in Section 164(1).
[961 F] 2.11.
Section 166 states in unmistakable terms that nothing contained in the preceding provisions in the chapter shall preclude the Revenue from making a direct assessment upon the beneficiary and/or recovering the tax payable from such person.
[962 B] 944 2.12.
By virtue of Section 166, the Revenue has an option in the case of a discretionary trust either to make an assessment upon the trustees or to make an assessment upon the beneficiaries.
Of course, both the trustee and the beneficiary cannot be simultaneously taxed in respect of the same income.
The assessments made by the Commission on the deceased settlor and the appellant are thus unexceptionable.
[966 D] Behramji Sorabji vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay, ; Commissioner of Income Tax Bombay City vs Ratilal Nathalal, ; Tarunendra Nath Tagore vs Commr.
of Income Tax, ; K. Subramania Pillai vs Agricultural Income Tar Officer, 7hukalay, ; Commissioner of Income Tar, Punjab vs Raghubir Singh, ; Nagappa vs C.I.T, and Ram Swaroop Das vs The State of Bihar, , referred to.
Sevantilal Maneklal vs C.I.T., , distinguished.
C.I.T vs Kamalini Khatau, (F.B.) Agreed with the dissenting opinion.
3.01.Both the settlor and the appellant have been receiving the income from the UK trusts during the several assessment years concerned herein.
The settlor had voluntarily included the entire income from the U.K. trusts in his income in the returns filed by him for the assessment years 1964 65 to 1969 70.
It is unlikely that he would have so included unless he really received it The Commission treated those declarations as proof of the settlor 's real intention.
The Commission also relied upon certain other circumstances including the manner in which the accounts of these trusts were maintained in support of their opinion that all concerned with the trusts, acted on the basis that the trust income was flowing to the settlor, and after his death to the appellant.
The Commission also referred specifically to similar declarations made by the appellant in his returns.
Even subsequent to the death of the settlor, the Commission pointed out, the appellant has been making similar declarations from time to time.
[967 C E] 3.02.
The appellant did not say that he did not receive the income from the U.K. trusts.
All he said was, since it is a discretionary trust, its income is not taxable in his hands.
If he had not received the income, he would have put forward that fact in the forefront.
But he did not.
Section 945 5 of the Act is wide enough to bring all such income to tax.
In case appellant proves that any income has been taxed in U.S. or U.K., the same income shall not be taxable over again in India.
[%7 H, 968 D]
