Some tax payers of the appellant Municipality filed a writ petition in the High Court challenging the validity of the rules made by it for the levy of consolidated property tax on lands and buildings and also the assessment list prepared and authenticated by the Municipality for the year 1967 68, 1968 69 and 1969 70.
It was contented before the High Court that Rules 2(7), 4 and 5 of the Rules of the consolidated property tax on the lands and buildings were ultra vires section 99(1) (i) and the proviso (e) to it read with section 2(1) of the Act, and that the assessment lists for the years 1967 68, 1968 69 and 1969 70 were invalid since they were prepared without following the procedure laid down in Sections 105 to 112 of the Act.
The High Court upheld the validity of Rules 2(7) and 4 and struck down the validity of Rule 5.
It also declared that the tax collected by the 803 804 Municipality for the assessment years 1968 69 and 1969 70 in excess of the amounts which may be determined in accordance with the principles laid down was without the authority of law and struck down the assessment list for the year 1967 68 on the ground that it was not prepared in compliance with the procedure I aid down in Sections 105 to 112 of the Act.
Being aggrieved by the High Court 's decision the appellants preferred the present appeals.
Allowing the appeals, this Court, HELD: 1.
It is not the value of occupation of the property to the tenant, but the rental income from it to the owner which is to be taken into consideration while estimating the reasonable return that a landlord can expect from his property.
While estimating or calculating the annual rent which might reasonably be expected from such property, the provisions of such legislation have to be taken into consideration.
Different rent restriction legislations have described the maximum rent recoverable under them differently such as standard rent, fair rent etc.
Hence the annual letting value of the building or land or both to which the rent restriction legislation is applicable cannot exceed the annual standard or fair rent.
It is the annual standard/fair rent which alone, therefore, can form the basis of the assessment of the property tax by the local authority.
[809 E G] 1.2.
Since there is no non obstante clause in the Gujarat Municipalities Act, 1963, this Court refrains from going into the question of non obstante clause in the provisions of the Act levying property tax.
[810 C] 13.
If the expression 'annual letting value ' in rule 4 is read as the annual letting value as determined by the outer limit prescribed by the standard or fair rent under the rent restriction legislation applicable to the premises, which in the present cast is the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947, the validity of the said rule cannot be assailed.
[811 B] 1.4.
Rule 5 mandates the actual rent received to be taken into consideration for fixation of the annual letting value, even if it is in excess of the standard rent fixed under the rent restriction legislation, which is contrary to the interpretation placed by this Court on the expression 'annual letting value".
The correct mode of getting over the difficulty is to 805 amend Rule 5 itself suitably to take care of such properties Instead of keeping it on the rule book as it is.
There is nothing to prevent the Municipality from introducing a new rule in place of the said rule.
[812B E] 1.5.
Even without Rule 5 and on the basis of Rule 4 as it is, the annual letting value can be calculated on the basis of the standard rent where the rent restriction legislation is applicable.
Where it is not applicable, nothing prevents the Municipality from assessing the properties on the basis of the actual rent received under the same Rule 4 itself.
[811 F] 1.6.
Rule 5 is to be read as being applicable only to the properties which are not governed by the provisions of the Rent Control Act.
As far as the properties which are amenable to the provisions of the Rent Control Act are concerned, their annual letting value will be calculated only on the basis of the standard rent determined or determinable under tile said Act.
Where the standard rent is determined by the Civil Court, of course under the rent restriction legislation, the annual letting value will be determined on the basis of such standard rent.
The rule, however, goes further and says that in other cases, viz., (1) where the standard rent is not determined and (2) even if it is determined, where actual rent charged is in excess of the standard rent, it is the actual rent, which will be taken as the basis for calculating the annual letting value.
The latter two situations do not make distinction between the properties to which the rent restriction legislation is applicable and the properties to which it is not applicable.
In other words, under the rule, even where the rent restriction legislation is in force, it is the actual rent which will be taken as the basis for calculating the annual letting value if the standard rent is not determined by the Court.
[817 D, 818 E F] 1.7.
Rule 5, to the extent it enables the authorities to take the actual rent as the basis for calculating the annual letting value, will apply to the properties to which the rent restriction legislation.
which in the present case is the Bombay Rent, Hotel and Lodging Housing Rates Control Act, 1947, does not apply.
[819 B] The Corporation of Calcutta vs Smt.
Padma Debi and Others, ; ; Corporation of Calcutta vs Life Insurance Corporation of India, ; , Guntur Municipal Council vs Guntur Town Rate Payers 806 Association ; and Dewan Daulat Rai Kapoor and Others vs New Delhi Municipal Committee & Others, ; , relied on.
Municipal Corporation Indore vs Smt.
Ratnaprabha and Others, ; , referred to.
[809 D] 2.
Section 112 in the context in which it appears is both directory and enabling in nature insofar as it requires the Municipality to authenticate the list before 31st July of the official year.
That the provisions are no more than directory is clear from the fact that they provide that if the Municipality fails to do its duty, the State Government way complete the work by appointing person(s) to do it.
This is as it should be since the ,various provisions of the Act show that the revenue and the expenditure of the Municipality, among others, is controlled and regulated by the State Government Further the Section requires that the Municipality should complete the authentication of the assessment list before a particular date which, in the present case happens to be, 31st July of the year.
It was necessary to incorporate in the section the said provision to give enough time to the State Government to step in and authenticate the list before the end of the official year.
The official year is the same for the Municipality as well as the State Government and for the purposes of budgeting, the provision that the assessment list should be authenticated by the particular date was necessary to be incorporated.
In any case neither the Municipality is prevented from authenticating it beyond 31st July nor is the person or persons appointed by the State Government prevented from doing so beyond 31st March of the official year.
[816 E G]
