The respondent who was employed as an Executive Engineer in the DDA appellant was served on 6.11.85 a preliminary memo alleging irregularities committed by him in the construction works, and that they were being investigated.
On 11.7.90 a chargesheet was framed on the basis of these irregularities, and on 13.7.90 the chargesheet was despatched for being served on him.
The respondent, however, proceeded on two months medical leave and, therefore, on 17.7.90 another Executive Engineer workIng in the same Wing as the respondent, received It and gave intimation that the respondent was on leave and adding the same would be handed over to the respondent on his return from leave.
A Departmental Promotion Committee met on 28.11.90, and in view of the earlier decision to Initiate disciplinary proceedings against the respondent, It followed the 'sealed cover procedure ' in the case of the respondent.
Efforts to effect personal service of the chargesheet on the respondent on account of his non availability continued and the same could be served personally on him only on 25.1.91.
As a result of the selection made by the D.P.C. certain persons were promoted to the post of Superintending Engineer, while the respondent 's matter was kept In abeyance to await the result of the disciplinary proceedings.
The respondent riled a writ petition In the High Court for a writ of 1034 mandamus directing the.
DDA to promote him as Superintending Engineer with effect from the date on which his juniors had been promoted to the said post on the basis of the selection by the D.P.C.
The High Court allowed the writ petition relying on Union of India and Others vs K V. Jankiraman and Others, ; , and taking the view that the framing of charge would carry with it the duty to issue and serve the same on the employee, that there was no justification for the DDA to follow the sealed cover procedure in this case on 28.11.91 when the Departmental Promotion Committee met since actual service of the chargesheet was made only after the date on which the D.P.C. met.
Accordingly, the High Court directed the DDA to open the sealed cover, and to promote the respondent as Superintending Engineer if otherwise found suitable by the D.P.C., and to give him seniority and all consequential benefits from the date on which his juniors were so promoted.
The DDA appellant challenged the aforesaid, decision by special leave in this Court, and contended that fankiraman cannot be read to hold, in a case like the present one where the disciplinary proceedings have been initiated by framing the chargesheet and despatching the same that the chargesheet had not been issued and, therefore, the sealed cover procedure could not be followed by the D.P.C. on 28.11.90.
On behalf of the respondent official it was urged that Jankiraman holds that without effective service of the chargesheet on the employee the disciplinary proceedings cannot be said to have been initiated, and reliance was also placed on the Office Memorandum dated 12.1.88 which required actual service and not mere issuance of the chargesheet for initiating the disciplinary proceedings.
Allowing the appeal, and setting aside the judgment of the High Court, this Court, HELD : 1.
The 'sealed cover ' procedure is applicable, in cases where the 'disciplinary proceedings are pending ' in respect of the government servant; or 'a decision has been taken to initiate disciplinary proceedings '.
Thug, on a decision being taken to initiate disciplinary proceedings, the guidelines contained in OMs dated 14.9.92 and 12.1.88 attract the sealed cover procedure.
[1040 D] 2.
The decision to initiate disciplinary proceedings cannot be sub 1035 sequent to the issuance of the chargesheet, since issue of the chargesheet is a consequence of the decision to initiate disciplinary proceedings.
The service of the chargesheet on the government servant follows the decision to initiate disciplinary proceedings, and it does not precede or coincide with that decision.
The delay, if any, if service of the chargesheet to the government servant, after it has been framed and despatched, does not have the effect of delaying initiation of the disciplinary proceedings, inas much as information to the government servant of the charges framed against him, by service of the chargesheet, is not a part of the decision making process of the authorities for initiating the disciplinary proceedings.
[1041 B D] 3.The plain meaning of the expression 'a decision has been taken to initiate disciplinary proceedings ' used in clause (ii) of para 2 of O.M. dated 12.1.88, also promotes the object of the provision.
The expression refers merely to the decision of the authority, and knowledge of the government servant, thereof, does not form a part of that decision.
The change made in clause (ii) of para 2 in O.M. dated 14.9.92, merely clarifies this position by using the expression 'chargesheet has been issued ' to indicate that service of chargesheet is not necessary; and issue of the chargesheet by its despatch indicates beyond doubt that the decision to initiate disciplinary proceedings was taken.
Jankiraman takes the same view, and it is not possible to read that decision otherwise.
[1041 E F] 4.
The decision in Janiraman is based, interalia, on O.M. dated 12/1/88.
The facts of the cases dealt with in the decision in Jankiraman do not indicate that the court took the view, that even though the chargesheet against the government servant was framed and direction given to despatch the same to the government servant as a result of the decision to initiate disciplinary proceedings taken prior to the meeting of the D.P.C., that was not sufficient to attract the sealed cover procedure merely because service of the chargesheet was effected subsequent to the meeting of the D.P.C. [1041 H, 1042 A] 5. 'Issue ' of the chargesheet in the context of a decision taken to initiate the disciplinary proceedings must mean, as it does, the framing of the chargesheet and taking of the necessary action to despatch the chargesheet to the employee to inform him of the charges framed against him requiring his explanation; and not also the further fact of service of the 1036 chargesheet on the employee.
It is so, because knowledge to the employee of the charges framed against him, on the basis of the decision taken to initiate disciplinary proceedings, does not form a part of the decision making process of the authorities to initiate the disciplinary proceedings, even if framing the charges forms a part of that process in certain situations.
[1043 E F] 6.
The meaning of the word 'issued ' has to be gathered from the context in which it is used.
The issue of a chargesheet, therefore, means its despatch to the government servant, and this act is complete the moment steps are taken for the purpose, by framing the chargesheet and despatching it to the government servant, the further fact of its actual service on the government 'servant not being a necessary part of its requirement.
This is the sense in which the word 'issue ' was used in the expression 'chargesheet has already been issued to the employees ', in para 17 of the decision in Janakiraman.
[1044 B C] 7.
The decision to initiate the disciplinary proceedings against the respondent had been taken and chargesheet had also been issued to the respondent prior to 28.11.90 when the D.P.C. adopted the sealed cover procedure.
It cannot be held otherwise merely because service of the chargesheet framed and issued earlier could be effected on the respondent after 28.11.90, on account of the absence of the respondent.
[1044 D] Union of India and Others vs K.V Jankiraman and Others, ; , referred to and relied on.
[1037 G]
