Parliament enacted In 1983 the National Oilseeds and Vegetable Oils Development Board Act, 1983 to provide for the development, under the control of the Union, of the Oilseeds Industry and the Vegetable Oils Industry and for matters connected therewith.
The Act contemplated the establishment of a board called the National Oilseeds and Vegetable Oils Development Board, and the Constitution of Oilseeds and Vegetable Oils Development Fund for promoting the purposes of the Act.
The Vegetable Oils Cess Act, 1983, was, simultaneously enacted to levy and collect by way of cess, for the purpose of the National Oilseeds and Vegetable Oils Development Board Act,1983, a duty of excise on vegetable oils produced in any mill in India at such rate not exceeding Rs. 5 per quintal on vegetable oil.
This Cess Act was, however, repealed by Section 12 of the Cotton, ' Copra and Vegetable Oils Cess (Abolition) Act, 1987.
Chapter 5 of the ' said Act carried the heading 'Collection and Payment of Arrears of Duties and Excise '.
The petitioners who were manufacturers of vegetable oil, which was subject to the cess/duty of excise under Section 3 of the Cess Act, in their writ petitions to this Court questioned the validity of the levy and collection of cess for the period commencing on, 1st March, 1986 and ending with 31st March.
It was contended that (1) In his Budget Speech delivered on 28.2.1986 while presenting the Budget 52 1986 87, the Union Finance Minister had stated that as an endeavour to reduce the number of cesses it had been decided to dispense with the cession cotton, copra and vegetable oils and that this statement was exemplified and implemented by way of a communication from the Directorate of Vanaspati.
It is not open to the Government to go back upon the said decision and demand cess for the period subsequent to March 1, 1986, and (2) By virtue of Sub section (4) of Section 3 of the Cess Act, Rule 8 of the Central Excise Rules is attracted among other provisions of the Central Excise Act and Rules.
Reading the budget proposals of the Finance Minister and the letter of the Directorate of Vanaspati together it must be held that vegetable oils have been exempted from the levy under Section 3 (1).
Dismissing the Writ Petitions, this Court, HELD: 1 (a) The cess having been imposed by a Parliamentary enactment could he rendered inoperative only, by a parliamentary enactment.
Such repealing enactment came only in the year 1987 with effect from April 1, 1987.
(58 C) (b) The repealing Act expressly provided in Section 13 that the cess due before the date of said repeal, but not collected, shall be collected according to law", as if the Cess Act is not repealed.
This provision amounts to a positive affirmation of the intention of the parliament to keep the said imposition alive and effective till the date of the repeal of the Cess Act.
(58 1).
) (c) In the face of the aforesaid statutory provisions, no rights can he founded nor can the levy of the cess be said to have been dispensed with by virtue of the alleged decision referred to in the Finance Minister 's speech or on account of the letter dated August 11., 1986.
(58 E) (d) The Finance Minister 's speech is not law.
The Parliament may or may not accept his proposal.
Indeed, in this case, it did not accept the said proposal immediately but only a %ear later.
It is only from the date of the repeal that the said levy becomes inoperative.
2 (a) The cess imposed under section 3 (1) of the Cess Act.
is a duty of Excise as stated in Section 3 Itself.
Therefore, the Central Board of Excise and Customs was perhaps competent to grant exemption even in the case of said cess though no definite opinion on this question need be expressed since it was not debated.
Suffice It to say that the Central Government cannot again be brought in under sub rule (2) of rule 8 in the place of the Central Board nor can the Directorate of Vanaspati and Vegetable Oils be equated to the Central Board of excise and customs.
(58 H, 59 A) (b) The words "so far as may bell occurring In section 3 (4) of the Cess Act cannot be stretched to that extent.
Above all It Is extremely doubtful whether the power of exemption conferred by rule 8 can be carried to the extent of nullifying the very Act itself.
It would be difficult to Wee that by virtue of the power of exemption, the very levy created by Section 3 (1) can be dispensed with.
Doing so would amount to nullifying the Cess Act Itself.
Nothing remains thereafter to be done under the cess Act.
Even the language of Rule 8 does not warrant such extensive power; Rule 8 contemplates merely exempting of certain excisable goods from the whole or any part of the duty leviable on such goods.
(59 B) 3.
The power of exemption cannot be utilised to dispense with the very levy created under Section 3 of the Cess Act or for that matter under Section 3 of the Central Excise Act.
(59 E) Kesavananda Bharti Sripadagalvaru and others vs State of kerala and another A.I.R. 1973 S.C. 1461, (62 G) relied on.
