Petitioners were in service, under Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C & AG for short), as Assistant Audit Officers (A.A.O. for short) Group B Gazetted, in pay scale Rs. 2000 3200, and were working in Railway Audit Department, after December 31,1985.
In 1960, Railway Board spelled out its policy, stating that scale of passes/P.T.0s.
and the rules governing their issue to staff of the Railway Audit Department will be the same as applicable to Railway servants.
However some distinctions were made as regards Indian Audit and Accounts Service Officers (IA & AS Officers) of Railway Audit Department, on recommendations of the C & AG., Central Government sanctioned higher scale of pay effective from March 1, 1984, for 80 per cent of Section officers in the Railway Audit Department to be designated as A.A.Os (Group B Gazetted).
Their pay scale was revised to Rs. 2000 3200 from January 1, 1986, on recommendation of Fourth Pay Commission.
They continued to have the privileges and facilities of Group B Officers of Indian Railway.
In 1987, consequent to the revision of pay scales of Railway posts, on recommendation by the Fourth pay Commission, the posts under Indian Railways were re classified.
Posts in scale of Rs. 2000 3200 were classified as Group 'C ' instead of Group B.
In 1989, the Railway Board, in view of restructuring of cadre of Indian Audit and Accounts Department, creation of posts of A.A.Os in scale of Rs. 2000 3200, classified as Group B Gazetted status, issued instructions that Audit Officers in Scale of Rs. 2000 3200 may 297 be given privileges and facilities viz Passes/P.T.0s.
Quarters etc, as admissible to Railway employees in identical scale.
Consequently they were not entitled to the privileges and facilities admissible to gazetted Railway Officers.
classified in Group B in scale of Rs. 2000 3500.
However, Assistant Audit Officers given Gazetted status between March 1, 1984, and December 31, 1985 were allowed to continue to enjoy the facilities of Passes/p.
T.Os quarters etc.
Petitioners filed application before the Central Administrative Tribunal, Principal Bench, claiming that Assistant Audit Officers, given Gazetted status Group B after December 31, 1985, were also entitled to the privileges and facilities admissible to Railway Officers, classified 'Group B '.
The application was rejected by the Tribunal and the Petitions filed Special Leave petition seeking redressal.
This Court dismissed the special leave petition and, HELD: That conferring special privileges and facilities, to Assistant Audit Officers, which are not provided to Railway servants in identical pay scale would lead to unjust results.
It would result in conferring special privileges and facilities, by the Indian Railways to persons belonging to foreign department of Controller and Auditor General of India, while their own servants, who hold equivalent posts on the same scale of pay will be denied such privileges and facilities.
The Railway Board 's letter dated April 14, 1960 also shows that the staff of the Railway Audit Department is treated more generously than the officers (if the same Audit Department in matters of issuance of Passes/P.T.0s.
The Assistant Audit Officers, who had been given status of gazetted Group B, by the comptroller and Audit General, cannot be treated, by the Indian Railways on par, with Railway servants, classified group B. In matters relating to conferring privileges and giving of facilities.
The Railway Servant (Pass) Rules, 1986, made in Consonance with classification of Railway servants, rightly made by the President of India, consequent upon the Railway services (Revised Pay) Rules, 1986, issued under the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution, confer facilities and privileges according to class to which Railway servants belong, they can not be treated as Rules violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
Nor can they be regarded as arbitrary.
(303 C, 304 G) That even if discrimination was brought about by the Railways in regard to officers of the same category, that is, Assist Ant Audit Officers, such discriminatory treatment accorded to a small number cannot be availed of by the Petitioners, to obtain she benefit of such wrongly conferred privileges and facilities.
However, this Court did not consider it appropriate to pronounce 298 upon the correctness of the conferment of such privileges and facilities to the Assistant Audit Officers, given status of Gazetted Group B between March 1, 1984 and December 31, 1985, when they had not been impleaded as party respondents.
(305 A C)
