The appellant had appeared for All India competitive examination.
He was not allotted any seat in any college according to the merit com preference cum eligibility.
His grievance now is that students with lesser marks than him are being admitted to Colleges in Kerala.
He says that he may be given a seat in any subject in any of the colleges in Kerala or for that matter anywhere else.
After the first, second and third lists pertaining to All India seats were published, the remaining vacant seats have been surrendered to the State Government already.
The State Government had already filled almost all of them.
Disposing of the appeal, this Court, HELD:1.1.
This Court cannot withdraw one seat from the State Government, at this belated stag course has begun in the month of September, 1992 itself and give it to the appellant.
Even otherwise it is not certain that there are no other candidates (who had appeared in the All India competitive examination) who may have scored higher marks than the appellant.
No direction can be given for his being considered against the 1993 vacancies because he has not appeared for the 1993 examination.
If, in case, any seat in lying vacant in any of the medical courses in Kerala, the second respondent, Director of Medical Education Thiruvananthapuram shall consider admitting the appellant against such seat relating to the year 1992.
(342 G) 338 1.02.
The post graduate courses comprise degree courses as well as diploma courses.
After the results of examinations are published, the admissions are made on the basis of merit cum preference cum eligibility with the aid of a computer.
(339 G) 1.03.
According to the system in vogue, a candidate who applies for admission in the All India quota is required to indicate eight medical colleges and six subjects, in the order of preference, to which he seeks admission.
(339 G) 1.04.
In the first instance, a list of admissions is issued.
But it so happens that for one or the other reason, many of the candidates in the list do not turnup to join the course.
Hence, a second list is issued and then a third.
But while preparing the second list or the third list, the overall merit cum preferencecum eligibility is not again examined, with the result that sometimes a candidate with lesser score gets a better subject than a candidate with higher score.
(339 H) 1.05.Inspite of promptings from this court, the authorities in charge of holding All India competitive examination have not been able to adhere to the prescribed schedule.
In such a situation, it is bound to happen that issuance of second and third lists delay the process of admission still further.
By the time the second and third lists are communicated, half the course is over.
(340 D) 1.06.
The new system, in short, is this: after the examination is over, the results would be published in the order of merit.
The selection committee will call 150 candidates a day in the order of merit A chart will be kept ready and displayed at all relevant places indicating the colleges and subjects wherein the seats are available.
Candidates will be called in the order of merit and asked to indicate his/her choice.
The slot chosen by him/her then gets closed.
This procedure will be gone through until all the seats are filled up.
There would be no second or third list.
Any seats remaining vacant thereafter will be surrendered to the State Government.
But this modification will apply to and come into effect only for and from the admissions for the year 1994.
It will not apply to the admissions currently underway.
(340 H, 341 A) 1.07.
In all other respects, ,the scheme in vogue shall continue to be effective.
339 Dr. Pradip Jain v Union of India, ; Dr. Dinesh Kumar Motilal Nehru college, ; and Dr. Dinesh Kumar v Motilal Nehru College, [1987]4 S.C.C.459, referred to.
