Under the General Terms and Conditions for supply of electricity notified by the Andhra Pradesh State Electricity Board, under Section 49(1) of the , the consumers were obliged to keep with the Electricity Board an amount equivalent to three month 's demand and energy charges as consumption deposit on which Interest at the rate of 3% per annum was payable by the Board.
In the event of delay in payment of consumption deposit within the stipulated period not only surcharge was payable by consumer but also the supply was liable to be disconnected.
Various petitions were riled before Andhra Pradesh High Court challenging the validity of terms and conditions contending that the consumption deposit should In no event exceed two months average consumption charges and that In view of the judgment of Supreme Court In M/s. Jagdamba Paper Industries vs H.S.E.B. Board, [1983] 4 S.C.C. 508, the Board was liable to pay Interest at the game rate as Is paid by a Scheduled Bank on fixed deposit.
The High Court dismissed the petitions.
In appeals to this Court, It was contended on behalf of the consumers that: (1) Section 49 of the is ,unconstitutional since there are no guidelines for framing the terms and conditions of supply of electricity; (2) in view of the fact that in case of power intensive consumers the cost of Electricity is very high the condition requiring 3 months ' security deposit is arbitrary and illegal for power intensive consumers; and (3) there is no power under the Electricity Supply Act to enable the Board to raise revenue or to cover its capital cost etc.
except by way of adjusting tariffs as seen from under Section 59 of the Supply Act, 1948.
Therefore, consumption deposit cannot be used for the purpose of revenue or raising revenue.
On behalf of the Electricity Board it was contended that: (1) In view of the fact that the object of consumption deposit (which is In the nature of advance payment and not a security deposit) Is to ensure prompt payment of electricity supply, It cannot be contended that 3 201 month 's consumption deposit Is arbitrary; (2)the fact that some of the consumers pay large amounts by way of electricity charges has nothing to do with the nature of deposit.
Merely because a unit Is power based it cannot be treated separately for the terms of supply relating to consumer deposit must be uniform.
In the case of Rajasthan Electricity Board the General Conditions expressly provided that no Interest will be paid by the Electricity Board on security deposit.
Futher, the Electricity Board issued notices requiring the consumers to deposit the enhanced amount of cash security as well as bank guarantee on the basis of maximum power consumption.
The consumers flied petitions In the Rajasthan High Court contending that provision for no Interest was bad In law and that the enhanced security deposit must he calculated not on three months maximum consumption but on the basis of minimum power consumption.
A Single Judge of the High Court allowed the petitions.
On appeal, the Division Bench held that the clause relating to nonpayment of interest was not reasonable.
Relying on Section 4 of the as well as on the Model Form of draft conditions contained In Schedule VI of the 1948 Act, the Division Bench held that interest was payable on the security deposit.
In appeals to this Court, it was contended on behalf of the Rajasthan State Electricity Board that: (1) there is no statutory provision which casts an obligation on the Board to pay Interest on the security deposit; nor even Interest is payable under common law or in equity; (2) the High Court erred In relying on the Model Form conditions as well as on the ; (3) the security deposit for three months is neither unreasonable nor arbitrary; (4) even if the contract between the Board and consumer is adhesion contract, it is not necessarily unconsciable; (5) in Jagdamba Paper Industries case the right of Interest was based on the concession of parties and the Court had no occasion to decide the rate or interest.
On behalf of the consumers it was contended that: (1)the scheme of the Electricity Act and Supply Act together with the Rules suggest the payment of interest; (2) since the money is deposited but the consumers with the Board to secure the Board against default In payment of bills, the Board Is in the position of a trustee in respect of 202 this money; (3) even under English Law, interest was payable on security for electricity.
For the intervenor on behalf of the Electricity Board of Orissa, it was submitted that Regulation 7 of the Orissa State Electricity Board General Conditions of Supply Regulations 1981 providing that no interest would be payable on security deposit is just and reasonable and is not arbitrary or violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
The Uttar Pradesh State Electricity Board was also paving 3% interest on consumption deposit.
The consumers preferred writ petitions before the Allahabad High Court claiming 12% interest ,but the same were dismissed.
In appeals to this Court it was contended on behalf of the consumers that in a number of matters this Court has also ordered interest at the rate of 12% on security deposit and the same principle should apply to this case; (2) if interest is not paid, security deposit cannot be demanded as this will amount to unconscionable bargain; and (3) the security deposit does not contemplate appropriation.
On behalf of the Electricity Board it was contended that: (1) in cases where 12 per cent interest was awarded it was only by way of ad interim measure.
Therefore, orders are not conclusive on this aspect; (2) under Article 226 of the Constitution, the court is to conduct a limited scrutiny whether by imposing a condition the Board has not acted as a private trader and thereby shed off its public utility character.
If the Court comes to the conclusion that the Board has not acted as a private trader and the nature of deposit has a rational relationship, the issue will fall outside the scope of judicial purview.
The Bihar State Electricity Board was paying 5 % interest on the security deposit.
The consumers claimed interest at the rate payable on fixed deposit by a nationalised bank and the High Court allowed the same.
The Electricity Board filed petition in this court contending that the High Court erred in awarding a higher rate of interest.
On behalf of the consumers it was contended that the increase in security deposit without assigning any reason was had in law.
203 In the connected writ petition, the challenge is to the validity of Sections 49 and 79 of the Supply Act.
According to the Punjab State Electricity Board, while the Electricity Board is required to make colossal advances to generate electricity and supply to consumers the consumers also use and consume electricity on credit ranging from 2 to 3 months depending upon the category of consumers.
To off set part of the amount that the consumer owes to the Board constantly and also to ensure timely payment of advances by the Board to its suppliers an advance consumption deposit is insisted upon before commencing supply to the consumer.
If this is not so taken the Board will be left with no other option than to increase the tariff.
Thus advance deposit cannot be termed as a fixed deposit as the amount cannot be utilised against nonpayment of dues from consumers.
Besides, the consumers can also ask for the refund.
Therefore, Sections 49(1) and 79 (j) cannot be termed as arbitrary.
It was also contended on behalf of the Punjab State Electricity Board that the amendment to clause 23 of abridged conditions of supply requiring consumers to pay advance consumption deposits is perfectly reasonable.
For the intervenor on behalf of Calcutta Electricity Supply Corporation, it was submitted that the deposit though called security deposit is really an adjustable advance payment of consumption charges.
The amount is revisable from time to time depending upon the average consumption charges on the basis of actual consumption over a period.
In short, it is in the nature of a running account.
The security deposit does not remain in tact like a fixed deposit but gets depleted day after day depending on the extent of consumption.
More often than not.
the consumption charges and other dues exceed the security deposit.
That necessitates calling for additional advance to make up a shortfall.
In the absence of any usage or contract or an,*, provision of law requiring payment of interest is not payable for wrongful detention of money.
In this case, there is no wrongful detention [of even.] Section 4(2) of the has no application to this deposit.
204 Disposing the petitions, this Court, HELD:1.
Section 49 of the is valid Sub section(1) of the said section starts with the words "Subject to the provisions of the Act and all regulations, if any, made in this behalf".
Therefore, the Board has to conform to the various provisions of the Act and the regulations.
Section 49 contains two powers; (1) to prescribe terms and conditions of supply; and (2) fix the tariff.
No guidelines are required in this regard.
[278A 248CE] Hindustan Zinc Ltd. vs A.P.S.E.B., ; ; Mysore State Electricity Bought vs Bangalore Woolen Cotton and Sill Mills Ltd. A.I.R. 1963S.C. 1128, Jagdamba Paper Industries Pvt. Ltd. vs Haryana State Electricity Board, ; , referred to.
Roberts vs Hopwood, ; Pyx Granite vs Minister of Housing and Local Government, , cited.
1.1.Where regulations are made under Section 49 read with Section 79 (j), the validity of the regulations could be examined by the court, whether they are reasonable or not.
[249 D] Southern Steel Ltd., Hyderabad vs The Andhra, Pradesh State Electricity Board, A.I.R. 1990 Andhra Pradesh 58, and M/s. B.R. Oil Mills.
Bharatpur vs Assistant Engineer (D) R.S.E.B. Bharatpur, A.I.R , referred to.
1.2The terms and conditions notified under Section 49 must relate to the object and purpose for which they are issued.
Certainly, that power cannot be exercised for a collateral purpose.
In this Section 49 is valid.
[251 C] 2.The nature of consumption deposit is to secure prompt payment and is intended for appropriation.
The deposit though called security deposit is really an adjustable advance payment of consumption charges.
The payment is in terms of the agreement interpreting the conditions of supply.
This security deposit is revisable from time to time on the basis of average consumption charges depending upon the actual consumption over a period.
This is the position under the 205 terms of supply of energy with reference to all the Boards.
[278 A, 252 D E] 2.1The cycle of Billing by the Board demonstrates that in the very nature of things, the consumer is supplied energy on credit.
The compulsory deposit in the context of billing cycle is hardly adequate to secure payments to the Board by the time the formal hill by the Board is raised on the consumer.
In one sense, the consumption security deposit represents only a part of the money which is payable to the Board on the bill being raised against the consumer.
Thus, the Board secures itself by resorting to such deposit to cover part of the liability.
[253 F G] 2.2The deposit made cannot be equated to a fixed deposit.
In the case of daily supply of electricity, there is a consequential liability to pay for each day 's consumption of electricity.
To ensure that payment the security deposit is furnished.
Hence, it cannot he equated to a deposit at all.
It is in the nature of a running current account.
[262 A] 2.3The argument that the deposit does not contemplate appro priation is not correct because in the nature of contract it is liable to be appropriated for the satisfaction of any amount liable to be paid by the consumer to the Board for violation of an), conditions of supply in the context of wide scale theft of energy tempering with the meters and such other methods adopted by the consumers.
Therefore, the said consumption security deposit serves not only too secure the interest of the Board for any such violation but should serve as a deterrent on the consumer in discharging his obligations towards the Board.
[264 F 6) Union of India vs A.L. Rallia Ram, ; ; Riches vs West minister Bank Ltd. 1947 Appeal Cases 390, held inapplicable.
2.4While the Electricity Board is required to make colossal advances to generate electricity and supply to consumers, the consumers use and consume electricity on credit ranging from 2 to 3 months depending upon the category of consumers.
To off set part of the amount the consumer owes to the Board continually to ensure 206 timely payment of bills by the Board to its suppliers, the advance consumption deposit is required to he kept with the Board before commencing supply to the consumer.
The clauses in the contract in relation to conditions of supply of electric energy enable the Board to adjust the bill against such deposits.
Therefore, this is not a case of mere deposit of money as in commercial transaction.
In demanding security deposit, it is open to the court to take note of pilferage.
[254 F H] Ashok Soap Factory vs Municipal Corporation of Delhi, J.T. , referred to.
Corpus Juris Secundum, Vol.26A,p.194,Davidson vs U.S., C.C.A. Pa., , 752, referred to.
2.5Three month 's security deposit cannot be characterised either unreasonable or arbitrary.
1255 F] Jagdama Paper Industries P. Ltd. vs Haryana State Electricity Board, [1993] 4S.C.C.508; K.C. Works vs Secretary A.P.S.E.B., Vidyut Soudha, A.I.R. 1979 Andhra Pradesh 291; Municipal Corporation for Greater Bombay vs M/s D.M. Industries, ; Haryana Ice Factory vs Municipal Corporation of Delhi, A.I.R. 1986 Delhi 78, referred to.
Southern Steel Ltd., Hyderabad vs The A.P. State Electricity Board, A.I.R. 1990 Andhra Pradesh 58, approved.
Indian Aluminium Company vs Karnataka Electricity Board ; , cited.
2.6Under the regulations framed by the Board in exercise of powers of Section 49 read with Section 79 (j) the consumer is only entitled and the Board has an obligation to supply energy to the consumer upon such terms and conditions as laid down in the regulations.
If, therefore.
the regulations prescribed a security deposit that will have to be complied with.
In cases where regulations have not been made Rule 27 of the Rules made under the Electricity Act enables the adoption of model form of draft conditions of supply.
207 Annexure VI in clause 14 states that the licensee may require any consumer to deposit security for the payment of his monthly bills for energy supplied and for the value of the meter and other apparatus installed in his premises.
Thus, the Board has the power to make regulations to demand security from the consumers.
[251F H, 252A B] 2.7Under Section 59 the Board is obligated to carry on its operation as to ensure that it generates a surplus of 3 per cent or as specified by the State Government.
The Board is obligated to adjust its tariffs for ensuring such surplus.
The condition of supply requiring a consumption security deposit has a direct bearing on the operations of the Board which are to be conducted in such a manner as to ensure a surplus.
The language in Section 59 of the Supply Act is "carry on its operations under this Act and adjust its tariffs.
" The language of the said Section is not by adjusting tariff.
Therefore, the argument that the only manner in which the Board can achieve a surplus is to adjust its tariffs does not flow from the language of Section 59.
So read, in the context of the insistence of a security deposit which has direct bearing on the operations of the Board is per se reasonable and constitutional.
[266 E 6] Kerla State Electricity Boaed vs S.N. Govinda Prabhu & Bros. 3.There is no liability on the Electricity Board either under the statute or common law or equity to pay interest on security deposit.
[278 B] 3.1There is no statutory provision which casts an obligation on the Board to pay interest on security deposit.
Model form of draft conditions of supply containing Clause 14 relating to interest on security deposit) as found in Annexure VI.
traceable to Rule 27 of Indian Electricity Rules, 1956, is applicable only to a licensee as defined in Section 2 (4) of the Electricity Act.
Even for a licensee it is not compulsory to adopt the model condition of supply.
These is an option available to adopt the model conditions of supply with such modifications as the circumstances of each case require.
[259G H, 260 A C] 208 3.2Schedule VI has been framed in exercise of powers under Sections 57 and 57A.
In defining "clear profit" paragraph (2)of clause XVII, Item (v) makes a reference, as interest on security deposits which is a part of expenditure properly incurred by the licensee.
From this, it is impossible to hold that this clause imposes an obligation on the licensee to pay interest on security deposits, All that would when is, if interest, is paid then it qualifies as an item of expenditure properly incurred.
This is the position with regard to licensee.
But this cannot apply to the Board, which is not a licensee.
For the same reason Item L 1 (c) of Form IV of the Electricity Rules relating to interest paid and accrued on consumers ' security deposits is of no avail because that relates to the manner of keeping accounts by the licensee, not being applicable to a Board.
Therefore, there is nothing to indicate under the scheme of the Electricity Act or Schedule VI of the Supply Act that interest must be paid on the security deposit.
Accordingly the Division Bench of Rajasthan High Court has erred in holding that is applicable.
[260 F H, 261 A B] 3.3Section 4(2) of the has no application to a case where on account of a contractual term or a statutory provision payment of interest is not permitted.
A careful reading of Section 4(2) would disclose that it merely enlarges the category of cases mentioned in Section 4(1).
Even otherwise, there is nothing to indicate that Section 4(2) could override other statutory provisions or a contract between the parties.
No doubt, Section 4(2) contains a non obstante clause.
But, such a clause is restricted to the provisions of and cannot extend to other laws or a contract between the parties.
[261 F 6] Civil Special Appeal No. 83 of 1987, decided on 30th July, 1991 by a Division Bench of the Rajasthan High Court, overruled.
3.4The word 'interest ' would apply only to cases where there is a relationship of debtor and creditor.
A lender of money who allows the borrower to use certain funds deprives himself of the use of those funds.
He does so because he charges interest which may be described as a kind of rent for the use of the funds.
For example, a bank or a lender lending out money on payment of interest.
In this case, there is no relationship of debtor and creditor.
Accordingly, the claim for 209 interest cannot be legally founded either on common law or equity.
[262 G, 265 A] Halshury 's Vol.
32 para 108: (Discussing cases where interest is payable under common law) para 109 (Discussing cases where there is equitable rights to interest), held inapplicable.
Bengal Nogpur Railway vs Ruttanji Ramji, A.I.R. 1939 P.C. 67, referred to.
3.5The object of the deposit is to secure the payment of consumption charges.
These charges may vary depending upon the daily consumption, depending on the level of supply .The amount due by way of consumption charges would also be liable to he appropriated.
Therefore, it is incorrect to state that the Board is a trustee.
The relationship between the Board and consumer is not that of a trustee and a beneficiary but a depositor and deposits.
This is not event case of a constructive trust under Section 90 of the Indian Trust Act, since no advantage is gained by the Electricity Board in derogation of the rights of the consumer.
1262 D F] 4.The clause not providing for interest on security deposit is neither arbitrary nor palpably unreasonable not even unconscionable for the following reasons: (a)The consumer made the security deposit in consideration of the performance of his obligation for obtaining the service which is essential to him.
(b The electricity supply is made to the consumers on credit.
(c)The billing time taken by the Board is to the advantage of the consumer.
(d)Public revenues are blocked in generation, transmission and distribution of electricity for the purpose of supply.
The Board pays interest on the loans borrowed by the Board.
This is in order to perform 210 public service.
On those payments made by the Board it gets no interest from the consumers.
(e) The Board needs back its blocked money to carry out public service with reasonable recompense.
(f) The Board is not essentially a commercial organisation to which the consumer has furnished the secu rity to earn interest thereon.
[269 F H, 270 A C] 4.1The argument that the Board is monopolistic in character and therefore, the consumers have no other option but to enter contract appears to be misconceived.
The consumption security deposit whether or not it carries interest is a condition precedent for the supply of electric energy.
The scrutiny by the Court In determining the uncon stitutionality of a provision not providing for interest must be tested on the touchstone whether in imposing such a condition the Board has acted as a private trader and thereby shed off Its public utility character? In imposing such a condition the Board has not acted as a private trader.
The nature of deposit has a rational relationship to the object which is Incorporated a condition of supply.
[266 A D,] Jagdamba Paper Industries (Pvt. ) Ltd. vs Haryana State Electric in Board; , , referred to.
4.2Assuming that the contract Is an adhesion contract, still it is not unconscionable.
Conditions and the terms of supply providing for non payment of interest is not so unconscionable as to shock the conscience of the Court.
[266 H] Central Inland Water Transport Corporation vs Brojo Nath Ganguly ; Bihar State Electricity Board vs Green Rubber Industries, [1990] 1 S.C.C. 731, referred to.
Farmsworth on Contracts, 2nd Edn.
319.320, para 4.27, referred to.
Gillespie Brothers Ltd. vs Roy Bowles Ltd. (1973) 1 A. E. R. 193; 211 G.B Mahajan and Ors.
vs Jalalgaon Municipal Council and Ors.
; cited.
4.3In Jagdamba Papers the question of Interest on security was not raised before the Court.
Therefore, the Court had no occasion to decide this issue of interest.
That part of the judgment is sub silentio.
[271 E, 272 A C] Jagdamba Paper Industries (Pvt.) Ltd. vs Haryana State Electricity.
Board, ; , explained and held inapplicable.
4.4This Court never Intended to adjudicate upon the rate of interest or render a decision on that question.
Therefore, it cannot be contended that the disposal of the Writ Petition though by a Bench of 3 Judges would be binding on a Bench of two Judges because it was entirely based on interlocutory order.
Therefore, this Court is free to decide the question on Its merits.
[273 F 6] 4.5The Division Bench of the Rajasthan High Court erred in striking down condition No. 20 of the General Conditions of the Rajasthan Electricity Board as violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
[271 D] 4.6The rate of interest on security deposit cannot be equated with the rate of interest on the fixed deposit.
Firstly, if the consumption charges are to be appropriated the moneys accrued by way of deposits cannot be held in fixed deposits.
Nor all deposits need carry Interest In every transaction.
Secondly, the nature and character of the security deposit is essentially different from fixed deposit.
[270 D E] 5.It may be that the consumers of electricity, where it is raw material, would be prompt in their payment in their own interest.
On that basis, it cannot be contended that they cannot be treated in the same way as defaulters.
The test, in Court 's considered opinion, is whether in the general application of law there is any discrimination.
Merely because some of the consumers are prompt those isolated cases cannot render the provision unconstitutional.
[273 H, 274 Al 212 The Collector of Customs Madras v, Nathella Sampathu Chetty; , ; Vivian Joseph vs Municipal Corporation.
Bonmbay ; , Fatehchand Himmatlal vs State of Maharashtra, [1977]2 S.C.R. 828 and; B. Banerjee vs Anita Pam, [1975]2 S.C.R. 774, referred to.
