The name of the respondent auction purchaser was entered as raiyat in respect of certain lands on the basis of auction sales dated 6.11.1954 and 3 12 1954 in execution of the decree for arrears of rent in respect thereof.
In 1970 the Assistant Settlement Officer initiated proceedings under section 44(2a) of the West Bengal Estate Acquisition Act, 1953 for revision of the record of rights in respect of the lands, taking the view that the rent execution sales being effected after 1.6.1954 were invalid under section 5B of the Act.
Accordingly, he ordered correction of the record of rights by substituting the names of the original raiyats for the auction purchaser.
The respondent filed appeals which were allowed by the appellate authority holding that section 5B of the Act had no application to raiyati interests.
The State filed writ petition under Article 227 of the Constitution before the 344 High Court.
The Special Bench of the High Court, confirming the decision of the appellate authority, held that the effective date in section 5B of the Act in respect of sale of raiyati and under raiyati holdings under the relevant statutes mentioned therein was 1.6.1954; that section 5B did not operate as a bar to execution of decree for arrears of rent as a money decree against raiyati or under raiyati interests, and section 168A (1) of the Bengal Tenancy Act, 1885 was impliedly repealed by the vesting of the interests of the intermediary including raiyats and under raiyats in the State; and that the initiation of the proceedings unders.
44(2a)of the Act was without jurisdiction.
The State filled the appeals by special leave.
The State challenged the judgment of the High Court on the ground that the High Court was not right in holding thats.
5B of the Act would not operate as a bar against the sale of raiyati or under raiyati interests if the execution of the rent decree is treated as an execution of money decree under the Code of Civil Procedure; and that the sale made pursuant to the execution of the money decree under the Code even though for rent, and of the raiyati or under raiyati interest holder, would not he a sale under the statutes men tioned in section 5B including the Tenancy Act.
Allowing the appeals, this Court, HELD:1.1 The proceedings initiated by the Assistant Settlement Officer to revise the entries in the record of rights made in favour of the respondent auction purchaser and the orders passed by him recording the names of the former raiyats as raiyats with possession of the lands and deleting the name of the auction purchaser, were valid as the raiyati interests were sold after 1.6.
1954 in execution of the decree for arrears of rent in respect of the lands in question.
(360 C E) 1.2By virtue of the notification issued under section 49, section 52 makes the provisions of sections 4, 5, 5A and 5B, among others, of Chapter 11 of the Act applicable to the raiyati and the under raiyati interests on the issuance of such notification.
(351 H) 1.3In the instant case the Notification No. 680 dated 9.4.1956 issued under section 49 was brought into force with effect from 10.4.1956.
It was not given retrospective effect from 15.4.1955.
The effect of this notification was that by 345 virtue of section 4 the intermediary interests stood vested in the State at the latest from 15.4.1955 while the raiyati and under raiyati interests stood vested in the State with effect from 10.4.1956.
The restriction on transfer of the said interests, however, came into effect retrospectively on or from 1.6.1954 by virtue of section 5B, since that date is mentioned in the section itself.
(352 AB) 1.4.
In view of section 5B of the Act, no estate, tenure or under tenure including raiyati and under raiyati interests could be sold under the statutes mentioned in s 5B including the Tenancy Act on and after 1.6.1954 and a sale after that date under any of those statutes would he void and have no effect under that section.
(352 C) 1.5 The present auction sales being of raiyati interests and effected on 6.11.1954and 3.12.1954 in execution of the decrees for the arrears of rent under the Tenancy Act were obviously invalid.
(352 D) 2.1 The decree pursuant to the suit under the Tenancy Act cannot he executed except under the provisions of that Act.
There cannot, therefore, be sale of the property in question pursuant to such decree under the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure.
(358 B) 2.2 The intention of the legislature in enacting section 5B was to prevent sales of the intermediary interests after 1.6.1954.
In view of the provisions of the Tenancy Act, the said interests could be sold only under and in accordance with the provisions of that Act.
The sale of such interests in the land pursuant to a decree for arrears of rent in respect of that land could not therefore, he made under the Code of Civil Procedure.
(360 D) 2.3 The Bengal Tenancy Act, 1885 is a self contained code governing the relations between the landlord and the tenant and for resolution of their disputes.
The Act incorporates certain provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure in toto while others with modification.
The Tenancy Act by implication prevents any suit between landlord and tenant to be filed otherwise than under its provisions.
All proceedings in the suit filed under the Bengal Tenancy Act from its inception to the satisfaction of the decree are to be governed by its provisions and the provisions of the Code are applicable to such proceedings only to the extent and subject to the conditions stated therein.
The Code as such is not applicable to the proceedings or to any part of it and hence no part of the proceedings can be prosecuted under the Code.
Even if simple money decree is obtained for the arrears of rent, no interest of 346 the tenant can he brought to sale in execution of such decree except under Abe provisions of the Tenancy Act.
In other words, no such interest can be sold under the Code and independently of the Tenancy Act.
(357 H, 358 A C) 2.4 Besides, Section 168A of the Tenancy Act removes the doubt, if any, and provides the procedure for attachment and sale of tenure or holding for arrears of rent due thereon, and liability of purchasers thereof.
The nonobstante clause of the Section excludes all other provisions of the Tenancy Act itself as well as of any other law and the provisions of any contract as well.
Clause (a) of the Section states that a decree for arrears of rent whether having the effect of a rent decree or a money decree or even a certificate for such arrears under the Bengal public Demands Recovery Act, 1930 shall not be executed by the attachment and sale of any movable or immovable property other than the entire tenure or holding to which the decree or certificate relates.
That provision will not apply only if the term of the tenure has expired before an application is made for the execution of such decree or certificate.
When the entire tenure or holding is purchased in execution of a decree for arrears of rent in respect thereof, clause (b) of section 168A (1) provides that the purchaser shall pay to the decree holder the deficiency, if any, between the purchase price and the amount due under the decree together with the cost incurred for the auction sale and also the rent which may have become due between the date of the institution of the suit and the date of confirmation of the sale.
This provision in inconsistent with the provisions of the Code.
(358 C F) 2.5 The High Court was not right in holding that the sales can be treated as being pursuant to a money decree and, therefore, under the Code and independently of the Tenancy Act.
The High Court unfortunately missed the vital fact that whether it is a money decree or rent decree, the entire raiyati interests of the judgement debtor in the land in question had to be sold under Section 168A of the Tenant Act but could not be sold in view of the bar imposed by Section 5B of the Act.
The bar cannot be over come by treating the sale under the Code to circumvent the provisions of the Tenancy Act and in particular of Section 168A of that Act.
(359 H, 360 A B) 2.6 After the intermediary interests vest in the State, they cannot be brought to sale and the remedy of the decree holder is to proceed against other property of the judgment debtor if any.
In that event, Section 168A would not come in the picture.
(358 G H)
