The assessee participated in an All India Highway Motor Car Rally and on being declared a winner, received an amount of Rs. 22,000 as prize money.
The Income tax officer included the prize money in his income for the relevant assessment year relying upon the definition of 'income 'in clause (24) of Section 2 of Income Tax Act.
On an appeal preferred by the respondent assessee the Appellate Assistant Commissioner held that as the Rally was not a race, the prize money cannot be treated as income within the meaning of section 2(24) (ix).
The Tribunal on an appeal by the Revenue, held that the Rally was not a race and as it was a test of skill and endurance, it was not a 'game ' within the meaning of Sec. 2 (24) (ix).
As the prize money received was casual in nature it fell outside Sec.
10(3) of the Act.
The High Court on a reference at the instance of the Revenue,upholding the findings of the Tribunal,observed that the expression 'winnings ' cannotes money won by betting or gambling and therefore the prize money not represent 'winnings '.
Inasmuch as the amount in question was obtained by participating in a rally which involved skill in driving the vehicle, it held, it cannot he included in the assessee 's income, also because it fell outside the preview of s.10 (3).
Allowing the Appeal, the Court, HELD:1.
The expression 'income ' must be construed in its widest sense.
The definition of 'income ' is an inclusive one.
Even if a receipt does not fall within sub clause (ix) or any of the sub clauses of Sec.2(24) of the Act it may yet constitute income.
Hence the prize money received by the respondent 329 assessee constitutes 'income ' as defined in clause (24) of Section 2 of the Act.
(335 C) 2.The High Court erred in reading several sub clauses in Sec.
2(24) as exhaustive when the statute expressly says that the definition is inclusive.
Even if a receipt does not fall within the ambit of any of the sub clauses in Sec.
2(24) it may still he income if it partakes of the nature of income.
The idea behind providing inclusive definition in Sec.
2(24) is not to limit its meaning but to widen its net.
This Court has repeatedly said that the word 'income ' is of widest amplitude and that it must he given its natural and grammatical meaning.
(335 D) Kamakshya Narayan Singh vs C.LT P.C., Navin Chandra Mafatlal vs C.I.T, Bombay 26 ITR (SC)and Bhagwan Das Jain vs Union of India SC, followed.
Gopal SaranNarain Singh vs Commissioner of Income Tax, 3ITR237 P.C., referred to.
3.If the monies which are not earned in the true sense of the word Constitute income, it is difficult to appreciate why do monies earned by skill and to not constitute income? The Rally was a contest, if not a race.
The Respondent assessee entered the contest to win it.
The Prize money which he got in return for winning the contest was a reward for his skill and endurance.
It does constitute his income which expression must be construed in its widest sense.
(335 B) 4.The sub clause (ix) of Sec.
2(24), is not confined to games of gambling nature alone.
Some of them are games of skill.
State of Bombay vs R.M. D. Chamarbaugwala ; ; and Stale of Andhra Pradesh vs K. Satyanarayan ; , followed.
5.As the definition of income in Sec.
2(24) is an inclusive one, its ambit should be the same as that of the word 'income ' occurring in Entry 82 of list 1 of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India.
(334 B) 6.Even casual income is 'income 'as is evident from Sec.
10(3).
A casual receipt which should mean in the context, casual income is liable to be included in the total income, if it is in excess of Rs. 1,000 by virtue of clause (3) 330 of Sec. 10.
The Tribunal erred in its finding that the prize money fell outside the purview of Sec.
10 (3) inspite of holding that the receipt in question was casual in nature.
(335 E)
