On May 27, 1978, the petitioner entered into an arbitration agreement under which he had to execute a certain work within 9 months.
He averred that he had sent his bills on July 12, 1979, but payment was not made.
On November 28, 1989, for the first time he sent a notice to the respondent for reference to arbitration.
The respondent approached the High Court under Ss. 5,12 and 33 of the .
A learned Single Judge held that the claim was hopelessly barred by limitation, and cancelled the arbitration agreement.
A Division Bench dismissed the Appeal.
On appeal, this Court addressed itself to 2 questions: Whether the High Court could permit a party to rescind an arbitration agreement; and whether delay can be a ground for rescinding such agreement.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD:1.
The Court has the power and jurisdiction under Ss. 5 and 12 to grant leave to the applicant in exceptional circumstances to revoke the contract of arbitration.
The Court should exercise the power sparingly, cautiously and with circumspection in permitting a party to rescind an arbitration agreement he had entered into voluntarily.
(365 B) 2.By virtue of section 37 of the , the provisions of the Limitation Act would apply to arbitrations, notwithstanding any term in the contract to the contrary.
(366 B) 3.The period of limitation for the commencement of an arbitration runs from the date on which, had there been no arbitration clause, the cause of 362 action would have accrued, just as in the case of actions the claim is not to be brought after the expiration of a specified number of years from the date on which the cause of action accrued, so in the case of arbitrations, the claim is not to be put forward after the expiration of the specified number of years from the date when the claim accrued.
(368 D E) Ram Dutt Ramkissen dass vs
Sassoon(E.D.)&Co.(1929)(56)1A 128(PC); Naamlooze Vennootschap Handels En Transport Maatschappij ' Vulcan ' vs A/S J. Ludwig Mowinckels Rederi [1 938] 2 All ER 152; Pegler vs Railway Executive at 338 and; West Riding of Yorkshire Country Council Huddersfield Corporation [1957] 1 AR ER 669 and Russell on Arbitrations; Justice Bachawat Law of Arbitration, applied.
Delay defeats justice: Defaulting party should hear the hardship and should not transmit the hardship to the other party, after the claim in the cause of arbitration was allowed to he barred.
(369 F ) Mustiu and Boyd 's Commercial Arbitration (1982 edn.), referred to.
The claim in the case on hand is undoubtedly hope lessly barred by limitation as the petitioner by his conduct slept over his right for more than 10 years.
The High Court justifiably exercised the discretionary power and jurisdiction under Ss. 5 and 12 (2) (b) in permitting the respondent to rescind the agreement.
(370 E)
