Section 6 of Andhra Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, 1957 provides a single point tax @ 4 % on declared goods, mentioned in the Third Schedule to that Act.
Item (2) of the Third Schedule describes the articles made of Iron & steel which fall in the category of 'declared goods '; sub item (i) of Item (2) pertains to "pig iron and cast iron including ingot moulds, bottom plates, iron scrap, cast iron scrap, runner scrap and iron skill scrap". 'Cast iron ' is defined in the Concise Oxford Dictionary as "a hard alloy of iron, carbon and silicon cast in a mould".
On February 28,1977 the Department of Revenue & Banking (Revenue Wing) Government of India issued a letter to all Finance/ Revenue Secretaries of all State Governments and Union Territories, explaining the term 'Cast Iron ' mentioned in section 14 (iv) (i) of the .
This letter said to have been issued in consultation with the Directorate General of Technical Development,_Chief Chemist and the Ministry of Law, Justice & Company Affairs, extended the scope of the expression 'cast iron ' to "cover 'cast iron casting ' also".
Based on similar clarifications, the Department of Revenue (S) Department of the Government of Andhra Pradesh issued a clarificatory order under section 42(2) of the Act vide GOMs No. 383 dated April 17,1985 extending the scope of the expression 'cast iron ' to include "cast iron castings".
This order was also published in the State 's official Gazette.
Section 42 (2) of A.P. General Sales Tax Act empowers the State Government to make, by an order, such provisions as appear to them necessary & expedient to remove difficulty in the implementation of this Act, provided that these are not inconsistent with the provisions of the Act.
The appellant manufactures and sells products like cast iron pipes,man 434 hole covers, etc.
He claims that read with the above clarificatory orders, he is liable to pay only 4% sales Tax under Section 6 of the A.P. General Sales Tax ct But, for the assessment year 1989 90 the Commercial Tax Officer C.T.O.) Narayanaguda Circle, Hyderabad levied Sales Tax on the said products at the rate applicable to general goods.
The C.T.O. having overruled the appellant 's contentions, the.
latter appealed to the Appellate Deputy Commissioner.
During the pendency of appeal a notice was issued to the appellant calling upon him to pay the tax assessed, since no stay has been granted in appeal.
Against this notice the appellant filed a writ petition No. 9315 of 1992 in the High Court of Andhra Pradesh.
The Division Bench of the High Court rejected the appellant 's main contention that his products were covered by Item (2) (i)of the Third Schedule to the A.P. General Sales Tax Act, and dismissed the writ petition.
Vide Civil Appeal No. 4474 of 1992 (with Writ Petition(Civil) No. 763 of 1992).
The appellant questions before this Court the above view of the High Court.
Rejecting the appellant 's contentions and upholding the judgment and order of the High Court, this Court, HELD: Law is what is declared by this Court and the High Court.
An executive authority can, at best, only opine its own understanding of the statute; such opinion is not binding upon the quasi judicial functioning of the authorities under the Act.
(444 B) Sanjeev Coke Manufacturing Company vs M/s Bharat Cooking Coal lid.
and another; , , referred to.
The Government cannot use the powers, conferred by section 42 (2) of the A.P. General Sales Tax Act, to dispense with a levy created by the Act.
(444D) The Van Nostrand 's Scientific Encyclopaedia treats 'cast iron ' 'and cast iron ' (with a hyphen) as two different words.
The Act speaks of 'cast iron ' (that is without a hyphen between the two words) (437 G H) Hence, the expression 'castiron 'in Item (2) (i) of A.P. General Sales Tax Act does not include the products cast iron pipes, man hole covers, bends etc.
(437 F) Deccan Engineers vs State of Andhra Pradesh.
1991 Vo. 12 A.P. Sales Tax Journal 138 referred to.
