The respondent, a Central Government employee, who was transferred from one place to another, challenged the order of transfer on the grounds that: his wife was also employed at the same place in a Central Government office; his children were also studying there; he himself had suffered backbone fracture injuries some time ago; the guidelines contained in Government of India O.M. dated 3.4.1986 had not been kept in mind while ordering his transfer; some other officials, who had been serving at the same place for a longer period than the respondent had been allowed to continue and his transfer was due to the mischief of his Controlling Officer.
In the counter affidavit filed by the appellants, it was submitted that the transfer was ordered on administrative grounds and was unexceptionable.
, A Single Member of the Central Administrative Tribunal quashed the order of transfer on the ground that the power of transfer was not an unfettered one, but was circumscribed by various circulars/ guidelines contained in the administrative instructions issued by the Government and an order of transfer could be interdicted if it was discriminatory, that in the matter of considering transfer of an individual officer, the Office Memorandum dated 3.4.1986, educational dislocation of the children and health ground,if present deserved special consideration and that in view of the facts and circumstances of the case the transfer order in question in respect of the respondent was mala fide.
428 Allowing the appeal, preferred by the Union of India and others, this Court, HELD: 1.1 An order of transfer is an incidence of Government servie.
Who should be transferred where is a matter for the appropriate authority to decide.
Unless the order of transfer is vitiated by malafides or is made in violation of statutory provisions, the Court cannot interfere with it.
There is no doubt that, while ordering the transfer the authority must keep in mind the guidelines issued by the Government on the subject.
Similarly, if a person makes any representation with respect to his transfer, the appropriate authority must consider the same having regard to the exigencies of administration.
The guidelines say that as far as possible, the husband and the wife must be posted at the same place.
The said guideline, however, does not confer upon the government employee a legally enforceable right.
Executive instructions issued by the Government are in the nature of guidelines.
They do not have statutory force.
[430 C E] 1.2.
There is no dispute that the respondent is liable to transfer anywhere in India.
It is not the case of the respondent that the order of his transfer was vitiated by mala fides on the part of the authority making the order, though the Tribunal says so, merely because certain guidelines issued by the Central Government were not followed.
The immediate superior of unit, against whom mischief had been attributed by the respondent, has nothing to do with his transfer.
[430 F] 2.1.
The jurisdiction of the Central Administrative Tribunal is akin to the jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India in service matters, as is evident from Article 323 A of the Constitution.
The constraints and norms which the High Court observes while exercising the said jurisdiction apply equally to the Tribunal created under Article 323A.
The Administrative Tribunal is not an Appellate Authority sitting in judgment over the order; of transfer.
It cannot substitute its own judgment for that of the authority competent to transfer.
[430 H,431 A] 2.2.
In the instant case, the Tribunal has dearly exceeded its jurisdiction in interfering with the order of transfer.
The order of the Tribunal reads as if it were sifting in appeal over the order of transfer made by the Senior Administrative Officer (competent authority).
[431 B] Bank of India vs Jagjit Singh Mehta, ; , explained.
