Petitioners firms were registered sales tax dealers.
They manufactured and sold handicraft items.
As they purchased raw material within the State against declaration forms ST 15 prescribed under Rule 21 of the Haryana general Sales Tax Rules read with Section 24 of the Haryana General Sales tax Act, purchase tax was not paid.
The petitioners sold the items of handicrafts to dealers in Delhi who exported the same out of India.
As the Delhi dealers issued Form H, prescribed under the Cectral Sales Tax Rules, they did not pay tax on the said sale/purchase.
Following the High court decision in M/s. Murli Manohar and company, Panipat & ors.
vs State of Haryana & Ors.
C.W. P. No. 1227 of 1980.
The Sales Tax Authorities levied purchase tax u/s 9 of the Haryana General Sales Tax Act for the assessment years in question on the purchase of raw material made by the petitioners, computing the tax with reference ' to the purchase value of the goods exported against Form H. Hence the present writ petition before this Court was filed challenging 454 155 the impugned order of levying purchase tax.
Meanwhile this court allowed the appeals preferred against the decision of the High Court in Murli Manohar and Company 's case, setting aside the judgment of the High Court.
As a common question arose in this batch of writ petitions, all petitions heard together.
The petitioners contended that in view of the decision of this Court in Murli Manohar 1991 [1] SCC 377, the writ petitions were to be allowed.
Disposing of the writ petitions, this Court, section HELD: 1.1,.
The decision in Murli Manohar says that there can be only three types of sales, namely, intra state sales, inter state sales and export sales a nd no other.
A sale to an exporter would be either at% intrastate sale or an inter state sale; in either case, the decision says, it does not attract the purchase tax(on raw material) under Section 9 of the Haryana General Sales Tax Act.
However, in the light of the decision in Hotel Balaji, it must be held that there is one more category in addition to the three categories mentioned above.
The fourth category is where a dealer in Haryana takes his goods (out of Haryana (without effecting a sale, within the State), and effects the sale in the other State.
According to Section 9 of the Haryana Act, as explained in Hotel Balaji, purchase tax can be levied and collected on the raw material purchased by the manufacture within Haryana, which was utilised for manufacturing the goods so sold in the other State.
(458 D F) Murli Manohar case.
; , followed.
Good year India Lid.
and Ors.
vs State of Haryana and Anr.
; , referred to.
Hotel Balaji and Ors.
vs State of Andhra Pradesh & ors.
J.T. explained 2.1.
In a petition under article 32 of the Constitution it is not the province of the Supreme Court to go into facts.
As repeatedly emphasised by this Court, the question whether a particular sale is an intra state sale, an inter state sale, an export sale within the meaning of Section 5(1) or a 456 penultimate sale within the meaning of section 5(3), or otherwise, is always a question of fact to be decided by the appropriate authority in the light of the principles enunciated by Courts.
(459 C) 2.2.
In these circumstances, it is directed that the matters be disposed of by the authorities under the Act in the light of the law declared by this Court in Murli Manohar, Hotel Balaji and in this judgment.
(459 D)
