The appellant landlord determined the tenancy of the contractual tenant in 1966 and filed a suit for his eviction.
The suit was decreed ex parte.
In execution proceedings the licensee obstructed and claimed to be protected licensee under Section 15A of the Bombay Rent Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947.
The objection was rejected by the executing Court.
The appellate Court confirmed the same holding that even though the first licence was, created in 1966 before determination of the tenancy for a period of six years and the second licence having been created in 1972, it was not necessary to examine the validity of the first, as the second one was created when contractual tenant had become statutory tenant, and therefore, he was incapable of transferring any right or interest in favour of the licensee.
On appeal, the High Court upheld the finding of the appellate court that the licence was created in 1972 It also held that creation of licence by a statutory tenant, was valid.
Being aggrieved by the judgment of the High Court, the appellant landlord preferred an appeal, before the Court.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.1 In the absence of any legislation touching the contract, a contractual tenant is left with no transferable right after determination of his tenancy.
(465 B) 1.2 The law would operate in favour of a person who held the premises under valid licence.
A valid licence could be created, by a contractual tenant or by a statutory tenant if he continued at par with contractual tenant by 461 operation of legislation.
(465 G) 1.3In the instant case, the licence was granted by the contractual tenant in 1972.
But his tenancy had been determined by the landlord in 1966.
He thus had become statutory tenant.
He did not, in law had any assignable interest on the date he created the licence.
The grantor, therefore, from a cause preceding the grant had ceased to have any interest, and was incapable of creating any valid licence unless he could be deemed to be at par with the contractual tenant by any provision in the Statute.
In absence of any such provision in the Bombay Rent Act, the licence was invalid and stood revoked.
The occupation of the respondent thus was not as licensee within the meaning of Section 15A of the Act.
(466 B C) Vasant Tatoba Hargude and Ors.
vs Dikkaya Muttaya Pujari: , approved.
Anand Nivas Private Ltd. vs Anandji Kalyanji 's Pedhi & Others, AIR 1965 SC 414; Jai Singh Morarji and others vs M/s Sovani (P) Ltd., ; ; Damadilal and others vs Parashram and Others, ; and Luadhichem Agencies vs Ahmed R. vs Peer Mohamed and Anr., 1, referred to.
