These appeals impugned the constitutionality of the Uttar Pradesh Transport Service (Development) Act, 1955 (U. P. IX Of 1955), passed by the State Legislature after obtaining the assent of the President, and the validity of the scheme of nationalisation framed and the notifications issued by the State Government under it.
The appellants as permit holders under the , were plying buses on different routes in Uttar Pradesh along with buses owned by the State Government.
The State Government issued a notification under section 3 Of the impugned Act directing that the said routes along with others should be exclusively served by the State buses, and followed up that notification by others under ss 4 and 8 of the Act.
The appellants moved the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution challenging the validity of the said Act and the notifications thereunder.
The High Court rejected their petitions and thereafter came into force the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act (100 Of 1956), inserting Ch.
IVA into the Act, which provided for nationalisation of transport services.
The contentions raised on behalf of the appellants were, (1) that the passing of the Amending Act made the impugned Act wholly void under article 254(1) Of the Constitution, (2) that the scheme framed under the impugned Act fell within the purview of section 68B of the Amending Act and ceased to be operative and (3) that even 'assuming that the impugned Act was valid in so far as the scheme was concerned, it violated article 31 as it stood before the Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1955.
A further contention on the basis of the proviso to article 254(2) was that the impugned Act stood wholly repealed by the Amending Act, section 68B of the latter excluding the operation of the General Clauses Act.
It was contended, inter alia, on behalf of the State that the amendment of article 31 by the Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1955, having removed, before the scheme under the impugned Act had 9 yet been framed, the constitutional limitation which that Article had imposed on the Legislature when it passed the impugned Act, had the effect of validating that Act passed by it at a time when it was subject to the limitation.
Held, (per curiam), that the Uttar Pradesh Transport Service (Development) Act, 1955, did not, on the passing of the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1956 (100 of 1956), become wholly void under article 254(1) Of the Constitution but continued to be a valid and subsisting law supporting the scheme already framed under the U.P. Act.
Even assuming that the Amending Act had the effect, under article 254(2), of repealing the State Act, such repeal could not nullify the scheme already framed under that Act, for the provisions of section 6 of the General Clauses Act would operate to save it.
Nor could it be said, having regard to the provisions of the impugned Act and particularly section II(5) thereof, that it offended article 31 of the Constitution as it stood before the Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1955, by failing to provide for the payment of adequate compensation.
Per Das, C.J., and Sinha J.
There was no reason why the doctrine of eclipse as explained in Bhikaji Narain Dhakras vs The State of Madhya Pradesh, ; , could not also apply to a post Constitution law that infringed a fundamental right conferred on citizens alone.
Such a law, though shadowed and rendered ineffective by the fundamental right so far as the citizens were concerned, would remain effective so far as noncitizens were concerned.
The moment the shadow was removed by a constitutional amendment, the law would apply to citizens without re enactment.
John M. Wilkerson vs Charles A. Rahrer, ; ; ; and Bhikaji Nayain Dhakras vs The State of Madhya Pradesh, ; , referred to.
The question whether a post Constitution law that infringed a fundamental right guaranteed to all persons, citizens or noncitizens ' would be subject to that doctrine should, however, be left open.
Held, (per Bhagwati, Subba Rao and Wanchoo, jj.), that it was apparent from the provisions of articles 254, 246 and 13 of the Constitution, read together, that the power of Parliament and the State Legislature to make laws with regard to any of the matters enumerated in the relevant list in the Seventh Schedule was subject to the provisions of the Constitution including article 13.
There was a clear distinction between the two clauses of article I3.
Under cl.
(1), pre Constitution law subsisted except to the extent of its inconsistency with the provisions of Part III whereas under Cl.
(2) any post Constitution law contravening those provisions was a nullity from its inception to the extent of such contravention.
The words "any law" in the second line of 2 Cl.
(2) meant an.
Act factually passed in spite of the prohibition contained therein, and did not pre suppose that the law made was not a nullity.
That prohibition went to the root and limited the State 's power of legislation and law made in spite of it was a still born one.
In construing the constitutional provisions relating to the powers of the legislature embodied in articles 245 and 13(2) of the Constitution, no distinction should be made as between an affirmative and a negative provision, for both are limitations on that power.
K. C. Gajapati Narayan Deo vs The State of Orissa, ; , referred to.
A distinction, well recognised in judicial decisions, had, however, to be made in judging the effect of law made in transgression of the limits fixed by articles 245 and I3(2), between an Act that was void from its inception and one that, though valid when made, was rendered unconstitutional later on.
On that distinction was based the principle that an after acquired power could not validate a statute and a law validly made could take effect when the obstruction was removed.
A review of the relevant authorities and judicial decisions clearly established, (1) that affirmative conferment of power to make laws subject wise and the negative prohibition from infringing any fundamental rights were but two,,aspects of want of legislative power, (2) that by expressly making the power to legislate on the entries in the Seventh Schedule subject to other provisions of the Constitution, that power was subjected to the limitations laid down in Part III of the Constitution, (3) that, therefore, a law in derogation or in excess of such power would be void ab initio either wholly or to the extent of the contravention and that (4) the doctrine of eclipse could be invoked only in the case of a law that was valid when made but was rendered invalid by a supervening constitutional inconsistency.
Newberry vs United State, ; 65 L. Ed. 9I3; John M. Wilkerson vs Charyles A. Rahrer, (1891) 140 U. section 545; ; ; Carter vs Egg and Egg Pulp Marketing Board, ; ; Keshavan Madhava Menon vs The State of Bombay, ; ; Behram Khurshed Pesikaka vs The State Of Bombay, [1955) 1 S.C.R. 589; Saghir Ahmed vs The State of U. P. ; ; Ram Chandra Balai vs State of Orissa, and Pannalal Binjraj vs Union of India; , , referred to and discussed.
The tests of repugnancy between two statutes, one passed by the Parliament and the other by the State Legislature, were, (1) whether there was a direct conflict between them, (2) whether Parliament intended to lay down an exhaustive code in respect of the subject matter replacing the Act of the State Legislature, and (3) whether both the laws occupied the same field.
A comparison of the provisions of the two Acts indicated 11 that both were intended to operate in respect of the same subject matter and the same field but only in respect of the schemes initiated after the Amending Act had come into force, the latter Act having no retrospective effect.
The State Act must, therefore, yield place to the Central Act to that extent and become void only in respect of schemes framed under the Central Act.
Keshavan Madhava Menon vs The State of Bombay, [1951] S.C.R. 228, applied.
