A partnership firm consisting of three partners was engaged inter alia in the business of manufacturing and sale of beedies under the brand name "Mangalore Prakash Beedies".
On May 20,1972 a private limited company called prakash beedies Ltd. the assessee appellant was incorporated.
One of its objects was to take over the business of the aforesaid firms which it did under an agreement dated 15 July 1972 whereby the firms sold its rights and assets to the company.
For the use of the trade name, a royalty at 10p.
for every 1000 beedies was to be paid by the company to the firm.
This payment was made ever year by the assesse on account of royalty.
The three partners of the firms were also directors of the company.
The relevant assessment years were 1974 75 and 1975 76.
The facts in the other appeals are similar.
The assessee claimed deduction of the amount paid by it as royalty.
The ITO allowed the deductions as claimed.
The CIT in stio motu proceedings disallow the aforesaid deductions.
On appeal, the tribunal restored the order of the ITO.
On reference, the High Court answered in fan,our of the revenue as the three directors of the assessee company were also partners in the firm.
It held that in law, a firm is merely a collection or association of individuals for carrying on a business.
Merely because the firm is an assessable entity, under the Income Tax Act, it does not follow that it is a juristic or legal entity.
It must therefore be held that the payments to the firm were in reality made to the 607 directors, thus attracting section 40 (c).
Before this Court, it was contended for the assessee that payment to a firm is not ipso fact payment to the partners, directly or indirectly.
In any event, the payments were made to the three persons not in their capacity of directors (qua directors).
but in consideration of a valuable right parted by them in favour of the assessee company.
section 40(c) was never intended to take in such payments.
They relied on the budget speech of the Finance Minister and argued that the principle of interpretation noscitor a sociis must be applied to the words "remuneration, benefit or amenity".
The genuineness or validity of the agreement, the factum of payments as royalty, and that the brand name carries significant business value was not disputed.
The question before this Court was whether the royalty payments fail within section 40(c).
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD : 1.
Even assuming that the payments to firm were payments to partners, the said payments did not fall within section 40(c).
The payment, . were made In consideration of a valuable right parted by the firm/partners/ directors of the assessee company in favour of the assessee.
So long as the agreement whereunder the said payments were made is not held to be a mere device or a mere screen, the said payments cannot be treated as payments made to the directors (qua directors).
(613 H, 614 A) The payments were made by way of consideration for allowing the to use a valuable right belonging to them viz. the brand name.
Such a payment may be liable to be scrutinised under sub section.
(2) of section 40 (A), but it certainly did not fall within the four corners of section 40(c).
(614 A) T.T. (Pvt.) Ltd. vs ITO Bangalore , approved.
CIT Patiale vs Avon Cycles (p) Ltd. and India Jute Co. Ltd. vs CIT , referred to. 2.
The power vested in the ITO is to determine whether any expenditure of allowance is excessive or unreasonable having regard to the legitimate business needs of the company and the benefit derived by the assessee or 608 accruing therefrom.
Any payment to a relative of a director or other persons mentioned in clause (c) will necessarily be examined applying the above test and if it is found that they are unwarranted, unreasonable or excessive, they will be disallowed.
Such a situation does not arise herein.
(615 C) CIT, Bombay vs M/s. Indian Engineering and Commercial Corporation (p) Ltd. [1983] distinguished.
JT 683.
