Recruitment to the Punjab Superior Judicial Service was governed by the Punjab Superior Judicial Service Rules, 1963.
Rule 8 A inserted in the said rules by notification dated June 14, 1977 provided that instructions issued by the State Government from time to time in relation to reservation of appointments for posts for Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes were applicable for appointments to posts in the Service.
The Secretary to the Government of Punjab, Welfare of Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes Department by letter dated June 6, 1974 Informed all Heads of Department etc.
that it had been decided to increase the percentage of reservation in direct recruitment in all services from 20% to 25 % in the case of members of Scheduled Castes and from 2% to 5 % in the case of members belonging to Backward Classes, and Indicated the vacancies to be reserved for the members of Scheduled Castes in a lot of 100 vacancies and specified the points.
It also directed that the Roster already existing would not be abandoned, but would now be maintained in continuation from the vacancy in the existing Roster last filled up according to the new pattern of reservation.
Circular dated November 19, 1974 made provision for carrying forward of reservation for members of Scheduled Castes/Backward Classes, and directed that the reservation should be carried forward form vacancy to vacancy in the same block until a Scheduled Caste or a Backward Class person is appointed or promoted in the same block, and that the reservation should be carried from vacancy to vacancy in each Mock and from block to block until the carried forward vacancies are filled up.
594 By letter dated May 5,1975 the Secretary to the Government, Welfare Department Communicated to all Heads of Department ; that the Government has decided that henceforth, 50% vacancies of the quata reserved for Scheduled Castes should be offered to Balmikis and Mazhbi Sikhs as a first preference from amongst the Scheduled Castes candidate, .
The Under Secretary, Welfare Department Reservation Cell by his letter dated April 8,1980, clarified the position with regard to the implementation of instructions regarding reservation for Mazhbi Sikhs and Balmikis contained in the aforesaid letter dated May 5,1975, the Clarification was to the effect that : (1) the combined merit list can be disturbed while giving appointment to the candidate belonging to Balmikis and MazhbiSikhs; (ii) the first reserved vacancy can he offered to Balmikis and Mazhbi Sikhs although their name may be below in the merit list, and (iii) on the basis of 50% reservation Bal mikis and Mazhbi Sikhs 1,3,5 and so on reserved vacancies shall go to the candidates of these castes if available and 2,4,6 and so on reserved vacancies shall go to other Scheduled Castes candidates.
After introduction of Rule 8 A in the Punjab Superior Judicial Service Rules, four persons were appointed by way of direct recruitment to the Service in the year 1979.
One of them, Shri Balwant Rai, belonged to a Scheduled Caste (other then Balmikis or Mazhbi Sikhs).
Thereafter, in 1981 one post fell vacant but no person belonging to a Scheduled Caste could be selected and candidate belonging to general category was appointed against the said post In 1982, selection was made for two posts but only one person could he selected and he also belonged to the general category and no person belonging to a Scheduled Caste was available for appointment.
In 1986, six persons including the appellant and respondent No. 3 were appointed on the basis of direct recruitment.
Out of those six persons, four belonged to the general category and two belonged to Scheduled Castes.
One of the two persons was Shri G.S. Samra who belonged to a Scheduled Caste other than Balmikis or Mazhbi Sikh.
In the merit list for the said selection the appellant was placed at No. 1, Shri G.S. Samra at No. 2, and respondent No. 3 at No. 5.
As per the Roster, Shri G.S. Samra was placed at Point No. 7, the appellant at Point No. 8 and respondent No. 3 at Point No. 9.
After joining the Service, Shri G.S. Samra resigned and had ceased to be a member of the service prior.
to April, 1, 1988.
In the tentative seniority list as on April 1, 1988,the appellant was placed at serial No. 52 and respondent No.3 was placed at serial No. 53.
Respondent 595 No. 3 submitted a representation against his placement in the seniority list and claimed that he should be placed against the post reserved for scheduled castes at Serial No. 5 in the Roster and on that basis be given the seniority of the year of 1981, and that since he is a Mazhbi Sikh, he is entitled to preference over Shri G.S. Samra who belonged to a Scheduled Caste other than Balmikis and Mazhbi Sikhs, and he claimed that he should have been placed at Point No. 7 in the Roster and Shri G.S. Samra should have been placed at Point No. 9 and on that basis also respondent No. 3 is senior to the appellant.
Representation was also invited from the appellant in this regard.
After considering the representations the High Court decided that respondent No. 3 was entitled to he placed above Shri G.S. Samra in view of the Circular Letter dated May 5, 1975 and that he should have been placed against Point No. 7 in the roster and Shri G.S. Samra should have been placed against Point No. 9 in the Roster, In the revised seniority list Respondent No. 3 was placed at Serial No. 52 while the appellant was placed at Serial No. 53.
Aggrieved by the aforesaid decision the appellant filed a Writ petition in the High Court which was dismissed.
The appellant appealed to this Court and contended that the first appointment, by direct recruitment, of a person belonging to the Scheduled Castes was of Shri Balwant Rai made in 1979, that was at Point No. 1 in the Roster, and should have gone to a Balmiki or Mazhbi Sikh but since no person belonging to these communities was available Shri Balwant Rai who belonged to a Scheduled Caste was appointed.
Relying on the clarification contained in the letter dated April 8, 1980 it was submitted that the vacancy at Point No. 5 reserved for Scheduled Castes was to be carried forwarded to point No. 7 and Shri G.S. Samra had to he adjusted at Point No. 7 in the Roster, that respondent No.3 being a Mazhbi Sikh could not claim to be placed at Point No. 7 against a vacancy which was reserved for a candidate belonging to Scheduled Castes other than Balmikis and Mazhbi Sikhs and that he could the before be only placed against the vacancy at Point No. 9 in the Roster.
The appeal was contested on behalf of Respondent No. 3 who urged that in view of the order dated May 5,1975,50% vacancies of the quota reserved for Scheduled Castes have to be offered to Balmikis and Mazhbi Sikhs and since Shri Balwant Rai belonging to a Scheduled Coste other than Balmikis & Mazhbi Sikhs had been appointed in 1979, the next post should go to Balmikis and Mazhbi sikhs, and on that basis, respondent No. 3 was entitled to be appointed against the second post at point No.7 of the Roster and Shri 596 GS.
Samra could only be appointed against third post at Point No. 9 in the Roster.
It was also urged that the clarification contained in the letter dated April 8, 1980 could only have prospective operation with effect from the date of its issue, and the sub roster indicated therein could be given effect to only from that date, and on that basis also respondent No3 was entitled to be placed against Point No. 7 in the 100 point roster and Shri GS.
Samra against Point No. 9 in the said roster.
Allowing the appeal and setting aside the judgment of the High Court, this Court, HELD : 1. (a).
There is no dispute in the instant case, that respondent No3 has been appointed against the post reserved for members of Scheduled Castes and the question is about the inter se placement of two persons appointed against vacancies reserved for Scheduled Caste candidates.
The Circular dated March 6, 1961 does not deal with the said question and it has to be dealt with on the basis of the instructions contained in the orders dated May 5,1975 and April 8,1980.
(605 E) Jagjit Singh vs State of Punjab, ; , explained and distinguished.
1.(b).
Respondent No.3 can only be treated to have been appointed against the vacancy at point No. 9 in the Roster and on that basis he must be placid below the appellant in the seniority list.
Respondent No 2 is directed to revise the seniority list of the members of the Service accordingly.
The appellant would be entitled to consequential benefits accruing as a result of revision in the seniority.
(605 F) 2.
The letter dated April 8, 1980 gives clarifications on certain doubts that had been created by some Departments in the matter of implementation of the instructions contained in the earlier letter dated May 5,1975.
Since the said letter dated April 8, 1980 is only clarificatory in nature there is no question of its having an operation independent of the instructions contained in the letter dated May 5, 1975 and the clarifications contained in the letter dated April 8,1980 have to be read as a part of the instructions contained in the earlier letter dated May 5, 1975.
(603 E) 3.
A statute which is explanatory or clarificatory of the earlier enactment is usually held to be retrospective.
597 Craies on Statute Law 7th Edn.
p. 58, relied on.
(603 F) 4.
All appointments against vacancies reserved for Scheduled Castes made after May 5,1975 (after May 14,1977 in so far as the Punjab Superior Judicial Service is concerned) have to be made in accordance with the instructions as contained in the letter dated May 5, 1975 as clarified by letter dated April 8, 1980.
(603 F) 5.
The appointment of Shri Balwant Rai in 1979 has to be treated to be an appointment made under the said instructions and operation of these instructions cannot be postponed till April 8, 1980.
The sub roster as indicated in the letter dated April 8, 1980 would have to be applied in respect of the post on which Shri Balwant Rai was appointed in 1979 and the said appointment has to be regarded as having been made against the vacancy at Point No. 1 in the roster which was reserved for Balmikis or Mazhbi Sikhs but since no Balmiki or Mazhbi Sikh was selected for that post, the said vacancy was assigned to Shri Balwant Rai who belonged to a Scheduled Caste other than a Balmiki or Sikh.
(603 H, 604 A) 6.
The vacancy at Point No. 1 which was reserved for Balmikis or Mazhbi Sikhs could not he carried forward in view of the directions contained in the letter dated April 8, 1980.
(604 A) 7.
The next post reserved for Scheduled Castes at Point No. 5 in the roster was meant for a person belonging to a Scheduled Caste other than Balmikis and Mazhbi Sikhs.
(604 A) 8.
In the selections that were made in 1981 and 1982 no person belonging to a Scheduled Caste was selected and, therefore, posts at Point Nos. 5 and 6 in the Roster became available to candidates in the general category and the vacancy at Point No. 5 reserved for Scheduled Castes was carried forward to point No. 7.
(604 B) 9.
In 1986, two persons belonging to Scheduled Castes, namely Shri G.S Samra and respondent No. 3 were selected.
(604 B) 10.
Since the post appoint No. 5 which had been carried forward to point No. 7 was reserved for a candidate belonging to a Scheduled Caste other than Balmiki or Mazhbi Sikh it had to be assigned to Shri G.S. Samra falling in that category and respondent No.3 who was a Mazhbi Sikh could only be ap 598 pointed against the reserved vacancy at Point No. 9 in the Roster.
Respondent No.3 can not claim that the vacancy at Point No.7 should be assigned to him.
If respondent No.3.
is adjusted against the vacancy at Point No.9 in the Roster, he has to be placed in seniority below the appellant who was appointed against Point No. 8 in the Roster.
(604 C)
