Prior to January 1, 1984, the Andhra Pradesh Entertainment Tax Act, 1989, in Section 4, provided for levy of entertainment tax at a rate fixed on the has is of percentage of payment made by a person for admission to any entertainment.
In section 4 C, in respect of entertainments held within the jurisdiction (if any local authority where population did n(it exceed 25, 000.
tax was levied at a certain percentage of the gross collection capacity per show and the percentage for such levy were fixed according to the population of the local authority within the jurisdiction of which the entertainment held.
The Amending Act 24 of 1984, replaced the earlier mode of levy of tax prescribed in Section 4 and introduced a mode of levy of tax on the has is of a prescribed percentage of the gross collection capacity per show.
The rates 617 were fixed on the basis of a percentage of the gross collection capacity per show varying with the category of the local area in which the theatre was situated as well as on the nature of the theatre, viz. air conditioned air cooled or (other than air conditioned and air cooled)or permanent,semi permanent including touring and temporary the atres.
The proprietor was given an option to pay a weekly consolidated amount irrespective of the number of shows actually held by him and the said amount was fixed on the basis of the prescribed number of shows per week.
The number of show. .
varied with the nature of the theatre as well as the category of the local area in which it was situate.
A fixed amount was also leviable by way of show tax on each show.
Before the High Court, a number of writ petitions were filed challenging the validity of sections 4,4 A and 5 of the Andhra Pradesh Entertainments Tax Act, 1939, as amended by Act 24 of 1984, on the grounds that (i) the levy of entertainment tax on the basis of gross collection capacity without reference to the actual amount collected or the actual number of tickets sold or the number of persons admitted was ultra vires the legislative power conferred on the State Legislature under Entry 62 of List 11 of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution; (ii) section 4 was hit by Article 14 of the Constitution, as it gave rise to discrimination amongst different theatres situate within the same local area; and that (iii) the levy of entertainment tax under section 4 being exproprietory amounted to an unreasonable restriction on the right guaranteed to the petitioners by Article 19(1) (g) of the Constitution and was not saved under Article 19(6).
Relying upon the decisions in Western India Theatres vs Cantonment Board. [1959] Supp. 2 SCR 63; Y.V. Srinivasamurthy vs State of Mysor.
AIR 1959 SC 894 and State of bombay vs R.M.D. Chamarbaugwala.
A. I. R. the High Court dismissing the writ petitions held that the State Legislature was competent to levy the tax under Entry 62 of List 11 of the Seventh Schedule; that as the tax levied retained the character of entertainment tax, the Legislature was competent to adopt such basis or such measure, or such method of levy; that wide discretion was allowed to the Legislature in the matter of classification and in the matter of selection of persons to be taxed and that the two fold classification made by section 4 was neither discriminatory nor arbitrary or it did not mete out hostile discrimination to certain theatres; that the rates of tax that were prescribed under section 4 based on an average expected occupancy rate of less than 50 per cent to 66 per cent, was neither unreasonable nor expropriatory; that section 5 was only optional and no) one was compelled to be governed by it or to opt for the composition scheme and if a person opted to be governed by section 5, he must be deemed 618 to have accepted all the conditions and features of the scheme.
During the pendency of these appeals Special leave petition in this court the Act of 1939 was amended by A.P. Act 23 of 1988 and A.I. Act 16 of 1991, whereby the Tables below sections 4, 4 A and 5 were substituted and subsection (6A) was inserted in section 5.
Before this Court the appellants and the petitioners reiterated two contentions raised before the High Court while assailing the constitutional validity of sections 4 and 5 of the Act, namely, (1) that the impugned provisions did not fall within the ambit of the legislavite power conferred on the St .Ate Legislature under Entry 62 of List 11 of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution; (ii) that the impugned provisions were violative of Article 14 of the Constitution, as they provided for imposing tax at a uniform rate (in a particular class of Cinema theaters irrespective of their location and occupancy.
Dismissing the appeal and the Special Leave petition, this Court, HELD: 1.1.
While considering the question as to legislative competence of the State Legislature, it is necessary to bear in mind that the impugned provisions provide for imposition of a tax and a tax has two distinct elements viz., subject of the tax and the measure of the tax.
The subject of the tax is the person, think or activity on which the tax is imposed, and the measure of the tax is the standard by which the amount of tax is measured.
(632 1)) 1.2.
The competence of the Legislature to enact a law imposing a tax under a particular head of the legislative list has to be examined in the context of the subject of the tax.
It the subject of the tax falls within the ambit of the legislative power conferred by the head of legislative entry, it would be within the competence of the Legislature to impose such as tax.
(632 E) 1.3.
Prior to the enactment of Act 24 of 1984, there were two modes for levy of the tax, one on the basis of the actual number of persons admitted to each show and the other on the basis of the percentage of the grows collection capacity per show.
As a result of the amendments introduced by Act 24 of 1984, the system for levy of tax on the basis of number (of persons actually admitted to each show was dispensed with and the tax was to be levied on the basis of the percentage of the gross collection capacity per show and different percentages were prescribed depending on the type of the theatre and the 619 nature of the local area where it was situated.
(633 F H) 1.4.
The question whether the alteration in the said mode of levy of tax by Act 24 of 1984 has the effect of altering the nature of the tax in a way that it has ceased to he a tax on entertainments and falls beyond the field of legislative competence conferred (in the State Legislature by Entry 62 of List 11, must he answered in the negative. 'The fact that instead of tax being levied on the basis of the payment for admission made by the persons actually admitted in the theater it is being levied on the basis of the gross collection capacity per show calculated on the basis of the notional aggregate of all the payments fair admission which the proprietor would realise per show if all the seats or accommodation in respect of the place of entertainment are (occupied and calculated at the maximum rate of payments for admission, would not alter the nature of the tax or the subject matter of the tax which continues to he a tax on entertainment.
(634 B D) 1.5.
The mode of levy based on 'per payment for admission ' proscribed under Section 4(1) prior to amendment by Act 24 of 1984 necessitated enquiry into the number of shows held at the theatre and the number of persons admitted to a cinema theatre for each show and gave room for abuse both on the part of proprietor as well as other officers incharge of assessment and collection of tax.
The mode of levy or measure of the tax prescribed under section 4(1),as substituted by Act24 of 1984, is a more convenient mode of levy of the tax inasmuch as it dispenses with the need to verify or enquire into the number of persons admitted to each show and to verify the correctness or otherwise of the returns submitted by the proprietor containing the number of persons admitted (A) each show and the amount of tax collected.
(634 E) 1.6.
On an examination of the rates prescribed under both the modes it is found that under the system (of consolidated levy prescribed under Section 4 C, the proprietor could break even if the average rate of occupancy was 40%.
As regards the rates prescribed under Sections 4 and 5 as amended by Act 24 of 1984 they are based on an average expected occupancy rate of less than 50% or 66% depending upon the area in which the theatre is situated.
This would mean that the entertainment tax that would be collected over and above the average occupancy rate would constitute the profit of the proprietor.
In the circumstances, it cannot be said that the adoption of the system of consolidated levy in Section 4(1) as amended by Act 24 of 1984 alters the nature of tax and it has ceased to be a tax on entertainments.
(634 F H) 620 1.7.
Once it is held that tax #in entertainment could be levied either of the two modes, viz., per payments of admission or gross collection capacity per show, it is for the legislature to decide the particular mode or modes of levy to be adopted and whether a choice should he available to the proprietor of the cinema theatre in this regard.
The legislature does not transgress the limit: of its legislative power confer red on it under Entry 62 of List 11 if it decides that consolidated levy on the basis of gross collection capacity per show shall be the only mode for levy of tax on entertainments (635 C) 1.8.
The impugned provisions contained in Sections 4 and 5 as amended by Act 24 of 1984 are not ultra vires the legislative power conferred on tile State Legislature under Entry 62 of List 11.
(635 D) Western India Theatres vs Cantonment Board, [1959] Supp. 2 SCR 63 and Y. V Srinivasamurthy vs State of Mysore AIR 1959 SC 894, explained. 2.01.
The right conferred by Article 14 postulates that all persons similarly circumstanced shall he treated alike both in privileges conferred and liabilities imposed, Since the State, in exercise of its governmental power, has, of necessity, to make laws operating differently on different groups of persons within its territory to attain particular ends in giving effect to its policies, it is recognised that the State must possess the power of distinguishing and classifying persons or things to be subjected to such laws.
It is, however, required that the classification must satisfy two conditions, namely, (i)it is founded on an intelligible different is which distinguishes those that are grouped together from others; and (ii) the differential must have a rational relation to the object sought to be achieved by the Act.
It is not the requirement that the classification should be scientifically perfect or logically complete.
Classification would be justified if it is not palpable arbitrary.
(636 A C) Re Special Courts Bill, at pp.
534 536 and Khandige Sham Bhat vs Agricultural Income Tax Officer, ; at p. 817.
followed.
In the field of taxation the legislature exercises an extremely wide discretion in classifying items for the purposes, so long as it refrains from clear and hostile discrimination against particular persons or classes.
(636 E) 621 East India Tobacco Co vs State of A.P. ; at p. 411; P.M. Ashwathanarayana Shetty vs State of Karnataka.
[1988] Supp.3 SCR 155 at p.m 188; Federation of Hotel & Restaurant Association of India vs Union of India, at p. 949, Kerala Hotel & Restaurant Association vs State of Kerala; , at p. 530: Gannon Dunkerley, and Co. vs State of Rajasthan, at 397; and San Antonio Independent School District vs Bodriques; , at p. 41, referred to.
just as a difference in the treatment of persons similarly situate leads to discrimination ', so also discrimination can arise if persons who are unequals, i.e. differently placed.
are treated similarly.
In such a case failure on the part of the legislature to classify the persons who are dissimilar in separate categories and applying the same law, irrespective of the differences brings about the same consequence as in a case where the law makes a distinction between persons who are similarly placed.
A law providing for equal treatment of unequal objects transactions or persons would he condemned as discriminatory if there is absence of rational relation to the object intended to he achieved by the law.
(637 A B) K. T Moopil Nair vs The State of Kerala & Anr.
, ; , distinguished.
Jalan Trading Co. (pvt.) Ltd. vs Mill Mazdoor Union, ; and Twyford Tea Co. Ltd. & Anr vs The State of Kerala & Anr., ; , referred to.
In the instant case, the legislature has prescribed different rates of tax by classifying theatres in the different classes, namely, air conditioned,air cooled, ordinary (other than air conditioned and air cooled), permanent and semi permanent and touring and temporary.
The theatre% have further been categorized on the basis (of the type of the local area in which they are situate.
It cannot, therefore, be said that there has been no attempt on the part of the legislature to classify the cinema theatres taking into consideration the differentiating circumstances for the purpose of imposition of tax.
(638 G H) 2.05.
In relation to cinema theatres it can he said that the attendance in the various cinema theatres within a local area would not be uniform and would depend on factors which may vary from time to time.
But this does not mean that cinema theatres in a particular category of local area will always 622 be at a disadvantage so as to be prejudicially affected by a uniform rate as compared to cinema theatres having a better location in the same local area.
The contention that the impugned provisions are violative of right to equality guaranteed under Article 14 (if the Constitution on the basis that unequals are being treated equally cannot be accepted.
(639 B C) 3.
The provision for enhancement contained in sub section (16) of section 5 relates to the cases.
There the proprietor of a cinema theatre opts for payment of weekly consolidated amount.
Since the proprietor has the option to opt for the said scheme he cannot complain that the scheme suffers from inequality.
on account of absence of a corresponding provision for reduction of amount of tax.
(639 E)
