A subsidiary company of the appellant holding company (C.A. No. 2866 of 1993) diverted to the appellant rupees ten crores received by it by way of chit subscriptions.
It failed to pay the subscribers the prize money.
When some of the subscribers initiated winding up proceedings against the subsidiary company the appellant appeared before the High Court and undertook the liability of the subsidiary company to an extent of a sum of Rs 10.40 Crores to the subscribers.
The High Court approved the scheme of compromise and arrangement under section 391 of the and directed the winding up order to be held in abeyance on the condition that the appellant holding company would pay off the amount or Rs. 10.40 Crores to the subscribers, within five years.
It also restricted alienation (of any property by the holding company.
Without obtaining prior permission (of the Court.
Even ten %,Cars after the order of the High Court, more than one third of the subscribers remained unpaid.
Meanwhile the appellant company took steps to sell 20.79 acres of land to pay the Creditors.
The appellant in C.A.No. 2863 65 (if 1973 made an offer where as the respondent creditors ' association made a counter offer.
The High Court accepted the (offer of Creditors ' association.
Hence the appeals by special leave.
Disposing of the appeals, this Court gave the following 904 Directions : 1.
The holding company shall deposit with the official Receiver fir Assignee concerned a sum equivalent to the deposited sum on which the High Court had directed sale deed to be executed in favour of the creditors association together with 25% interest minus the interest, if any earned by the deposit, made, calculated (in the deposited amount, from the date of deposit till 31st.
July, 1993, within a period of three months.
Out of the amount mentioned in condition (1) above, a sum equivalent to the amount deposited by creditors Association, together with interest at 25% thereon from the date of deposit upto 31st July, 1993 shall be refunded to the creditors association in lieu of their claim for the disputed land being given up.
The balance amount shall remain for the benefit of general body of creditors of the subsidiary company.
Tile holding company shall pay through the receiver the entire outstanding debts payable to the subscribers who were members of the creditors association on the date when their claim applications were decided by the High Court, together with interest thereon at 12 per cent from the date of decision till 31st July, 1993.
In case the above terms and conditions are complied with, within the period allowed then the disputed land offered for sale by the holding company and purchased by creditors ' associations shall stand released in holding company 's favour.
If such deposits are not made, the sale in favour of creditors company shall stand confirmed 5.
In view of the offer made by the appellant in Appeals No. 2863 65 of 1993, the land on its release shall be sold, for a price not less titan five lakhs per acre.
The amount so realised shall also be deposited of the holding company with the receiver for distribution among general body of creditors of the subsidiary, company.
The receiver shall further take steps to see that the holding company fulfils its obligations and pays the entire balance within a period of one year from 31st August, 1993.
In case of failure to clear the dues of all tile subscribers it shall he open to an%.
unpaid subscriber to approach the High Court for recalling the order passed by the High Court for in 1983 direction the winding up to be plot in abeyance, as well as to the steps to get the amount realised front assets of 905 the holding company.
If such an application is made it shall be disposed of by the High Court expeditiously in accordance with law after hearing parties concerned.
