In 1989, respondent 1 and his sister applied for migration from Mumbili Medical College in the Faculty of Medicine, affiliated to the University of Dar es Salam to a recognised medical college in India.
The Medical Council of India turned down this application.
A writ petition was filed in the Court at Jabalpur.
The High Court directed that the appellant and other authorities consider the case of the petitioners.
Thereafter the Executive Committee of the Medical Council reconsidered the case on 20th August, 1991.
It found that the grounds for migration were not sufficient; that it was.
the course of stud already undergone vis a vis that being taught in the medical college in which migration was sought, and not the facts of individual case, which was relevant.
Also the candidate had not furnished enough materials to make the comparison.
The Council therefore rejected the application.
A review petition and contempt petition filed in the High Court were dismissed.
Thereupon, in a miscellaneous petition filed on the same grounds seeking admission in the second year or the 1 year professional MBBS Course at Medical College, Jabalpur the High Court directed that the petitioners be given provisional admission.
The petitioners however, did not produce the required documents and the college did not provisionally admit them.
In an interlocutory application, the High Court permitted one of the petitioners to withdraw herself from the petition and directed that the other petitioner 788 (respondent I before this Court) he granted provisional admission on his filing necessary forms and depositing the fees without insisting ton the Production of any other certificate or testimonials or syllabus (of Dar es Sala in University On fear of contempt, the Dean had to comply with this order.
On an application before it, this Court stayed the interim order and requested the High Court to dispose of the main petition expeditiously.
The High Court allowed the %Tit petition and quashed the resolution dated 20th August, 1991.
refusing migration, holding that there was no application of mind by the Council.
On appeal before this Court, it was contended that the High Court erred in directing admission of respondent in a recognised medical college from an unrecognised medical college by way of migration , that Regulation V had been misread and that not having under gone study in a recognised medical college nor having passed the first professional examination, he could not be admitted to the second year; that he had failed in anatomy and had not sat for his supplementary examination and had therefore ceased to be a student of Dar es Salam University and that the first year course at Dar es Salam University and in India were not equivalent.
Equivalence in any case, it was urged, is to be decided by an expert body and is not in the domain of the Court.
For respondent 1, it was argued that the self contradictory stand of the Council on equivalence had led to the High Court deciding the issue; that equity was in his favour; that he had in any event passed his pre medical test in 1991; and that he belongs to a scheduled tribe.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
The Medical Council has come to the correct conclusion that there cannot he migration from unrecognised institution to a recognised medical college.
(799 G) Dar es Salam University has not been recognised as provided in the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956.(7% A) 2.
The High Court does not have the necessary expertise to determine equivalent.
The Medical Council is the main authority in this respect.
(799 C) 789 3.
what is material for grant of permission for migration is the course of study which a student has undergone vis a vis the courses being taught in the medical college in which the migration is sought, and not the individual case.
(799 D) The material placed before the Council was not sufficient to decide equivalence.
The concerned authority is to verify the disputed factual position concerning his performance in the 1991 pre Medical test and decide on considering him for admission for the academic year 1993 94.
(800 E G)
