The appellants as the Mahants of the respective maths or asthals were served with notices under section 59 of the Bihar Hindu Religious Trusts Act, 195o, by the President, Bihar State Board of Religious Trusts, asking them to furnish statements and accounts of the properties in their possession.
They challenged the constitutional validity of the Act by proceedings taken in the High Court on the grounds (1) that sections 2, 5, 6, 7 and 8 of the Act infringe article 14 Of the Constitution, inasmuch as there was inequality of treatment as between Hindu religious trusts on one hand and Sikh religious trusts on the other, the latter having been excluded from the purview of the Act, and that there was inequality of treatment even as between Hindu religious trusts and Jain religious trusts, though both came under the Act; (2) that the provisions of ch.
V of the Act and in particular sections 28 and 32 violate article 19(1)(f) of the Constitution, as under those provisions the mahant or Shebait practically loses his right of management and is reduced to the position of a mere servant of the Board; (3) that the provisions of the Act contravene articles 25 and 26 of the Constitution, as the power to alter or modify the budget relating to a religious trust or the power to give directions to a trustee may be exercised by the Board in such a way as to affect the due observance of religious practices in the math or temple; (4) that section 70 imposes an unauthorised tax, and (5) that section 55(2) contravenes article I33 of the Constitution.
Held, (1) that in view of the fact that in the matter of religious trusts in the State of Bihar, there are differences between Sikhs, Hindus and jains and that the needs of jains and Hindus are not the same in the matter of the administration of 564 their respective religious trusts, it is open to the Bihar Legislature to exclude Sikhs who might have been in no need of protection and to distinguish between Hindus and jains.
Accordingly, SS. 2, 5, 6, 7, and 8 of the Act do not infringe article 14 Of the Constitution.
It is well settled that while article 14 forbids class legislation, it does not forbid reasonable classification for the purposes of legislation, and in order to pass the test of permissible classification, two conditions must be fulfilled, namely, (1) that the classification must be founded on an intelligible differentia which distinguished persons or things that are grouped together from others left out of the group and (2) that that differentia must have a rational relation to the object sought to be achieved by the statute in question.
Shri Ram Krishna Dalmia vs Shri Justice section R. Tcndollkar, ; , relied on.
(2) that having regard to the position of a trustee in respect of the trust property which he holds and the object or purpose of the Act, the restrictions imposed in Ch.
V of the Act are really for the purpose of carrying out the objects of the trust and for the better administration, protection and preservation of the trust properties, and are reasonable restrictions in the interests of the general public within the meaning Of cl.
(5) Of article 19 of the Constitution.
(3) that the Act does not contravene articles 25 and 26 of the Constitution, as the provisions of the Act relating to the power of the Board to alter the budget and to give directions to the trustee are subject to restrictions, namely, that they must be for the proper administration of the religious trust ; and, further, none of the provisions interfere with " matters of religion " including practices which a religious denomination regards as part of its religion.
(4) that section 70 Of the Act is a valid provision as it only provides for the levy of a fee for the purpose of defraying the expenses incurred or to be incurred in the administration of the Act and is not a tax.
Mahant Sri jagannath Ramanuj Das vs The State of Orissa, ; , followed.
(5) that section 55(2) Of the Act does not contravene article I33 Of the Constitution as it does not override or is not intended to override article 133 or any other Article of the Constitution relating to appeals to the Supreme Court.
