The respondents were small scale manufactures of fertilizers.
They were entitled to payment of subsidy on meeting prescribed standard in the manufacture of single super phosphate (SSP).
The Government of Madhya Pradesh requested PDIL, a consultancy and R.& D Organisation, to test the rock phosphate at Hirapur mines for determining disability allowance payable to SSP producers.
On the basis of this report, the payment of subsidy was withheld, and a show cause notice issued to the respondents.
A writ petition filed in the High Court was allowed by a Division Bench which quashed the show cause notice and ordered that the subsidy be paid.
It found that the PDIL report had been made without notice to the manufacturers or inviting their participation and that the laboratory report ; furnished by the manufacturers on which the payment (of subsidy was dependent had not been questioned.
On appeal before this Court, the questions to be decided were whether the withholding of payment of subsidy to the respondent was justified; whether the High Court committed any error in interfering at the stage of show cause in exercise of its extraordinary jurisdiction; and whether tile report of PDIL, prepared behind the back of the respondents could be used to reject the standard fertilizer of the respondent.
It was contended for the appellants that a detailed technical examination was pending and the subsidy worked out had on in been provisional, and that PDIL had carried out the examination.
PDIL being independent and reputed, it was not required to here the manufacturers.
Further, the non release of 761 subsidy was also on the basis of input cost data.
It was urged that the High Court was not justified in quashing the show cause notice and issuing directions for paying the subsidy without giving the department an opportunity to verify if the respondents had in fact compiled with the Control Order.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court HELD : 1.
PDIL was engaged to rind out the grade of phosphate from Hirapur mines to enable the manufacturers to claim disability allowance, and not whether they were producing fertilizer in accordance with the standard provided in the Control Order.
The purpose being entirely different, the report could not be utilised for a different purpose.
(767 G) 2.
There is no evidence to doubt the authority of the reports submitted by the inspectors appointed under the Control Order that the fertilizer produced was of specified standard.
(768 B) 3.
On facts, in the absence of any reliable data or any material the inference drawn by the appellants in the notice that the fertiliser was not of a specified standard was baseless.
The entire exercise was therefore vitiated being tainted with arbitrariness.
(770 F G) 4.
The High Court should normally not interfere at the stage of show cause notice.
But where, from the facts it is apparent that there was no material available with the department to doubt the statement on behalf of the respondent, it would be failing to exercise jurisdiction if the Court does not discharge its constitutional obligation of protecting the manufacturers who are in perilous condition as they are not able to meet their liabilities to pay to financial institutions and various other authorities and are facing proceedings on various counts and have virtually closed their unit.
The authorities did not realise either the purpose of granting subsidy or the harassment to which the manufacturers have been exposed.
Entire litigation appears to be a sad plight for those who have set up small scale units in the hope that they will stand on their own on the subsidy given by the Government as admittedly the price of manufacturing fertilisers is much more than the price fixed by the Government for which it assured to pay subsidy.
(771 B D) 762
