Basappa Bheemappa K,as the Watandar of the disputed agricultural lands admeasuring 4 acres, and 6 acres 26 guntts, in Kubihal Village in Kundgol Taluk of Dhwarwad District which became a part of Karnataka State in 1956.
In 1950, he leased the disputed lands to appellant 1 and the father of appellant 2 for their personal cultivation.
With the coming into force of the Bombay paragana and Kulkarni Watans(Abolition) Act 1950 the lands were resumed by the State of Bombay, Bheemappa applied under this Act for regrant of the wattan land, and the Dy.
Commissioner of Dhawad District made the regrant in his favour on 30.11.1968.
On 31.3.1969, he sold the land to appellant No. 1 and the father of appellant No. 2 under a registered sale deed.
The land tribunal under the Karnataka land Reforms Act 1961 found it unnecessary to register the occupancy rights (of the appellants in view of the sale.
In 1976, respondent field a suit against Bheemappa and 2 other brothers for partition to the disputed property and separate possession.
He impleadcd appellants 1 and 2 as defendant,; in the suit since they were in possession of the disputed lands.
He contended that Bheemappa had sold the lands without the prior consent of his brothers, and for nor legal necessity.
of the family, and the sale was void ab initio.
780 The Munsiff Court granted a decree in favour of the respondent on its finding that the disputed funds were Hindu joint family properties, that the sale *%,as void ab initio for tile reasons stated . and that the plea (if the defendants appellants that if the sale was void the tenancy revived. ",as unacceptable.
The Munsiff Court, and in appeal, the Civil Judge concurrently held that the sale was void since sale (it ' fragments was prohibited under the Karnataka prevention of Fragmentation Act 1966.
A regular second appeal before the High Court was dismissed in limine.
The appellants contended before this Court that if the sale was ab initio void, the agricultural tenancy (of the appellant%; revived.
For the respondents it was submitted that the tenancy on lease hold rights in the disputed lands held by the appellant got merged in tile sale effected in their favour.
When that sale was found to be void it did not have the effect (if reviving the merged tenancy of the appellants,as would restore their tenancy right,; in the disputed lands.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: (1) Tile tenants being the persons deemed to be in possession of the disputed lands and entitled to continue in possession thereof a partition decree could have been granted, in respect of such tenanted lands only if permissible by law.
(784 H) (2) The courts below having found that the sale deed was void because Bheemappa could not having sold the undivided interest of his brother, only his 1/4 undivided interest, in the disputed lands had to be regarded as having been sold by him.
(784 H) The lessors ' entire interest (or entire reversion in the disputed lands cannot therefore be regarded us having been sold under the sale deed of 31 st March, 1969.
From this, it follows that the lease hold interests of the leases and the lessors entire reversion could not have merged in one and the same person, so as to constitute merger envisaged under section 111(d) of the Transfer of Property.
Act, 1982.
For constituting merger under that procession, the interests of the lessee and the interests of the lessor in the whole of the 781 property had to vest at the same time in one person in the same right.
(785 BC) The tenancy rights of the appellants in the disputed lands was not affected or disturbed by the sale deed of 31st March, 1969, and it is unnecessary to consider the question of revival of the right of tenancy of the appellants in the disputed lands.
(785 D) 3.
Case remitted to the Court of Munsiff at Kundgol Dharwad District to decide the claim for partition if the disputed lands had continued as tenanted lands, as found by this Court.
(785 E)
