The respondent state, in the process of overhauling the methodology of teaching and administration of teachers training institutes in order to achieve qualitative excellence in teacher education , amended the Tamil Nadu Minority Schools (Recognition and Payment of Grant) Rules 1977 by G.O. No.536 dated 17 5 1989 and No. 661 dated 12 6 1991.
The Rules besides providing for instructions teaching practice to be followed and minimum qualification for the staff prescribed certain other conditions regarding land,building, hotel 986 furniture, library, teaching appliances, sports facilities, recognised middle school for providing teaching practice to trainees, etc.
to be satisfies by a teachers training institute to qualify for grant of recognition.
The appellant/petitioners are various Teachers Training Institute in the State of Tamil Nadu.
claiming to be minority educational institutions in terms of Article 30(1) of the Constitution of India The State Government declined to recognise these institutions on the ground that they failed to sutisfy the conditions for grant of recognition as provided under the Recognition Rules.
The appellants/petitioners filed writ petitions before the High Court challenging the validity of the Recognition Rules on the ground that the same were violative of Articles 30(1) and 14 of the Constitution.
It was contended that as the minorities have a fundamental right under r Article 30(1) of the Constitution to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice, the conditions provided under the recognitions Rules were wholly arbitrary and were designed to oust the appellants from the educational field and the the provisions were so onerous that it was difficult rather impossible to comply with the same.
The High Court dismissed the writ petitions.
The appellants/petitioners filed the appeals and the special leave petitions.
It was contended on behalf of the appellants that the Rules could not be made applicable to the institutions already established and given recognition by the State Government under the directions of the Court; and that the successful students of these institutions who had taken examinations be given certificates.
This Court dismissed the appeals and the special leave petitions by its order dated 25 5 1993 indicating that reasons therefor would follow.
Giving reasons for its order dated 25 5 1993, this Court HELD : 1.
The High Court was right in holding that none of the conditions for grant of recognition to teachers training institutes prescribed under the Tamil Nadu Minority Schools (Recognition and Payment of Grants) Rules, 1977, infracted Articles 14 & 30(1) of the Constitution.
It rightly culled out the following principles (i) The fundamental right declared by Article 30(1) of the Constitution is absolute in terms, but subject to regulatory measures; 987 (ii)There is no fundamental right under Article 19(1) (g)of the Constitution to establish or administer an educational institution, if recognition is sought therefore; (iii) The institutions must he educational institutions of the minorities in truth and reality and not mere masked phantoms; (iv) There is no fundamental right to recognition and an% institution seeking recognition should abide by the regulations prescribed by the State as conditions therefor, (v) The minority institutions must be fully equipped with educational excellence to keep in step with other institutions in the State; (vi) The regulations framed by the State cannot abridge the fundamental right of the minorities and they should be in the interests (if the minority institutions themselves and not based on State necessity or general societal necessities .
(vii) The regulations should be, with a view to promoting excellence (of educational standards and ensuring security of the services of teachers and other employees of the institutions and in the true interests of efficiency (if institutions, discipline, health, sanitation, morality public order and the like; (viii) Even unaided institutions are not immune from the operations of general laws of the land such as Contract Law Tax measures, Economic Laws and, Social Welfare legislations, Labour and Industrial Laws and similar other laws which are intended to meet the need of the Society.
Kerala education bill,[1959] SCR 995; Rev. Sidhajbai Sabhai section vs State of Bombay and Anr[1963] 3 SCR 837; section Azeesh Basha vs Union of India ; ; State o Kerala etc.
vs Very Rev. Mother Provincial etc ; ; Regina vs St. Alosius Higher Elementary School and Anr[1971] Supp.
SCR 6; The Ahmedabad St. Xaviers College Society and Anr etc vs State of Gujarat and Anr[1975] 1 SCR 173; The Gandhi Faiz e am College, Shajahanpur
University of Agra and Anr.[1975] 2 SCC 283; Lilly Kurian vs Sr.
Lewina and 988 Ors.[1979] 1 SCR 320; All Saints High School, Hyderabad etc.
vs Government of Andhra Pradesh & Ors.
etc ; ; The Managing Board of the Milli Talimi Mission, Bihar Ranchi & Ors vs The State of Bihar & Ors ; ; A.P. Christians Medical Educational Society vs Government of Andhra Pradesh and Anr.[1986] 2 SCC 667 Frank Anthony Public School Employees Association vs Union of India and Ors [1986]4 SCC 707 All Bihar Christian Schools Association and Anr.
vs State of Bihar and Ors. ; St. Stephon 's College vs The University of Delhi JT(1991) 4 SCC, 548 and Unni Krishnan and Anr.
vs State of Andhra Pradesh and Ors.
cited.
2.1 The teacher education programme has to he redesigned to bring in a system of education which can prepare the student teacher to shoulder the responsibility of imparting educating with a living dynamism and the traditional pattern of "chalk, talk and teach" method has to be replaced by more vibrant system with improved methods of reaching, to achieve qualitative excellence in teacher education.
N.M. Nageshwaramma vs State of Andhra Pradesh & Anr [1986] Supp SCC 166 Andhra Kesari Education Society vs Director of School Education & Ors and State of Maharashtra vs Vikas Sahebrao Roundale & Ors.
J.T.(1992) 5 SC 175, relied on.
2.2 It is entirely for the State Government and not for this Court, to lay down the requirements of a teachers training institute campus.
All those institutes which did not have permanent recognition before the issue of the Recognition Rules, 1977 are bound to comply with the said conditions before they are entitled to permanent recognition.
The High Court was Justified in holding that the institutions which were operating on the basis of temporary recognitions, either under the orders of the Courts or otherwise, shall have to comply with the recognition rules to enable them to earn recognition.
These institutions are neither properly, organised nor fully, equipped to train the teachers.
and have done more harm than good to the cause of education.
3.1 In view of the series of the judgments of this Court the Courts should not issue fiat to allow the students of unrecognised institutions to appear the different examinations pending the disposal of the writ applications.
Such interim orders affect the career of several students and cause unnecessary embarrassment and harassment to the authorities, who have to comply with such directions of the Courts.
989 A.P. Christians Medical Educational Society vs Government of Andhra Pradesh ; , relied on.
3.2 The High Court should not have passed interim orders directing authorities concerned to allow the teachers of unrecognised institutions to appear at the examinations.
It is a matter of common knowledge that many institutions claiming themselves to be minority institutions within the meaning of Article 30(1) of the Constitution invoke the jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226 or of this Court under Article 32 for a writ of mandamus to recognise the institutions as minority institutions only when the dates for examinations are notified and, as a part of strategy, seek directions to allow, meanwhile, the students to appear at the examinations.
Many of such institutions are not only "masked phantoms" but are established as business ventures for admitting sub standard students without any competitive tests, on basis of considerations which cannot serve even the interest of the minority.
The teachers of such institutions cannot derive any benefit on basis of interim orders when ultimately the main writ applications have been dismissed.
As such no equity or legal right can be pleaded on behalf of the students admitted for traning by such minority institutions for publication of their results or award of certificates.
A.P. Christians Medical Educational Society vs Government of Andhra Pradesh, ; ; and State of Tamil Nadu and others vs St. Joseph Teachers Training Institute and another; , , relied on.
