On 25.2.91 the appellants except appellant No. 3 were appointed as Assistant District Government Counsel (Criminal) in accordance with the provisions of Section 24 of the Criminal Procedure Code and the Legal Remembrancer Manual.
The appellant No.3 was appointed on 13.12.1990.
The last date of the tenure of the appellants, except appellant No.3, was 31.12.1991, where as the tenure of appellant No.3 was upto 13.12.1991.
Before 970 the expiry of their terms, the District Judge, preparing two lists, 'A ' and `B ' recommended the appellants ' names for extension of their tenures.
List `A ' contained the names of Lawyers (including the appellants), whose work and conduct was approved for their extension, whereas List 'B ' contained the remaining names of the lawyers (including appellants in C.A. Nos. 386, 387/ 1993) who were considered as 'average lawyers '.
The District Judge requested the District Magistrate to send his recommendation to the State Government.
The District Magistrate did not recommend the appellants ' names as their reputation, professional work, behaviour and conduct was not found in accordance with public interest.
On 28.12.1991 the State Government extended the terms of the appellants till further orders.
Later without assigning any reason, the extension recommended by the District Judge was rejected by the State Government.
The appellants filed writ petitions in the High Court against the Government 's decision.
The High Court dismissed their writ applications, against which the present appeals were filed by special leave before this Court.
C.A. Nos. 386 & 387 OF 1993.
The appellants ' names were included in the List 'B ' prepared by the District Judge.
The State Government rejected the recommendation of the District Judge, without assigning any reason.
The writ petitions preferred by them in the High Court were dismissed.
Hence these appeals by special leave.
As there was a common issue arose in these appeals, same were heard and decided together.
The appellants contended that in view of Para 7.06(2) of the Legal Remembrancer Manual the appointment of any legal practitioner as a District Government Counsel did not automatically come to an end.
The State submitted that as Section 24(4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure vested power in the District Magistrate to consider the suitability of the person concerned, for appointment, according to his opinion, as such there was not much scope of judicial review by Courts, unless a clear case of malice on the part of the District Magistrate was made out.
971 Allowing the Civil Appeals Nos. 722 and 723 of 1993 and dismissing the Civil Appeal Nos. 386 and 387 of 1993, this Court.
HELD:1.1.
When sub section (4) and sub section (5) of Section 24 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, speak about preparation of a panel, out of which appointments against the posts of Prosecutor or Additional Public Prosecutor have to be made, then the Sessions Judge and the District Magistrate are required to consult and discuss the names of the persons fit to be included in the panel and to include such names in the panel.
1.2.The expressions "panel of names of persons", do not mean that some names are to be suggested by the Sessions Judge and some comments are to be made, in respect of those names by the District Magistrate, without proper consultation and discussion over such names.
The statutory mandate ought to have been complied with by the District Magistrate and the Sessions Judge in its true spirit.
1.3.Section 24 of the Code does not speak about the extension or renewal of the terms of the Public Prosecutor or Additional Public Prosecutor.
But after the expiry of the term of the appointment of persons concerned, it requires the same statutory exercise, in which either new persons are appointed or those who have working as Public Prosecutor or Additional Public Prosecutor, are again appointed by the State Government, for a fresh term.
The procedure prescribed in the Manual to the extent it is not in conflict with the provisions of Section 24, shall be deemed to be supplementing the statutory provisions.
But merely because there is a provision for extension or renewal of the term, the same cannot be claimed as a matter of right.
1.4.While exercising the power of judicial review even_in respect of appointment of members of the legal profession as District Government Counsel, the Court can examine whether there was any infirmity in the "decision making process".
Of course, while doing so, the Court cannot substitute its own judgment over the final decision taken in respect of selection of persons for those posts.
Chief Constable of the North Wales Police vs Evans, [1982]3 All E.R. 141, referred to.
1.5.In the facts of the present case, the procedure prescribed by Section 24 of the Code have not been followed by the District Magistrate.
There is 972 nothing on the records of the case to show that any panel, as required by sub section (4) of Section 24, was prepared by the District Magistrate in consul"on with the District & Sessions Judge.
The District Magistrate simply made some general comment in respect of the appellants, when the District & Sessions Judge had put them in List 'A ' of his recommendation.
This shall not amount to either the compliance of sub section (4) of Section 24 of the Code or Para 7.06(2) of the Manual.
It appears there has been no effective or real consultation between the Sessions Judge and the District Magistrate for preparation of the panel, as contemplated by sub section (4) of Section 24 of the Code.
1.6.The members of the legal profession are required to maintain high standard of legal ethics and dignity of profession.
They are not supposed to solicit work or seek mandamus from courts in matters of professional engagements.
1.7.In view of the strong recommendation about the quality of the appellant 's professional work, the District Magistrate should have Applied his mind in consultation with the Sessions Judge, in respect of each individual case, instead of making a general and identical comment against all the appellants.
1.8.As the District Magistrate has not performed his statutory duty as enjoined by law, the appeals of the appellants have to allowed.
1.9.The District Magistrate is directed to perform his statutory duty afresh, in accordance with the requirement of Section 24 of the Code read with the relevant paragraphs of Chapter VII of the Manual, which are not inconsistent with Section 24 of the Code, so far the appellants are concerned, if the vacancies are still there.
The necessary steps shall be taken preferably within four months from the date of this judgment.
The State Government shall thereafter perform its part in accordance with Section 24 and different paragraphs of the Manual which are applicable in the facts and circum stances of the case.
Kumari Shrilekha Vidyarthi vs State of U.P., , referred to.
2.The District & Sessions Judge, who is required to express his opinion ton the merit and the conduct of the persons recommended for appointment or extension of the period as District Government Counsel, has expressed the 973 opinion that appellants (in C. As.
386 387 of 93) are "average lawyers", and has put them in List 'B '.
In other words, neither the District & Sessions Judge has recommended the case of the appellants of these appeals for extension nor the District Magistrate.
Their case cannot be treated at par with the appellants of the other appeals.
In such a situation, no useful purpose will be served by directing the District Magistrate to perform his statutory duty, as required by sub section (4) of Section 24 of the Code again, even in respect of these appellants.
3.Although power has been vested in a particular authority, in subjective terms still judicial review is permissible.
Barium Chemicals Ltd, vs Company Law Board, AIR ; State of Assam vs Bharat Kala Bhandar Ltd , AIR ; Rohtas Industries Ltd. vs S.D. Agarwal, AIR ; The Purtabpur Company Ltd. vs Call e Commissioner of Bihar, AIR [1970] SC 1989 and; M.A. Rasheed vs The State of Kerala, AIR , relied on.
