The appellant State issued a notification under section 4 of the West Bengal Estates Acquisition Act, 1953 covering the land comprised in the tea garden of the respondent company.
The Revenue Officer issued notices to the respondent company initiating proceedings for assessment of rent.
The Company objected stating that it was not an intermediary within the meaning of the Act and since its tea estate comprised of free hold land the Revenue Officer had no jurisdiction to assess the rent under Section 42(2) of the Act.
The Revenue Officer rejected the contention and fixed the rent at Rs.2,375.94 per year.
On revision preferred by the State, the Revenue Officer determined the rent at Rs.8,765.24 per year.
The Company preferred appeals before the Tribunal.
The appeals were dismissed in default and the restoration applications were also rejected.
Thereafter, the Company preferred applications before the High Court under Section 115 CPC read with Article 227 of the Constitution for restoration of the two appeals, and obtained stay of the operation of the Revenue Officer 's order.
During the pendency of the cases, the Additional Deputy Commissioner informed the respondent that inspite of the repeated reminders the company had not executed the long term lease for 30 years on prepayment of the requisite number of instalments or rent and cess.
The respondent company replied pointing out that the High Court had granted the stay order and therefore the matter stood stayed till the disposal of the said cases.
Thereafter, the Collector served upon the Company, a notice under section 106 of the Transfer of Property Act, 880 1882 determining the tenancy of the company In respect of the tea garden on the expiry of the specified date.
The company was required to hand over the vacant and peaceful possession of the tea garden.
In reply to the said notice, the company stated that in view of the stay order granted by the High Court no further proceedings be taken.
Thereafter the Collector took over the possession of the tea garden.
The applications before the High Court were still pending.
However, aggrieved by the order of the Collector taking over its tea garden, the Respondent preferred a Writ Petition before the High Court Allowing the writ petition, the High Court directed the appellant State Government and other authorities to deliver the possession of the tea garden to the Company within a month.
Aggrieved by the High Court 's order, the State as also the West Bengal Tea Development Corporation to whom the possession of the tea garden is transferred by the State, preferred appeals, before this Court.
Disposing of the appeals, this Court, HELD:1.
The Revenue Officer had initially determined the rent at the rate of Rs.2,371.94 per year, but the same was not accepted by the Government and on a representation made by the State Government, the Revenue Officer had refixed the rent at Rs.8,769.24 per year by order dated 22.8.1968.
The Company had challenged the rent refixed at Rs. 8.769.24 and the High Court had stayed the order of the Revenue Officer fixing the rent at the rate of Rs.8,769.24.
In view of these circumstances, it was necessary on the part of the Collector to have passed an order of summary settlement as contemplated under Form I Schedule F of the West Bengal Estates Acquisition Rules, 1954.
The High Court was, therefore, right in holding that the Collector had no jurisdiction to terminate the tenancy on the ground of non payment of rent for not executing a lease deed inasmuch as the Collector had not mentioned in the notice terminating the tenancy under Section 106 of the Transfer of Property Act, that he was prepared to accept the rent at the rate of Rs. 2,375.94 per year as determined initially by the Revenue Officer.
[886 F H; 887 A,B] 2.In order to do complete justice between the parties, it is proper that the respondent Company should be given the prosession of the tea garden provided the Company pays the entire arrears of rent from 27.7.1965to 21.4.1981, the date when the Company was dispossessed, 881 calculated at the rate of Rs. 8,769.24 per year after adjusting any amount already paid, within three months.
There would be no necessity for the Collector to make any order of summary settlement and a long term lease should be executed as contemplated under sub section (3) of Section 6 of the West Bengal Estates Acquisition Act, 1953.
As soon as the arrears of rent are paid by the Company and a lease deed is executed, the Company should be handed over the possession of the tea garden.
In case any increase in the amount of rent is permissible under the law due to lapse of time, the State Government would be free to take the same into consideration while granting the long term lease.
[887 B D]
