The appellant landlord filed an eviction suit for possession of the demised premises mainly on the ground of arrears of rent under Section 12(3) of the Bombay rent Act, 1947.
The suit was settled between the parties.
By the terms of the compromise, possession would be given by the tenant to the landlord by 10 October 1970, or the landlord may recover possession by execution based on this decree; but, if the tenant paid the entire arrears in full by 10 October 1970, the landlord would not execute the decree for possession.
The tenant failing to pay the entire arrears as stipulated the landlord decree holder filed execution proceedings.
The executing Court issued a warrant for possession but the Appellate Court set aside the order and dismissed the prayer for eviction.
The High Court remanded the matter to the Appellate Court to determine the character of the compromise terms.
That court again allowed the appeal and dismissed the execution proceedings altogether.
On appeal, the High Court agreed with the Appellate Court.
It found 730 that clause permitting eviction was penal in nature and therefore, not enforceable.
The questions before this court were:did the parties to the compromise intend to create or continue the relationship of landlord and tenant; whether the compromise terms in the consent decree were penal in nature or merely gave a concession; and whether Section 114 Transfer of Property Act could be invoked while executing a decree for possession, notwithstanding Section 12(3) of the Bombay Act.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: It is well settled that a decree passed on the basis of a compromise by and between the parties is essentially a contract between the parties which derives sanctity by the court superadding its seal to the contract.
But all the same the consent terms retain all the elements of a contract to which the court 's imprimaturs is affixed to give it the sanctity of an executable court order.
The court will not add its seal to the compromise terms unless the terms are consistent with the relevant law.
(735 H) If the law vests exclusive jurisdiction in the court to adjudicate on any matter, the court will not add its seal to the consent terms unless it has applied its mind to the question.
In such a case it is the independent satisfaction of the court which changes the character of the document from a mere contract to a court 's adjudication which will stop the tenant from contending otherwise in any subsequent proceedings and operate as resjudicata.
(736 B) The character of the con sent decree will depend on the nature of the dispute resolved and the part played by the court while superadding its seal to it.
(736 C) (2) If a defendant is required to suffer the consequence of his failure to abide by terms stipulated, such consequence would he penal in nature.
But if the defendant gets some benefit by complying with a requirement, such as clause can never be penal in character.
(739 B) (3) Admittedly the tenant had failed to pay or tender in court the 731 standard rent and permitted increases due to the landlord.
(736 E) The clause in the consent terms whereby, upon payment of the entire rent etc.
due from the tenant, by a stipulated date was dearly to secure his dues i.e. arrears of rent etc.
This is in the nature of a concession.
Where a landlord grants a concession and agrees that if the entire arrears is cleared by a stipulated date, he will not insists possession that will not render the clause penal in nature.
(739 E) (4) If the condition precedent for availing of the benefit of concession under clause (3) of the consent terms is satisfied, the relationship of landlord and tenant continues but if the tenant fails to comply with the condition precedent for availing (of the benefit or concession the forfeiture operates and the tenant becomes liable for eviction under the decree.
(739 G) (5) After the enactment of clause (b) to section 12(3) which is a special provision incorporating the equity provision contained in section 114, T.P. Act, in a modified form, cases governed under the Act must he resolved in accordance with section 12(3) of the Act and not under section 114, T.P. Act.
The landlord 's right to seek eviction has been drastically reduced and circumscribed by sections 12and 13 of the Act.
Similarly the tenant must also seek protection from eviction by complying with the requirements of the Act.
(740 B) If such is not the legal position, Sections 12 (3) (a) and 12 (3) (b) would be rendered wholly nugatory.
Under the Act a tenant is allowed to continue in possession notwithstanding the termination of the contractual tenancy if the abides by the provisions of the Act.
If he fails to abide by the requirement of section 12(3) of the Act, he must take the consequences flowing therefrom.
There is no question of granting him double protection.
(740 C E) Krishnabai vs Hari, 8 BLR 813 and Gajanand Govind vs Pandurang Keshav, 53 B.L.R. 100, referred to.
(840 B) Pradesh Kumar Bajpai vs Binod Behari Sharkar, [1980] 3S.C.R. 93, relied on.
(840 H)
