A deed of trust was executed by the respondent on March II, 1938, when she was residing at D in the State of Bihar, in respect of the properties described in the Schedules referred to in the deed, some of which were situate outside the State of Bihar.
In the trust deed she described herself as the settlor, and it was recited therein that the settlor had installed a deity named Iswar Srigopal in her house and had since been regularly worshiping and performing the puja of the said deity; and that she had been erecting a Nat Mandir to be named in memory of her deceased son.
The recitals also showed that the settlor had provided for the construction of two temples (jugal Mandir), in one of which was to be installed the deity Srigopal and other deities, and in the other the marble image of, her preceptor and that the temple, committee shall consist of the, Jugal.
Mandir shebait for the time being and six pious Hindus who must be residents.
of D and of whom at least four shall be Begalis.
One 76 602 of the clauses of the trust deed recited : "The ' pronamis ' and perquisites to be offered to the deities and image in the jugal Mandir shall form part of the Srimati Charusila Trust Estate and neither the shebait nor any one else shall have interest or claim in or over same.
,, The provisions of the trust deed in regard to the ceremonials relating to free distribution of food and water and the festivals to be performed for the deity and the image, which were well known festivals in which members of the Hindu Community usually take part, contemplated that they were to be done on a large scale so as to enable a large number of persons to take part in them.
There was also a provision in the trust deed for the establishment of a hospital for Hindu females and a charitable dispensary for patients of any religion or creed.
After the coming into force of the Bihar Hindu Religious Trusts Act, 1950, the President of Bihar State Board of Religious Trusts started proceedings under sections 59 and 70 Of the Act against the respondent in respect of the trust on the footing that it was a public trust to which the Act applied.
The respondent made an application to the Patna High Court under article 226 of the Constitution in which she prayed that a writ or order be issued quashing the proceedings taken against her by the Bihar State Board of Religious Trusts on the grounds (I) that the trust deed dated March II, 1938, was a private endowment created for the worship of a family idol in which the public were not interested, (2) that the Act did not apply to private trusts, (3) that the Act was ultra vires the Constitution by reason of the circumstance that its several provisions interfered with her rights as a citizen guaranteed under Part III of the Constitution, and (4) that, in any case, the Act was not applicable to the trust deed in question as some of the properties were situate outside the State of Bihar.
Held (1) that on its true construction the deed of trust dated March 11, 1938, created a religious and charitable trust of a public nature.
Deoki Nandan vs Murlidar, ; , considered.
In re Charusila Dasi, I.L.R. [1946] I Cal. 473, explained.
One of the relevant considerations as to whether the trust was a public trust, will be if by the trust deed any right of worship has been given to the public or any, section of the public answering a particular description.
(2) that the Act does not apply to private endowments.
Mahant Ram Saroop Dasji vs section P. Sahi, [1959] SUPP.
2 S.C.R. 583, followed.
(3) that the provisions of the Act do not take away or abridge any of the rights conferred by Part III of the Constitution.
Mahant Moti Das vs section P. Sahi, [1959] Supp. 2 S.C.R. 563, followed.
603 (4) that section 3 of the Act makes the Act applicable to all public religious and charitable institutions within, the meaning of the definition clause in section 2(1) Of the Act, which are situate in the State of Bihar and any part of the property of which is in that State.
(5) that where the trust is situate in Bihar the State has legislative power over it and also over its trustees or their servants and agents who must be in Bihar to administer the trust, and as the object of the Act is to provide for the better administration of Hindu Religious Trusts in the State of Bihar and for the protection of properties appertaining thereto, in respect of the property belonging to the trust outside the State the aim is sought to be achieved by exercising control over the trustees in Personam, and there is really no question of the Act having extra territorial operation.
(6) that, in the present case, the circumstance that the temples where the deities were installed are situate in Bihar and that the hospital and charitable dispensary are to be established in Bihar for the benefit of the Hindu Public in Bihar, gives enough territorial connection to enable the legislature of Bihar to make a law with respect to such.
trust.
Tata Iron & Steel Co. Ltd. vs State of Bihar, [1958] S.C.R. 1355 and The State of Bombay vs R.M.D. Chamaybaugwala, (1957] S.C.R. 874, relied on.
Saydar Gurdyal Singh vs The Rajah of Faridkote, (1894) L.R. 21 I.A. I71, distinguished.
