The respondent company was a dealer in matchwood called sawar " and his place of business was situate in Chanda in the erstwhile Central Provinces.
Pursuant to an agreement between the respondent and a match factory, the former loaded diverse quantities of " sawar " logs on railway wagons and despatched the same by rail from Chanda and other railway stations in the Central Provinces to Ambernath, a town in the erstwhile Province of Bombay.
Under cl. 4 Of the agreement the goods to be supplied under the contract shall be despatched by the contractor from certain railway stations within the Central Provinces, while cl. 2 reserved the right of the consignee to examine the goods on arrival at.
Ambernath and to reject the same if they, were found, in the opinion of the factory manager, not to conform with the specifications.
Clause 6 provided that the goods shall be measured under the supervision of the factory 's repre sentative, the decision of the factory manager at Ambernath being binding on the contractor, and by cl. 7 the prices of the goods shall be " F. O.R. Ambernath ".
The course of dealings between the parties was that on arrival of the logs at Ambernath the logs were inspected and measured by the factory manager and the prices, calculated at the agreed rates, were paid to the respondent 's agent at Bombay.
The question was as to when and where the property in the logs passed from the respondent to the consignee and whether the respondent was liable to pay sales tax under the provisions of the Central Provinces and Berar Sales Tax Act, 1947.
At the date when the agreement was entered into, the logs were unascertained goods.
There was also no evidence that at that date the particular logs delivered thereunder were in the Central Provinces in the shape of logs at all.
The sales tax department levied the tax on the respondent on the grounds, inter alia, that (1) the property in the logs passed from the respondent to the factory consignee under section 23 Of the Indian , when the logs were loaded in the wagons at railway stations within the Central Provinces and the railway 703 receipts taken in the name of the factory were forwarded to the latter, and that (2) in any case, as the logs were in the Central Provinces at the date when the contract for sale was made, the transfer in them must be deemed to have taken place there under Explanation II to section 2(g) Of the Central Provinces and Berar Sales Tax Act, 1947.
Held : (1) that on a proper construction of the contract as a whole the intention of the parties was that the respondent would send the logs by rail from the different stations in the Central Provinces to Ambernath where the factory manager would inspect, measure and accept the same if in his opinion they were of the description and quality agreed upon.
Conse quently, as the respondent sent the logs and left it to the factory to appropriate to the contract such of them as they accepted as of contract quality and description, the property in the logs did not pass to the buyer by the mere delivery to the railway for carriage but passed only at Ambernath when the logs were appropriated by the factory with the assent of the seller within the meaning of section 23 of the Indian .
(2) that Explanation II to section 2(g) of the Central Provinces because under the Explanation the goods, in respect of which the contract of sale is made, must, at the date of the contract be in existence in the Central Provinces, that is to say, that the goods must at the date of the contract be there in the form in which they are agreed to be sold and there was no evidence, in the present case, for this.
