The question for decision in this appeal was whether a single transaction of sale of land measuring about three quarters of an acre was an adventure in the nature of trade so as to make it liable to income tax.
The assessee appellant, an Engineer by profession, was engaged in various business activities including that of an engineering firm but, admittedly, had no dealing, except the one in question, in respect of land.
In 1946 be entered into an agreement with the Hindusthan Co operative Insurance Society Ltd. for the purchase of the land in question and paid a sum of Rs. 32,748 in two instalments, being 25% of the estimated total price of the land.
As his construction activities declined and the Government, who had requisitioned the land, were not immediately releasing it, the appellant sold his rights under the agreement to a third party in 1947 and thereby received a sum of Rs. 74,000 odd in excess of the amount paid by him to the Society.
The land, however, was not released by the Government until 1949.
The Income tax Officer held that the transaction was an adventure in the nature of trade and the said sum was a profit therefrom, taxable under section 10 of the Incometax Act, and included it in the assessable income.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner, in appeal, held that the assessee, a man of means, had intended to purchase the land for his own use, and that the motive of profit was entirely absent when the purchase was made and that as it was a case of appreciation of capital, he was liable to pay Capital Gains tax.
The Appellate Tribunal on appeal by the Department, reversed the findings and the decision of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and affirmed that of the Income tax Officer.
After the assessee had obtained from this Court special leave to appeal, he made an application to the High Court under section 66(2) of the Income tax Act, which that Court dismissed as being barred by limitation.
Held, (per Bhagwati and Sinha, JJ., Kapur, J., dissenting) that admittedly the transaction in question being a single instance of its kind, and not in the line of the business of the assessee, it was for the Department to prove that the dominant intention of the appellant, when he entered into the agreement with the Society, was to embark on a venture in the nature of 847 trade as distinguished from a capital investment, and they having failed to do so, the appeal must succeed.
Commissioners of Inland Revenue vs Reinhold, , applied.
There could be no doubt, as held by the Court, that the question for decision involved in such cases was one of law or a mixed question of fact and law.
G. Venkataswami Naidu and Co. vs The Commissioner of I come tax; , , referred to and distinguished.
The line of demarcation, however, between an isolated trans action and a venture in the nature of trade was very thin and each case had to be decided on the total impression all its facts and circumstances made on the mind of the judge.
Case law reviewed.
KAPUR, J. Even though the powers of this Court under article I36 of the Constitution were very wide, they had to be exercised within the limits imposed by its own decisions and one such limitation was that this Court would not ordinarily interfere on questions of fact.
Since the question involved in the instant case was a mixed question of law and fact, the facts should properly be found by the body whose exclusive function under the Income tax Act was to do so.
G. Venkataswami Naidu & Co. vs The Commissioner of Income tax; , and Dhakeswari Cotton Mills vs The Commissioner of Income tax, [1955] i S.C.R. 94I, referred to.
Nor could an assessee be allowed to by pass the procedure prescribed by sections 66(1), 66(2) of the Income tax Act to have question of law determined.
Since, however, the Appellate Tribunal had, in the instant case, failed to consider certain essential facts, the case should be remitted to it for a proper decision in the light of the observations made by this Court.
