This appeal was directed against concurrent orders of the Election Tribunal and the High Court on appeal, setting aside the appellant 's election to the Punjab Legislative Assembly on an election petition filed by the respondent No. 1, on the ground of corrupt practice of undue influence within the meaning of proviso (a)(ii) to section 123(2) of the Representation of the People Act, 951.
A large number of voters of the constituency were Namdhari Sikhs and the appellant, under the authority of the supreme religious leader of the Namdhari Sikhs and his son, issued the following poster and distributed it widely throughout the constituency, 749 "A command from Shri Sat Guru Sacha Padshah to the Naindharies of Halqa Sirsa".
"Every Namdhari of this Halqa is commanded by Shri Sat Guru that he should make every effort for the success of Shri Ram Dayal Vaid, a candidate for the Punjab Vidhan Sabha, by giving his own vote and those of his friends and acquaintances, it being our primary duty to make him successful in the election.
The election symbol of Shri Vaid is a riding horseman.
Maharaj Bir Singh S/o.
Sat Guru Maharaj Pratap Singh, Jiwan Nagar (Hissar).
" Both the Tribunal and the High Court found that the reli gious leader not only issued the said hukam or command, but also delivered speeches to the effect that every Namdhari must vote for the appellant implying that disobedience of his mandate would carry divine displeasure or spiritual censure and practically left no free choice to the Namdhari electors.
Held, that the case clearly fell within the purview of pro viso (a)(ii) to section 123(2) Of the Representation of the People Act and the appeal must be dismissed.
The law in England relating to undue influence at elections, was not the same as the law in India.
While the law in England laid emphasis upon the individual aspect of the exercise of undue influence, under the Indian law what was material was not the actual effect produced but the doing of such acts as were calculated to interfere with the free exercise of an electoral North Durham 's case, , referred to.
Decisions of the English Courts in this regard, therefore, could not be used as precedents in India.
