The respondent who was a teacher in a railway school was prosecuted under section 161 of the Indian Penal Code and section 5(2) read with section 5(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947.
The (1) , 222.
740 prosecution case was that the respondent offered to secure a job for the complainant in the Railway Running Shed at Abu Road, if the latteR paid him Rs. 100, that the complainant agreed to this, and that on October 5, 1954, the complainant wrote out an application addressed to the Divisional Mechanical Engineer, Abu Road., and handed it to the respondent and gave him Rs. 50 promising to pay the balance of Rs. 50 after the Job had been secured.
The Special judge who tried the case accepted the prosecution story and convicted the respondent on both the charges, but, on appeal, the High Court acquitted him on the ground that he was not a public servant.
The State appealed to the Supreme Court.
It was contended for the respondent that even if he were considered to be a public servant he could not be held guilty on either of the charges framed against him.
It was found that neither in the charge framed under section 161 of the Indian Penal Code nor in the evidence was there anything to show that the respondent intended to approach any public servant in order to secure a job for the complainant.
Held : (1) that the respondent was a public servant within the meaning of the ninth clause of section 2I of the Indian Penal Code as he was in the service of Government,, was being paid by it and was entrusted with the performance of a public duty inasmuch as he was a teacher in a school maintained by Government and it was part of his public duty to teach boys.
G. A. Monterio vs The State of Ajmer, ; , followed.
(2) that in view of the words " by otherwise abusing his position " read along with the words " in the discharge of his duty " in section 5(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947, an offence under that section requires that the public servant should misconduct himself in the discharge of his duty.
In the present case, as the respondent was only a teacher it was not part of his duty to make appointments in the Railway Running Shed at Abu Road, and consequently when he took money for procuring a job for the complainant he was not committing misconduct in the discharge of his duty.
Accordingly, a conviction under section 5(2) read with section 5(1)(d)of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947, was not valid.
(3) that the mere fact that a person takes money in order to get a job for another person somewhere would not by itself be an offence under section 161 of the Indian Penal Code and that as the charge under section 161 did not disclose who was the public servant whom the respondent would have approached for rendering or attempting to render service to the complainant in securing a job for him, the prosecution under that section was not maintainable; and, (4) that the presumption under section 4(1) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 could not, arise in the present case as section 161 of the Indian Penal Code was not applicable.
