These appeals arose out of suits for ejectment instituted in the Revenue Court by the respondent Zamindar against the appellants under section 180 of the U. P. Tenancy Act, 1939 (U. P. I7 Of 1939).
His case was that the lands in suit were his sir lands and the appellants trespassed on the same on the basis of a wrong order of the Criminal Court.
The case of the appellants was that they were admitted as hereditary tenants by the respondents.
There was a previous proceeding under section I45 of the Code of Criminal Procedure between the parties and the Magistrate found possession with the appellants and directed that they should remain in possession till evicted by due process of law.
The Revenue Court which tried the suits found that the lands were sir lands of the respondent and the appellants were not hereditary tenants and did not take possession with the consent of the respondent.
The Additional Commissioner on appeal and the Board of Revenue on second appeal, agreed with these findings of the Revenue Court and dismissed the appeals.
The Board negatived the plea of the appellants that the suits were not triable by the Revenue Court.
Section 180 of the U. P. Tenancy Act, 1939, provides that a person taking or retaining possession of land without the consent of the person entitled to admit him into occupation and otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of law for the time being in force will be liable to enactment thereunder.
In view of the finding of the courts below that the appellants had not taken possession with the consent of the respondent, the question was whether they did so by virtue Of section I45 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Held, that the provisions of section I45 of the Code of Criminal Procedure authorised the Magistrate only to declare the actual possession of a party on a specified date and not to give possession or permit any party to take possession.
He had no power under that section to decide questions of title or right to possession which a civil court alone could decide.
The words " taking " and " retaining " were used by section 180 of the Act in an independent and exclusive sense.
The former referred to taking of possession illegally and the latter to taking of possession legally but subsequent retaining of it illegally.
Consequently, the appellants whose possession had been found 799 to be illegal from the very inception, could not be said to retain possession legally so as to be outside the scope of the section.
It was also clear that possession in accordance with law, such as was contemplated by section 180 of the Act, meant possession with lawful title.
The provisional Order of the Magistrate with regard to possession, irrespective of lawful rights of the parties, could not, therefore, enable the appellants to resist the suit under.
section 180 of the Act.
Dinomoni Chowdhrani vs Barojo Mohini Chowdhyani, (1901) L.R. 29 I.A. 24, referred to.
