In 1949 the appellant framed a scheme called " Tonnage Pro duction Bonus Scheme " whereunder the workmen were to get 13 days ' basic wages by way of bonus on a production Of 30,000 tons and thereafter an additional one day 's basic wage for every 46o tons produced upto a maximum Of 36,000.
The scheme was accepted by the workmen.
In 1953 the workmen raised industrial disputes claiming profit bonus for the years 1950 51 and 1951 52 in addition to the production bonus and asked for revision of the production bonus scheme.
The Industrial Tribunal, to which the disputes were referred, rejected both the claims.
On appeal, the Appellate Tribunal awarded profit bonus equal to one month 's basic wage for 1951 52 but dismissed the claim for 1950 51 as having been made too late.
It revised the production bonus scheme by providing for i day 's basic wage for each increase Of 460 tons over 30,000 tons uPtO 36,000 tons and for 2 days, basic wage for each increase Of 46o tons in excess Of 36,000 tons.
The appellant contended (i) that the Tribunal had no jurisdiction to vary the production bonus scheme ; (ii) that such a scheme could only be varied by agreement ; (iii) that no proper grounds had been made out for varying the scheme ; (iv) that profit bonus could not be awarded in addition ' to production bonus ; (v) that the production bonus in this case was really profit bonus ; and (vi) that there was no available surplus out of which profit bonus could be paid.
Held, that the Tribunal had jurisdiction to revise the pro duction bonus scheme.
Payment of production bonus was payment of further emoluments depending not upon extra profits, but, upon extra production, as an incentive to the workmen to put in more than the standard performance.
Though it was discretionary with the appellants to introduce the scheme, once the scheme was introduced and put into operation, it became a term of employment of the workmen and any dispute with respect to such term of employment was an industrial dispute which could properly be referred to a Tribunal.
The power of the Tribunal in considering the scheme 1013 was not confined to the question of mala fides etc.
of the employer 's action but it had power to vary the terms of the scheme if circumstances justified it.
There was no justification for interfering with the scheme upto a production Of 36,000 tons in view of the agreement between the parties.
But the scheme did not provide for production above 36,000 tons and as such there was no agreement with respect to this, and as the production had gone up beyond 36,000 tons it was necessary to provide for production bonus beyond this quantity.
There were two reasons for increase in the rates of payment of production bonus, viz., (i) the intensification of the efforts of the workmen in increasing production, and (ii) the progressive going down of the labour cost of production per ton as production increased.
The rates had to be increased progressively with production.
Consequently, for each 46o tons increase in production the proper rates for payment of production bonus would be 1 1/4, 1 3/4 and 2 days ' basic wages respectively or production between.
36,000 and 42,000 tons, 42,000 and 48,000 tons, 48,000 and 54,000 tons and 54,000 and 60,000 tons.
The " Tonnage Production Bonus Scheme " introduced by the appellant was in fact also a production bonus scheme and not a profit bonus scheme.
The fact that one of the terms of the scheme empowered the directors to cancel or reduce the payment of production bonus in case the gross profit was not sufficient to meet fixed dividends, interest, depreciation charges, taxation and 10% dividend to ordinary shareholders did not make it a profit bonus scheme as the circumstances mentioned are not the same that have to be taken into account in arriving at the available surplus according to the Full Bench formula.
Nor was the position altered by the clause in the scheme which empowered the appellant to cancel or modify the scheme in case Government enforced by legislation any scheme for bonus or profit sharing as this did not mean that the scheme itself was for profit sharing or profit bonus.
The other clauses of the scheme clearly indicated that it was for production bonus.
If there was an available surplus of profits according to the Full Bench Formula the workmen were entitled to get profit bonus in addition to the production bonus.
Mathuradas Kanji vs Labour Appellate Tribunal, A.I.R. , distinguished.
Held further, that there was available surplus of profits and the profit bonus equal to one month 's basic wages was properly awarded by the Appellate Tribunal for [1951 52.
The claim for deduction for rehabilitation was made on a wrong basis by the appellant.
In order to arrive at a realistic figure for rehabilitation the total block should be divided into three heads : (i) land,(ii)buildings, railway sidings and things of that nature which had a. much longer life and where no imports were needed, and (iii)machinery.
In the case of land no replacement was necessary and no provision need be made for rehabilitation.
In the 1014 case of buildings etc.
the multiplier would be smaller while the divisor would be larger.
Machinery bad again to be sub divided according to when it was purchased so as to arrive at correct multipliers and divisors.
As machinery purchased before the last war stood on one footing there would be a pre 1939 block.
The second block may be of machinery purchased during the war and the third of that purchased after the war.
The last two were not rigid divisions.
In the circumstances of the present case, the proper multipliers for these three bocks would be 4, 2 and 1 respectively.
As both Tribunals had accepted 10 as the divisor that may be accepted as.
the divisor for the three blocks.
Calculating on that basis the rehabilitation costs did not wipe out the entire gross profits as claimed by the appellants and there was an available surplus out of which profit bonus could be paid.
The clerical staff, budli workers and temporary workers were not entitled to claim attendance bonus as they were differ ent from other workmen.
