One of the items in dispute referred to the Industrial Tribunal for adjudication, which was the subject matter of this appeal, related to the demand of the Workers ' Union that the appellant company must provide quarters to its employees in terms of the Bihar Government Scheme and undertake immediate construction for that purpose.
The case of the Company was that the State and not the employer was primarily responsible for providing quarters to the employees and, in any event, it was not financially possible for the appellant to undertake the task.
The Tribunal upheld the Union 's claim and directed the company to start construction of at least 15 quarters, as specified by the Government scheme, within a year.
The Labour Appellate Tri bunal, on appeal, held that the Government scheme was binding on the company and upheld the award.
The scheme, on which the award was based, was one prepared by the Industrial Housing sub Committee appointed by the Government of Bihar and sanctioned by the Government as recommended by the Bihar Central (Standing) Labour Advisory Board.
It imposed on the employers the responsibility for housing industrial labour and provided for financial assistance to the employers by the State Government to the extent Of 50% of 'the capital required, by way of loan repayable in 25 annual instalments, recoverable, on default, from the properties mortgaged for the loan or the assets of the debtor.
The scheme prescribed the terms on which the quarters were to be let out to the employees and specified their size.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant that, the scheme was not obligatory and could not impose a term of employment for the workmen.
For the Union it was argued that the scheme had materially altered the rule, followed by indus trial adjudication in such cases, so far as the State of Bihar was concerned and had imposed a moral obligation on the appellant.
Neither the Industrial Tribunal nor the Labour Appellate Tribunal in appeal, took the financial position of the company into consideration where they held that the Scheme did impose a 96 762 moral obligation on the appellant to provide quarters for its employees, which was enforceable in industrial adjudication.
Held, that the scheme sanctioned by the Bihar Government was merely of a recommendatory nature and since it had no statutory force it could not provide a basis for the direction made by the award.
Its language showed that it was vague and not intended to be acted upon and so it could not have the effect of introducing a term of employment as between the employer and the workmen.
Although there could be no doubt that, Industrial Tribunals had generally the power and jurisdiction, apart from any scheme or agreement between the parties, in appropriate cases, to impose new obligations on the employers in the interest of social justice and for securing peace and co operation between the employer and the workmen, the award in appeal could not be justified on the merits under the prevailing condition of the industrial evolution in the country.
Western India Automobile Association vs The Industrial Tribunal, Bombay, A.I.R. 1949 F.C. III, The Bharat Bank Ltd., Delhi vs The Employees of the Bharat Bank Ltd., Delhi; , and Rohtas Industries Ltd. vs Brijnandan Pandey; , , referred to.
It was the duty of Industrial Tribunals to take into consi deration the interests of national economy and progress and they were entirely right in taking the view, which they had consistently done, that it would be inexpedient in the present financial condition of the industries in the country to impose the additional burden of providing housing facilities on them which should be the primary responsibility of the State.
Eastern Plywood Manufacturing Co., Ltd. vs Their Workers, , Mohomad Rai Akbarali Khan vs The Associated Cement Companies Ltd., , SamastipuR Central Sugar Co., Ltd. vs Their Workmen, and M/s. National Carbon Co. (India) Ltd. vs National Carbon Co. Mazdoor Union, Calcutta, [1956] L.A.C. 660, approved.
