Clause 16 of the General Order No. 6,5 made by the Governor on March I5, 195,, under the Uttar Pradesh , 947, provided that the decision of the Tribunal or 972 Adjudicator shall be pronounced within 4o days from the date of reference.
By orders dated August 19, 1952, and January 20, 1953, the Governor referred two industrial disputes for adjudication.
The references did not specify the time within which the awards were to be submitted but stated that the disputes were to be adjudicated in accordance with the provisions of Order No. 615.
In the first reference the period for making the award was extendad from time to time up to March 10, 1953, but in the second reference the time was not extended.
On February 18, 1953, before the awards were made, cl. 16 of Order No. 615 was amended and the time Of 4o days was altered to 18o days.
The award in the first case was made on April 17, 1953, beyond 180 days of the reference, and in the second case on June 26, 953, beyond 40 ,lays of the reference but within 180 days thereof.
On May 22, 1953, the Uttar Pradesh Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Ordinance, 1951, came into force which conferred, with retrospective effect, power on the State Government to enlarge, from time to time, the period for making an award and which also validated certain awards not made within the time originally fixed for making them.
The Labour Appellate Tribunal held that the two awards were not valid in law as they had not been made within time.
It was contended by the appellant that as cl. 16 of the Order No. 6I5 had been amended the orders of reference must be construed as specifying 180 days within which the awards were to be submitted, and that, in any case, the awards were validated by section 3 of the Ordinance.
Held, that the award in the first case was submitted beyond time and was invalid and could not be validated by section 3 Of the Ordinance but that the award in the second case, though submitted beyond time, was validated by section 3(2) of the Ordinance.
The Act required the awards to be submitted within a speci fied time and although the orders of reference specified no time it was stated therein that the references were to be decided in accordance with the provisions of Order No. 615, and as such the orders must be read as specifying 4o days as the time within which the awards had to be submitted.
The subsequent amendment of cl. 16 whereby 180 days were substituted for 4o days could not affect an order of reference previously made as cl. 16, as amended, could not be held to have retrospective operation.
On a true construction Of section 3 Of the Ordinance cl.
(1) must be held to validate all orders of extension of time for submission of awards made prior to the commencement of the Ordinance, cl.
(3) applies to proceedings pending at the commencement of the Ordinance and makes section 6 A of the Act, introduced by the Ordinance, applicable to such proceedings and cl.
(2) validatesawards against which no judicial proceedings were pending at the commencement of the Ordinance and not only awards which had become final.
Consequently, the award in the first case against which an appeal had been filed before the commencement of the 973 Ordinance and to which cl.
(3) Of section 3 of the Ordinance applied was bad as it was made beyond the last date of the enlargement of time.
But the award in the second case against which the appeal was filed after the commencement of the Ordinance was validated by el.
(2) Of section 3 of the Ordinance.
