Pending an adjudication proceeding between the workmen and the Mills, the management of the appellant Mills served notices on thirty three of its workmen and thereafter suspended them for taking a leading part in a protracted go slow in contravention of the Industrial Disputes Act.
For similar reasons, a few days later, it again served similar notices on fifteen others and suspended them.
Thereafter the management made two applications under section 33 Of the Industrial Disputes Act for permission to dismiss the said workmen.
The forty eight workmen in their turn applied under section 33A of the Act alleging breach of section 33 by the management in suspending them by way of punishment.
The Industrial Tribunal found that the suspension was not by way of punishment and that there was a deliberate resort to go slow by the workmen which was unjustified; it refused the permission with respect to sixteen of the workmen on the ground of want of evidence but granted leave to the management to suspend the rest for seven days, thus disallowing the prayer for dismissal.
It also rejected the workmen 's application under section 33A of the Act.
Appeals were filed by both the parties and when they came up for hearing, the Appellate Tribunal allowed the workmen to withdraw their appeal so far as it related to their application under section 33A of the Act, with the result that the finding of the Tribunal that the suspension was not a punishment but only pending enquiry by the management and proceedings before the Tribunal, stood confirmed.
While agreeing with all other findings of the Tribunal, the Appellate Tribunal took the view that the suspension ordered by the management was substantive punishment since the notices did not state that it was pending enquiry, and the subsequent application for permisson to dismiss the workmen was, therefore, mala fide and dismissed the appeal of the management.
Held, that the material findings arrived at by the Industrial Tribunal not having been upset by the Appellate Tribunal, the only possible order on the applications of the management under section 33 of the Act was to permit it to dismiss the workmen provided there was evidence against them all.
It was not open to the Industrial Tribunal to substitute some other form of punisliment and give permission therefor.
837 The Appellate Tribunal was clearly in error in holding that suspension, in the instant case, was not an interim order pending .enquiry and proceedings before the Tribunal under section 33, but substantive punishment, contrary to the finding of the Industrial Tribunal which stood confirmed by its own order permitting the withdrawal of the appeal against it by the workmen.
The finding of the Industrial Tribunal that there was no evidence against sixteen workmen was, on the face of it, perverse, since the evidence against them was the same as against the thirty two others.
As go slow was serious misconduct, insidious in nature and could not be countenanced, and since the workmen were found guilty of such misconduct, the management must be granted the permission to dismiss them.
