Two workmen Das and another were arrested by the police on the complaint of the appellant company for an alleged theft.
The manager held an enquiry and dismissed Das from service for gross misconduct.
At the enquiry, Das stated that he had nothing to say and knew nothing about the theft.
Certain persons whose statements had been recorded by the manager at the investigation stage in the absence of Das, were present at the said enquiry.
Das was told to ask those persons what they had to say, though he was neither supplied with the copies of the statements made by them nor the statements were read over to him at the time of the enquiry.
Das replied that he would not put any.
questions to them.
Thereupon these witnesses were asked whether the evidence they had given before the manager was correct, and if not, they were at liberty to amend it, to which they replied that the evidence they had given was correct.
Some time later, the Magistrate on the final report of the police discharged Das.
Thereafter the Union had the matter referred to the Tribunal.
Before the Tribunal the company produced only the statements of the witnesses but did not produce the witnesses themselves.
The Tribunal found in favour of the workman.
The company came up in appeal by special leave to the Supreme Court, where, for the first time it raised the question of the qualification and competency of the one member Tribunal under section 7 Of the Act.
Held, that the question whether the Tribunal was a competent one under section 7 of the , prior to the amending Act 36 of 956, must be raised before the Tribunal itself as it was a matter of investigation and could not be raised for the first time before the Supreme Court.
Held further, that the basic principle of natural justice in an enquiry was that the opponent must be given the opportunity of questioning the witnesses after knowing in full what they had to state against him.
The witnesses on whom the party relied should generally be examined in the presence of the opponent and he must also be informed about the material sought to be used against him, and given an opportunity to explain it, 33 Union of India vs T. R. Varma [1958] S.C.R. 499, followed.
New Prakash Transport Co. Ltd. vs New Suwvarna Transport Co. Ltd. , referred to.
Held, further, that if there was defect in the conduct of the enquiry by the employer it could be cured if all the relevant evidence including the witnesses who were not examined in the presence of the workman were produced before the Tribunal, thereby giving the party an opportunity to cross examine them, and leaving it to the Tribunal to consider the evidence and decide the case on merits.
Sasa Musa Sugar Works (P) Ltd. vs Shobrati Khan C.As.
746 & 747 Of 1957 decided on 29 4 1959, followed.
