The discharged employees of the Company in liquidation raised an industrial dispute wherein the auction purchaser of the Company was also impleaded as a party.
The Tribunal, inter alia, held that no relationship of employer and employee existed between the auction purchaser and the old staff who had been discharged prior to the purchase of the business, and the reference so far as the auction purchaser was concerned was incompetent.
The Tribunal directed the liquidators to pay compensation to the discharged employees.
The liquidators were refused sanction to appeal from the said award by the High Court whereupon the auction purchaser who was also the managing director of the Company, prior to its liquidation, preferred an appeal in the name of the Company represented by himself as the managing director and also in his capacity as the auction purchaser of the Company.
The Appellate Tribunal dismissed the appeal in limine as incompetent in view of the provisions Of section 457 Of the , on the ground that the appeal was not maintainable as it was not authorised by the High Court.
Held, that where a party to the Reference in an industrial dispute was exonerated from its terms, and no Award was made against him, he could not be said to be an aggrieved party, thereby attracting the provisions of section 12 of the Industrial Disputes (Appellate Tribunal) Act 1950, and any appeal by him from the said Award will be incompetent.
14 No person other than the Official Liquidator, who is place in charge of the affairs of the Company in the process of winding up, is authorised with the sanction of the Court to institute any suit, prefer an appeal or other legal proceedings in the name and on behalf of the Company.
Held, further, that there is no inconsistency between section 457 of the and section 12 Of the Industrial Disputes (Appellate Tribunal) Act 1950.
But in construing the provisions Of section 12 Of the Industrial Disputes (Appellate Tribunal) Act 1950, if there was anything in the , with particular reference to section 457 which was inconsistent with the provisions of Industrial Disputes (Appellate Tribunal) Act 1950, the latter Act shall prevail.
Section 457 of the , concerns a very special case, it only lays down a condition precedent to the filing of a case if it has to be by the liquidator of a company in the process of winding up.
Section 12 of the Industrial Disputes (Appellate Tribunal) Act 1950 is the usual statutory provision which permits an appeal to be presented to the Appellate Tribunal, which otherwise would not lie, by any party who is aggrieved by an award; it does not either in express terms or by necessary implication override, abrogate or modify the provisions Of section 457 Of the , nor does it do away with the necessity for the requisite sanction of the court which is a condition precedent so far as the liquidator is concerned to institute any suit or proceedings in the name or on behalf of the company in liquidation.
In the instant case the appeal purported to be filed on behalf of the Company in liquidation through its managing director was wholly incompetent ; and the second appellant, the auctionpurchaser, could not be said to the aggrieved party enabling him to invokes.
12 of the Act.
