Initially the appellant was a 100% subsidiary of the British company, Crompton Parkinson Ltd. In 1947 an agreement called " Technical Aid Agreement " was concluded between the two companies under which the appellant agreed to pay to the parent company 5% Of the net value of its sales every year as service fee for the use of their patterns, valuable designs, technical aid, benefit of research and ancillary services and facilities.
As the appellant obtained the benefit of the parent company 's technical knowledge and research it did not maintain a separate research establishment on which it would otherwise have had to spend far more than the service fee it paid.
The agreement had received the approval of the Government; the income tax authorities had, every year, allowed the service fee as legitimate expenditure ; and the remittances to the parent company had been sanctioned by the Reserve Bank of India.
In the claim for bonus by the workmen, the Tribunal, in calculating the gross profits, pruned down the allowable expenditure on account of the service fee to one fourth on the grounds that the amount of service fee paid was excessive and beyond the requirements of commercial necessity and that a large part of the payment was in the nature of capital expenditure.
In calculating the available surplus the Tribunal deducted as a first charge 4 1/2 months basic wages as bonus before deducting depreciation and income tax contrary to the terms of the Full Bench formula.
Held, that the entire amount of service fee paid ought to have been allowed as proper expenditure.
Unless it was definitely found that a purported expenditure was sham or had been made with the express object of minimising the profits with a view to deprive the workmen of their bonus, the Tribunal could not substitute its own judgment as to what was or was not commercially justified in place of that of the appellant and its directors.
The service fee was a genuine expenditure and represented a binding contractual obligation which could legally be enforced against the appellant and a breach thereof may have had serious consequences affecting its business.
Held further, that the Tribunal acted wrongly in deducting 937 bonus as a prior charge even before the recognised items of prior charges.
Such departures from the Full Bench Formula by Tribunals were to be deprecated.
Associated Cement Companies Ltd. vs Its Workmen, C.A. Nos.
459 and 460 of 1957, decided on 5 5 59, followed.
