For the year 1953 54, the employers paid bonus to the workmen equal to three months ' wages, but the workmen demanded bonus equivalent to seven months and six months basic wages with dearness allowance.
The employers contended that after making deductions for the prior charges from the gross profits in accordance with the formula evolved by the Full Bench of the Labour Appellate Tribunal in Mill Owners Association, Bombay vs The Rashtriya Mill Mazdoor Sangh, , there was no available surplus left and consequently the 926 workmen could claim no bonus.
The workmen countered that the formula required revision as the employers were becoming increasingly more rehabilitation conscious and their appetite for the provision for rehabilitation was fast growing with the result that in most cases, after allowing for rehabilitation, there was no surplus left for the payment of bonus and the main object of the formula was thus frustrated.
The workmen further contended that the whole of the rehabilitation expenses should not be provided for out of trading profits and that the claim for rehabilitation should be fixed at a reasonable amount and the industry should be required to find the balance from other sources: Held, that though there may be some force in the plea made for the revision of the Full Bench formula, the problem raised by the said plea is of such a character that it can be appropriately considered only by a high powered commission and not by this Court while hearing the present group of appeals.
Besides the Full Bench formula had on the whole worked fairly satisfactorily in a large number of industries all over the country, and the claim for bonus should be decided by Tribunals on the basis of this formula without attempting to revise it.
The formula was elastic enough to meet reasonably the claims of the industry and labour for fair play and justice.
If the content of each item specified in the formula was determined objectively in the light of all relevant and material facts, the Tribunals would generally find it possible to make reasonable adjustments between the rival claims and provide for a fair distribution of the available surplus.
Muir Mills Co. Ltd. vs Suti Mills Mazdoor Union, Kanpur, ; , Baroda Borough Municipality vs Its Workmen, ; , Sree Meenakshi Mills Ltd. vs Their Workmen; , and The State of Mysore vs The Workers of Kolar Gold Mines; , , referred to.
The formula was based on two considerations: first, that labour was entitled to claim a share in the trading profits of the industry, because it had partially contributed to the same; and second, that labour was entitled to claim that the gap between its actual wage and the living wage should, within reasonable limits, be filled up.
In dealing with the claims for bonus, the two fold basis of the formula must always be kept in mind.
Further, it was not necessary that the workmen must actually manufacture or produce the goods before they become entitled to claim any bonus.
Burma Shell Oil Storage & Distributing Co. of India Ltd. vs Their Workmen, , applied.
The working of the formula begins with the figure of gross profits, taken from the profit and loss account, which are arrived at after payment of wages and dearness allowance to employees 927 and other items of admissible expenditure.
It would be open to the Tribunal to examine the accounts and to disallow deliberate and mala fide debit entries made to reduce the amount of gross profits.
It would likewise be open to the parties to claim the exclusion of items, credit or debit, on the ground that they were patently and obviously extraneous and entirely unrelated to the trading profits of the year.
But the Tribunal must resist the temptation of dissecting the balance sheet too minutely or attempting to reconstruct it.
K. Cottton Manufacturers Ltd., Kanpur vs Their Workmen, , applied.
The formula deals with the claims for bonus on the basis that the relevant year is a self sufficient unit and the appropriate accounts have to be made on the notional basis in respect of the said year.
Hence, the refund of excess profits and the adjustment of the previous year 's depreciation and losses cannot be made against the bonus year 's profits.
Model Mills etc.
Textile Mills, Nagpur vs The Rashtriya Mills Mazdoor Sangh ; Bennett Coleman and Co. Ltd. vs Their Workmen, , referred to.
After ascertaining the amount of gross profits, the first item of deduction therefrom relates to depreciation.
The depreciation which has to be deducted from the gross profits should be the notional normal depreciation as explained in the case of Surat Electricity Co. Ltd., , and should not include the initial and additional depreciation allowable under the Income tax Act.
U.P. Electric Supply Co. Ltd. vs Their Workmen, ; Surat Electricity Co 'section Staff Union vs Surat Electricity Co. Ltd., , referred to.
The second item of deduction is on account of income tax.
On the balance obtained after deducting the depreciation from the gross profits the tribunal has to calculate the amount of income tax payable for the bonus year.
In making this calculation it would not be reasonable to allow the employer to claim under the item of income tax an additional amount in respect of the two further depreciations which are expressly authorised under section 10(2)(vi) of the Income tax Act.
Therefore the two concessions thus given by the Income tax Act should not be taken into account in determining the amount of income tax under the formula.
Sree Meenakshi Mills Ltd. vs Their Workmen, [1958] S.C.R. 878, explained and followed.
The third item of deduction under the formula relates to the return on paid up capital as well as working capital.
The formula provides generally for the payment of interest at 6% 118 928 per annum on the paid up capital and at 2% on working capital.
These rates are not inflexible and will vary according to the circumstances of each case.
Workmen of Assam Co. Ltd. vs Assaam Co. Ltd., [1959] S.C.R. 327 ; Rustom and Hoynsby (India) Ltd. vs Their Workmen (1955):I L.L.J. 73, Mill Owners Association, Bombay vs The Rashtriya Mill Mazdoor Sangh, , Tea and Coffee Workers Union vs Brooke Bond (India) (Private) Ltd., , U. P. Elcctric Supply Co. Ltd. vs Their Workmen, , referred to.
The fourth item of deduction is on account of rehabilitation which includes replacement and modernisation but not expansion.
Rehabilitation has to be calculated for the plant and machinery as well as the buildings.
The whole of the rehabilitation charges have to come out of the trading profits as this guarantees the continuance of the industry to the benefit both of the employer and labour.
The Tribunal has to estimate the probable cost of replacement of plant and machinery at the time when such replacement would become due.
In determining such cost, the Tribunal has to project the price level into the future, determined not only in the light of the prices prevailing during the bonus year, but also of subsequent price levels.
The decision on the question of the probable cost of rehabilitation is always reached by adopting a suitable multiplier.
This multiplier is based on the ratio between the cost price of the plant and machinery and the probable price which may have to be paid for its rehabilitation, replacement or modernisation.
As there has been a continuous rise in the price of industrial plant and machinery, the older the plant which needs rehabilitation, the higher is the multiplier.
If the employer has deliberately or mala fide refrained from rehabilitating his old machinery with a view to claim a higher multiplier, his conduct may be taken into account in determining the multiplier and the amount of rehabilitation payable to him.
Once a proper multiplier is adopted, the probable cost of rehabilitation can be easily determined by multiplying the original cost by the multiplier.
At this stage the divisor steps in.
The total amount required for rehabilitation has to be divided by a suitable divisor in order to ascertain the annual requirement of the employer in that behalf year by year.
Before awarding an appropriate amount in respect of rehabilitation for the bonus year, deductions have to be made, first on account of the break down value of the plant and machinery which is usually calculated at the rate Of 5% Of the cost price, secondly the depreciation and general liquid resources available to the employer other than those earmarked for specific purposes, thirdly all the rehabilitation amounts which may have been allowed to the employers in the previous years, but had remained unused in the meanwhile.
929 It is only after all the prior charges have thus been deter mined and deducted from the gross profits that the available surplus can be ascertained for payment of bonus.
The procedure adopted by some Tribunals of nationally working out the amount of bonus and then giving it priority in the calculations before the determination of the income tax payable inevitably lessens the amount of tax proportionately, and should be deprecated.
Rehabilitation cannot be given priority before the income tax payable is ascertained and deducted from the gross profits.
No addition should be made to the list of prior charges re cognised by the formula even with respect to the employers claim for deductions on account of gratuity fund created for the benefit of the workmen.
But the Tribunal ought to, when the available surplus is determined, take into account such a claim and reasonable amount of allowance should be definitely borne in mind in finally fixing the amount of bonus.
M/s. Metro Motors vs Their Workmen, , referred to.
When the available surplus has been ascertained, three parties are entitled to claim shares therein : labour 's claim for bonus, the industry 's claim for the purpose of expansion and other needs and the share holders ' claim for additional return on the capital invested by them.
The ratio of distribution would obviously depend on several factors: such as the gap between the actual wages and the living wages, the setting apart of a gratuity fund by the employer and the amount thereof, the extent of the available surplus, the dividends actually paid by the employer and those paid by comparable concerns, the probabilities of expansion, the general financial condition of the employer and his necessity to meet urgent liabilities.
It would be wrong on principle to take overtime payment into account in calculating the bonus payable to each workman.
Once the total amount payable as bonus is determined on the principles as indicated, the question of overtime payment being taken into account can no longer be a dispute between the employer and his workmen but one between the workmen inter se.
