The appellant company, carrying on business in manufacturing and selling textiles at Baroda, received in the assessment years 1942 43 and 1943 44 payments in cheques from the Government of India for the supply of such goods on bills submitted, as agreed upon in prescribed printed forms which provided that the Government should pay the amount due to the appellant by cheque.
The appellant, however, did not request or write to the Government indicating in what way the payment by cheque was 237 to be made.
The Government sent the cheques from Delhi by post to the appellant at Baroda and it received and accepted them in Baroda in full and unconditional satisfaction of its claim and cashed them through its bank accounts in Bombay and Ahmedabad.
The question was whether the amounts of the cheques were income, profits and gains received by the appellant in the taxable territories and were as such liable to tax under section 4(1)(a) of the Indian Income tax Act.
The Income tax Officer held that the amounts were received in British India as the cheques were drawn on banks in British India and the Appellate Assistant Commissioner on appeal affirmed his order.
The Income tax Appellate Tribunal on appeal held that even though the appellant did not ask the Government to send the cheques by post, there was an implied request to do so and following the decision of this Court in Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay South vs Messrs. Ogale Glass Works Ltd. [1955] I S.C.R. 185, held that the amounts of the cheques were received in the taxable territories and as such the appellant was liable to tax under section 4(1)(a) of the Act.
Hence these appeals by special leave.
The question for decision was whether in the facts and circumstances of the case the stipulation that payments should be made by cheques implied a request by the appellant to the Government to send the cheques by post so as to constitute the Post Office its agent for receiving such payments.
Held, that regard being had to the general course of business usage which was followed in this case, there could be no doubt that the parties intended that the cheques should be sent by post which was the normal agency for transmission of such articles and, consequently, there was an implied request by the appellant to the Government to send the cheques by post so as to constitute the Post Office its agent for the purpose of receiving those payments.
Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay South vs Messrs. Ogale Glass Works Ltd. [1955] I S.C.R. 185 and Norman vs Rickets, , applied.
Pennington vs Crossley and Sons (Limited), [1879] 13 T.L.R. 513, considered.
Thorappa vs Umedmalji and Exparte Cote In ye Deveza, , distinguished.
