With a view to provide a pension to H who was the managing director of the appellant company, after his retirement at the age Of 55 years on September 20, 1955, the company executed a trust deed on September 16, 1948, in favour of three trustees to whom the company paid a sum of Rs. 1,09,643 and further undertook to pay annually Rs. 4,364 for six consecutive years.
The trustees undertook to hold the said sums upon trust to spend the same in taking out a Deferred Annuity Policy with an Insurance Society in the name of the trustees but on the life of H under which a certain sum of money was payable annually to H for life from the date of his superannuation.
It was also provided in the deed that notwithstanding the main clause the trustees would, if so desired by the company, take out instead a different kind of policy for the benefit of both H and his wife, with a further provision for His wife should H die before he attained the age Of 55.
On January 12, 1949, the trustees took out a policy, wherein the amount of Deferred Annuity to be paid per annum was fixed according as whether both H and his wife were living on September 20, 1955, or one of them died earlier.
The policy also contained, inter alia, two clauses: " (i) Provided the contract is in force and unseduced, the Grantees (i. e., the trustees) shall be entitled to surrender the Annuity on the Option Anniversary (i.e., Sept. 20, 1955) for the Capital sum of pound 10,169 subject to written notice of the intention to surrender being received by the Directors of the Society within the thirty days preceding the Option Anniversary.
(2) If both the Nominees shall die whilst the Contract remains in force and unreduced and before the Option Anniversary the said funds and Property of the Society shall be liable to make repayment to the Grantees of a sum equal to a return of all the premiums which shall have been paid under this Contract without interest after proof thereof and subject as hereinbefore provided.
" The appellant company paid the initial sum and the yearly premia for some years before H died.
For the assessment years 1949.50, 1950.51, 1951 52 and 1952 53, the appellant claimed a deduction of these sums from its profits or gains under section 10(2)(XV) 965 of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922, but the Income tax authorities disallowed the claim on the ground that the sums claimed did not amount to expenditure within the meaning of the section.
The appellant 's contention was that payment of pension was an expenditure of a revenue character and so also the payment of a lump sum to get rid of a recurring liability to pay such pension and that expenditure on insurance was not contingent, because though the contingency related to life and depended on it, the probabilities were estimated on actuarial calculations and, that the expenditure was, therefore, real.
Held, that expenditure which is deductible for the purposes of income tax under section 10(2)(xv) of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922, is one which must be towards a liability actually existing at the time, but the putting aside of money which may become expenditure on the happening of an event is not expenditure.
In the present case, on the terms of the deed of trust, money was placed in the hands of trustees for the purchase of annuities of different kinds, if required, but to be returned if the annuities were not bought, and the clauses in the policy taken out by the trustees showed that till September 20, 1955, the appellant had dominion through the trustees over the premia paid.
The payment to the trustees was therefore towards a liability depending on a contingency.
Consequently, the amount claimed was not liable to be deducted as an expenditure under section IO(2)(XV) Of the Act.
Cases on English Income tax law reviewed.
