The appellant company in enforcement of a standing order, framed under the (XX of 1946), against which the respondent had preferred no appeal, compulsorily retired 47 of its workmen at the age Of 55.
A dispute was raised by the workmen as to the validity of such retirement and the three questions referred to the Tribunal for adjudication were, (1) whether forced retirement of workmen at 55 was justified, (2) what relief were the workmen entitled to on retirement and (3) supposing the forced retirement of the workmen in question was justified, to what relief would they be entitled.
It was urged on behalf of the respondents that the age of superannuation fixed by the standing order should apply only to new entrants and in the case of old ones the age should be sixty with option to them to continue even thereafter.
The Labour Appellate Tribunal on appeal, in reversal of the findings of the Industrial Tribunal, held that the Standing Order in question could not bar adjudication as to the propriety of the system of forced retirement, that in view of the admitted fact that there was no fixed age of retirement in the appellant 's concern before the Standing Order, it could not be enforced against workmen recruited prior to it and by its award directed that the workmen who had been compulsorily retired should be reinstated on refunding :what they had received in the shape of gratuity and Provident Fund dues.
It was urged by way of preliminary objections on behalf of the appellant that (1) the 349 appeal to the Labour Appellate Tribunal was incompetent as no substantial question of law was involved in it, and (2) that the reference to adjudication was itself bad and the delay in raising the present dispute showed that the respondent had acquiesced in the relevant standing order.
Held, that the objections must fail.
The question as to what should be the proper age of super annuation for industrial workers was one of general importance as it affected a large number of employees and involved questions of industrial policy and principle, so it was a substantial question of law under section 7(1)(a) of the Industrial Disputes (Appellate Tribunal) Act, 1950.
A standing order, even though binding as between the employer and the employees under section 7 of the , was open to modification even under the Act as it stood prior to its amendment in 1956, in an industrial dispute raised by the workmen for that purpose and as such the present reference, questioning the propriety and validity of the system of forced retirement as introduced by the appellant must be decided on merits.
Mettur Industries Ltd. vs Varma and Others (1958) 11 L.L.J. 326 and Bharat Starch and Chemicals Ltd. vs The Industrial Tribunal, Punjab, , referred to.
The delay, inevitable in raising an industrial dispute, could be no ground in the instant case for an inference that the respondent had acquiesced in the relevant standing order.
In industrial disputes legal technicalities should be avoided as far as it was reasonably possible to do so and industrial tribunals should be cautious in applying the principle of acquiescence and estoppel in the adjudication of such disputes.
Held, further, that it was evident in the instant case that it was unfair to fix the age of superannuation of previous employees by a subsequent standing order which should apply in that matter only to future entrants.
In view of the fact However, that the previous employees had agreed that such age for them should be sixty, with option to continue thereafter, the age of superannuation for them should be fixed at sixty, but without the option, which must be held to be wholly unreasonable and inconsistent with the basic idea of a retirement age.
jamadoba Colliery of Messrs. Tata Iron and Steel Co. Ltd. vs Shri Nasiban, , referred to.
Guest, Keen, Williams Private Ltd. vs Its Workmen, The Calcutta Gazette, Pt. 1, dt.
24 9 53, P. 3261; M/s. Calcutta Exchange Gazette & Daily Advertiser vs Shri Uma Prasanna Bhattacharjee, The Calcutta Gazette, Pt. 1, dt. 16 9 1954, P. 3111 and Bengal Chamber of Commerce vs Its Employees, Govt. of West Bengal, Labour Deptt., "Award made by the Tribunals " for quarter ending March 1949, P 116, distinguished.
350 In fixing the age of superannuation, however, industrial tribunals should take into consideration various relevant factors, such as the nature of the work, the wage structure, retirement benefits and other amenities available, the climate of the locality, age of superannuation in comparable industries and the past practice prevailing in the industry.
