The respondent Municipality issued a notice under sub section
(1) Of section 153A of the Bombay District Municipal Act, 1901, as adapted and applied to the State of Saurashtra and as amended by Act XI Of 1955, calling upon the appellant to show cause why it should not be directed to discharge the effluent Of it 's chemical works in the manner specified in the notice.
On the appellant objecting to the notice and the requisition contained therein, a Special Officer was appointed by the Government under sub section
(3) of that section to hold an enquiry in the matter.
The Special Officer treated some of the issues raised,, as preliminary issues of law and held that the question whether the discharge of the effluent polluted the water and adversely affected the fertility of the soil was a matter for the subjective satisfaction of the Municipality and binding on him and was as such beyond the scope of his enquiry.
The question for determination in this appeal was whether the Special Officer was right in the view he took of section 153A(3) Of the Act and in restricting the scope of the enquiry in the way he did.
389 Held, that Special Officer took a wrong view of his jurisdiction under section 153A(3) Of the Act and was in error in restricting the scope of the enquiry.
There could be no doubt on a proper appreciation of the scheme laid down by the provision of section 153A of the Act, correctly construed, that while the subjective satisfaction of the Municipality as to the existence of the nuisance could not be questioned at the initial stage when it sought to put the machinery provided by sub section
(1) in motion or under sub section
(2) where such existence was admitted, the situation contemplated by sub section
(3) where the notice and the requisition were wholly disputed, and no mere modification of the requisition sought, was entirely different.
The language of sub section
(3) and particularly the words " to hold an enquiry into the matter " used by it clearly indicated that where there was such a contest, it was the duty of the Special Officer to enquire into the existence of the alleged nuisance and come to a finding of his own.
The status of the Special Official and powers conferred on him by the relevant provisions of the Act, clearly indicated that sub section
(3) was intended by the Legislature to be a protection against any arbitrary exercise of its power by the Municipality.
It was of the utmost importance that such proceedings should in the interest of the community, be disposed of with all possible expedition.
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 173 of 1959.
Appeal by special leave from the judgment and order dated July 16, 1958, of the Special Officer appointed under section 153(3) of the Bombay District Municipal Act, 1901 (Bombay Act No. 1 1 1 of 1901), as applied to Saurashtra, Zalawad Division, Surendarnagar.
