The appellant was detained under section 3(1)(a)(ii) of the Pre ventive Detention Act, 1950.
The copy of the grounds of the order of detention served on him stated that he was detained as he had been acting in a way prejudicial to the maintenance of public order as evidenced by the particulars stated in its four paragraphs.
Paragraph 1 stated, inter alia, that the appellant had, in a meeting of the refugees vilified the Prime Minister of India for his unsympathetic attitude towards the sufferings of the refugees and gave expression to violent feelings regarding his person while referring to the recent Nehru Noon Pact; paragraph 2 stated that he called upon the members of his party to build up a strong movement against the implementation of the pact and tried to rouse passion by alleging the Prime Minister had no sympathy for West Bengal; paragraph 3 stated that at another meeting he denounced the pact and stressed the need of forming a militia with the youths of the country for the safety of the people living in border areas and paragraph 4, that he intended to proceed to Delhi on the date mentioned, and was likely to instigate plans endangering the personal safety of the Prime Minister.
The High Court, on an application under sections 491 and 561A of the Code of Criminal Procedure for the issue of a writ of habeas corpus, while upholding the order of detention, held that the said paragraphs were really not the grounds of detention but merely pieces of evidence on which the only ground of detention, namely, acting in a manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order, was based, that paragraph 4 was merely an inference of fact having a bearing on the ground of detention.
It was contended, inter alia, on appeal that paragraph 4 was extremely vague and devoid of particulars, and that the allegations made had no rational connection with the objects mentioned in section 3 of the Act and so he was deprived of his right to make an effective representation.
All this was, however, denied on behalf of the State.
Held, that the High Court had overlooked the difference between the objects of detention specified in cls.
(a) and (b) of section 3(1) of the Act and the statement of facts which constitute the grounds envisaged by section 7 of the Act.
412 Sections 3 and 7 of the , read together, contemplate that the copy of the order passed by the detaining authority under section 3(2) Of the Act to be served on the detenu should contain, (1) a preamble reciting in terms one or more of the sub clauses of cls.
(a) and (b) of section 3(1) as its object or objects, (2) the grounds contemplated by section 7, namely, the conclusions of fact, which led to the passing of the order of detention, informing the detenu as to why he was detained, and (3) particulars, if and where necessary, but not those referred to in sub sections
(3) and (4) Of section 3 of the Act.
In the instant case, however, the error of confusion made by the High Court could not invalidate its order since the grounds of detention, characterised by the High Court as recitals of fact, read together, were in no way ambiguous, indefinite or irrelevant to the object of the detention, namely, the maintenance of public order and did not deprive the detenu of his right of representation.
The State of Bombay vs Atma Ram Sridhay Vaidya [1951] S.C.R. 167, considered.
Dwarka Das Bhatia vs The State of Jammu Kashmir.
; , held inapplicable.
