In a double member Parliamentary constituency one seat was reserved for the scheduled tribes and the other was general.
Four persons filed their nominations for the election, G 1 and G 2 for the general seat and S1 and S2 for the reserved seat.
At the polls the number of votes received by the candidates were in the following order: S1, S2, G1 and G2.
In accordance with the provisions of section 54(4) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, S1 was declared elected to the reserved seat and S2, who had received the largest number of votes out of the remaining candidates, was declared elected to the general seat.
G1 filed an election petition for a declaration that the election of S2 was void and for a further declaration that he had himself been duly elected to the general seat.
The petition was based on three grounds, viz., (i) that upon a proper interpretation Of section 54(4) a candidate who had filed his nomination for the reserved seat could not be declared elected to the general seat ; (ii) that if the interpretation be otherwise then section 54(4) was ultra vires; and (iii) that S2 had ceased to be a member of a scheduled tribe at the relevant time and his nomination was improperly accepted.
Held, (Kapur, J., dissenting) that, S2 was properly and validly declared elected.
The provisions of the Constitution and of the Act show that the election in a double member constituency was held for the whole constituency and not for the seats and a candidate who had filed nomination as a member of the scheduled tribes was entitled to contest for both the seats.
On a fair and reasonable construction Of section 54(4) Of the Act there could be no doubt that in a case like the present, after S1 was declared duly elected to the reserved seat, the votes secured by the remaining three candidates had to be considered before declaring the election for the general seat.
A member of the scheduled tribe or caste did not forego his right to seek election to the general seat merely because he availed himself of the additional concession of standing for the reserved seat by making the prescribed declaration for that purpose.
It was not necessary for him to file two nomination papers for the two seats.
Section 54(4) of the Act did not offend article 14 or article 330 Of the Constitution and was not unconstitutional.
427 Held, further, that the appellant had failed to establish that S2 had ceased to be a member of the scheduled tribe and had become a Kshatriya.
Whatever may have been the origin of Hindu castes and tribes in ancient times, gradually castes came to be based on birth alone.
A person who belonged by birth to a depressed caste or tribe would find it very difficult, if not impossible, to attain the status of a higher caste by virtue of his volition, education, culture and status.
The caste status of a person had to be determined in the light of the recognition received by him from the members of the caste into which he sought an entry ; unilateral acts of such a person asserting a higher status were not enough to establish the higher status.
It is to be hoped that this position will change, and in course of time the cherished ideal of castless society truly based on social equality will be attained under the powerful impact of the doctrine of social justice and equality proclaimed by the Constitution and sought to be implemented by the relevant statutes and as a result of the spread of secular education and the growth of a rational outlook and of proper sense of social values ; but at present it would be unrealistic and utopian to ignore the difficulties which a member of the depressed tribe or caste has to face in claiming a higher status amongst his co religionists.
Per Kapur, J. The election Of S2 to the general seat was not valid.
When a member of the scheduled tribe or caste offered himself for election to a reserved seat he could be elected only to that seat and not to the general seat.
The provisions of the Constitution and of the Act show that the election in a constituency was for filling of a seat in the constituency and not for a constituency.
When a candidate offers himself for election in a constituency, he does so for election to fill a seat in the constituency.
Therefore, if a candidate wanted to contest both the seats he had to file two nomination papers one for the general seat and the other for the reserved seat and he had to make two deposits.
Section 8(2) Of the destroyed the effect of section 54 of the Act.
Caste in Hinduism had its origin not on the basis of birth but of guna, karma and subhavana (quality, actions and character).
Caste is nothing but division of labour.
Hinduism might have become static at one time; it is no longer so and it is wrong to say that caste is dependent upon birth and not on kayma i.e. action.
section 2 had by his actions raised himself to the position of a Kshatriya and he was no longer a member of the scheduled tribe or caste.
