The appellant was put up on trial on charges under sections 5(1)(a) and 5(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947.
Payments of particular sums by way of bribe were not proved against him.
But the High Court, holding that the appellant 's bare statements from the dock unsupported by any other acceptable evidence could not satisfactorily account for the large deposits standing to his credit in his bank accounts raised the presumption under section 5(3) of the Act and held him guilty of criminal misconduct in the discharge of his official duty under section 5(1)(d) of the Act, concerning the conviction and sentence passed on him by the 462 special Magistrate.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant that the charge relating to specific instances of bribery having failed, the contrary to the presumption under section 5(3) Of the Act should have been held as established and in absence of any finding that his statements were false it should have been held that the charge against him had not been proved beyond all reasonable doubt.
Held, that section 5(3) of the Prevention of Corruption Act did not create a new offence but only laid down a rule of evidence that empowered the Court to presume the guilt of the accused in certain circumstances, contrary to the well known principle of criminal law that the burden of proof was always on the prosecution and never shifted on to the accused.
The Legislature by using the expression " satisfactorily account " in section 5(3) of the, Act, cast the burden on the accused not only to offer a plausible explanation as to how he came by the large wealth disproportionate to his known sources of income, but also to satisfy the court that his explanation was worthy of credence.
Consequently, cases under the general law where it had been held that the accused could be exonerated if he offered a plausible explanation could have no application.
The expression " known sources of income " used in that section referred to such sources of income as became known to the prosecution as a result of the investigation and could not mean those that were witthin the special knowledge of the accused, and it was no part of the duty of the prosecution to lead evidence in that regard.
Where the prosecution fulfilled the conditions laid down by the earlier part of section 5(3) Of the Act, the statutory presumption had to be raised and it would be for the accused to rebut the same by cogent evidence.
Rex vs Carrbriant, , and Otto George Gfeller vs The King, A.I.R. (30) ; Hate Singh Bhagat Singh vs State of Madhya Bharat, A.I.R. 1953 S.C. 468 and Regina vs Dunbar, , held inapplicable.
The failure to substantiate a charge under section 5(1)(a) of the Act on evidence would not necessarily mean an acquittal in respect of a charge under section 5(1)(d) of the Act.
If the requirements of the earlier part of section 5(3) were established by evidence, conviction for criminal misconduct under section 5(1)(d) based on the presumption under section 5(3) Of the Act would be perfectly valid in law.
