The appellant company, incorporated in India, entered into a contract on June 18, 1945, for the supply of five hundred bales of jute, with the respondent company which was incorporated in England and which had its registered office in London.
The contract, inter alia, provided that in the event of default of tender or delivery, the seller shall pay to the buyer as and for liquidated damages 10s.
per ton plus the excess (if any) of the market value over the contract price, the market value being that of jute contracted for on the day following the date of default.
There was a provision for arbitration, under which any claim or dispute whatever arising out of, or in relation to this contract or its construction or fulfilment shall be referred to arbitration in London in accordance with the bye laws of the London jute Association.
Disputes having arisen regarding the performance of the contract the respondent referred the matter to the arbitration of the London jute Association, who appointed two of its members as the arbitrators.
The appellant did not reply to the notice given by the arbitrators but filed an application on 570 August 10, 1949, under section 33 Of the , in the Calcutta High Court, praying, inter alia, (a) for a declaration that the arbitration agreement was void on the ground of uncertainty, and (b) for a declaration that there was in fact and in law no contract between the parties on account of mutual mistake of the parties.
Notice was given by the appellant to the respondent and the London jute Association that further steps in the arbitration proceedings should not be taken pending disposal of the application under section 33 Of the .
The arbitrators, however, proceeded with the arbitration and gave their award on October 17, 1949.
On November 26, 195i, an application was filed by the respondent in the Calcutta High Court under section 5 of the , praying that judgment be pronounced in accordance with the award.
The appellant contended that the award was invalid on the grounds, inter alia, (i) that the award was bad under section 35 of the , as it was made after the receipt of the notice of filing of the petition dated August 10, 1940, under section 33 of the , by the respondent and the arbitrators and during the pendency of the said application, and (2) that the liquidated damages provided under the award included not only the difference between the contract price and the market price on the date of default but also a further sum of 10s.
per ton, that the extra amount was against the provisions Of sections 73 and 74 of the , and that, therefore, the award was bad on the face of it and could not be enforced in view of the provisions Of section 7(e) of the , which lays down that an award cannot be enforced in India if it is contrary to the Law of India.
Held: (i) that the subject matter of the legal proceedings under section 33 Of the , which relates to the existence and validity of the arbitration agreement, are not matters within the competence of the arbitrators, and do not therefore cover any part of the subject matter of the reference.
Consequently, section 35 of the is inapplicable.
(2) The award does not violate the provisions of sections 73 and 74 Of the , as the arbitrators have only awarded the maximum amount named in the contract.
