A Bill introduced in the House of the People on the report of the States Reorganisation Commission and as recommended by the President under the proviso to article 3 Of the Constitution, contained a proposal for the formation of three separate units, viz., (1) Union territory of Bombay, (2) Maharashtra, including Marathawada and Vidarbha and (3) Gujrat, including Saurashtra and Cutch.
This Bill was referred by the President to the State Legislatures concerned and their views obtained.
The joint Select Committee of the House of the People (Lok Sabha) and the Council of States (Rajya Sabha) considered the Bill and made its report.
Subsequently, Parliament amended some of the clauses and passed the Bill which came to be known as the .
That Act by section 8(1) constituted a composite State of Bombay instead of the three separate units as originally proposed in the Bill.
The petition , out of which the present appeal has arisen, was filed by the appellant under article 226 of the Constitution in the High Court of Bombay.
His contention was that the said Act was passed in contravention of the provisions of article 3 of the Constitution, since the Legislature of Bombay had not been given an opportunity of expressing its views on the formation of the composite State.
The High Court dismissed the petition.
Held, that the proviso to article 3 lays down two conditions and under the second condition therein stated, what the President has to refer to the State Legislature for its opinion is the proposal contained in the Bill.
On a true construction, the proviso does not contemplate that if Parliament subsequently modifies that proposal, there must be a fresh bill or a fresh reference to the State Legislature.
The word 'State ' in article 3 of the Constitution has obvious reference to article i and the States mentioned in the First Schedule to the Constitution, and the expression 'Legislature of the State ' means the Legislature of such a State.
There are, therefore, no reasons for the application of any special doctrine of democratic theory or practice prevalent in other countries in interpreting those words; nor any justification for giving an extended meaning to the word 'State ' in determining the true scope and effect of the proviso.
77 606 The requirements of article IV, section 3 of the American Constitu tion are materially different from those of the second proviso to article 3 Of the Indian Constitution and, consequently, decisions based on the former are not in point.
State of Louisiana vs State Of Mississipi, (1905) 202 U.S.
I and State of Washington vs State of Oregon, (19O8) 2II U.S. 127, held inapplicable.
State of 'Texas vs George W. White; , referred to.
It is not correct to contend that the word 'Bill ' in the proviso must be interpreted to include an amendment of any of the clauses of the Bill or at least a substantial amendment thereof, and that any proposal contained in such amendment must be referred back to the State Legislature.
Such an interpretation of article 3 will nullify the effect of article 122(1) and is untenable in view of the provisions in articles 117 and 118 of the Constitution.
Although the formation of a composite State in terms of section 8 of the Act was without doubt a substantial modification of the proposal as originally contained in the Bill, it could not be said that the said modification was not germane to the subject matter of the original proposal or was a direct negative thereof, so as to be beyond the scope of an amendment.
T. H. Vakil vs Bombay Presidency Radio Club Ltd., (1944) 47 Bom.
L.R 428, applied.
Therefore, the Act could not be held to have been enacted in violation of article 3 Of the Constitution.
