Under the Jammu and Kashmir Constitution Act all powers, legislative, executive and judicial vested in the Ruler.
On the accession of the State to India on October 22, 1947, the powers in respect of defence, external affairs and communications were ceded to India.
Under section 5 Of the Constitution Act, the Ruler promulgated the Enemy Agents Ordinance, section 2005, which provided for the trial and punishment of enemy agents and other persons siding the enemy.
The Ordinance provided for trial of offences by Special judges and prescribed a procedure materially different from that followed in the criminal Courts.
Section 5 of the Constitution Act was repealed on November 17, 1951.
The appellants were prosecuted under the Ordinance for offences alleged to have been committed on June 27 and 28, 1957.
They contended (1) that the Ordinance violated article 14 of the Constitution of India, (ii) that the Ruler had no legislative competence to issue the Ordinance as it dealt with defence, (iii) that S 5 of the 681 J. K. Constitution Act having been repealed the Ordinance came to an end, (iv) that the Ordinance had lapsed as the emergency on account of which it was issued had ceased, and (v) that the Ordinance was void as it was inconsistent with the Emergency Provisions in Part XVIII of the Constitution of India.
Held, that the Ordinance was intra vires, valid and subsisting.
The Ordinance was riot discriminative and did not violate article 14 Of the Constitution.
In view of the circumstances existing in the State, " enemy agents " and other persons aiding the I, enemy " to whom the Ordinance applied formed a reasonable classification which was founded on an intelligible differentia which distinguished such persons from others and the differentia had a rational relation to the object of the Ordinance which was to check subversion of the Government.
Besides, if the Ordinance did not make any classification of persons but only created an offence and provided stringent procedure and punishment then there was no discrimination at all as everybody who committed the offence was subjected to the same procedure.
Ram Krishna Dalmia vs Shri justice section R. Tendolkar; , followed.
The Ordinance was not legislation with respect to defence and was within the legislative competence of the Ruler.
The entry " defence " dealt only with the armed forces whether on land or sea or in the air and the raising or maintenance of such forces and their operations.
The Ordinance dealt in the main with certain acts done with the intent to aid the enemy though indirectly it was concerned with the operations of the armed forces.
In pith and substance the Ordinance was a law relating to public order, criminal law and procedure and not defence.
Though section 5 Of the Constitution Act was repealed the Ordinance was saved by section 6(b) of the Jammu and Kashmir General Clauses Act.
Section 6(b) saved, inter alia, " anything duly don(, " under a repealed enactment and the Ordinance was a thing duly done " under section 5 of the Constitution Act.
The Ordinance was a permanent piece of legislation.
It came into existence because of an emergency but that was only the occasion for passing it.
Being a permanent law it could only be brought to an end by means of repeal by competent authority.
The Emergency Provisions in Ch.
XVIII of the Constitution of India had nothing to do with the validity or otherwise of the Ordinance and the question of any inconsistency between the Ordinance and these provisions did not arise.
