On May 91 1935, one V obtained a decree against R and later assigned the same in favour of his mother M. M made an application for an order recognizing her as the assignee and for 617 execution which was disposed of on September 27, 1937.
In 1939, V was adjudicated an insolvent on the ground that the assignment was a fraudulent preference.
Thereafter M made a second application for execution which was disposed of on September 30, 1940.
The Official Receiver who had been appointed receiver in insolvency applied under section 54 of the Provincial Insolvency Act and on April, 9, 1943 obtained an order annulling the assignment.
On September 27, 1943, the Receiver applied for execution of the decree relying upon the applications made by M to save limitation under article 182, Limitation Act.
The judgment debtor objected that the execution application was time barred because, in view of the orders in the insolvency proceedings, M was not entitled to the decree on the dates she applied for execution and her applications were incompetent and could not save limitation.
The judgment debtor contended that (i) the order of annulment related back to the date of assignment and consequently M had never been entitled to the decree, (ii) the order of adjudication had the effect itself of annulling the assignment and vesting the decree in the receiver from the date of presentation of the application for adjudication, and (iii) the receiver was not entitled to take advantage of the applications made by M as he was not claiming through her but against her.
Held, (per curiam) that the application for execution made by the receiver was within time as the previous applications made by M were competent and saved the limitation.
The assignment in favour of M stood till it was annulled and till then M had the right to execute the decree.
Even if the annulment related back to the date of assignment, it did not make illegal the exercise of the rights under the assignment made prior to the annulment.
Sub sections (2) and (7) Of section 28 of the Provincial Insolvency Act which provided that upon adjudication all the assets of the insolvent vested in the receiver with effect from the date of the application for adjudication, could not have the effect of vesting the decree in the receiver.
The order of adjudication, though it was based on the ground that the assignment was a fraudulent preference amounting to an act of insolvency, did not itself annul the assignment and the assignment stood till it was annulled by an order under section 54.
As such M was competent to execute the decree and the applications made by her were in accordance with law and could be relied upon by the receiver to save the limitation for the application made by him.
The fact that the receiver did not claim through M did not disentitle him from taking advantage of the applications made by M. Article 182, Limitation Act, merely required the application for execution of a decree to be made within three years of the final order on a previous application made in accordance with law for the execution of the same decree.
Mahomed Siddique Yousuf vs Official Assignee of Calcutta, (1943) L.R. 70 I.A. 93; Ex Parte Learoyd, (1878) 10 Ch. D. 3, distinguished.
618 Subba Rao J.
The order of adjudication did not by its own force divest the title of M and vest it in the Official Receiver.
An assignment made before the filing of the application for adjudication was binding on the Official Receiver until it was annulled under sections 53, 54 or 54 A of the Act.
Mahomed Siddique Yousuf vs Official Assignee of Calcutta, (1943) L.R. 70 I.A. 93 and Ex parte Learoyd, (1878) 10 Ch.
D. 3, distinguished.
Official Receiver, Guntur vs Narra Gopala Krishnayya I.L.R. and D. G. Sahasrabudhe vs Kala Chand Deochand (i) A transfer by a debtor before insolvency with a view to give fraudulent preference conveyed a valid title to the transferee; (2) such a transfer was voidable against the Official Receiver in circumstances mentioned in section 54 of the Act; (3) when the transfer was annulled the property vested in the Official Receiver who could administer it in the interest of the creditors ; and (4) even after annulment the transfer stood as between the transferor and the transferee and the transferee was entitled to the balance of the sale proceeds remaining after satisfying the creditors.
Official Receiver, Coimbatore vs Palaniswami Chetti, Mad. 75o, Amir Hasan vs Saiyid Hasan, All. 900, and Rukhmanbai vs Govindram I.L.R. , relied on.
