The suit out of which the present appeal arose was one for redemption of some occupancy lands, owned and mortgaged by two brothers, S and A, the Khata of the lands standing in the name of S as the registered occupant under section 74 of the Bombay Land Revenue Code, 1879.
The mortgage, which was a usufructuary one, was executed by S and A in 1888 in favour of the predecessors in interest of the appellants.
By a Rajinama filed under section 74 of the Code in 1900, S made an unconditional 88 694 surrender of the occupancy.
On the same day the mortgagees by a Kabuliyat prayed that the occupancy in the mortgaged property might be granted to them.
Both the Rajinama and the Kabuliyat were granted by the Mamlatdar.
By the Rajinama S did not, however, purport to relinquish the occupancy on behalf of A. After the death of S, A applied to the Mamlatdar for the cancellation of the transfer in favour of the mortgagees and registering the mortgaged property in his name.
That application was rejected.
The heirs of S, claiming also to be the heirs of A, brought the suit for redemption.
The defence of the appellants was that the plaintiffs were not the heirs of A and that the right of redemption in the entire occupancy had been extinguished by the Rajinama.
The administrators of the estate of A were then added as defendants but were later on transposed to the category of co plaintiffs.
The courts below found against the appellants.
Hence this appeal by special leave.
The question for determination was whether the surrender by S amounted to a relinquishment of the entire occupancy including the share of A. Held, that the Rajinama could in no way affect the right of A to his share, in the occupancy and the right of redemption in respect of his share still subsisted.
Under section 74 of the Bombay Land Revenue Code, 1879, rightly construed, the registered occupant had no inherent or independent right, in the absence of any authority, express or implied, which must be clearly pleaded and strictly proved, to give a notice of relinquishment so as to affect the interest of other occupants as well.
Although the section conferred certain rights and imposed certain obligations on the registered occupant, it was not intended to take away the rights of other occupants.
Lalchand Sakharam Marwadi vs Khendu Kedu Ugbade, 22 Bom.
L.R. 1431, referred to.
Held, further, that even though A 's application to get the mortgaged property registered his name had failed, there could be no question of adverse possession since the possession of the mortgagees had a lawful origin in the usufructuary mortgage.
Nor could a mere assertion of adverse title affect the subsisting equity of redemption or shorten the prescribed period of limitation for the suit.
Khiarajmal vs Diam, I.L.R. , referred to.
