Although it is well settled that a court of appeal should not lightly disturb a finding of fact arrived at by the trial judge who had the opportunity of observing the demeanour of the witnesses and hearing them, that does not mean that an appellate court hearing an appeal on facts can never reverse such a finding.
Where the decision on a question of fact depends on a fair consideration of matters on record, and it appears to the Appeal Court that important considerations have not been taken into account and properly weighed by the trial judge, and such considerations clearly indicate that the view taken by the trial judge is wrong, it is its duty to reverse the finding even if it involves the disbelieving of witnesses believed by the trial court.
Where again the trial judge omits to properly weigh or take into account 664 important considerations bearing on the credibility of witnesses or the probability of their version, which point the other way, it is the duty of the court of appeal to reverse the findings of the trial Court.
If the question of fact does not solely depend on the credibility of witnesses for its determination, but is one of inference from proved facts, on a consideration of probabilities, the court of appeal stands in the same position as the trial court and is free to reverse its findings.
Shunmugayoya Mudaliay vs Manikka Mudaliar, (1909) L.R. 36 I.A. 185; Coghlan vs Cumberland, (1898) i Ch.
704; Wall (Thomas) vs Thomas, (1947) i All E.R. 582; Bonmax vs Austin Motor Co. Ltd. (1955) i All E.R. 326; Sayju Pershad vs Raja jwaleshwari Pratap Narain Singh, (195I) I.L.R. and Laljee Mohomet vs Girlder, , referred to.
Consequently, where, as in the present case, the plaintiff brought a suit for pre emption and the question for determination was one of fact, namely, whether the plaintiff had performed the essential ceremonies of Talab E Mowasibat and Talab E Ishtashad, and the trial court believed his witnesses, not because it had been impressed by their demearour, and the High Court in appeal disbelieved them in the light of the probabilities of the case and reversed the decision of the trial court.
Held, that it was not correct to contend that the way in which the High Court had approached the case was wrong or that its decision was not justified.
