The employees of the appellant Bank commenced pen down strikes, which were followed by a general strike, pending arbitration of an industrial dispute between them.
The Government of India intervened and as the result of an agreement that followed the Bank reinstated all the employees except 150, against whom it had positive objections, and the Government referred their cases under section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1047, to the Industrial Tribunal for adjudication.
The two issues before the Industrial Tribunal were whether the 150 employees had been wrongly dismissed and what wages and allowances would the 807 employees be entitled to on reinstatement.
The case of the employees was that the Bank wanted to penalise the active trade union workers by the said dismissals while the Bank maintained that the employees were guilty of participation in illegal strikes intended to paralyse its business and scare away its customers.
The Industrial Tribunal did not hear evidence and, by its final award, held that, the strikes being illegal, the Bank was, on that ground alone, justified in dismissing the employees.
Even so, it directed the Bank to make certain payments to the employees on compassionate grounds.
The Bank as well as the employees appealed.
The Labour Appellate Tribunal held that even though the strikes were illegal under section 23(b) read with section 24(1) of the , the Bank had, by entering into the agreement with the Government of India, waived its right to take penal action against the employees for joining the illegal strikes and that, therefore, an enquiry should be held on additional evidence to decide the disputes on merits.
Against this interlocutory order the Bank appealed to this Court and it was held by this Court that while the strikes were no doubt illegal under section 23(b) of the Act, the orders of dismissal passed by the Bank were no less so under section 33 of the Act, and it dismissed the appeal.
The Appellate Tribunal, thereafter, heard the cases on merits, directed the reinstatement of 136 of the said employees, but refused to reinstate the rest whom it found guilty of issuing posters and circulars subversive of the credit of the Bank.
Both the parties appealed to this Court.
Preliminary objections were raised on behalf of the said employees that, (1) in view of the decision of this Court dismissing the Bank 's appeal against the said interlocutory order the subsequent inquiry by the Tribunal and the orders of dismissal must be held to be void and, (2) no charges having been admittedly framed nor any proper enquiry held by the Bank against the employees, the orders of dismissal were wholly invalid.
It was urged, inter alia, on behalf of the Bank in the appeals that participation in a pen down strike by itself amounted to misconduct sufficient to disentitle an employee to reinstatement and that the entire body of strikers, being collectively responsible for the publication of the subversive documents in question, the dismissed employees could by no means escape liability.
Held (per curiam), that the preliminary objections must be negatived and the decision of the Appellate Tribunal affirmed with this modification that, in view of its inconsistent findings, the appeal of one of the employees must be allowed.
Per Sinha and Gajendragadkar, JJ.
The purpose the Legislature had in view in enacting section 33 of the , was to maintain the status quo by placing a ban on any action by the employer pending adjudication.
But the jurisdiction conferred on the Industrial Tribunal by section 33 of the Act was a limited one.
Where a proper enquiry had been held and no victimisation or unfair labour practice had been 808 resorted to, the Tribunal in granting permission had only to satisfy itself that there was a Prima facie case against the employee and not to consider the propriety or adequacy of the ,proposed action.
But to such permission, when granted, the Tribunal could attach no conditions; it can either grant or refuse it.
The effect of such permission was only to remove the ban imposed by section 33 of the Act.
It could neither validate a dismissal nor prevent it from being challenged in an industrial dispute; but in such a dispute, when raised, the employer could justify its action only on such grounds as were specified in the original charge sheet and no others.
There was substantial difference between non compliance with section 33 of the Act and that with article 311(2) of the Constitu tion.
Compliance with section 33 only avoided the penalty under section 31(1) of the Act, while compliance with article 311(2) of the Constitution made the order of dismissal final.
Atherton West & Co. Ltd. V. Suti Mills Mazdoor Union, ; , The Automobile Products of India Ltd. vs Rukmaji Bala; , , Lakshmi Devi Sugar Mills Ltd. vs Pt.
Ram Sarup, ; , Indian lron and Steel Co. Ltd. vs Their Workmen, ; and McKenzie & Co. Ltd. vs Its Workmen, referred to.
It was not, therefore, correct to contend that non compliance with section 33 of the Act could render the orders of dismissal wholly void or take away the jurisdiction of the Tribunal to hold the enquiry.
Nor could the failure to hold a proper enquiry have that effect.
Under section 33A of the Act, as construed by this Court, the jurisdiction of the Tribunal was not limited to an enquiry as to the contravention of section 33 of the Act.
Even if such contravention was proved, the employer could still justify the impugned dismissal on merits and there was no difference in this regard between a reference under section 10 of the Act and a dispute raised under section 33A of the Act.
The Automobile Products of India Ltd. vs Rukmaji Bala, ; and Equitable Coal Co.Ltd.
vs Algu Singh, A.I.R. 1958 S C. 761, referred to.
Although there can be no doubt that in proper cases the Industrial Tribunal has the power to direct reinstatement in disputes arising out of dismissal of employees, it is not possible to Jay down any hard and fast rule to be applied to such cases.
In coming to its decision, the Industrial Tribunal has to reconcile the conflicting claims of the employer and the employee, the latter 's right to protection against wrongful dismissal, and in such a case the normal rule is reinstatement, and the interest and safety of the industry itself.
Its approach to such a problem cannot, therefore, be legalistic or doctrinaire or as is permissible 809 in a civil court deciding the validity of dismissals under section 240 of the Government of India Act, 1935, or article 311(2) of the Constitution.
Western India Automobile Association vs Industrial Tribunal, Bombay, and Buckingham & Carnatic Mills Ltd. vs Their Workmen, , referred to.
If no enquiry is held by the employer before it passes an order of dismissal, the propriety of such dismissal can be adjudged by the Tribunal on evidence and no employer can be allowed to object to it on the ground that it interferes with the exercise of its managerial function.
The Madras Electric Tramways, (1904) Ltd. Madras vs Their Workers, , distinguished and held inapplicable.
The propriety of reinstatement in a case of wrongful or illegal dismissal is normally a question of fact and where the Industrial Tribunal on a proper consideration of the relevant factors refuses to pass such an order this Court would be reluctant, in absence of any general or substantial question of law, to interfere under article 136 of the Constitution.
A pen down strike falls within the definition of a strike contained in section 2(q) of the Industrial Disputes Art, 1947, and is not Per se illegal.
Even if it might involve an element of civil trespass as in the present case, that cannot disentitle an employee to reinstatement.
M/s. Burn & Co. Ltd. vs Their Workmen, A.I.R. 1959 S.C. 529, referred to.
It is not safe to extend principles of American decisions to such a strike without a careful scrutiny of the relevant provisions of the American Statute and the facts on which the said decisions are based.
National Labour Relations Board vs Fansteel Metallurgical Corporation, 306 U.S. 238, considered and held inapplicable.
William Truax vs Michael Corrigan, , referred to.
Since in the instant case, the peaceful and non violent conduct of the strikers, as found by the Appellate Tribunal, could not amount to criminal trespass within, the meaning of section 441 of the Indian Penal Code, mere participation in the pen down strike did not disentitle them to reinstatement.
T. H. Bird vs King emperor, (1934) L.R. XIII Pat.
268, held inapplicable.
The mere fact that the employer had engaged new hands during the strike, was not sufficient to defeat the claim to reinstatement of such employees as were subsequently found to have been wrongfully dismissed.
National Transport and General Co. Ltd. vs The Workmen, C.A. NO.
312 of 1956, decided on January 22, 1957, referred to.
810 But where, as in the instant case, the Appellate Tribunal took a common sense view of the matter of evidence and held certain office bearers and leaders of the union liable for subversive acts and refused to extend such liability to the entire body of strikers on theoretical and academic grounds, no principles of natural justice could be said to have been contravened by it.
