A complaint was filed against the appellant and one Bose before the Sub Divisional Magistrate, Darjeeling.
Under the W.B. Criminal Law Amendment (Special Courts) Act, 1949 the case was allotted to Mr. Dutta Gupta, Special judge, Alipur, who by order dated July 11, 1951, acquitted the appellant but convicted Bose.
Bose appealed to the High Court which held the Act to be ultra vires and quashed the conviction.
The Act was amended and another complaint was then filed against the appellant and Bose before Mr. Lodh, Special judge, Alipur.
The appellant pleaded the bar of section 403 Code of Criminal Procedure on account of his acquittal by Mr. Dutta Gupta but the Special judge overruled the plea.
The appellant went to the High Court in revision and on March 19, 1953, Chunder, J., held that the acquittal was not by a competent Court as the Act creating the court had been declared ultra vires and dismissed the application.
In the meantime the case was withdrawn from Mr. Lodh and was allotted to the Special judge, Darjeeling, and a fresh complaint was filed against both accused.
On an application made by Bose the High Court quashed these proceedings and directed the proceedings pending in the Court of the Sub Divisional Magistrate, Darjeeling, to be disposed of in accordance with law.
By this time the Supreme Court had held in Kedar Nath Bajoria vs The State of West Bengal that the Act was intra vires.
The appellant again raised the plea of the bar of section 403 Code of Criminal Procedure, contending that in view of the decision of the Supreme Court his acquittal was by a competent Court.
The plea was rejected by the Magistrates and a revision application was dismissed by the High Court on the ground that the appellant was bound by the decision of Chunder, J., holding that the acquittal was by a Court not of competent jurisdiction.
The appellant appealed by special leave.
Held (Sarkar, J., dissenting), that in view of the decision of the Supreme Court in Kedar Nath Bajoria 's case the trial before Mr. Dutta Gupta, Special judge was a lawful one and the acquittal of the appellant which was never set aside was a bar to another trial.
It was open to the appellant to challenge in this appeal the order made by Chunder, J., on March 19, 1953.
Except 59 where the statute so required, it was not imperative upon a party to appeal against every error, defect or irregularity in any order by which he may be aggrieved and by not doing so he did not forfeit his right to have the matter considered by the Supreme Court.
So far as the Supreme Court was concerned it made no difference whether the intermediate order complained of was passed by the Trial Court and was not taken to the High Court or it was taken to the High Court and was confirmed by it.
Kedar Nath Bajoria vs The State of West Bengal, ; , followed.
Maharaja Moheshur Singh vs The Bengal Government, (1859) 7 M.I.A. 283, Alexander John Forbes vs Ameeroonissa Begum, (1865) 10 M.I.A. 340, Sheonath vs Ram Nath, (1865) 10 M.I.A. 413 and Shah Mukhun Lal vs Baboo Sree Kishen Singh, (1868) 12 M.I.A. 157, referred to.
Sambasivam vs Public Prosecutor, Federation of Malaya, and Pritam Singh vs The State of Punjab, A.I.R. 1956 S.C. 415, applied.
Sarkar J.
The judgment of Chunder, J., prevented the appel lant from raising the question that the Court of Mr. Dutta Gupta was a court of competent jurisdiction.
That decision was a final judgment and it did not lose its force as such because a Superior Court in a different case subsequently took a view which showed that the judgment was wrong.
That decision was not an interlocutory order as it decided that the appellant had no right not to be prosecuted again.
The principle of finality of judgment obtained in criminal law as well as it did in civil law.
In re May, , Sambasivam vs Public Prosecutor, Federation of Malaya, and Ram Kirpal Shukul vs Mussumat Rup Kuari, (1883) L.R. 11 I.A. 37, referred to.
