Section 25F(b) of the , provided: "No workman employed in any industry who has been in continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer until . (b) the workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to fifteen days ' average pay for every completed year of service or any part thereof in excess of six months .
" The dispute between the appellant company and its workmen related to the claim for gratuity made by the latter and it was the appellant 's contention that in the scheme of gratuity framed by the Tribunal no gratuity should be paid to workmen who would be entitled to receive retrenchment compensation under section 25F of the .
Before section 25F was introduced in the Act by Act 43 of 1953, workmen were given the benefit of both retrenchment compensation and gratuity by industrial awards, but the decisions were not always uniform.
Ordinance V was promulgated on October 24, 1953, by section 25E(b) of which it was provided that before a workman was retrenched he must be paid at the time of retrenchment gratuity which shall be equivalent to 15 days ' average pay for every completed year of service or any part thereof in excess of six months.
The 33 Ordinance was followed by Act 43 of 1953, which was deemed to have come into force on October 24, 1953; and in the statement of aims and objects of the Act it was said " that a workman . shall not be retrenched until he has been given one month 's notice in writing or one month 's wages in lieu of such notice, and also a gratuity . ".
Section 25(F)(b) of the Act was in the same terms as section 25E(b) of the Ordinance,, except that for the word CC gratuity " the expression " retrenchment compensation " was substituted.
The appellant 's case was that after section 25F was enacted there was no longer any scope for framing gratuity schemes in addition to the statutory retrenchment compensation for retrenched employees on the grounds (1) that both in section 25E(b) of the Ordinance and the statement of aims and objects of the amending Act, the word "gratuity" had been used and not retrenchment compensation, (2) that in determining the amount of compensation payable to a retrenched workman the length of his past service had been taken into account, and schemes of gratuity also provide for payment of gratuity on similar considerations and adopt a similar measure, and (3) that a retrenched workman would get both retrenchment compensation and gratuity and so get more than what other workmen with corresponding length of service would get on their retirement.
Held: (1) that for construing S, 25F of the , the words used in the statement about the aims and objects of the Act are not relevant and that the character of the payment prescribed by the section could only be determined by the expression " retrenchment compensation used therein ; and, (2) that in the absence of any provision in the excluding the claim or grant of gratuity the mere enactment of section 25F cannot oust the jurisdiction of industrial tribunals to entertain claims for gratuity schemes or make it improper or unjust to frame such schemes for all employees including those who are retrenched.
The object of granting retrenchment compensation is to enable the workman who is given partial protection to tide over the period of unemployment, and to keep his gratuity safe and unused so that it may be available to him after his retirement.
The two claims complement each other, and the fact that they appear to constitute a double benefit cannot affect their validity.
