The U. P. Union Bank was in occupation of a building belonging to the respondent as a tenant.
After the passing of the winding up order of the bank the Official Liquidators removed the offices of the bank from the premises and called upon the respondent landlord to take possession thereof.
The respondent refused to do so as part of the premises was occupied by some trespassers.
Thereafter the Official Liquidators did not do any business in the building in connection with the winding up of the bank.
The respondent claimed the entire rent from the date of the winding up order up to the date on which the Official Liquidators would give him vacant possession of the premises.
The High Court held that in view of the proviso to r. 97 of the Rules framed by the High Court under the Companies Act the respondent was entitled to recover the entire rent claimed by him and not pro rata with the other creditors of the bank.
The proviso to r. 97 of the Company Rules runs thus: " Provided that where the official liquidator remains in occupation of premises demised to a company which is being wound up, nothing herein contained shall prejudice or affect the rights of the landlord of such premises to claim payment 190 by the Company or the Official Liquidator of rent during the period of the company 's or the Official Liquidator 's occupation." On appeal by the Official Liquidators by a certificate of the High Court: Held, that the landlord respondent was not entitled to claim priority in respect of payment of rent because the proviso to r. 97 of the Company Rules framed by the High Court affirms the right of the landlord to claim payment of rent accruing due since the date of winding up but does not deal with the question of priority in payment thereof, and further because the building in question did not remain in the possession of the liquidators for the purpose of liquidation.
In re Oak Pits Colliery Company, , followed.
Held, further, that section 230 of the Companies Act, 1913, which specifies categories to which priority in payment should be given, does not give priority to rent due to landlord and it is not within the competence of the High Court to give priority by its rules to a category which is not included in that section.
Under section 193 the Court has power to order payment of the costs and expenses of winding in such priority as it thinks fit in cases where the assets are insufficient to discharge the liabilities, and section 230(3) empowers the Court to direct the company to retain such sums as may be necessary for the costs and expenses of winding up even before discharging the debts for which priority is given by section 230.
If a debt can reasonably be described as costs and expenses of winding up the court may direct preferential payment thereof, otherwise only pro rata payment with the other ordinary creditors can be claimed out of the assets of the company.
