Section 28(1) of the authorised the State Government to grant sanction to a non licensee to engage in the business of supplying energy on " such conditions in this behalf " as it may fix.
By a notification dated May 26, 1948, issued under section 28(1) the first respondent granted sanction to the first petitioner, to engage in the business of supplying energy to Muktsar.
Clause 11 of the notification provided that the Provincial Government shall have the option of acquiring the undertaking at anytime after October 21, 1950, after giving one year 's notice and that it shall pay the price of lands, buildings, works, material and plant that may be acquired at the fair market value.
On January 3, 1958, the first respondent issued a notice exercising the option given under cl. 11 and intimated to the first petitioner that upon expiry of one year its undertaking shall vest and become the absolute property of the first respondent.
On January 4, 1959, the first respondent took possession of the undertaking in pursuance of the notice.
The petitioners contended that cl. 11 of the notification was ultra vires section 28 and that if cl. 11 was justified by section 28 then section 28 was void as it offended articles 19 and 31 of the Constitution.
Held, that cl.
11 of the notification was intra vires section 28.
A statutory provision which dealt with the grant of sanction to 240 a person to engage in the business of supplying energy must, having regard to the special features of the business, necessarily deal with the position which would arise on the termination of the sanction ; so it could be assumed that such statutory provision would make adequate provision empowering the State Government to provide for the compulsory acquisition of the assets of the supplier on payment of proper compensation.
Though section 28(1) did not specifically provide for compulsory acquisition on payment of compensation, the expression " such conditions in this behalf " in section 28(1) in the context would include conditions dealing with the position which would inevitably arise when the business came to an end.
The sanction under section 28 being necessarily temporary it was in the interest of the:grantee himself that some provision was made for payment of compensation to him.
A condition for 'acquisition like cl. 11 was, therefore, within the scope of section 28(1).
New Orleans Gas Light Co. vs Louisiana Light and Heat Producing and Manufacturing Co. ; ; 29 L. Ed. 516, referred to.
Held, further, that section 28 was valid and did not offend either article 19 or article 31.
The Act could not be challenged on the ground of violating article 31(2) as it was an existing law which was saved by clause (5) of the article 31.
Similarly, it was saved by section 299(4) of the Government of India Act, 1935, from an attack under section 299(2).
The restrictions imposed by section 28 of the Act were reasonable restrictions imposed in the interests of the general public within the meaning of article 19(5).
Such limitations were generally imposed on the business of supplying energy.
