The appellant held an office under the Government and was dismissed from service on January 24, 1956, for a reason other than corruption or disloyalty to the State.
He filed his nomination paper for election to Parliament which did not disclose any disqualifications.
No objection was taken to the nomination and it was accepted without making any enquiry.
After the poll the appellant was declared duly elected.
The respondent filed an election petition challenging the election of the appellant on the ground, inter alia, that the nomination of the appellant had been improperly accepted as he was dismissed from Government service and he had failed to obtain a certificate from the Election Commission that he had not been dismissed for corruption or disloyalty to the State.
After limitation for filing the petition had expired, the respondent applied to the Election Tribunal for amendment of the petition seeking to add to this ground the statement that the nomination paper was not accompanied by the prescribed certificate.
The Tribunal disallowed the amendment on the ground that the amendment sought to introduce a 290 new ground after the period of limitation and then dismissed the election petition holding that the appellant was qualified to stand for the election and his nomination was not improperly accepted.
On appeal, the High Court held that the amendment should have been allowed as it merely asked for a clarification and not the introduction of a new ground and consequently it set aside tile order of the Tribunal and directed a retrial of the issue involving.
The appellant obtained special leave and appealed.
Held, that the amendment could not be allowed as it sought to introduce a new ground in the petition after the period of limitation.
The ground taken in the petition was that there was an improper acceptance of the nomination covered by section 100(1)(d)(1) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
But there was no improper acceptance of the nomination for the nomination paper ex facie did not disclose any defect or disqualification.
There being no subsisting prayer seeking to raise the ground under section 100(1)(d)(iv) for non compliance with the Provisions of section 33(3) of the Act, the amendment was foreign to the scope of the, enquiry under the ground covered by section 100(1)(d)(1).
Durga Shankar Mehta vs Thakur Raghuraj Singh, [1955] 1 S.C.R. 267 and Harish Chandra Bajpai vs Triloki Singh ; , followed.
Veluswami vs Raja Nainay, ; , referred to.
There was no jurisdiction in the High Court to interfere with the discretion of the Election Tribunal refusing to allow the amendment after the entire petition had been disposed of.
It is undesirable for an appellate Court to interfere with the order of a subordinate Tribunal made in the exercise of its discretion without exceeding the limits of its powers, unless it has acted perversely or has taken a view which is clearly wrong.
