In a suit for partition of the joint family properties filed by the respondent against his brother and his sons, appellants 1 to 5 respectively, the latter while admitting the relationship of the respondent and his half share to the family properties, pleaded, inter alia, that the court had no jurisdiction to divide the immoveable properties situated in Burma and in the Indian State of Pudukottai.
The trial court passed a preliminary decree excluding from its operation the aforesaid immoveable properties.
Against the preliminary decree appeals were preferred before the High Court by the several parties on various grounds, but in his appeal the respondent did not challenge the finding of the trial court that it had no jurisdiction to deal with foreign immoveable properties.
During the pendency of the appeals, on the joint application made by the parties, the trial court made an order referring for determination by the two arbitrators named by them " all the matters in dispute in the suit and all matters and proceedings connected therewith ".
In due course the arbitrators gave an award which was then filed in the trial court.
As regards immoveable properties in Pudukottai the award recited that since the parties had separated and the properties in suit before the arbitrators had been actually divided by metes and bounds, the two branches shall enjoy the Pudukottai properties in equal halves; while with reference to the properties in Burma the arbitrators asked the parties to hold the documents of title half and half for safe custody and added that when the parties decided to divide the properties all the documents would have to be 27 210 brought together and a partition made according to law.
The appellant challenged the validity of the award on the grounds inter alia (1) that the reference and the award dealt with immoveable properties in Burma and Pudukottai and so they were invalid, and (2) that the trial court was not competent to make the order of reference under section 21 of the Indian .
Held: (1) that the reference and the award could not be challenged on the ground that they purported to deal with foreign immoveable properties because (a) at the time when the matters in dispute were referred to arbitration it was on the basis of the finding of the trial court that the court had no jurisdiction to deal with foreign immoveable properties, and (b) the award did not divide the said properties or declare their shares in them, but merely recited the fact that the parties having become divided and accepted a half share in each of the branches they would hold and enjoy the properties half and half.
There is a distinction between a mere recital of a fact and something which in itself creates a title.
Bageshwari Charan Singh vs Jagarnath Kuari, (1932) L.R. 53 I.A. 130, relied on.
(2) that the words " suit " and " court " in section 20 of the Indian , include appellate court proceedings and appellate court, respectively.
Abani Bhusan Chakravarthy and Others vs Hem Chandra Chakravarthy and Others, , disapproved.
Thakur Prasad vs Baleshwar Ahir and Others, A.I.R. 1954 Pat. 106, Moradhwaj vs Bhudar Das A.I.R. 1955 All. 353 and Subramannaya Bhatta vs Devadas Nayak and Others, A.I.R. 1955 Mad. 693, approved.
(3)that the word " judgment " in section 21 of the Act means a judgmentwhich finally decides all matters in controversy in the suit and does not refer to the various interlocutory orders and judgments that may be passed during the hearing of the suit.
(4) that a judgment delivered by a court in a partition suit which is followed by a preliminary decree is not a final judgment in the suit and that a court after a preliminary decree has been passed has jurisdiction to make an order of reference under section 21 of the Act.
Jadu Nath Roy and Others vs Paramesway Mullick and Others, (1939) L.R. 67 I.A. 11, relied on.
(5) that where a preliminary decree has been drawn up and an appeal has been filed against it, both the trial court and the appellate court are possessed of the matters in dispute in part and it would be open to either court to make an order of reference in respect of all the matters in dispute between the 211 parties; that as in the present case proceedings subsequent to the preliminary decree were pending before the trial court, the latter was competent to act under section 21 of the Act.
