The Secretary of the Government of Bihar in the Revenue Department issued a notice to the petitioner company who were the lessees of mining lease, charging it with violation of sections 10, 12 and 14 Of the Bihar Mica Act, 1947, and calling upon it to show cause why action should not be taken to cancel its licence which was being issued from year to year for mining Mica.
The company asked for particulars of the alleged violation of the provisions of the Act from the Government which was furnished.
The company sent a written representation to the Government denying the allegations.
After two years of the said representation, the Government issued a notification cancelling the 78 610 petitioner company 's licence under the provisions of section 25(1)(c) Of the Act.
The company moved the Supreme Court under article 32 Of the Constitution for the issue of a writ of certiorari to quash the said order of the Government of Bihar cancelling the licence and for the issue of writ of mandamus directing them to forbear from giving effect to the said order of cancellation, on ground inter alia that the Government acted illegally and with mala fides and infringed the fundamental rights of the petitioner under article 19(1), sub cls.
(f) and (g) of the Constitution and that the provision of section 25(1)(c) of the Bihar Mica Act, 1947, operate as an unreasonable restriction on the said right, and even if the said section did not infringe its fundamental rights, the order of the Government in cancelling the lease without affording it a reasonable opportunity to show cause within the meaning of the second proviso to that section, infringed its fundamental rights.
Held, that the provisions of section 25(1)(c) of the Bihar Mica Act, does not impose an unreasonable restriction on the fundamental rights under article 19(1)(f) & (g) of the Constitution.
The restrictions which a State is authorised to impose under cls.
(5) & (6) of article 19 of the Constitution, in the interest of the general public over the fundamental rights of a citizen under sub cls.
(f) & (g) of clause (1) of article 19 must be reasonable and must not depend upon the mere uncontrolled discretion of the executive.
It is the duty of this Court to decide having regard to the concept and principle of reasonableness which is correctly laid down in The State of Madras vs V. G. Row, whether a particular Statute satisfied the objective test of " reasonableness.
" The statutory conditions of the Bihar Mica Act, subject to which the licence is given are, obviously, reasonable and necessary for regulating the mining industry The power to cancel the licence which is conferred on the Government under section 25 Of the said Act is only to achieve the object of the Act, i.e., to enforce provisions which have been enacted in the interest of the public, and that power is exercisable on the basis of objective tests and in accordance with the principles of natural justice.
The general proposition that whenever discretionary power is conferred on a State Government or the Union Government by law, the said law must necessarily operate as a reasonable restriction on a fundamental right, negatives the concept of fundamental rights for the simple reason that fundamental rights are guaranteed against State action.
Therefore, the conferment of such a power on the State Government and not upon a subordinate officer is only one of the considerations that may enter into the judicial verdict on reasonableness of a particular law and the reasonableness of that law falls to be decided only on the cumulative effect of the circumstances under which such power is conferred.
611 The concept of " reasonable opportunity " is an elastic one and is not susceptible of easy and precise definition.
What is reasonable opportunity under one set of circumstances need not be reasonable under different circumstances.
It is the duty of the Court to ascertain in each case, having regard to the overall picture before it, to come to a conclusion whether reasonable opportunity is given to a person to " show cause.
" Tribunals or authorities who are entrusted with quasi judicial functions are as much bound by the relevant principles governing the " doctrine of bias " as any other judicial tribunal.
In the instant case the Revenue Minister had personal bias within the meaning of the decisions and he should not have taken part in either initiating the enquiry or in cancelling the licence.
Neither the necessary conditions to enable the Government to take action under section 25(1)(c) Of the Act has been established nor the State Government has afforded reasonable opportunity to the petitioner within the meaning of the second proviso to section 25(1) Of the Act.
State of Madras vs V. G. Row, ; , followed.
Thakur Raghubir Singh vs Court of Wards, Ajmer, ; , held inapplicable.
