The appellants who were holders of certain lands known as Lal liti " lands were assessed to land revenue under the provisions of the Bombay Land Revenue Code, 1879, after the Bombay Taluqdari Tenure Abolition Act, 3 1949, came into force.
"Lal liti " lands were granted originally by Taluqdars in Gujrat to cadets, widows of the family and relations for maintenance and to village servants and others, either in reward for past services or as remuneration for services to be performed.
Before the establishment of British rule, Taluqdars had the position of semi independent chiefs, but subsequent to the establishment of British rule they became mere owners of proprietary estates holding lands directly from Government, and in respect of such estates the Gujrat Taluq dars ' Act, 1888, was passed providing for their revenue administration.
The appellants claimed that these lands had been enjoyed without payment of any " jama " since pre British times and that the exemption from payment of land revenue was not affected by the Bombay Taluqdari Tenure Abolition Act, 1949.
The High Court took the view that the lands were liable to be assessed under section 5 of that Act.
It was contended for the appellants, inter alia, that no liability for payment of land revenue in respect of " Lal liti " lands could arise under section 5 of the Act, because (1) the Taluqdar retained no interest in such lands after the grant and, consequently, such lands were not taluqdari lands within the meaning of section 2(3) of the Act, (2) clause (a) of section 5(1) of the Act was merely declaratory, 394 while cl.
(b) was the operative clause by which the only persons liable for payment of land revenue were (i) a taluqdar holding any taluqdari land and (ii) a cadet of a taluqdari family holding any taluqdari land for maintenance, and (3) even assuming thatcl.
(a) made taluqdari lands liable to the payment of land revenue Code, a " Lal liti " holder could not be made liable, because he was not an occupant of unalienated land within the meaning of section 136(1) of the Code.
Held:(1) that having regard to the history of " Lal liti lands and the provisions of the Gujrat Taluqdar 's Act, 1888, such lands are lands which form part of a taluqdari estate, even though no " jama " was actually paid to the taluqdar or to Government, and are, therefore, taluqdari lands within the meaning of section 2(3) of the Bombay Taluqdari Abolition Act, 1949; (2)that cl.
(a) of section 5(1) of the Bombay Taluqdari Abolition Act was a general provision and applied the Bombay Land Revenue Code to all taluqdari lands, while cl.
(b) was a particular deeming Provision with regard to the taluqdar and his cadet and (3)that whatever might have been the position of a " Lal liti " holder earlier, on the abolition of the Taluqdari tenure by the Bombay Taluqdari Abolition Act, he became a holder in actual possession of land in respect of which the Government had not transferred its rights to the payment of revenue, wholly or partially,to the ownership of any person.
