The respondent company was registered a stock holder under the Iron and Steel (Control of Production and Distribution) Order, 1941 issued by the Central Government in exercise of its powers under r. 81(2) Of the Defence of India Rules.
On December 10, 1949, the Iron and Steel Controller issued a notification under cl.
11B of the Order decreasing the prices already fixed for all categories of steel by Rs. 30 per ton.
Crirminal cases were started against the company, its three directors, its general 628 manager and two sales men under cl.
11B, read with section 7 of the Essential Supplies (Temporary Powers) Act, 1946, on the allegation that they had sold their old stock of steel for prices higher than those prescribed by the said notification.
The respondents moved the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution for quashing the said criminal proceedings.
Their contention was that cl.
11B of the Order was invalid and unconstitutional as it violated articles 19(1)(f) and (g) of the Constitution.
It was also urged that the said clause was ultra vires the powers conferred on the Central Government by section 3 Of the Act, under which the order must now be deemed to have been issued.
The High Court held that the cl. 11B violated articles 19(1)(f) and (g) of the Constitution.
The Union of India appealed.
Held, that neither cl. 11B of the Iron and Steel (Control of Production and Distribution) Order, 1941, nor the impugned notification violated article 19(1)(f) and (g) of the Constitution and their validity was beyond question.
The clear implication of the constitutional validity of sections 3 and 4 of the Essential Supplies (Temporary powers) Act, 1946, as found by this Court in Harishankar Bagla vs The State of Madhya Pradesh, , is that if the Central Government, instead of exercising its own authority under section 3 Of the Act, chooses by a notified order to authorise the Controller to pass appropriate orders, the notified order cannot be challenged on the ground that it suffers from the vice of excessive delegation.
All that the Iron and Steel (Control of Production and Distribution) Order, 1941, seeks to do is to prescribe an integrated scheme for the guidance of the Controller and other specified authorities in effectuating the policy laid down by section 3 of the Act and it is obvious that cl.
11B of the Order by authorising the fixation of the maximum price for the different categories of iron and steel directly carries out that legislative object, namely, equitable distribution of the goods at fair prices.
The power conferred on the Central Government by section 3 and on the specified authority by section 4 Of the Act is canalised by the policy clearly enunciated by section 3, and cl. 11B which seeks to further canalise the exercise of that power cannot be said to confer on the delegate uncanalised or unbridled power or suffer from excessive delegation.
It is apparent, therefore, that cl.
11B read by itself cannot violate article 19 of the Constitution and there is no basis for the argument that by conferring such powers as it does on the Controller, it unreasonably restricts the exercise of fundamental rights under article 19(1)(f) and (g) of the Constitution.
It may, however, still be open to a party to show that a price structure fixed by the Controller by a particular notification violates article 19 of the Constitution.
But before this can be successfully done, he must be able to show not merely that a particular stock holder suffered loss in respect of particular 629 transactions but that in a large majority of cases, if not all, the impugned notification is likely to adversely affect the fundamental right of the dealers under articles 19(1)(f) and (g) of the Constitution.
M/s. Dwarka Prasad Laxmi Narain vs The State of Uttar Pradesh; , and The State of Rajasthan vs Nath Mul and Mitha Mal, ; , distinguished.
Harishankar Bagla vs The State of Madhya Pradesh, , explained and applied.
