The respondent, proprietor of Ramnagar Estate, filed a suit against the appellant, proprietor of Ganeshpur Estate, for the recovery of certain properties.
The appellant filed a cross suit against the respondent.
During the pendency of the suits the appellant was declared to be a person of unsound mind and the Court of Wards assumed superintendence of her properties under the U. P. Court of Wards Act, and placed them in charge of the Deputy Commissioner of Barabanki.
Thereupon the cause titles on the suits were amended and in place of the appellant 's name the 'Deputy Commissioner, Barabanki I/C Court of Wards Ganeshpur Estate ' was substituted.
The Trial Court partly decreed the respondent 's suit and dismissed the appellant 's suit.
Both parties preferred appeals to the High Court.
While the appeals were pending the Court of Wards took over the Estate of the respondent also and placed it also in charge of the Deputy Commissioner, Barabanki.
The cause titles of the appeals were then amended and for the name of the respondent, the name 'Deputy Commissioner, Barabanki I/C Court of Wards Ramnagar Estate ' was substituted.
Thereafter, the Court of Wards passed a resolution settling the appeal on certain terms and under its instructions the lawyers for the parties presented petitions to the High Court for recording compromises in the appeals.
The High Court passed decrees in terms of the compromises.
Shortly afterwards the Court of Wards released the two estates.
Later, the appellant recovered from her affliction, and was declared to be of sound mind.
She presented two applications to the High Court alleging that the compromise decrees were a nullity and praying for a proper disposal of the appeals.
The High Court rejected the applications.
The appellant contended, that the compromise decrees were a nullity (i) as the Court of Wards had not complied with the mandatory provisions of section 56 of the Act, (ii) as there could not in law be a compromise unless there were two parties but in this case there was only one party the Deputy Commissioner, Barabanki and (iii) as the High Court failed to appoint a disinterested person.
as I guardian of the appellant who 432 was of unsound mind under 0.
XXXII of the Code of Civil Procedure.
Held, (per section K. Das and A. K. Sarkar, jj ), that the compromise decrees were not a nullity and were binding on the parties.
Section 56 of the Act which provided that when in a suit or proceeding two or more wards had conflicting interests, " the Court of Wards shall appoint for each such ward a representative " to conduct or defend the case on behalf of the ward whom he represented was clearly direct and the failure of the Court of Wards to observe the provisions thereof did not render the compromise decrees a nullity.
A directory provision did not give discretionary power to do or not to do the thing directed ; it was intended to be obeyed but a failure to obey it did not render a thing duly done in disobedience of it a nullity.
When the appeals were compromised, the compromise between the parties to the appeals, namely, the appellant and the respondent.
It was not a compromise which the Deputy Commissioner, Barabanki, made with himself though he repre sented both the parties.
There was nothing in the Act which indicated that the Court of Wards did not have the power of making a contract between two wards.
The Deputy Commissioner, Barabanki had been appointed the guardian of the appellant under the Act, and he was entitled to act as her guardian for the appeals under 0.
XXXII, r. 4 Of the Code.
The Court of Wards was different from a private guardian and could be trusted to be impartial.
The High Court was right in leaving the interests of the appellant in charge of the Court of Wards though it was also in charge of the interests of the respondent.
Per K. Subba Rao, J.
The compromise decrees were a nullity.
The provisions of section 56 of the Act were mandatory and a non compliance therewith vitiated the proceedings.
The inten tion of the legislature should be gathered from the object of the Act and from a consideration of the inconvenience that may be caused by accepting the one or the other of the views.
The object of section 56 was to prevent the anomaly of the same person representing two conflicting interests and to safeguard the interests of the wards placed under the supervision of the Court of Wards.
No inconvenience would result from holding the provisions to be mandatory.
The word " shall " in section 56 could not be read as " may ".
jagan Nath vs jaswant Singh; , , Queen vs Ingall, , Caldow vs Pixwell, , Hari Vishnu Kamath vs Syed Ahmad Ishaque, ; and Braja Sunder Deb vs Rajendra Narayan Bhanj Deo, (1937) L.R. 65 I.A. 57, referred to.
