The question for decision in the appeal was the right of the revenue authorities of the State Government concerned, to resume certain lands known as 'patelki huq inam, ' which lay in the jagir village of Nawabag situate in the ceded area of Berar.
The lands were granted by the then sovereign authority by way of remuneration or emoluments for services to be rendered by the patel; the grant was of ancient origin and was recognised as a ' service inam ' by the British Government.
In the village of Nawabag there were four families of patels, who went by the surnames of Dongre, Rokade, Raut and Ingle, the members of which held the patel 's office in rotation of ten years.
There was a partition in the Rokade family as result of which the 'patelki inam ' lands were divided, and the lands in suit were allotted to the share of the appellant who never held the patel 's office.
During an enquiry for the preparation of the record of rights of the said jagir village, it was held that the appellant was not entitled to hold the 'patelki inam ' lands which were given as emoluments for service to the working patel, and the Financial Commissioner finally held that the person actually working as patel was entitled to receive the full emoluments of his office, and confirmed the order that the lands in possession of the appellant should be resumed and regranted to the working patel, viz., the respondent No. 1.
On the question of the true nature of the patelki huq inam, two points arose: (1) was it a grant by way of remuneration or emoluments of the patel 's office by the use of the land, or (2) was it a grant of land to the patelki family burdened with service and so long as the service was performed by any member of the family, the lands were joint family lands subject to partition etc.
among the members of the family.
Held, that the 'patelki inam ' in this case was in its origin a grant by way of remuneration for patelki service by the sovereign authority; it was separate from and independent of the jagir of Nawabag though the land lay within the jagir village.
In its true character the 'patelki inam ' was land given in lieu of wages or emoluments for the office of patel; it could not be freely alienated and the Government could resume the land.
Held, further, that where one of two or more patels of the village held office in turn by rotation, that did not mean that 711 the patel ceases to be a patel when his turn was over; he continued to be a patel and to enjoy his emoluments of office.
Held, also, that there was nothing in the Inam Rules, 1859, on the basis of which a person could claim as of right that he had a share in the 'patelki inam ' lands as a member of the patel 's family irrespective of whether he performed the service or not.
A member of the patel 's family was not entitled as of right to a share in the emoluments of the patel 's office and Government had every right to resume 'patelki inam ' lands and regrant them to the officiator in accordance with the provisions of the Patel and Patwaris Law, 1900, and section 1900 of the Berar Land Revenue Code, 1928.
Held, also, that on the finding that the lands were given by way of emoluments for the patel 's office, no question of title by adverse possession arose against the Government in the circumstances of the case.
Venkata Jagannadha vs Veerabhadrayya, (1921) L.R. I.A. 224, referred to.
Krishnarao vs Nilkantha and Others, A.I.R. (1922) Nag.
52, Mir Subhan Ali vs Imami Begum, (1925) 21 Nag.
L. Reports 117, Lakhamgouda Basavaprabhu Sardesai vs Baswantrao and Others, A.I.R. (1931) P.C. 157, Jaiwantrao and Another vs Sahebyao, (1933) 29 Nag.
L. Reports 210 and Raje Shrinivasrao vs Raje Vinayakrao, I.L.R. discussed.
