The sole trustee of a deity in a suit prayed for a decree for the recovery of the arrears of income of a property alleging that the property in dispute constituted a specified endowment for Kalyanotsavam of the deity and the appellants who were trustees of the said property had committed default in carrying out the purpose of the trust; but there was no formal Prayer for the declaration that the said properties and income thereof formed a specific endowment for the said due performance of the services of Kalyanotsovam of the deity and feeding charges, and other expenses.
The defence raised was that lnam was a personal grant burdened with service of the deity and that it was not a specific trust or an endowment for the benefit of the idol.
The High Court after allowing the respondents to amend the plaint by adding a formal prayer for declaration stating that the properties and income thereof formed a specific endowment for the due performance of the services of Kalyanotsavam of the deity held in favour of the respondents and further, observed that the appellants were liable to pay the entire income to the deity.
On appeal to the Supreme Court it was contended for the appellants inter alia (1) that the grant was a personal grant, burdened with the provision for service and it was not a specific grant.
(2) that High Court should not have allowed the amendment of the plaint.
Held, that in the instant case the grant, was a specific endowment for Kalyanotsavam of the deity and therefore a specific trust and not a grant to the appellants with the added obligation of spending on the service.
In considering the question of the nature of a grant, the inam registers have always been treated as evidence of the utmost importance particularly where Sanad & Inam title deeds are not produced, and when two inferences are possible from the reading of documents there is no reason why the Supreme Court will interfere with the view taken by the. courts below.
When at the time of a grant the specific charitable payments exhaust the income of the property, it is a fair inference to draw 769 therefrom that the intention was to devote the whole income to charity and any subsequent increase in the value of the property accrues to the charity and the courts would be right to apply the doctrine of Cy pres.
Held, further, that where necessary allegations had been made in a plaint and the requisite pleas raised and issues framed on the question and the parties were fully cognizant on the points in controversy and necessary evidence led by them, the courts would be right in allowing the amendment by the addition of a prayer in the prayer clause, which was in the nature of formal relief which flowed from the allegation in the plaint.
