Section 3 of the U.P. Special Powers Act, 1932 (XIV Of 1932), provided as follows: "Whoever, by word, either spoken or written, or by signs or by visible representations, or otherwise, instigates, expressly or by implication, any person or class of persons not to pay or to defer payment of any liability, and whoever does any act, with intent or knowing it to be likely that any words, signs or visible representations containing such instigation shall thereby be communicated directly or indirectly to any person or class of persons, in any manner whatsoever, shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with fine, extending to Rs. 250, or with both.
" The appellant, who was prosecuted under the section for delivering speeches instigating cultivators not to pay enhanced irrigation rates to the Government, applied to the High Court for a writ of habeas corpus on the ground, amongst others, that the said section was inconsistent with article 19(1) (a) of the Constitution and as such void.
The High Court decided in favour of the appellant and he was released.
The State appealed to this Court and the question for determination was whether the impugned section embodied reasonable restrictions in the interests of public order and was thus protected by article 19(2) of the Constitution.
Held, that even though in a comprehensive sense all the grounds specified in article 19(2) of the Constitution on which any reasonable restrictions on the right to freedom of speech must be based can be brought under the general head "public order", that expression, inserted into the Article by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, must be demarcated from the other grounds and ordinarily read in an exclusive sense to mean public peace, safety and tranquility in contradistinction to national upheavals, such as revolution, civil strife and war, affecting the security of the State.
Romesh Thappar vs The State of Madras ; , Brij Bhushan vs
The State of Delhi.
; , The State of Bihar vs Shailabala Devi. ; and Cantewell vs Connecticut.
; , discussed.
822 It is well settled by decisions of this Court that in a restriction in order to be reasonable must have a reasonable relation to the object the Legislation has in view and must not go beyond it.
Restrictions, therefore, meant to be in the interest of public order which have no proximate relationship or nexus with it but can be only remotely or hypothetically connected with it, cannot be reasonable within the meaning of article 19(2) of the Constitution.
Rex vs Basudeva, A.I.R.(1950) F.C. 67, applied.
Ramji Lal Modi vs The State of U.P. and Virendra vs The State of Punjab, ; , explained.
So judged, it cannot be said that the acts prohibited under the wide and sweeping provisions of section 3 of the Act can have any proximate or even foreseeable connection with public order sought to be protected by it, and, consequently, that section, being violative of the right to freedom of speech guaranteed by article 19(1) (a) of the Constitution, must be struck down as unconstitutional.
It would be incorrect to argue that since instigation by a single individual not to pay taxes might ultimately lead to a revolution resulting in distruction of public order, that instigation must have a proximate connection with public order.
No fundamental rights can be restricted on such hypothetical and imaginary consideration.
Nor is it possible to accept the argument that in a demo cratic set up there can be no scope for agitational approach or that any instigation to break a bad law must by itself constitute a breach of public order, for to do so without obvious limitations would be to destroy the right to freedom of speech on which democracy is founded.
It is not possible to apply the doctrine of severability relating to fundamental rights as enunciated by this Court to the provisions of the impugned section, since it is not possible to precisely determine whether the various categories of instigation mentioned therein fall within or without the constitutionally permissible limits of legislation and separate the valid parts from the invalid.
R.M.D. Chamarbaugwalla vs The Union of India (1957) S.C.R. 93o, explained and distinguished.
Romesh Thappar vs The State of Madras ; and Chintaman Rao vs The State o Madhya Pradesh.
(1950) S.C.R. 759, referred to.
