The appellant, a resident and ordinarily resident in India, carried on trade in Colombo in grains and foodstuffs for cattle.
For the relevant assessment years the Income tax Officer rejected the accounts produced by the appellant on the grounds inter alia that there was absence of vouchers and that the stock account and the manufacturing account had not been kept or produced; and he then made an estimate of the profits.
The Appellate Tribunal also agreed with the Income tax Officer and held that the correct profits could not be deduced from the books produced by the assessee and that therefore the proviso to section 13 of the (1)(1959) II L.L.J. 38. 886 Indian income tax Act, 1922 applied.
Having taken into consideration all the relevant factors it computted the profits at 15 on grains imported from India and 12 1/2 % on grains purchased in Ceylon, and, in support of its computation, it pointed out that in certain cases which had come to its notice the rates of profits went Up to 20%.
The appellant challenged the validity of the assessment on the ground that the principle of natural justice had been violated in that the Tribunal had taken into consideration the rate of profit in other cases without giving an opportunity to the appellant to explain those cases, and relied upon Dhakeshwari Cotton Mills Ltd.v.
The Commissioner of lncome tax, WestBengal.
[1I955] i S.C.R. 941 He also urged that the non production of stock account was not such a defect as to entitle the Taxing Authorities to reject the books and apply the proviso to section 13 of the Act.
Held:(1) that the percentage of profits made by traders in other cases was not the basis made by the Tribunal for arriving at any conclusion as to the percentage at which income should be computed in the present case, but was merely an ancillary support to that conclusion and that Dhakeshwari Cotton Mills Ltd. vs The Commissioner of Income tax, West Bengal, was not applicable to the case.
(2)that the keeping of a stock register is of great importance because that is a means of verifying the assessee 's accounts by having aquantitative tally; that if, after taking into account all the materials including the want of a stock register, it is found that from the method of accounting correct profits of the business are not deducible, the operation of the proviso to section 13 of the Act would be attracted.
Ghansyam Das Permanand vs Commissioner of Income tax C.P. & Beray , Bombay Cycle Stores Company Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax.
and Commissioner of Income tax vs McMillan and Co. [1958] S.C.R. 689, relied on.
