By means of a will the respondents husband autliorised her to adopt the appellant, and the will was duly registered after the death of the testator.
The relevant portion of the will ran thus: "Under this will, I am authorising the said Champalal Ishwardas to execute the same.
I have appointed him the executor of this will.
Under the said will the said Champalal alone shall be the full owner of my entire movable and immovable property and the executor of the will after my 811 death if I adopt him during my lifetime or even if my wife adopts him (after my death).
" The appellant applied for appointment of a curator under S.192 of the Succession Act but subsequently the parties entered into an agreement for arbitration in the matter.
Three arbitrators were appointed and the time for making the award was extended by the Court on their application.
The arbitration agreement stated that the arbitrators had to decide what should be the respective rights of the parties in the estate in case the respondent adopted the appellant.
An award was made and filed in Court by the arbitrators to the effect that the respondent should adopt the appellant according to Hindu Law within four months failing which the appellant would be their and executor of the entire property of the deceased and the respondent would be entitled to a maintenance of Ks.
200 per mensem.
But it in spite of the respondent 's readiness to adopt, the appellant refused to be adopted within four months, he would not have any right in the property nor would he be the executor.
The award was at first unregistered and on being returned it was subsequently registered and refiled in Court.
The attorney of two of the arbitrators furnished to the Sub Registrar a list of the property covered by the award.
The proceedings under the Succession Act and the were then separated.
The respondent made an application under section 14(2) Of the , and the appellant applied for setting aside the award.
The Court passed a decree in terms of the award.
The High Court on appeal by the appellant upheld the award.
On appeal by a certificate of the High Court the appellant contended that being an executor lie could not refer the matter to arbitration, that the award was not filed within the time prescribed by the Limitation Act, that it was not registered according to law, that the First Additional judge had no jurisdiction to extend time for making the award, that the arbitrators were guilty of misconduct and the award was in excess of the power given to them and that even if the award was proper and legal the respondent having refused to adopt the appellant the decree should have been as provided by the award on the happening of the contingency and the Court passing the decree had no jurisdiction to take subsequent events into consideration.
Held, that the filing of the award by the arbitrators after notice to the parties was not barred by limitation as article 178 of the Limitation Act applied to applications made by the parties and not to the filing of the award by the arbitrators.
The award required registration but the filing of an un registered award under section 49 of the Registration Act was not prohibited; what was prohibited was that it could not be taken into cvideince so as to affect immovable property falling under section 17 Of the Act.
812 The Court had jurisdiction to entertain the application for filing the award and to extend time for filing it.
By the will the appellant could not get the property of the Bai testator nor was he constituted an executor except in the event of his being adopted and therefore he could enter into the arbitration agreement.
The agreement for arbitration having specifically stated that the consequences of adoption or non adoption were to be decided by the arbitrators, they rightly laid down what was to happen if the adoption did not take place owing to the default of either party, imposing a time limit Was implicit in the terms of the agreement and their award was not in excess of the power given to them by the arbitration agreement.
The award could not be treated as having perverted the line of succession by merely stating that if the adoption did not take place the respondent would receive I share of the testator 's property and it would form her stridhan.
