In a trial by jury, the judge should in his charge to the jury be careful to lead them to a correct appreciation of the evidence so that the essential issues in the case may be correctly determined by them after understanding the true import of the evidence on the rival sides.
Since a verdict of the jury depends upon the charge, if it fails to perform this basic purpose it cannot be regarded as a proper charge and if it contains also misdirections as to law, the verdict cannot be upheld; but if, upon the general view taken, the case has been fairly left within the jury 's province, the verdict cannot be set aside unless something gross amounting to a complete misdescription of the whole bearing of the evidence has occurred.
Mushtak Hussein vs The State of Bombay, ; , Ramkrishan Mithanlal Sharma vs The State of Bombay, ; and Arnold vs King Emperor, (1914) L.R. 41 I.A. 149, relied on.
Per section K. Das and Sarkar, jj.
Though the charge to the jury in the present case was lengthy, the length was due in part to a protracted narrative of facts and the many disputed questions of fact to which the attention of the jury had to be drawn, and as the judge did state the several disputed points arising therefrom and their bearing on the main qestions at issue, the jury were not misled.
Held, that there was no misdirection and that the verdict of the jury could not be interfered with.
Per Hidayatullah, J.
In his charge to the jury, in the present case, (1) the judge took each witness, turn by turn, paraphrased, his evidence, sentence by sentence and read out those portions which he did not paraphrase, without trying to draw the attention of the jury to the relevancy or materiality of the various 2 parts; and did not make any difference between the testimony of the eye witnesses and of the formal witnesses in the matter of treatment, (2) while telling the jury that they could give the benefit of the doubt on proof of any individual fact if they felt any doubt about the proof, the judge did not at the same time caution them that the totality of facts must be viewed in relation to the offence charged and that the benefit resulting in acquittal could be given only if they felt that when all was seen and considered, there was doubt as to whether the accused had committed the crime or not, (3) the judge while explaining the ingredients of the offence of grievous hurt under section 325 of the Indian Penal Code failed to tell the jury that grievous hurt was only an aggravated form of hurt and that even if they held that the accused did not cause a grievous injury it would be open to them to hold that he caused a simple injury which would bring the matter within section 323 Of the Code, and (4) omissions were treated as contradictions and placed before the jury in complete disregard of section 162 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, Held, that these defects amounted to misdirections and that the verdict could not be accepted.
