In pursuance Of section 32 of the Indian Railways Act, 1890 (IX of 1890), the Central Government had by means of a notification, fixed certain rates of terminal charges for loading and unloading goods carried from one station to another by Railway.
Inspite of this notification the appellant Railway Company did not levy any terminal charges in accordance with those rates up to a certain point of time and continued to charge at a rate which Was then prevalent and in which no terminal charges were included.
Subsequently, however, the Railway Company issued a Local Rates Advice by which terminal charges were added to the prevalent rates with the result that the total charges payable to the Railway by the respondent mills rose considerably.
It was for relief against this increase that the mills made a complaint under section 41 (1) (i) of the Indian Railways Act to Railway Rates Tribunal.
The contention of the Railway Company, inter alia, was that as in increasing the charges the Administration had merely applied standardized terminal charges as notified by the Central Government no complaint could be made in respect thereof under section 41 (1) (i).
The Tribunal by a majority held that this was not a case of application of a standardised terminal charge and so it had jurisdiction to consider the question, and they ordered a reduction of terminal charges from the total charges.
On appeal by the Railway, Held, that the Railway Rates Tribunal had no jurisdiction either to investigate the reasonableness or otherwise of terminal charges levied by the Railway or to reduce the same.
The charges sought to be levied by the Railway Administration were "terminal charges" within the meaning of the 927 Railways Act, and the proposed levy being in accordance with the Government notification under section 32 of the Act was nothing more than the application of standardised terminal charges.
Irrespective of the fact of the actual user by any particular consignor of the stations, sidings and other things mentioned in section 3 (14) of the Railways Act, " terminal charges " were leviable by reason of the mere fact that these things had been provided for by the Railway Administration, Hall & Co. vs London Brighton and South Coast Railway, Co., , considered.
