The appellant 's workmen were represented by a Union called Kamdar Mandal Cement Works, Porbandar.
The registration of the said union was cancelled and that led to the formation of two Unions, the Cement Kamdar Mandal and Cement Employees Union.
The Cement Kamdar Mandal gave two notices one after another to the appellant, purporting to terminate two previous awards, wherein the defunct union represented the workmen.
Thereafter the Mandal presented fresh demands and the dispute was referred to the Tribunal.
The second union, the Cement Employees ' Union which represented the majority of the appellant 's workmen at Porbandar had been impleaded in the proceedings.
The appellant raised preliminary objections before the Tribunal against the competency of the reference inter alia on the ground that the award in question by which the parties were bound had not been duly terminated under section 19(6) of the Act in as much as the union which purported to terminate the said award represented only a minority of workmen bound by it.
The Tribunal by its interlocutory judgment found against the appellant.
The dispute between the parties centres round the question as to who can issue the notice terminating the award on behalf of workmen who are bound by the award as a result of section 18 of the Act.
The question therefore for decision is whether a registered trade union representing a minority of workmen governed by an award can give notice to the other party intimating its intention to terminate the award under section 19(6) of the .
Held, that the effect of section 18 is that an award properly made by an industrial tribunal governs the employer and all those who represent him under section 18(c) and the employees who are parties to the dispute and all those who are included in section 18(b) and (d).
On a fair and reasonable reading of section 19(6), the true position is that, though the expression "any party bound by the award" refers to all workmen bound by the award, notice to terminate the said award can be given not by an individual workman but by a group of workmen acting collectively either through their union or otherwise, and it is not necessary that such a group of workmen acting collectively either through their union or otherwise, should represent the majority of workmen bound by the award.
Thus it is open to a minority of workmen or a minority union to terminate 158 the award by which they, along with other employees, are bound just as much as it is open to them to raise an industrial dispute under the Act.
The Central Provinces Transport Services Limited vs Raghunath Gopal Patwardhan; , and The Newspapers Limited vs
The State Industrial Tribunal, U. P.; , , referred to.
