These appeals raised the question of constitutional validity of the Vindhya Pradesh Abolition of jagirs and Land Reforms Act, I952 (XI Of 1952).
Applications were made before the judicial Commissioner under article 226 of the Constitution on the ground that various provisions of the Act placed unreasonable restrictions on the exercise of the fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution.
The judicial Commissioner held that the Act, excepting section 22(1), section 37 and cl.
(4)(e) of the Schedule to the Act, was constitutionally valid.
The State appealed against that part of the order which declared the three provisions unconstitutional and one of the petitioners appealed against the order declaring the rest of the Act constitutional.
Held, that the appeal of the State must be allowed and that of the petitioner dismissed.
It was not correct to say that section 22 of the Act, which lays down the scheme for giving, effect to section 7(a) of the Act which permits the jagirdars to remain in possession of certain lands even after the abolition of their jagirs, is a piece of colourable legislation and, therefore, ultra vires the Legislature.
That section cannot be said to discriminate as between jagirdars on the one hand and other occupants of land, to whom section 28(1) applies, on the other, since they belong to distinct and different classes.
107 Even assuming that they belong to the same class and section 22 is discriminatory, that section is protected by article 31A of the Constitution.
The question as to colourable legislation ' is really one relating to legislative competency and there can be no doubt that the Vindhya Pradesh Legislature was perfectly competent to enact the impugned provisions under Entry 18, List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution.
K. C. Gajapati Narayan Deo vs The State of Orissa.
[1954] S.C.R. i and Raghubir Singh vs The State of Ajmer (Now Rajasthan).
[1959] SuPP1.
(1) S.C.R. 478, relied on.
There was no substance in the contention that section 37 of the Act is repugnant to section 9 of the Code of Civil Procedure and consequently ultra vires the State Legislature.
The Vindaya Pradesh Legislature had undoubtedly the power under Entry 3, List II of the Seventh Schedule to make a provision like section 37 Of the Act and, once it did so, the last part of section 9 of the Code would apply and the jurisdiction of the Civil Courts would be barred by section 9 of the Code read with section 37 of the Act.
Nor was it correct to say that cl.
(4)(e) of the Schedule deprives the jagirdar of his proprietory interest without compensation.
Although he may have to pay rent for the land remaining with him, no revenue for such land was any longer payable by him and the revenue is taken into account in assessing compensation.
The entire Act, therefore, falls within the protection of article 31A of the Constitution and, in view of the decisions of this Court, its constitutional validity is beyond question.
Case law referred to.
