The Sessions Court has power to examine witnesses who were not examined before the Committing Magistrate because of sec.
540, Criminal Procedure Code, and if the witness is treated as a prosecution witness and examined by the prose cuting counsel instead of by the court, that at best would be an irrigularity curable by sec.
537 of the Code.
The proper time to object to such a procedure would be at the trial itself.
Sher Bahadur vs The Crown (I.L.R. and Queen Empress vs G.W. Hayfield (I.L.R. 14 All.
212)distin quished S.S. Jhabwala vs Emperor (A.I.R. 1933 All. 690) and Mussamat.
Niamat vs The Crown I.L.R. 17 All. 176) approved.
Emperor vs Channing Arnold referred to.
Resort to sec.
145 of the Evidence Act is necessary only if a witness denies that he made the former statement.
In that event it would be necessary to prove that he did and if the former statement was reduced to writing, then sec.
145 requires that his attention must be drawn to those parts which are to be used for contradiction.
But that position does not arise when the witness admits the former statement.
In such a case all that is necessary is to look to the former statement of which no further proof is necessary because of the admission ' that it was made.
The former statement cannot be used as substantive evidence unless sec.
288, Criminal Procedure Code, is called in aid but even without sec.
288 the court would be entitled to say, basing on the evidence in chief which is the substantive evidence, that what the witness said to the police or the Committing Magistrate, is the true version, not because those state ments form substantive evidence, but because they tally with the evidence in chief which is substantive.
If a former statement can be brought in under sec.
157 of the Evidence Act, it can be transmuted into substantive evidence by the application of sec.
288 of the Criminal Procedure Code.
Tara Singh vs The State ; distinquished.
813 In the certificate of the Committing Magistrate endorsed on the deposition sheet states that the deposition was read out to the witness and the witness admitted it to be correct the court is bound to accept this as correct under sec.
80 of the Evidence Act until it is proved to be untrue.
It is not necessary nor desirable to examine the Commit ting Magistrate to prove the truth of his certificate.
Kashmera Singh vs The State of Madhya Pradsh [1952] (S.C.R.) 526 followed.
Even if it be true that the deposition was not read over, that would only amount to a curable irregularity and in the absence of prejudice which must be disclosed in an affidavit which shows exactly where the record departs from what the witness actually said, the objection cannot be sustained.
