In 1951 on account of the failure of the monsoon, generation of electricity from the Hydro Electric System was affected and it was found necessary to reduce the consumption of electricity.
The Government of Bombay passed an order under section 6A(1) of the Bombay Electricity (Special Powers) Act, 1946, regulating the use of electrical energy and the respondent Mills were compelled to reduce the working time.
For the period during which the short working continued the workers claimed their wages and dearness allowances or compensation in lieu thereof. ' The Industrial Court to which the matter was referred for arbitration under section 73 Of the Bombay Industrial Relations Act, 1946, made an award directing all the respondent Mills to pay compensation to the employees.
The Mills pleaded that no compensation was payable because (1) the closure of the Mills was in pursuance of the directions made by the Government under the Bombay Electricity (Special Powers) Act, 1946, and, therefore, section 11(1) of that Act barred the reference, (2) the Industrial Court had no jurisdiction to entertain the claim for compensation as the matter was covered by Standing Orders 16 and 17 which were determinative of the relations between the workmen and their employers under section 40(1) of the Bombay Industrial Relations Act, 1946, and (3) in any case, no compensation was payable in view of the decision in Muir Mills Co. Ltd. vs Suti Mills Mazdoor Union, Kanpur, ; Held, (1) that section 11 (1) of the Bombay Electricity (Special Powers) Act, 1946, barred only proceedings arising from the interference with the supply of electric energy and protected those who acted in pursuance of orders passed under that Act; the section did not prevent the raising of an industrial dispute.
(2)that Standing Orders 16 and 17 contemplated only cases of compensation in lieu of notice and wages for the period of closure, and did not cover cases of compensation for closure ; that the provisions of section 73 of the Bombay Industrial Relations Act, 1946, were wide enough to cover the reference in the present case and that the claim for compensation was not barred by Standing Orders 16 and 17, read with section 40(1) of the Act.
Digambar Ramachandra vs Khandesh Mills, (1949) 52 Bom.
L.R. 46, disapproved.
232 (3)that the decision in Muir Mills Co. Ltd. vs Suti Mills Mazdoor Union, Kanpur, was concerned only with the award of bonus and was not applicable to the present case.
