The first appellant was the Managing Director and the second appellant a Director and technical expert of a cloth dyeing concern known as Parikh Dyeing and Printing Mills Ltd. The company entered into a contract with the Textile Commissioner undertaking to dye a large quantity of cloth which was supplied to the company for that purpose.
In pursuance of the contract certain quantity of cloth was dyed and delivered to the Textile Commissioner by the company but it failed to dye and deliver the balance of cloth which remained in its possession and was not returned to the Textile Commissioner in spite of repeated demands.
Ultimately the two appellants were prosecuted for criminal breach of trust under section 409 read with section 34 of the Indian Penal Code and were convicted for the same in a trial by jury.
320 In appeal the High Court reviewed the evidence on the ground of misdirection to the jury but found that the two appellants were liable to account for the cloth over which they had dominion, and having failed to do so each of them was guilty of the offence of criminal breach of trust.
The High Court refused to accept the appellants ' plea that the cloth was old and was eaten up by white ants and moths.
On appeal by the appellants by special leave: Held, that to establish a charge of criminal breach of trust, the prosecution was not bound to prove the precise mode of conversion, misappropriation or misapplication by the accused of the property entrusted to him or over which he had dominion.
The principal ingredient of the offence of criminal breach of trust being dishonest misappropriation the mere failure of the accused to account for the property entrusted to him might not be the foundation of his conviction in all cases but where he was unable to account and rendered an explanation for his failure which was untrue, an inference of misappropriation with dishonest intent might readily be made.
The essence of liability under section 34 of the Indian Penal Code is the existence of a common intention animating the offenders and the participation in a criminal act in furtherance of the common intention.
The physical presence at the scene of offence of the offender sought to be rendered liable under section 34 is not, on the words of the statute, one of the conditions of its applicability in every case.
Barendra Kumar Ghose vs The King Emperor, (1929) L.R. 52 I.A. 40, followed.
Shreekantiah Ramayya Munipalli vs The State of Bombay, ; , explained and distinguished.
