During the year 1954 1955, the appellant paid a sum equiva lent to 3 months basic wages as bonus to its monthly paid clerical staff.
These employees raised an industrial dispute claiming an additional bonus equal to 7 months basic wages.
The Industrial Tribunal to which the dispute was referred awarded additional bonus equal to 5 months basic wages.
The appellant contended that (i) since the element of risk in the business was great and the capital employed was small the Full Bench formula had to be materially altered and rates higher than 6% on paid up capital and 4% on reserves employed as working capital should be allowed (ii) a higher allowance ought to be made for rehabilitation; and (iii) the entire surplus ought not to be treated as available for distribution as only a small percentage of the workmen had made the claim for bonus.
Held, that since the claim for additional bonus was made only by a small percentage of the workmen the entire available surplus could not be treated as available in distributing bonus to them.
Not only the 882 staff members who had raised the claim but II, 247 other workmen as well had contributed to the emergence of the surplus.
The sum still in the hands of the company could not be treated as a matter only between the company and these present claimants.
Indian Hume Pipe Co., vs Their Workmen, [1959] SUPP.
2 S.C.R. 948.
L.L.I. 357, applied.
Return on invested capital had always to provide for pure interest plus compensation for the risks of business.
In a particular industry where the risk was appreciably less than usual there would be good cause for providing less than 6 % ; and in an industry where extraordinary risks were run more than 6% could reasonably be provided for.
There was no unusual risk run by the appellants in their business and no case was made out for allowing any higher return on the paid up capital or working capital.
There was no justification for compensation of the entrepreneur for the fact that with a small amount of capital considerable profits were earned.
As fixed capital was liable to gradual deterioration reserves had to be created out of profits for replacing any portion of it as soon as it became too deteriorated for efficient use.
It was neces 195 sary that the company 's capital fund remained intact.
An amount reasonably sufficient for the notional requirement of rehabilitation during the relevant year was deducted as a prior charge in ascertaining surplus profits from which bonus could be paid.
The basis of the prior charge was the assumption that rehabilitation was a continuing process and needed allotment from year to year.
But in the present 'case the appellant had failed to make out any case for rehabilitation allowance in addition to the ordinary depreciation.
Associated Cement Company 's case, , relied on.
