This was an appeal by certain textile mills of Ahmedabad against a scheme for gratuity awarded by the Industrial Court.
The Labour Association, the respondent, gave a notice of change under section 42(2) of the Bombay Industrial Relations Act, 1946 (Bom.
XI of 1947), intimating the Mill Owners ' Association that they wanted a scheme for gratuity and mentioned four categories of termination of service in the annexure.
This demand was refused and so referred to the Industrial Court under section 73A of the Act.
Pending the reference the Employees ' Provident Funds Act, 1952 (19 of 1952), came into operation and the Industrial Court, on an objection by the Mill Owners ' Association, held that it was inadvisable to proceed with the reference and that a fresh application should be made, if necessary, after the scheme envisaged by the Act is introduced and rejected the respondent 's demand.
Thereafter a fresh notice of change was given by the respondent and there were certain references to the Industrial Court in respect of the demand.
The parties came to an agreement to refer all their disputes to arbitration, the references were withdrawn and the disputes were referred to the Board of Arbitrators.
Before the Board the Mill Owners ' Association took the objection that so long as the award of the Industrial Court dismissing the earlier reference subsisted, the claim for gratuity could not be considered by it.
That objection was upheld by the Board and it made no provision for gratuity.
Thereupon the respondent applied for the modification of the award under section 116A of the Act, and the Industrial Court by its award, which is the subject matter of the present appeal, framed a scheme for gratuity on an industry cum region basis: Held, that the decision of the Industrial Court was correct and must be upheld.
Regard being had to the true nature of its earlier award and the scope of the application for its modification, it could not be said that the respondent was seeking to alter the framework or change any of the principles of that award and the application under section 116A of the Act must be held to be competent.
330 A scheme for gratuity is by its nature an integrated scheme and covers all classes of termination of service where gratuity benefit can be legitimately claimed and the refusal of the Industrial Court in the earlier award amounted to a refusal to frame any scheme at all.
The statutory provident fund created by the Employees ' Provident Funds Act, 1952, could be no bar to the respondent 's claim for a gratuity scheme although there can be no doubt that in awarding such a scheme Industrial Courts must make due allowance for it.
Provisions of section 17 of the said Act clearly indicate that the statutory benefits under the Act are the minimum to which the employees are entitled and that they are no bar to additional benefits claimed by the employees.
Indian Hume Pipe Co. Ltd. vs Their Workmen, [1960] 2 S.C.R. 32, referred to.
It was not correct to say that the claim for gratuity was essentially similar to a claim for profit bonus and must always be considered on unitwise basis.
The benefit of gratuity is in the nature of a retiral benefit and before framing such a scheme industrial adjudication has to, take into account such relevant factors as the financial condition of the employer, his profit making capacity, the profits earned by him in the past, the extent of his reserves and the chances of his replenishing them as well as the claims for capital invested by him, and in evolving a long term scheme a long view of the employer 's financial condition should be taken and on that basis alone the feasibility of a scheme and the extent of the benefit to be given should be determined.
Arthur Butler & Co. (Muzaffarpur) Ltd. and Arthur Butler Workers Union, and Boots Pure Drug CO.
(India) Ltd. vs Their Workmen, , referred to.
Even assuming that gratuity is no part of deferred wage, it would not be reasonable to assimilate the scheme for gratuity to that of profit bonus or to apply the principles of the Full Bench formula applicable to the latter.
A claim for gratuity is strictly not a claim to receive a share of the profits at all.
Express Newspapers (Private) Ltd. vs The Union of India, and Indian Oxygen and Acetylene Co. Ltd. Employees ' Union vs Indian Oxygen and Acetylene Co. Ltd., , referred to.
It was not correct to say that an industry wise basis is wholly inappropriate in dealing with gratuity or that the Industrial Court was in error in adopting that basis.
Although some hardship to the weaker units in the industry may not be avoided, there were several factors in its favour both from the point of view of employers and employees.
Since in the present state of economic development in the country the propriety of the adoption of an all India basis for a scheme of gratuity may be open to doubt no exception can on principle be taken to the industry cum region basis adopted in the instant case.
331 Express Newspapers (Private) Ltd. vs The Union of India, , applied.
