The appellant who was a minor filed an application by his mother as his guardian under section 488 of the Code of Criminal Procedure in the Court of the City Magistrate, Allahabad, praying for an order against the respondent, for maintenance alleging that he was his putative father.
The Magistrate summarily dismissed the appellant 's application without issuing notice to the respondent as required by s.488, Criminal Procedure Code.
The Court of Session in revision against the Magistrate 's order came to the conclusion that it was a fit case in which the Magistrate ought to have issued summons to the respondent and submitted the record to the High Court recommending that the order passed by the Magistrate be set aside and that the Magistrate be ordered to proceed with the application in accordance with law.
TheHighCourtrejectedtheSessionsCourt preference and refused to certify that the case was a fit one for appeal to the Supreme Court.
On appeal by special leave : Held, that the appellant was not given full opportunity to establish his case in the manner prescribed by law.
432 Section 488 of the Code of Criminal Procedure does not contemplate a preliminary enquiry before issuing a notice but lays down that all evidence under that section should be taken in the presence of the respondent or his pleader indicating thereby that one enquiry only should be held after notice.
Sub section (6) of section 488 is mandatory in form and in clear terms it prescribes the procedure to be followed by the Magistrate.
It is the duty of the Court, before making the order, to find definitely, though in a summary manner, the paternity of child.
Chapter XXXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure is a self contained one and the relief given under it is essentially of a civil nature.
It prescribes a summary procedure for compelling a man to maintain his wife or children.
The findings of a Magistrate under this chapter are not final and the parties can legitimately agitate their rights in a civil court.
