The system of working in the cash department of the appellant Bank was that there was a Chief Cashier and there were about thirty Assistant Cashiers under him.
The Chief Cashier had to give security for the work of the cash department; the Assistant Cashiers were employed upon being introduced by the Chief Cashier who guaranteed each such employee.
There was long standing practice in the Bank that at the end of the day when the cash was locked up under the supervision of the Chief Cashier, all the assistant cashiers had to be present so that the cash could be checked before being locked up.
In spite of reminders C, an Assistant Cashier, had been leaving the Bank without the permission of the Chief Cashier for some time before the cash was checked and locked up.
The Chief Cashier reported the matter to the management, withdrew his guarantee in respect of C and stated that unless the services of C were dispensed with his conduct would affect the security of the cash department.
The Bank terminated the services of C in accordance with the provisions of para.
522(1) of the All India Industrial Tribunal (Bank Disputes) Award, 1953, without holding any enquiry against C.
The Industrial Tribunal to which the dispute was referred held that this was in fact and in reality a case of termination of services for misconduct and the Bank ought to have followed the procedure laid down in para.
521 of the Bank Award for taking disciplinary action, that the termination of service was illegal and improper and that C was entitled to reinstatement with full back wages and other benefits : Held, that the services of the Assistant Cashier were properly terminated by the Bank.
There was no doubt that an employer could not dispense with the services of a permanent employee by mere notice and claim that the industrial tribunal had no jurisdiction to inquire into the circumstances of such termination.
Even in a case of this kind the requirement of bona fides was essential and if the termination of service was a colourable exercise of the power or as a result of victimisation or unfair labour practice the tribunal had jurisdiction to interfere.
Where the termination of service was capricious, arbitrary or unnecessarily harsh that may be cogent evidence of victimisation or unfair labour practice.
In the present case the security of the 442 Bank was involved and if the Bank decided that it would not go into the squabble between the Chief Cashier and C and would use para.
522(1) of the Bank Award to terminate the services of C it could not be said the Bank was exercising its power under para.
522(1) in a. colourable manner.
It was not necessary that in every case where there was an allegation of misconduct the procedure under para.
521 for taking disciplinary action should be followed.
Buckingham and Carnatic Company Ltd. vs Workers ' of the COmpany, , approved.
