A dispute was raised by the respondents, the workmen of the appellant company, with respect to contract labour employed by it for cleaning maintenance work at the refinery including premises and plant belonging to it.
They made a demand for abolition of the contract system and for absorbing the workmen employed through the contractors into the regular service of the company.
The matter was referred to the Tribunal under section 10 of the .
The company objected to the reference on the grounds (1) that it was incompetent inasmuch as there was no dispute between it and the respondents and it was not open to them to raise a dispute with respect to the workmen of some other employer, viz., the contractor, and (2) in any case, it was for the company to decide what was the best method of carrying on its business and the Tribunal could not interfere with that function of the management.
The Tribunal held that the reference was competent and on the merits it was of opinion that the work which was being done through the contractor was necessary for the company to be done daily, that doing this work through annual contracts resulted in the deprivation of security of service and other benefits, privileges, leave, etc., of the workmen of the contractor and that therefore the contract system with respect to this work should be abolished: Held, (1) that the dispute in the present case was an industrial dispute within the meaning of section 2(k) of the , as interpreted in Workmen of Dimakuchi Tea Estate vs The Management of Dimakuchi Tea Estate, , because (i) the respondents had a community of interest with the workmen of the contractor, (ii) they hall also a substantial interest in the subject matter of the dispute in the sense that the class to which they belonged, namely, workmen, was substantially affected thereby, and (iii) the company could give relief in the matter.
The reference was, accordingly, competent.
(2) that the direction given by the Tribunal that the contract system should be abolished was just in the circumstances of the case and should not be interfered with.
D. Macropollo and Co. (P) Ltd. vs D. Macropollo and Co. (P) Ltd. Employees ' Union, A.I.R. 1958 S.C. 1012,
