The appellant was the managing agent of a company which was, at the relevant time, carrying on the business of transporting cargo in boats which touched ports in British India and in the Indian State of Cochin and other States.
Under the managing agency contract the remuneration payable to the appellant was expressed in the following terms: " That the managing agent shall as and by way of remuneration for its services receive a commission of ten per cent.
of the gross freight charged to the shippers.
Such remuneration shall be payable to the managing agents at the place where the same is earned by the company unless other wise requested by the managing agent.
" The Income tax Officer and the Excess Profits Tax Officer assessed the appellant to tax in respect of the whole of the managing commission received by it on the footing that the entire commission accrued or arose in British India.
The appellant claimed that a part of the managing agency commission accrued in the Indian States and not in British India and that it would be entitled to an apportionment of the managing agency commission and to claim exemption from tax in respect of the commission which accrued outside British India under section 14(2)(c) of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922, and the third proviso to section 5 of the Excess Profits Tax Act, 1940.
The Appellate Tribunal found that except booking and collecting some freight at Cochin, all other important and responsible work of managing the company was done from the head office at Bombay and not from Cochin: Held, that normally the commission payable to the managing agent of a company accrues at the place where the business is actually done, that is, where the services of the managing agent are performed, and as on the finding in the present case the appellant practically performed all the services at Bombay, the commission which it earned though computed on the percentage of freight, accrued or arose in British India.
Commissioner of Income tax, Madras vs K. R. M. T. T. Thia garaja Chetty and Co., , followed.
Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay vs Ahmedbhai Umarbhai and Co., Bombay, ; and Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay Presidency and Aden vs Chunilal B. Mehta, , distinguished, 73 558 Sall and industries Agencies Ltd., Bombay vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay City, , considered.
