In 1900 the then proprietor of the Dhalbhum estate who was the predecessor in interest of the first respondent granted a permanent lease of the mining rights for certain metals and minerals in the estate to one Prince Mohammad Bakhtyar Shah.
During the lifetime of the said proprietor the management of the estate was taken over by the Deputy Commission of Singhbhum under the Chotanagpur Encumbered Estates Act and after the former 's death the manager of the Estate granted to the Official Receiver to the estate of Prince Mohammad Bakhtyar Shah another lease in respect of mining rights in the same area in 1919.
The first respondent commenced the present litigation for the purpose of recovering rents and royalties on the basis of the second lease from the heirs and representatives of the estate of Prince Mohammad Bakhtyar Shah and also from the appellant as the Receiver to that Estate.
The decision of the case depended upon the construction of the two leases of 1900 and 1919 and the Trial Court and the High Court decided the case in favour of the plaintiff respondents.
On appeal by the contesting defendant appellant on a certificate granted by the High Court : Held, that the intention of the parties to a dispositive document must be gathered from the words used by the parties themselves and they must be presumed to have used the words in their strict grammatical sense.
If the statements made in the earlier part of the document were irreconcilable with those made in the later part, the earlier part must prevail.
In cases of ambiguity the court should look at all the parts of the document to ascertain the intention of the parties.
If ambiguity still remains, the Court should interpret the document strictly against the grantor and in favour of the grantee.
Under Exp.
11 of section 19 of the Limitation Act the words duly authorised " would include duly authorised either by the action of the party indebted or by force of law or order of the court.
Annapagonda vs Sangadiappa, , Rashbehari vs Anand Ram, , Ramcharan Das vs Gaya Prasad, 30 All. 422, Lakshumanan vs Sadayappa, A.I.R. 1919 Mad. 816 and Thankamma vs Kunhamma, A.I.R. 1919 Mad. 370, approved.
605 Currimbhai vs Ahmedali, and Lakshmanan Chetty vs Sadayappa Chetty, 35 M.L.J. 571, considered.
