The appellant was a shareholder of a company known as Mafatlal Gagalbhai and Co., Ltd. The Company with its registered office at Bombay was at all material times resident in British India.
It was also doing business in the former Baroda State and used to keep its profits derived in that State with Mafatlal Gagalbhai Investment Corporation, Navsari.
In the year 1949 Mafatlal Gagalbhai and Co. Ltd. declared dividends out of profits which had accrued partly in British India and partly in the Indian State.
The appellant was assessed to income tax on the dividends earned by her.
She did not bring those dividends into British India and claimed the benefit of para.
4 of the Merged States (Taxation Concessions) Order.
The Tribunal held that the income did not accrue to the appellant in the Baroda State but it did not decide the question whether she was entitled to the benefits of the Taxation Concessions Order.
The High Court on a reference to it held that para.
4 of the Taxation Concessions Order.
did not apply to the assessee but it did not decide the other question as to where the income had accrued to the assessee.
On appeal by special leave the appellant contended, inter alia, that since the Tribunal had not gone into the question of the applicability to the assessee of the Concessions Order and had not expressed any opinion thereon, the High Court could not raise the question on its own and decide it: Held, that the High Court exceeded its jurisdiction in going outside the point of law decided by the Tribunal and deciding a different point of law.
Section 66 of the Income tax Act which confers jurisdiction upon the High Court only permits a reference of a question of law arising out of the order of the Tribunal.
It does not confer jurisdiction on the High Court to decide a different question of law not arising out of such order.
New Jehangir Vakil Mills Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, , Scindia Steam Navigation Co. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, , Commissioner of Incometax vs Breach Candy Swimming Bath Trust, and Ismailia Grain Merchants Association vs Commissioner of Incometax, [1957] 31 I.T.R. 433, distinguished.
Mash Trading Co. vs Commissioner of Income tax, , considered.
