The appellant paid wages to its workmen in the Carding Department on piece rate basis and in addition, the workmen were entitled to receive further emoluments if their production exceeded a certain norm.
The right to receive these additional emoluments had become a part of the terms of service of these workmen.
In 1948 the Government of Uttar Pradesh with a view to make it obligatory on the employers in the different industries to keep the wages of workmen at a certain level, by its order under the provisions of section 3 of the U.P. , laid down the standard of basic wages and dearness allowance for different industries in the province.
The appellant in giving effect to the said order of the Government for introducing the new piece rate raised the fixed piece rate but stopped the system of paying additional emoluments, as it thought itself to be justified, in taking into consideration for this purpose the amounts actually earned by the workers including what had been earned as additional emoluments which were being paid to the workmen by way of productive and incentive bonuses.
The workmen 's case was that by stopping the additional emoluments which they used to get on the basis of better production by extra efforts the employer had in fact reduced the wages to which they were entitled and the fact that higher piece rates were introduced did not affect the question.
The question was whether the Government order required or authorised the company to.
include the incentive bonus and the production bonus which they had been so long paying in fixing the new piece rate for the purpose of compliance with the directions given in the Government order as regards the basic wages: Held, that the Government.
order did not require or justify the employer including the production and incentive bonuses in the calculation of the rates of the basic wage of the workers and consequently the Government order did not have the effect of absolving the company from the duty of continuing to pay the production and incentive bonuses to workmen as before: Held, further, that the concept of " basic " is not peculiar to wages alone; it is what is normally allowable to all, irrespective of special claims and is also ordinarily understood to mean that part of the price of labour, which the employer must pay to all 489 workmen belonging to all categories.
The phrase is used ordinarily in marked contradistinction to " dearness allowance " the quantum of which varies from time to time, in accordance with the rise or fall in the cost of living.
Thus understood " basic wage" never includes the additional emoluments which some workmen may earn, on the basis of a system of bonuses related to the production.
Titaghur Paper Mills Co. Ltd. vs Their Workmen, [1959] SUPP.
(2) S.C.R. 1012, referred to.
