The respondent was the Editor of the Deccan Herald, owned and published by the appellant, and the two contracts executed by the parties contained an arbitration clause that if in the interpretation or application of the contract any difference arose between the parties the same shall be referred to arbitration and the award shall be binding between the parties and also provided for, apart from his monthly salary, the payment of 10% of the profits to the respondent.
Upon the termination of his services by the appellant, the respondent brought a suit for accounts and payment of the profits found due to him.
The appellant by an 714 application pleaded that the suit ought to be stayed under section 34 of the , and the dispute referred to arbitration in accordance with the agreement between the parties.
The trial judge refused to exercise his discretion in favour of the appellant and refused to stay the suit.
On appeal the High Court confirmed the decision of the trial court.
The appellant came up to this Court by special leave under article 136 of the Constitution: Held, that the power conferred on the court by section 34 Of the , is discretionary and even though the conditions specified therein were fulfilled no party could claim there under a stay of legal proceedings instituted in a court as a matter of right.
But the discretion vested in the court is a judicial discretion and must be exercised as such in the facts and circumstances of each case.
No inflexible rules can, therefore, be laid down f or its exercise and the court has to act according to common sense and justice.
Gardner vs Jay, , referred to Where the discretion under the section has been properly and judiciously exercised by the trial court the appellate court would not be justified in interfering with such exercise of discretion merely on the ground that it would have taken a contrary decision if it had considered the matter at the trial stage.
But if it appears to the appellate court that the trial court has exercised its discretion unreasonably or capriciously or has ignored relevant facts or has approached the matter unjudiciously, it would be its duty to interfere.
Charles Osenton & Co. vs jhanaton, , referred to.
The words " interpretation and application of the contract frequently used in arbitration clauses, as they have been in the contracts in question, cover not only disputes relating to the construction of the relevant terms of the contract but also their effect, and unless the context compels a contrary construction, a dispute relating to the working of the contract falls within such a clause.
But the Supreme Court would not lightly interfere under article 136 of the Constitution with the concurrent exercise of dis cretion of the courts below under section 34 Of the Act.
Before it can justly do so, the appellant must satisfy the Court, on the relevant facts referred to by the courts below, that they exercised their discretion in a manifestly unreasonable or perverse way which was likely to defeat the ends of justice.
