Messrs. Shivnarayan Surajmal Nomani were the managing agents of the New Swadeshi Mills of Ahmedabad Ltd. The Nemani group and the appellant company which is the assesses 811 held a substantial number of shares of the said mills.
Sometime in 1944 some difference arose between them and it was decided that the Nemani group should sell its block of shares to the appellant company at an agreed price and then the appellant company would become the managing agents of the mills company on payment of Rs. 5,00,000 to the Nemani group and would be entitled to the emoluments of the managing agents as from April 1, 1944.
The relevant portion of the Managing Agency Agreement ran thus: " (2) The remuneration of the agents as such agents of the company as aforesaid shall be as follows: A commission at the rate of three and a half per cent.
on the gross proceeds of all sales of the yarn, cloth, waste and other articles manufactured by the company earned in any year or other period for which the accounts of the company are made up and laid before the General Meeting." " (3) The said commission shall become due to the Managing Agents at the end of each financial year or other period for which the accounts of the company are to be laid before the General Meeting and shall be payable and paid immediately after such accounts have been passed by the General Meeting.
,, The assessment year was 1946 47, and the year ending with Diwali, 1945 (October 18, 1944, to November 4, 1945) was the accounting year.
The managing agency commission from April 1, 1944, to December 31, 1944, amounted to Rs. 2,20,433 and from January 1, 1945, to March 31, 1945, to Rs. 67,959.
The case of the appellant company was that for the assessment year 1946 47 it was liable to pay tax only on the commission of Rs. 67,959 which it had earned by working as managing agent of the Mills company and it was not liable to pay tax on the sum of Rs. 2,20,433.
On a difference of opinion having arisen between the departmental taxing authorities and the Tribunal the following question was referred to the High Court for decision : " Whether on the facts and circumstances of the case the managing agency commission of 3 1/2 on sales made by the New Swadeshi Mills of Ahmedabad Ltd., between April 1, 1944, and December 31, 1944, accrued to Shivnarayan Surajmal Nemani or to the assessee ? " The High Court following the decision of the Supreme Court in E. D. Sassoon and Company Ltd. V. Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay City, held that the appellant company was liable to pay tax on the whole of the commission as the commission accrued due on March 31, 1945, and they became entitled to receive it at the end of the year; it also held that no debt was created in favour of the agents when the goods were sold.
On appeal by the assessee company on a certificate of the High Court: Held, that the view of the High Court was correct.
The commission of the managing agents accrued and became due at the end of the financial year and that neither any debt nor any right to receive payment arose in favour of the agents when each 812 transaction of sale took place.
No income arose or accrued on the sale proceeds at the time of each sale.
E. D. Sassoon and Company Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay; , , referred to.
Lakshminarayan Ram Gopal and Sons vs The Government of Hyderabad, ; , followed.
Commissioners of Inland Revenue vs Gardner Mountain & D 'Ambrumenil Ltd., and Turner Morrison & Co. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, West Bengal, , distinguished.
