The assesses had made profits during the assessment year 1951 52 but after deduction of the depreciation allowance it was found to have incurred a loss for income tax purposes.
In the same year the assesses declared dividends.
The Income tax Officer treated this amount as 'excess dividend ' and levied additional income tax as provided in paragraph B of Part I of the First Schedule to the Indian Finance Act, 1951.
The assesses contended that inasmuch as there was no income at all which was 954 taxable the words " on the total income " in paragraph B did not apply to it and no additional income tax could be levied.
The appellant, relying on the proviso to paragraph B, contended that additional income tax was imposed on excess dividend and if excess dividend was paid out, the liability to tax arose: Held, that the assessee was not liable to pay additional incometax.
The liability to tax was imposed by section 3 of the Income tax Act and the Finance Act merely laid down the rates at which tax was to be levied on the total income.
If there was no income there was no question of applying a rate to the " total income " and no income tax or super tax could possibly result.
The word " additional " in the expression "additional income tax " implied that there was a tax before.
The expressions " charge on the total income " and " profits liable to tax " in paragraph B contemplated only those cases where there was income and not cases where there was loss.
Consequently the expression " dividends payable out of such profits " could only apply when there were profits and not when there were no profits.
The imposition of additional income tax was conditioned by the existence of income and profits.
The legislature used language appropriate to income and applied the rate to the " total income ".
Where there was no total income the law could not apply and the courts could not be asked to supply the omission made by the legislature or to delete or to modify any words.
If the words of a taxing statute failed then so did the tax.
The courts could not, except rarely and in clear cases, help the draftsman by a favourable construc tion.
Curtis vs Stovin, , Commissioner of Incometax vs Teja Singh, S.C., Whitney vs Commissioners of Inland Revenue, , Special Commissioners of Income Tax vs Linsleys, Ltd., and Commissioners of Inland Revenue vs South Georgia Co. Ltd. , distinguished.
The Cape Brandy Syndicate vs The Commissioners of Inland Revenue,(1620) and Wolfson vs Commissioners of Inland Revenue,(1949) , referred to.
The proviso to paragraph B prescribed varying rates for varying circumstances; it dealt with rates alone and not with the chargeability to tax.
There were no words in this proviso making the excess dividend into income or subjecting it to tax independently of the charge to tax on the total income.
