On June 3, 1956, riots broke out after a public meeting held in Bombay in connection with the re organisation of the State of Bombay was dispersed on account of the disturbances created therein.
The car in which the appellant was travelling was stopped by the crowd and some of those who surrounded the car caught hold of him by his neck and hair and wanted to drag him out of the car.
The appellant then opened fire with his revolver.
The respondent 's brother, S, who was hit on the chest by one of the shots fired was removed to the hospital but died before medical assistance could be given.
The police surgeon who made a postmortem examination expressed the opinion that the shot must have been fired from a distance of 2 to 18 inches only.
The Coroner 's jury returned a verdict that S died of the wound caused by a bullet fired by the appellant " under such circumstances as would render the firing to be in the exercise of the right of private defence and as such justified.
" The respondent filed a complaint in the court of the Presi dency Magistrate, Bombay, on the allegation that his brother died as a result of the firing resorted to by the appellant who thereby committed an offence punishable under section 302 of the Indian Penal Code and prayed that process might be issued against him.
The Magistrate referred the complaint to the police for enquiry and report under section 202 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and after considering the report said: " From the statements recorded by the Police in this case and from the surrounding circumstances of the case, I have come to the definite conclusion that the report of the Police stating that the shot was fired by the accused in self defence is true.
The statement of the police surgeon conclusively supports the conclusion.
The eye witnesses brought by the complainant are not credible witnesses.
It will be harassment to the accused and waste of public time if any process is issued in this case ".
The Magistrate, accordingly, dismissed the complaint under section 203 of the Code of Criminal 2 Procedure.
The High Court, in revision, set aside the order of dismissal and directed the Magistrate to issue process against the appellant and deal with the case in accordance with law, on the grounds that this was not a case in which it was proper for the Magistrate to dismiss the complaint under section 203 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, that proof of the plea of self defence could not be held to have been established from the mere report of the police, and that there was nothing in section 202 or section 203 of the Code of Criminal Procedure which abrogated the rule as to the pre sumption laid down in section 105 of the Indian Evidence Act.
Held, that under section 203 of the Code of Criminal Procedure the judgment which the Magistrate has to form must be based on the statements of the complainant and his witnesses and the result of the investigation or inquiry, and in arriving at his judgment he is not fettered in any way except by judicial considerations ; provided that there are satisfactory and reliable materials on which he can base his judgment as to whether there is sufficient ground for proceeding on the complaint or not, if he has not misdirected himself as to the scope of an enquiry under section 202 and has applied his mind judicially to the materials before him, it would be erroneous in law to hold that a plea based on an exception can never be accepted by him in arriving at his judgment.
Held, further, that on the facts of the present case, the order of the Magistrate was correct and that the judgment of the High Court setting aside that order on an erroneous view of the scope of section 203 of the Code of Criminal Procedure must be set aside.
