Upon the death of the holder in 1932, the Government of Bombay by order dated June 7, 1932, resumed the Saranjam estate of Gajendragad and re granted the same to his eldest son.
By the same order the assignment of some lands out of the estate in favour of B, a younger member of the family, by way of maintenance was also continued.
On May 14, 1940, B died leaving his widow, A, and his undivided brother, D. A asked the Government for permission to adopt a son but without the permission being granted adopted V on July 10, 1941.
By an order dated December 17, 1941, the Government continued the maintenance grant (Saranjam potgi) to D. Thereupon V filed a suit against the Government and D for recovery of the lands on the grounds (i) that the order of the Government dated December 17, 1941, was ultra vires, null and void, and (ii) that by the custom of lineal primogeniture which prevailed in the family the lands, upon the death of B and upon the adoption of V by A, devolved upon V in preference to D.
The suit was contested, inter alia, on the grounds: (i) that under the relevant Saranjam Rules the interest of B came to an end on his death and was not such as could devolve upon V despite the order dated December 17, 1941, (ii) that the alleged family custom did not apply to maintenance grants and (iii) that the suit was barred under section 4 Of the Bombay Revenue jurisdiction Act, 1876: Held, that the plaintiff was not entitled to the lands either under the Saranjam Rules or under the custom; further that the suit was barred by $ 4 of the Bombay Revenue jurisdiction Act, 1876.
103 790 The maintenance grant (potgi holding) was part of the Saranjam and was governed by the incidents of Saranjam tenure and by the relevant Saranjam Rules.
Saranjam grants were granted or withheld at the will and pleasure of the sovereign power and the grant was always subject to interruption and revocation by resumption, temporary or absolute.
On the death of B it was open to the Government to resume the grant and to grant it to D and this is what it did by the order dated December 17, 1941.
The taking in adoption of the plaintiff by the widow of the deceased could not affect the operation of the order passed by the Government.
Daulatrao Malojiyao vs Province of Bombay (1946) 49 Bom.
L.R. 270, referred to.
Even under the custom of lineal primogeniture pleaded by the plaintiff, D was entitled to get the properties after the death of B. It was not pleaded that the properties once so vested were divested by subsequent adoption by the widow.
Further it was neither pleaded nor proved that the custom took away the right of the Government to resume the maintenance grant and to make a fresh grant thereof.
Sub clause 4 of the Bombay Revenue jurisdiction Act, 1876, barred the jurisdiction of civil courts in respect of " claims against the Government relating to lands granted or held as Saranjam".
The plaintiff asked for a finding that the order of December 17, 1941, was null and void and did not affect the properties in suit.
Unless the order was out of his way, the plaintiff was not entitled to claim recovery of possession.
The claim was one which fell within the mischief of section 4 and the suit was barred.
