The , was enacted with the object of preventing undesirable transactions in securities by regulating the stock exchange business, and the Act conferred an effective controlling power on the Central Government over the stock exchange.
In exercise of the power conferred on the Central Government to make rules the Central Government made rules described as the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Rules, 1957, providing, inter alia, for the qualification for membership of a stock exchange seeking recognition etc.
After the Act came into force two Companies, namely, the Native Share and Stock Brokers ' Association and the Indian Stock Exchange Limited doing stock exchange business in Greater Bombay applied for recognition under the Act.
The Government after considering the merits of the companies and the relevant circumstances issued a notification dated August 31, 1957, recognising the Native Share and Stock Brokers ' Association under the name " The Stock Exchange, Bombay " subject to certain conditions.
One of the conditions was that the members of the other com pany, India Stock Exchange Limited, would be entitled to apply for membership of the Stock Exchange, Bombay, provided they were active members of the Indian Stock Exchange Limited for 12 months immediately preceding August 6, 1957, and they were also eligible under r. 8(i) of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Rules, 1957, to be members of a recognised stock exchange.
Within the time granted for applying for membership a number 'of active members of the Indian Stock Exchange Limited applied for membership and were admitted as members of the recognised Stock Exchange.
Though three years had elapsed after this no member other than the petitioner questioned the validity of the notification which was accepted and the recognised Stock Exchange became established.
The petitioner, however, filed a petition under article 32 Of the Constitution praying that the Union be directed to withdraw or cancel the notification dated August 31, 1957, recognising the Stock Exchange, Bombay, under section 4 Of the .
Subsequently on November 30, 1957, the Central Government 192 issued another notification applying section 13 Of the Act to Greater Bombay with the result that thereafter every contract in shares between the members of any unrecognised stock exchange in that city would be illegal.
The contentions of the petitioner in the petition for the issue of a writ of mandamus were that under article 19(i)(g) of the Constitution he had a fundamental right to carry on business in shares and the two notifications in question imposed unreasonable restrictions on his right, that the notification dated August 31, 1957, was void as it was not sanctioned by the provisions Of section 4 Of the ' Act, that the condition 2(i)(a) of the said notification classifying members of the Indian Stock Exchange Limited as active members and members who were not active infringed fundamental right granted under article 14 Of the Constitution and as the said condition was not severable the entire notification was bad.
The respondent besides controverting the said contentions further contended that as the petitioner had not questioned the validity of the Act itself the notification issued thereunder could not be questioned.
Held, that the validity of a notification could not be ques tioned if it was issued under a self contained Act and restated the provisions of the Act the validity of which was accepted.
If, however, the Act conferred a power on the State in general terms and the notification issued thereunder infringed any of the fundamental rights it could be attacked even though the Act was valid.
The Stock Exchange Rules did not operate as a bar against the petitioner becoming a member of the Stock Exchange sub ject to the rules governing such application.
The restrictions and conditions imposed under the notifica tion in question were not unreasonable.
The condition restricting membership to active members only is germane to the recognition of the Stock Exchange and is therefore, a condition within the meaning of " any other conditions " in cl.
(b) of sub section (1) Of section 4 Of the Act.
The classification between active members and others was justifiable and the period fixed by the Government as the standard for ascertaining the active membership was neither arbitrary nor unreasonable.
There was a presumption in favour of the State that there was a reasonable basis for the classification and the burden to prove that it violated the guarantee of equal protection lay on the petitioner who impeached it.
