In pursuance of an agreement dated October 21, 954, entered into between the Government of India and the Government of France whereby there was a de facto transfer of the administration of Pondicherry and other French Settlements to the Government of India as and from November 1, 1954, a notification dated October 30, 1954, was issued by the Government of India called the French Establishments ' (Application of Laws) Order, 1954, by virtue of which certain enactments specified in column (3) of the Schedule which included the Sea Customs Act, 306 1878, the Imports & Exports Trade (Control) Act, 1947, and the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947, were extended to Pondicherry.
Paragraph 6 of the Order provided: "Unless otherwise specifically provided in the Schedule, all laws in force in French Establishments immediately before the commencement of the Order, which correspond to enactments specified in the Schedule, shall cease to have effect, save as respect things done or omitted to be done before such commencement Shortly prior to the transfer of the administration of Pondicherry to India, the petitioners had entered into certain agreements with foreign suppliers for the import into Pondicherry of diverse goods.
Pondicherry was, prior to the transfer to India, a free port without any restrictions on imports, except on a few items, and the importers could acquire foreign exchange either at the official rate in respect of some transactions or at the open market in respect of others.
The petitioners had with the consent of the French authorities obtained through the banks foreign exchange from the open market to finance their imports and had, with the foreign exchange so acquired, opened irrevocable letters of credit in favour of their foreign suppliers on account of the price of the goods to be supplied.
On or about November 1, 1954, the goods covered by the aforesaid imports were in different stages of shipment and arrived at the port of Pondicherry in January and February 1955.
The Collector of Customs treated the imports of the goods as unauthorised and confiscated the same and gave the petitioners an option to pay in lieu of confiscation a penalty, on the ground that the petitioners had not obtained a licence for bringing the goods into Pondicherry and that section 167(8) of the , was contravened.
The petitioners claimed, inter alia, that the transactions entered into by them with the foreign dealers were " things done " within the meaning of para.
6 of the French Establishments ' (Application of Laws) Order, 1954, and that therefore the imports by the petitioners were within the saving clause of that paragraph.
Held, (Per Sinha, C. J., Imam and Subba Rao, JJ.
Sarkar and Shah, JJ.
dissenting): (1) that on its proper interpretation, the expression " things done " in para.
6 of the French Establishments ' (Application of Laws) Order, 1954, was comprehensive enough to take in not only things done but also the effects or the legal consequences flowing therefrom ; The Queen vs Justices of the West Riding of Yoykshire, and Heston and Isleworth Urban District Council vs Gyout, , relied on.
(2) that the bringing of the goods into India and the rele vant contracts entered into by the petitioners with the foreign dealers formed parts of a same transaction, and therefore, the: imports were the effect or the legal consequence of the, " things done ", i.e., the contracts entered into by, the petitioner; 307 State of Travancore Cochin vs The Bombay Co. Ltd., ; and State of Travancore Cochin V. Shanmugha Vilas Cashew Nut Factoyy, ; , relied on.
(3) that para.
6 of the order saved the transactions entered into by the petitioners and that, therefore, the Collector of Customs had no right to confiscate their goods on the ground that they were imported without a licence.
Per Sarkar, J. (1) The mere making of the contracts and the opening of the letters of credit without the bringing of the goods into Pondicherry would not amount to an " import " and, therefore, the imports by the petitioners would not be within the saving clause in para.
6 as things done before the commencement of the Application of Laws Order.
(2) In the absence of the necessary words to extend the application of French laws to the effect of things done or rights acquired from the doing of them, the saving clause in para.
6 could not protect the imports made by the petitioners from the operation of the Indian laws applied to the French Establishments.
Per Shah, J. (1) Steps preliminary to import, even if they are closely integrated therewith, are not included in the concept of import, in dealing with the provisions of the and the Imports and Exports Trade (Control) Act.
(2) By the use of the expression things done or omitted to be done before such commencement in cl. 6 of the French Establishments ' (Application of Laws) Order, 1954, French law applies to acts and omissions before November 1, 1954, and not to legal consequences of those acts and omissions ensuing after that date, and hence import of goods across the customs frontier in the Pondicherry Port after November 1, 1954, without a licence in that behalf is contrary to the provisions of the and the Import and Exports Trade (Control) Act.
