By a notification under section 4 of the West Bengal Land Deve lopment and Planning Act, 1948, the Government declared that certain plots of land belonging to the respondent were needed for the settlement of immigrants from East Pakistan and for improving living conditions in the locality.
Thereafter a second notification was issued by the Government under section 6 read with section 7 of the Act declaring that the plots covered by the previous notification were needed for the same purpose as stated therein.
When the Government started to erect structures on the land thus acquired the respondent moved the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution challenging the vires of the Act and impugning the legality of the proceedings taken under tile Act.
The petition was heard by a judge of the High Court sitting singly who negatived all the contentions of the petitioner and discharged the rule.
On appeal by the respondent under the Letters Patent, a Division Bench of the High Court held that the Act did not infringe the provisions of articles 19(i)(f) and 31(2) of the Constitution.
The High Court further held that it was incumbent on the State Government to frame a development scheme after possession of the land had been taken even though the Government was entitled to deal with the land on an emergency basis under section 7 of the Act, which runs thus: " In cases of urgency, if in respect of any notified area the State Government is satisfied that the preparation of a development scheme is likely to be delayed, the State Government may, at any time, make a declaration under section 6, in respect of such notified area or any part thereof though no development scheme has either been prepared or sanctioned under section 5 ".
The High Court allowed the respondent 's appeal and directed a writ of mandamus to issue to the Government requiring them to proceed to frame a development scheme in terms of the Act.
On appeal by the State of West Bengal on a certificate granted by the High Court, 369 Held, that the High Court was in error in issuing the mandamus against the appellants.
Section 7 of the Act com pletely dispensed with the statutory necessity of preparing a scheme of development as envisaged in section 5 of the Act in cases where the Government had taken the decision that it was necessary to proceed further with the acquisition proceedings without waiting for a development scheme.
No discrimination was implicit in the provisions of section 7 of the Act and no fundamental right of the appellant was infringed either under article 14 or articles 19(1)(f) and 31(2) of the Constitution.
