The appellant, at the time a resident of Lahore, was asses sed to income tax on an income of Rs. 49,047 for the assessment year 1944 45 by the Income tax Officer, Lahore.
After the partition in 1947 he shifted to Delhi and resided there.
He was one of the three share holders of a company called Indra Singh and Sons Ltd. of Calcutta, the shares of all the three shareholders being equal.
The company at a meeting held oil April 17, 1943, passed its accounts for the year ending March 31, 1942, but declared no dividends although the accounts disclosed large profits.
On June 11, 1947, the Income tax Officer, Calcutta, passed an order under section 23A of the Income tax Act that the sum of Rs. 4,74,370, being the appellant 's share of the undistributed assessable income of the company, be included in his income for the assessment year 1944 45.
Thereupon the Income tax Officer, Delhi, on April 10, 1948, issued a notice to the appellant, who was then working as the Defence Minister of India and residing in Delhi, under section 34 of the Act to file a revised return, which he did under protest, reopened the earlier assessment and by a fresh order made on March 25, 1949, assessed the appellant on an income of Rs. 5,23,417 for the year in question.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant that the proceeding under section 34 could be held only in Lahore and not in India at all.
The question for determination was whether the Income tax Officer, Delhi, could validly reassess the appellant under section 34 of the Act.
Held, that the issue of a notice under section 34 of the Income tax Act, 1922, under the provision of the section itself, attracted such provisions of the Act as might apply to a notice issued under section 22(2) of the Act and since section 64 of the Act was the only provision under which the place of assessment upon a notice under section 22(2) could be determined, in absence of anything to the contrary in the Act, section 64 applied to an assessment under section 34 of the Act.
The appellant was, therefore, rightly assessed by the Income tax Officer, Delhi, under section 64(2) of the Act.
483 C. V.Govindarajulu vs Commissioner of Income tax, Madras, I.L.R. and Lakshminarain Bhadani vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bihar and Orissa, , held inapplicable.
The time specified by the proviso to section 64(3) could have no application since the contention in the present case was that the assessment under section 34 could be made only in Lahore and not in India at all.
Section 23A of the Act, as it then stood, raised only one fiction, and not two, and that was of an income arising on a specific date in the past with the purpose that such income might be included in the income of a share holder for assessment.
That income must, therefore, be deemed to have existed on the date for the purpose of assessment and, if not included in the assessment for the relevant year, must be taken to have actually escaped assessment so as to attract section 34 of the Act.
Dodworth vs Dale, , D. & G. R. Rankine vs Com missioners of Inland Revenue, and Chatturam Horliram Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bihar and Orissa, ; , held inapplicable.
There is no warrant for the proposition that section 23A of the Act was meant to apply only to cases where pending assessment for any year, an order is made under that section creating a fictional income that year.
Such an order could, therefore, be made even after the assessment of the income of the share holder for the year concerned had already been completed.
But section 23A does not itself provide for any assessment being made and that has to be made under other provisions of the Act authorising assessment including section 34.
It is not correct to say that section 23A(1), as it then stood, was beyond the competence of the Legislature and was as such unconstitutional.
Under Entry 54 of List I of the Seventh Schedule to the Government of India Act, 1935, the Legislature could pass not only a law imposing a, tax on a person on his own income but also a law preventing him from evading the tax payable on his income and there can be no doubt that section 23A, properly construed, was meant to prevent such evasion.
