The petitioner was Second in Command of 1.
N. section Mysore which came to Bombay in the beginning of March, 1959.
Soon thereafter he was arrested on a charge of murder under section 302 of the 'Indian Penal Code and was placed, and continued to remain, in naval custody all along during his trial.
In due course he was placed on trial by a jury before the Sessions Judge, Greater Bombay, in which the jury returned a verdict of not guilty by a majority; but the Sessions judge disagreeing with the verdict of the jury made a reference to the High Court which convicted the petitioner under section 302 of the Indian Penal Code and sentenced him to imprisonment for life.
On the same day when the High Court pronounced its judgment the Governor of Bombay passed an order under article 161 of the Constitution of India suspending the sentence passed by the High Court of Bombay on the petitioner until the appeal intended to be filed by him in the Supreme Court against his conviction and sentence was disposed of and subject meanwhile to the condition that he shall be detained in the Naval Jail custody.
A warrant for the arrest of the petitioner which was issued in pursuance of the judgment of the High Court was returned unserved with the report that it could not be served in view of the order of the Governor suspending the sentence passed upon the petitioner.
In course of the hearing of an application for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court filed by the petitioner in the High Court the matter of the unexecuted warrant was placed before it and a Special Bench of the High Court after examining the validity of the action taken by the Governor came to the conclusion that the order passed by the Governor was not invalid, that the order for detention of the petitioner in naval custody was not unconstitutional and that the sentence passed on the petitioner having been suspended the provisions of 0.
XXI, r. 5, of the Supreme Court Rules did not apply and it was not necessary for the petitioner to surrender to his sentence.
Thereafter the petitioner filed an application for special leave in the Supreme Court and also another application praying for exemption from compliance with the aforesaid rule and 498 for the hearing of his application for special leave without surrendering to his sentence.
His plea at first was that as he was not a free man it was not possible for him to comply with the requirements of 0.
XXI, r. 5, of the Supreme Court Rules; but he subsequently amended it to the effect that the aforesaid Rule did not apply to his case in view of the Governor 's order.
On a reference of this matter by a Division Bench of this Court to the Constitution Bench for hearing, Held, that the Governor had no power to grant the suspension of sentence for the period during which the matter was sub judice in this Court.
The Governor 's order suspending the sentence could only operate until the matter became sub judice in this Court on the filing of the petition for special leave to appeal whereupon this Court being in seisin of the matter would consider whether 0.
XXI, r. 5 should be applied or the petitioner should be exempted from the operation thereof as prayed for.
It would then be for this Court to pass such orders as it thought fit as to whether bail should be granted to the petitioner or he should surrender to his sentence or to pass such other order as the court deemed fit in the circumstances of the case.
On the principle of harmonious construction and to avoid a possible conflict between the powers given under article 161 to the Governor and under article 142 to the Supreme Court, both of which are absolute and unfettered in their respective fields of operation, it must be held that.
article 161,does not deal with the suspension of sentence during the time that article 142 is in operation and the matter is sub judice in the Supreme Court.
Per KAPUR J. (dissenting) The language of article 161 is of the widest amplitude.
It is plenary and an act of grace and clemency and may be termed as benign prerogative of mercy; The power of pardon is absolute and exercisable at any time.
Rules framed under article 145 are subordinate legislation and cannot override the provisions of article 161 of the Constitution itself.
While the Governor 's power to grant pardon is a power specially conferred upon him as was vested in the British Governor in British days, the power given to the Court under article 142(1) is a general power exercisable for doing complete justice in any cause or matter, and if they deal with the same matter then article 161 must prevail over article 142(1).
The two powers may have the same effect but they operate in distinct fields on different principles taking wholly irreconcilable factors into consideration.
The action taken by the executive being the exercise of overriding power is not subject to judicial review.
It could not have been the intention of the framers of the Constitution that the amplitude of executive power should be restricted as to become suspended for the period of pendency of an appeal in the Supreme Court.
