On November 15, 1954, the Registrar wrote to the company of which the appellant was the Managing Agent under section 137, Indian Companies Act, 1913, that it had been represented to him that the business of the company was carried on in fraud and called upon it to furnish certain information.
On April 15, 1955, the Registrar made a report to the Central Government under section 137(5) to the effect that in his opinion the affairs of the company were carried on in fraud of contributories and they disclosed an unsatisfactory state of affairs and that a case had been made out for an investigation under section 138.
Thereupon, the Central Government, on November 1, 1955, appointed an Inspector to investigate the affairs of the company and to report thereon.
The Inspector was authorised under section 140 to examine any person on oath, and he wrote to the appellant that he would examine him on oath in relation to the business of the company.
On April 1, 1956, the Indian Companies Act, 1913, was repealed by the Indian , which conferred wider and more drastic powers of investigation.
On July 26, 1956, the Central Government accorded approval under section 239(2) of the new Act to the Inspector exercising his powers of investigating into and reporting on the affairs of the company.
In May 1957 the Inspector served notices upon the appellant calling upon him to attend his office on the date and the time specified for the purpose of being examined on oath and to produce certain account books and papers relating to the company.
The appellant challenged the investigation and contended : (i) that since the Inspector was appointed under the old Act he had no jurisdiction to exercise the powers referable to the provisions of the new Act, (ii) that section 240 of the new Act which provided for the production of documents and, evidence at such investigations offended article 20(3) of the Constitution, and (iii) that section 239 of the new Act which conferred powers on inspectors for investigation and section 240 offended article 14 of the Constitution.
418 Held, that the Inspector appointed under section 138(4) of the old Act must be deemed to have been appointed under section 235 of the new Act and had authority and power to issue notices under section 240 of the new Act.
Section 645 of the new Act provided that the appointment of an Inspector under the old Act shall, on repeal of the old Act and on coming into force of the new Act, have effect as if it was made under the new Act.
Section 646 which provided that nothing in the new Act shall affect the operation of section T38 of the old Act as respects inspectors was not an exception or proviso to section 645 and the two sections being saving sections had to be read as independent of and in addition to, and not as exceptions to, each other.
Held, further that section 240 of Indian , did not offend article 20(3) of the Constitution.
For invoking the constitutional right against testimonial compulsion guaranteed under article 20(3) there must be at the relevant stage a formal accusation against the party pleading the guarantee relating to the commission of an offence which may result in a prosecution.
The enquiry undertaken under section 240 by the Inspector was in substance an enquiry into the affairs of the company; at this stage there was no accusation, formal or otherwise, against any specified individual.
The mere fact that a prosecution may ultimately be launched against the alleged offenders would not retrospectively change the complexion or character of the proceedings held by the Inspector when he makes the investigation.
Maqbool Hussain vs The State of Bombay, ; , section A. Venkataraman vs The Union of India, [1954] S.C.R. 1150, M. P. Sharma vs Satish Chandra, District Magistrate, Delhi, ; , Thomas Dana vs State of Punjab, [1959] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 274 and Mohammed Dastagir vs The State of Madras, ; , relied on.
Held, further that SS. 239 and 240 of the Indian , did not violate article 14 of the Constitution.
These sections denied the company and persons in charge of the management of such companies the ordinary protection afforded to witnesses under section 132 of the Evidence Act and under section 161(1) and (2) of the Criminal Procedure Code.
As they were entrusted with the financial interests of a large number of citizens it was legitimate to treat such companies and their managers as a class by themselves and to provide for necessary safeguards and checks against abuse of power by the managers.
The basis of the classification is founded on an intelligible differentia which has a rational relation to the object sought to be achieved.
Shri Ram Krishna Dalmia vs justice Tendolkar, [1959] S.C.R. 297, applied.
