The respondent sued the State of Bihar for a declaration that the Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950, was ultra vires, void and unconstitutional and for a permanent injunction restraining the State and its officers or agents from issuing any notification thereunder in respect of her estate or taking possession thereof and on a petition filed along with the plaint obtained an order of temporary injunction against the State in terms of her prayer, pending the hearing of the suit.
More than a year thereafter, the State made an application under 0. 39, r. 4 of the Code for a discharge of the order of temporary injunction on the ground that the impugned Act had in another case been declarer valid by the Supreme Court.
Before that application could, however, be heard, the State of Bihar, on May 19, 1952 issued a notification under section 3(1) of the Act, authenticated by the Additional Secretary to the Government, declaring that, amongst others, the respondent 's estate had vested in the State of Bihar under the provisions of the Act.
Thereupon the respondent moved the trial Court for taking action against the State under 0. 39, r. 2(3) of the Code.
The contention on behalf of the State was that in view of article 31 B of the Constitution the issue of the notification was lawful and could not constitute contempt of Court.
The Subordinate judge held that this was no defence to the application by the respondent and directed attachment of the appellant 's property to the value of Rs. 5,000 and the High Court on appeal affirmed that decision.
Held, that the courts below took the correct view of the matter and that the appeal must be dismissed.
The procedure laid down by 0. 39, r. 2(3) of the Code of Civil Procedure is remedial and essentially one for the enforcement or execution of an order of temporary injunction passed under 0. 39, r. 2(1) and is available against the State although the provision for detention may not apply to it.
It is wrong to say that it is either contrary to article 300 of the Constitution or hit by the rule that no action lies against the State in tort or for a wrong doing entailing punishment or compensation.
District Board of Bhagalpur vs Province of Bihar, A.I.R. 1954 729 Pat.
529 and Tarafatullah vs section N. Maitra, A.I.R. 1952 Cal.
gig, distinguished.
There is also no basis for the contention that the State is not expressly or by necessary implication mentioned in 0. 39, r. 2(3).
The word 'person ' used by it, properly construed, includes the defendant against whom the order of injunction is primarily issued as also the defendant 's agents, servants and workmen.
Since the court 's power to issue an order of temporary injunction against the State under 0. 39, r. 2(1) cannot be in doubt, disobedience of such an order when issued necessarily attracts 0. 39, r. 2(3) of the Code.
Director of Rationing & Distribution vs Corporation of Calcutta, ; , held inapplicable.
Held, further, that when once an order is passed which the Court has jurisdiction to pass, it is the duty of the State no less than any private party to obey it so long as it stands, and the conduct of the State Government in the instant case in issuing the notification at a time when its application for vacating the injunction was still pending and the attitude taken up by it after the application under 0. 39, r. 2(3) was made and persisted in till the end must be disapproved.
