The respondents, directors of a company, were prosecuted under sections 32(5) and 133(3) of the Companies Act, 1913, for breaches Of sections 32 and :131 of that Act for having knowingly and wilfully authorised the failure to file the summary of share capital for the year 1953 and being knowingly and wilfully parties to the failure to lay before the company in general meeting the balance sheet and profit and loss account as at March 31, 1953.
The respondents contended that there was no default in complying with the requirements of the section as no general meeting had been held in the year concerned.
Held A person charged with an offence cannot rely on his default as an answer to the charge and so, if the respondents were responsible for not calling the general meeting, they cannot be heard to say in defence to the charges brought against them that the general meeting had not been called.
The company and its officers were bound to perform the conditions precedent, if they could do that, in order that they might perform their duty.
802 It is no less necessary to call a meeting for performing the obligations imposed by section 32 because section 76 creates an obligation to call a meeting and imposes an independent penalty for breach of that obligation.
Liability under section 32(5) or section 133(3) would be incurred where the officer has wrongfully assisted in the meeting not being held though he might also be liable at the same time to the penalty under section 76.
Sub section (5) Of section 32 by imposing a daily fine during the continuance of the default does not indicate that the default is not committed till a meeting has been held.
The default occurs after the expiry of twenty one days from the day when the meeting should have been held.
Imperator vs The Pioneer Clay and Industrial Works Ltd., I.L.R. , Queen vs Newton, (1879) 48 Law J. Rep. M.C. 77 and Dorte vs South African Super Aeration Ltd., , distinguished.
Gibson vs Bayton, , Edmonds vs Foster, (1875) 45 Law J. Rep. M.C. 41 and park vs Lawton, , approved.
Doyle vs South African Super Acration Ltd., , not applicable.
