The appellant was the holder of a personal inam which he had purchased from the original inamdar to whom a Sanad had been issued under Bombay Act No. VII of 1863.
He was paying Rs. 7 as salami and Rs. 6 3 0 as quit rent, the full assessment of the land being Rs. 56 8 0.
The land which formed part of the inam was originally in a village but subsequently became a part of the suburbs of the city of Surat and as the land was being used for non agricultural purpose and a large bungalow had been erected on it, the Collector decided that it was liable to non agricultural assessment under section 52 Of the Bombay Land Revenue Code, 1879, with effect from August 1, 1955, in view of proviso (b) to section 4 Of the Bombay Personal Inams Abolition Act, 1952.
The appellant challenged the constitutionality of the Bombay Personal Inams Abolition Act, 1952, on the grounds, inter alia, (i) that the Act was not protected by article 31 A of the Constitution of India as the property which bad been dealt with under the Act was not an estate and no compensation had been.
provided in the Act for taking away the property of the appellant, and (2) that in view of the fact that the holder of the inam was, given a Sanad when his inam was recognised, it was not open to the State of Bombay to enact a law which would in any way vary the terms of the Sanad.
The appellant also contended that, in any case, the Collector 's order to the effect that the land should be assessed under section 52 Of the Bombay Land Revenue Code, 1879, as non agricultural was incorrect because (1) section 7 Of the Act created an exception to sections 4 and 5 with respect to lands of inamdars used for building or for other non agricultural purposes and therefore the appellant 's inam land which was used entirely for non agricultural purposes could not be assessed under section 5 of the Act, (2) that section 52 Of the Code which gave power to the Collector to make assessments of lands not wholly exempt from the payment of land revenue did not apply to this case because here the assessment had been fixed under the provisions of Ch.
VIII A of the Code and section 52 only applied when no assessment had been fixed under Ch.
VIII A. 952 Held: (i) that the Bombay Personal Inams Abolition Act, 1952, was valid and was protected by article 31 A of the Constitution of India.
Gangadharrao Narayanrao Majumdar vs State of Bombay, ; , Thakur jagannath Baksh Singh vs United Provinces, [1946] F.C.R. III and Maharaj Umeg Singh vs The 'State of Bombay; , , followed.
(2) that the exception made in section 7 Of the Act only saved such inam lands as were used for building or other non agricultural purposes by the inamdar from vesting in the Government, but they remained subject to the provisions Of sections 4 and 5 of the Act.
(3) that section 52 of the Bombay Land Revenue Code, 1879, when it said that the section would not apply where assessment had been fixed under Ch.
VIII A of the Code, referred to actual assessment under the Chapter and not to what was deemed to be an assessment under that Chapter by virtue of section 117 R, and that as the land in the present case was not wholly exempt from revenue and as in fact no assessment had been fixed on the land under Ch.
VIII A, section 52 would apply and the Collector would have power to make an assessment in the manner provided by that section.
