The appellant 's nomination paper for election to the Assam Legislative Assembly was rejected by the Returning Officer on the ground of disqualification under section 7(b) of the Representation of the People Act, 195, in that he had been convicted and sentenced to three years ' rigorous imprisonment under section 4(b) of the Explosive Substances Act (VI of 1908) and five years had not expired after his release.
The appellant had applied to the Election Commission for removing the said disqualification but it had refused to do so.
The appellant 's sentence was, however, remitted by the Government of Assam under s 401 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and the period for which he was actually in jail was less than two years.
The Election Tribunal held that the nomination paper had been improperly rejected and set aside the election but the High Court taking a contrary view, dismissed the election petition.
Held, that the High Court was right in holding that the appellant was disqualified under section 7(b) of the Representation of the People Act and that his nomination paper had been rightly rejected.
That section speaks of a conviction and sentence by a Court and an order of remission of the sentence under section 401 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, unlike the grant of a free pardon, cannot wipe out either the conviction or the sentence.
Such order is an executive order that merely affects the execution of the sentence and does not stand on the same footing as an order of Court, either in appeal or in revision, reducing the sentence passed by the Trial Court.
Venkatesh Yeshwant Deshpande vs Emperor, A.I.R. 1938 Nag.
513, distinguished.
Ganda Singh vs Sampuran Singh, , over ruled.
Held, further, that an inference as to whether a successful candidate was a consenting party to the corrupt ractice under 134 section 100(i)(b) of the Act from facts found on evidence was a question of fact and not a mixed question of fact and law.
Meenakshi Mills, Maduyai vs The Commissioner of Income tax, Madyas, ; , referred to.
