The appellant framed bye laws for the regulation and control of flour, rice and oil mills under which a licence had to be obtained on payment of licence fee for running a mill.
The bye laws were framed under section 174 of the U. P. District Boards Act, 1922.
The respondent contended that the bye laws were ultra vires and void as the District Boards had been divested of their powers to regulate and control trade under the District Boards Act on account of section III of the P. P. Panchayat Raj Act, 1947, which operated in the same field.
Held, that the bye laws had been validly made and that the District Boards were not divested of their powers to regu late and control trade under the District Boards Act, 1922, by the provisions of U. P. Panchayat Raj Act, 1947.
Section 91(q) of the District Boards Act cast a duty on the District Boards to make provisions for regulating offensive, dangerous or obnoxious trades, callings or practices and section 174(2)(k) specifically empowered District Boards to make bye laws in this respect.
There was no similar duty or power conferred upon Village Panchayats under the Panchayat Raj Act and consequently the question of the later enactment prevailing over the former did 82 not arise.
The reference to "sanitation" in section 15(c) of the Panchayat Raj Act did not cover regulation and control of trade.
Though the word " sanitation " in its widest connotation was capable of including this, it was not used in its widest sense in section 15(c) but only in its ordinary sense in relation to conservancy, drainage and the like.
Section III of the Panchayat Raj Act was in general terms, but bye laws could be framed under it only in respect of the functions and duties imposed upon a Gram Panchayat under sections 15 and 16.
Held, further, that the licence fee charged by the District Board could not be struck down on account of fees being charged from the respondent in respect of his mills under the U. P. Rice and Dal Mills Control Order, 1948, and the U. P.
Pure Food Act.
The licence fee charged by the District Board was for the regulation of obnoxious trades and the purpose of this regulation was different from the purpose for which fee was charged from the respondent under the Essential Supplies Act and the Pure Food Act.
