The petitioners who were displaced persons from West Pakistan put forward certain claims in regard to village houses which they had left there, but which were rejected by the Rehabilitation authorities.
The claims were for amounts above Rs. 20,000 in the case of some of the petitioners and above Rs. 10,000 in the case of the others.
By r. 5 framed under the , claims could be verified provided, inter alia, that where a claimant had been allotted any agricultural land in India and such land so allotted exceeded four acres, the value of the building in respect of which the claim was made shall not be less than Rs. 20,000 and where it did not exceed four acres the claim made was not less than Rs. 10,000 Rule 65 of the , provided that any person to whom more than four acres of agricultural land had been allotted shall not be entitled to receive compensation separately in respect of his verified claim for any rural building the assessed value of which was less than Rs. 20,000, and any person allotted four acres or less was not entitled to receive compensation where the value was less than Rs. 10,000 The petitioners challenged the validity of the aforesaid rules as being discriminatory and thereby contravening article 14 of the Constitution of India on the grounds that the object of the various Acts and the rules made thereunder was to rehabilitate displaced persons but by the rules, classifications had been made with reference to houses in rural areas which were discriminatory as neither the classes were based on intelligible differentia nor was there a rational nexus between that differentia and the object sought to be achieved.
It was found that the impugned rules were made in pursuance of an Inter Dominion Agreement between the two Governments with regard to evaluation of evacuee property, which had received recognition in article 31(5) (b)(iii) of the Constitution.
Held, that the impugned rules afforded a reasonable justifi cation for the classification and did not contravene article 14 of the Constitution.
