The respondents were the elected members of the Vicarabad 296 Municipal Committee, constituted in 1953, under the Hydera bad Municipal and Town Committees Act, 1951 That Act was repealed by section 320 of the Hyderabad District Municipalities Act, 1956, which came into force in 1956.
That section provided that the committee constituted under the repealed enactment was to be deemed to have been constituted under the Act and the members thereof should hold office till the first meeting of the committee was called under section 35 of the Act.
No election was held under the new Act; the old committee, which continued to function, after duly passing a resolution and obtaining the necessary sanction from the Government, sold certain municipal lands to third parties.
The appellants, who were rate payers of the said Municipality, moved the High Court for the issue of a writ of quo warranto challenging the said sales under article 226 of the Constitution.
The High Court dismissed the petition.
The contention of the appellants in this Court was that the members of the said committee were functus officio on expiry of three years from the commencement of the Act for section 34 of the Act prescribed a term of three years and section 320 of the Act did not provide any definite term for them.
But if section 34 was held to be inapplicable, neither could the first general election under the Act, for which section 16 of the Act was the only provision, be held, nor could the first meeting of the committee called under section 35 of the Act and the result would be that the old committee would continue indefinitely.
Held, that the contention must be negatived.
The word 'committee ' in section 320 of the Hyderabad District Municipalities Act, 1956, did not mean a committee elected under the Act and the term of three years prescribed by section 34 of the Act could not, therefore, apply to it.
Construed in the light of well recognised principles of interpretation of statutes and the scheme as envisaged by sections 16, 17, 18, 20, 32, 34, and 320 of the Act, section 320 of the Act could be no more than a transitory provision and it would be unreasonable to suggest that the Legislature which repealed the earlier Act with the express intention of constituting committees on broad based democratic principles, intended to perpetuate old committees constituted under the repealed Act.
Section 16(1) of the Act, properly construed, was clearly inapplicable to the first general election under the Act and could apply only to subsequent elections.
So far as the first general election under the Act was concerned, sections 17 and 20 of the Act provided a self contained and integrated machinery therefor independent of section 16(1) of the Act.
Canada Sugar Refining Co. vs R., , referred to.
The Legislature in enacting the new Act assumed and expected that the Government would, within a reasonable time issue notifications for holding the first general election under section 17 of the Act and its failure to do so and thus implement the 297 Act, and not any inherent inconsistency in the Act itself, prolonged the life of the old committee.
Since section 77 of the Act expressly authorised the Municipal Committee to sell municipal property subject to the conditions specified therein, no prohibition could be implied from the provisions of s 76 of the Act and the impugned sales, effected in conformity with the conditions precedent laid down by section 77 of the Act, could not be said to be ultra vires the powers of the committee.
Elizabeth Dowager Baroness Wenlock vs The River Dee Company, and Attorney General vs Fulhan Corpora tion, , considered.
Per Sarkar, J.
It is well settled that where the language of a statute leads to manifest contradiction of the apparent purpose of the enactment, as the language of section 16(i) does in the present case, the Court has the power so to read it as to carry out the obvious intention of the Legislature.
The intention of the Legislature in enacting the new Act clearly was that elections should be held and committees constituted under it.
Seaford Court Estates Ltd. vs Asher, , referred to.
Section 16(1) is the only section of the Act which authorises the holding of a general election but, since the requirements as to time in section 16(i) of the Act could not apply to the first general election, that section must be read to carry out the obvious intention of the Legislature as if there was no such requirement in the case of the first general election under the Act.
Although this would not indicate when that election was to be held, the obvious implication would be that it must be held within a reasonable time of the commencement of the Act.
Section 20 of the Act does not authorise the holding of a general election.
Salmon vs Duncombe, , referred to.
