The Punjab Government issued notification under sections 4 and 6 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, and started proceedings for acquisition of lands for the construction of a labour colony under the Government sponsored Housing Scheme for the workers of the Thapar Industrial Workers ' Co operative Hous ing Society Ltd. The appellants challenged the acquisition proceedings under article 226 of the Constitution on the ground, inter alia, that the procedure prescribed by Part VII of the said Act had not been admittedly complied with.
The Division Bench in affirming the order of dismissal passed by the trial judge held that although article 31 of the Constitution by prohibiting compulsory acquisition of property except for a public purpose had made Part VII of the Act redundant, the present proceedings were saved since the acquisition was for a public purpose.
Held, that the High Court was in error in holding that the Constitution had rendered Part VII of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, redundant or null and void, although it was right in dismissing the appeal.
That Act, as an existing Act, was saved by article 31(5)(a) from being affected by article 31(2) of the Constitution.
Acquisition of building sites for residential houses for industrial labour is for a public purpose even apart from section 17(2) 460 (b)of the Act as amended by ':the Land Acquisition (Punjab Amendment) Act of 1953.
Babu Barkava Thakur vs The State of Bombay [1961] 1 S.C.R. 128, referred to.
Although in the case of an acquisition for a company simpliciter, no declaration under section 6 of the Act can be made without complying with the provisions of Part VII of the Act, it is not correct to say that no acquisition for a company for a public purpose can be made except under Part VII of the Act.
If the cost of the acquisition is borne either wholly or partially by the Government, the purpose would be a public purpose within the meaning of the Act.
But if the cost is entirely borne by the company it would be an acquisition for the company simpliciter and Part VII would apply.
Since in the instant case a part of the compensation was to be borne by the Government, it was not necessary to comply with the provisions of Part VII of the Act.
