The respondent who was a District and Sessions Judge in the erstwhile State of Pepsu was removed from service on April 7, 1953 by an order passed by the President of India who was then in charge of the administration of the State.
A representation made by the respondent on May 18, 1955, was considered by the Council of Ministers of the State as in the meantime the President 's rule had come to an end, and its views were expressed in the form of a Resolution dated September 28, 1955; but before taking any action it invited the advice of the Public Service Commission.
On receipt of the report of the Public Service Commission, the Council of Ministers considered the matter again on March 8, 1956, and its views were recorded in the minutes of the proceedings.
On August 11, 1956, the representation made by the respondent was considered over again by the Council and a final conclusion was reached in respect of it.
In accordance with the said conclusion an order was passed which was communicated to the respondent to the effect that he might be re employed on some suitable post.
On May 5, 1958, the respondent instituted a suit against the State of Punjab for a declaration that the removal of his service on April 7, 1953, was illegal, and filed an application under O. 14, r. 4, and O. 11, r. 14, of the Code of Civil Procedure for the production of certain documents, which included the proceedings of the Council of Ministers dated September 28, 1955, March 8, 1956, and August 11, 1956, and the report of the Public Service Commission.
The State objected to the production of the said documents claiming privilege under section 123 of the , and the Chief Secretary of the State filed an affidavit giving reasons in support of the claim.
The question was whether having regard to the true scope and effect of the provisions of sections 123 and 167 of the Act the claim of privilege raised by the State was sustainable.
Held, that the documents dated September 28, 1955, March 8, 1956, and August II, 1956, which embodied the minutes of 372 the meetings of the Council of Ministers indicating the advice which the Council ultimately gave to the Rajpramukh, were expressly saved by article 163(3) of the Constitution of India and fell within the category of documents relating to " affairs of State " within the meaning of section 123 of the .
Accordingly, they were protected under section 123, and as the head of the department, the Chief Secretary, did not give permission for their production, the Court cannot compel the State to produce them.
Held, further (Subba Rao, J., dissenting), that the report of the Public Service Commission being the advice tendered by it, was also protected under section 123 of the Act.
Held, also (Kapur, J., dissenting), that the words "records relating to affairs of State " in section 123 cannot be given a wide meaning so as to take in every document pertaining to the entire business of State, but should be confined only to such documents whose disclosure may cause injury to the public interest.
The second clause of section 162 refers to the objections both as to the production and admissibility of the document and entitles the court to take other evidence in lieu of inspection of the document in dealing with a privilege claimed or an objection raised under section 123, to determine the validity of the objections.
Case law reviewed.
Per Sinha, C. J., Gajendragadkar and Wanchoo, jj.
Though under sections 123 and 162 the Court cannot hold an enquiry into the possible injury to public interest which may result from the disclosure of the document in question, the matter being left for the authority concerned to decide, the Court is competent to hold a preliminary enquiry and determine the validity of the objection to its production and that necessarily involves an enquiry into the question as to whether the document relates to affairs of State under section 123.
Where section 123 confers mide powers on the head of the department to claim privilege on the ground that the disclosure may cause injury to public interest, scrupulous care must be taken to avoid making a claim for such a privilege on the ground that the disclosure of the document may defeat the defence raised by the State.
The apprehension that the disclosure may adversely affect the head of the department or the Minister in charge of the department or even the Government in power, or that it may provoke public criticism or censure in the Legislature, should not weigh in the mind of the head of the department and the sole test which should determine his decision is injury to public interest and nothing else.
The privilege under section 123 should be claimed generally by the Minister in charge who is the political head of the department concerned ; if not, the Secretary of the department should 373 make the claim, and the claim should always be made in the form of an affidavit.
When the affidavit is made by the Secretary, the Court may in a proper case, require an affidavit of the Minister himself.
The affidavit should show that each document in question has been carefully read and considered, and the person making the affidavit is satisfied that its disclosure would lead to public injury.
If there are series of documents included in a file it should appear from the affidavit that each one of the documents, whose disclosure is objected to, has been duly considered by the authority concerned.
The affidavit should also indicate briefly within permissible limits the reason why it is apprehended that their disclosure would lead to injury to public interest.
If the affidavit produced in support of the claim ' for privilege is found to be unsatisfactory a further affidavit may be called, and in a proper case the person making the affidavit whether he is a Minister or the Secretary should be summoned to face cross examination on the relevant points.
The provisions of O. 11, r. 19(2), of the Code of Civil Procedure must be read subject to section 162 of the and where a privilege is claimed at the stage of inspection under O. 11, r. 19(2), of the Code, the Court is precluded from inspecting the privileged document in view of section 162 of the Act.
Per Kapur, J.
The words of section 123 of the Act are very wide and cover all classes of documents which may fall within the phrase " affairs of State ", some noxious and others inno cuous, and may even appear to be unduly restrictive of the rights of the litigant but if that is the law the sense of responsibility of the official concerned and his sense of fair play has to be trusted.
Under that section discretion to produce or not to produce a document is given to the head of the department and the court has not the power to override the ministerial certificate against production.
The words " or take other evidence to enable it to determine on its admissibility" in section 162 on their plain language do not apply to production and the taking of evidence must have reference to admissibility.
The section does not entitle the court to take other evidence i.e., other than the document, to determine the nature of the document or the reasons impelling the head of the department to withhold the production of the document.
It is permissible for the Court to determine the collateral facts whether the official claiming the privilege is the person mentioned in section 123, or to require him to file a proper affidavit or even to cross examine him on such matters which do not fall within the enquiry as to the nature of the document or nature of the injury.
He may also be cross examined as to the existence of the practice of the department to keep documents of the class 374 secret but beyond that the ministerial discretion should be accepted and it should neither be reviewed nor overruled.
Per Subba Rao, J. (1) " Records relating to affairs of State" in section 123 of the Act mean documents of State whose production would endanger the public interest; documents pertaining to public security, defence and foreign relations are documents relating to affairs of State; unpublished documents relating to trading, commercial or contractual activities of the State are not, ordinarily, to be considered as documents relating to affairs of State, but in special circumstances they may partake of that character and it is a question of fact in each case whether they relate to affairs of State or not in the sense that if they are disclosed public interest would suffer.
(2) Under no circumstances can a court inspect such a docu ment or permit giving of secondary evidence of its contents.
(3) Under section 162 the Court has overriding power to disallow a claim of privilege raised by the State, but in its discre tion, the court will exercise its power only in exceptional circumstances when public interest demands.
The said claim shall be made by an affidavit filed by the Minister in charge of the department concerned describing the nature of the document in general and broadly the category of public interest its non disclosure purports to serve.
Ordinarily, the court shall accept the affidavit of a Minister, but in exceptional circumstances, when it has reason to believe that there is more than what meets the eye, it can examine the Minister and take other evidence to decide the question of privilege.
(4) The disclosure of the report of the Public Service Com mission may expose the Government if the latter ignores a good advice, but such an exposure is certainly in public interest and in a conflict between the administration of justice and the claim of privilege by the State, the claim must be overruled.
