ivil Appeal Nos.
1909 10 of 1989.
From the Judgment and Order dated 2.4.1987 of the Del hi High Court in C.C.P. Nos. 82 and 176 of 1986.
WITH CIVIL APPEAL NO.
19 11 OF 1989.
From the Judgment and Order dated 2.4.1987 of the Del hi High Court in C.C.P. No. 82 of 1986 in C.W. No. 44 of 1975 .
K. Parasaran, Attorney General, K.K. Venugopal, F. section Nariman, Gopal Subramaniam, C.V.S. Rao, P. Parmeshwara n, C.S. Vaidyanathan, S.R. Bhat, S.R. Setia, G.D. Gupta, Ash ok K. Mahajan and section Ravinder Bhat for the appearing parties.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by DUTT, J.
Special leave granted in all these matter section Heard learned Counsel for the parties.
The dispute between the direct recruits and the Emergency 16 Commissioned Officers (ECOs) in the Central Reserve Poli ce Force (CRPF) over the question of seniority has been goi ng on for a long time.
The Delhi High Court has, ultimatel y, held in favour of the ECOs and by the impugned judgment, t he High Court has directed the implementation of its decisi on regarding seniority and grant of consequential benefits to the ECOs.
As per the judgment of the High Court, the 37 dire ct recruits, who are now holding the posts of Commandants, th at is to say, 22 as Commandants (Selection Grade) and 15 as Commandants (NonSelection Grade), by virtue of the upgrad a tion of 88 posts of Commandants (Non Selection Grade), wi ll have to be reverted.
The direct recruits feel aggrieved by the impugned judgment of the High Court and it is contend ed on their behalf that as they were not parties in the co n tempt proceedings in which the impugned judgment of the Hi gh Court has been passed, it is not binding on them, and th at the matter should be remanded to the High Court so as to give them an opportunity of being heard.
If these conte n tions of the direct recruits are accepted, there will be further delay.
It may be mentioned that this is the second time th at the matter has come to this Court.
It is the desire of t he parties that the dispute should be amicably settled an d, pursuant to that desire, the parties including the Union of India had, from time to time, given their respective sugge s tions regarding the terms of settlement.
Unfortunately, t he suggestions or the proposed terms of settlement were n ot accepted by one party or the other.
The terms that we re suggested by the Union of India were not acceptable to t he ECOs and those of the ECOs were not acceptable to the dire ct recruits.
It is gratifying to state that at the last heating, bo th the direct recruits and the ECOs came with an agreed ter ms of settlement.
The hearing was adjourned so as to enable t he Union of India to consider the terms of settlement as agre ed to by the direct recruits and the ECOs.
Mr. Gopal Subramaniam, the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the Union of India, states that although the Uni on of India is also of the view that the dispute between t he parties should be resolved amicably, yet the said agre ed terms of settlement were not acceptable to it and it has, in lieu of the same made two alternative suggestions for se t tlement.
Copies of the alternative suggestions have be en produced before us by Mr. Subramaniam.
Neither of the alte r na 17 tive suggestions is, however, acceptable to the ECOs.
We have considered the respective terms of settlement as put forward by the parties including the said two altern a tive suggestions.
CRPF is a sensitive police force and the re should not be any dispute and differences among the membe rs of such force.
It is the duty of the Government to mainta in peace and harmony in the force by trying to resolve a ny dispute among the members of the force in public interest.
After considering the facts and circumstances of t he case including the impugned judgment of the High Court a nd the terms of settlement, as agreed to by the direct recrui ts and the ECOs, and also the alternative suggestions of t he Union of India, we are of the view that the terms of settl e ment, as agreed to by the direct recruits and the ECO s, appear to be fair and reasonable and do not involve a ny additional financial liability of the Union of India f or placing the 35 ECOs in the posts of Commandants (Selecti on Grade) with effect from the date they were promoted as Commandants (Non Selection Grade), as provided in the agre ed terms of settlement.
On an examination of the two altern a tive suggestions made on behalf of the Union of India, we are of the view that they do not redress the grievances of the ECOs.
In our opinion, while it may be desirable that t he present position of the direct recruits should be protecte d, the giving of such protection should not be to the prejudi ce of the ECOs.
In the circumstances, in order to establish peace a nd amity between the contending parties and for ends of ju s tice, we direct that, in modification of the impugned jud g ment of the High Court, the appeals be disposed of in a c cordance with the terms of settlement, as agreed to by t he direct recruits and the ECOs, as follows: 1.
The Union of India shall withdraw the order viz. ord er No. F.2/1O/86 Estt (CRPF) PP IV dated 18.6.1986 with immed i ate effect.
The order providing for upgradation of 88 pos ts of Assistant Commandant (2nd in command) to the post of Commandants (Non Selection Grade) shall thus stand rescin d ed.
The D.P.C. 1986 and all consequential orders regardi ng promotion against upgraded posts shall also stand revoked.
To protect the 37 direct recruits who were holdi ng posts of Commandants, the Union of India shall create 37 supernumerary posts of Commandants (22 as Commandant Selec 18 tion Grade and 15 as Commandant Non Selection Grade), whi ch shall be held by the 37 direct recruits who were holding t he said posts on the date of judgment dated 2.9.1985 passed by the High Court of Delhi.
The vacancies of 13 posts occurring in the year 19 86 of Commandant (Non Selection Grade) shall be filled afre sh by means of a D.P.C.
The D.P.C. shall make promotions in accordance with rules and shall operate upon the revis ed seniority list prepared by the Department pursuant to t he judgment of the High Court dated 2.9.1985 affirmed by th is Court on 21.1.1986.
The subsequent vacancies in the years 1987 and 19 88 for the posts of Commandants (Non Selection Grade) shall be filled in accordance with rules and the promotions shall be made through D.P.C. in accordance with law/Rules.
The Union of India shall review the D.P.C. of 1985 f or the posts of Commandants and such review shall be complet ed as early as possible.
Further, 35 ECOs who have already been promoted as Commandant (Non Selection Grade) till today will hold t he posts of Commandant (Selection Grade), from the date th ey were promoted as Commandant (Non Selection Grade) with t he condition that they will not be paid any salary for the po st of Commandant (Selection Grade) till their turn comes f or promotion to Commandant (Selection Grade) against regul ar vacancies, as per the seniority list.
Each party to bear his/its own costs.
Y.L. Appeals di s posed of.
