The appellant firm imported dates from abroad partly by steamer and partly by country craft.
At the relevant time import of dates by steamers had been prohibited by Government (1) [1945] 1 3 I.T.R. Supp.
(2) ; 652 notification, and the consignments which were imported by steamer were, therefore, confiscated by the customs authorities under section 167, item 8, of the Sea Customs Act, i878, but under section 183 of the Act the appellant was given an option to pay Rs. 82,250 as penalty in lieu of confiscation.
The appellant paid the amount and got the dates released.
Before the Income tax authorities it claimed to deduct the amount paid as penalty as an allowable expenditure under section 1O(2)(XV) of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922, but the claim was rejected.
It was contended that the order of confiscation was against the stock in trade and not against the person of the appellant firm and as the amount paid was expended for the release of the stock in trade, it was an allowable expenditure.
Held, that the amount paid by the appellant by way of penalty for a breach of the law could not be considered to be an expenditure laid out wholly and exclusively for the purpose of the business and was not an allowable deduction under section 1O(2) (xv) of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922.
Expenses which are permitted as deductions are such as are made in order to enable a person to carry on and earn profit in the business.
It is not enough that the disbursements are made in the course of or arise out of or are concerned with or made out of the profits of the business but they must also be for the purpose of earning the profits of the business.
An expenditure is not deductible unless it is a commercial loss in trade and a penalty imposed for breach of the law during the course of trade cannot on grounds of public policy be said to be a commercial expense for the purpose of a business or disbursement made for the purpose of earning the profits of such business.
Case law reviewed.
