The respondent was a sub Inspector of Police.
A complaint was received by the Superintendent of Police that the com plainant was carrying currency notes of Rs. 650 in a bundle when he was stopped by the respondent and his person was searched, that the respondent opened the bundle of notes and handed over the notes one by one to one Lalji, who was with him and that Lalji returned the notes to him but on reaching home he found the notes short by Rs. 250.
Proceedings under section 7 of the Police Act were taken against the respondent on the charge of misappropriation of Rs. 250 and he was dismissed from service by an order of the Deputy Inspector General of Police.
The respondent filed a writ petition before the High Court challenging the order of the dismissal on the ground that the authorities had acted in violation of Rule I of Para.
486 of the U. P. Police Regulation.
This rule required that every information received by the police relating to the commission of a cognizable offence by a Police Officer shall be dealt with in the first place under Ch.
XIV, Code of Criminal Procedure.
The High Court held that the provisions of para.
486 of the Police Regulations had not been observed and that the proceedings taken under section 7 of the Police Act were invalid and illegal and accordingly quashed the order of dismissal.
The appellant contended (i) that the complaint did not make out any cognizable offence against the respondent and r. I of Para.
486 was not applicable in this case, (ii) that r. III of Para.
486 enabled the authorities to initiate departmental proceedings without complying with the provisions of r. I, (iii) that the Police Regulations made in exercise of the power conferred on the Government under the Police Act delegating the power of the Governor to dismiss at pleasure to a subordinate officer were only administrative directions for the exercise of the pleasure in a reasonable manner and any breach of the regulations did not confer any right or give a cause of action to the public servant, and (iv) that the regulations were only directory and the non compliance with the rules did not invalidate the order of dismissal.
680 Held, (per Sarkar, Subba Rao and Mudholkar, JJ.) that the order of dismissal was illegal as it was based upon an enquiry held in violation of r. I of Para 486 of the Police Regulations.
The facts alleged in the complaint made out a cognizable offence under section 405 Indian Penal Code against the respondent, and the provisions of r. I of Para .
486 were applicable to it.
A Police Officer making a search of a person was 'entrusted ' with the money handed over by the person searched.
Rule III of Para.
486 did not deal with cognizable offences, it dealt with offences falling only under section 7 Police Act and to non cognizable offences.
Rule III did not provide an alternative procedure to that prescribed under r. I.
The position with regard to the tenure of public servants and to the taking of disciplinary action against them under the present Constitution was as follows: (i) Every person who was a member of a public service described in article 310 of the Constitution held office during the pleasure of the President or the Governor.
(ii) The power to dismiss a public servant at pleasure was outside the scope of article I54 and, therefore, could not be delegated by the Governor to a subordinate officer, and could be exercised by him only in the manner prescribed by the Constitution.
(iii) This tenure was subject to the limitations or qualifi cations mentioned in article 311.
(iv )Parliament or the Legislature of States could not make a law abrogating or modifying this tenure so as to impinge upon the overriding power conferred upon the President or the Governor under article 310, as qualified by article 311.
(v) Parliament or the Legislatures of States could make a law regulating the conditions of service of such a member which included proceedings by way of disciplinary action, without affecting the powers of the President or the Governor under article 310 read with article 311.
(vi) Parliament and the Legislatures also could makea law laying down and regulating the scope and content of the doctrine of "reasonable opportunity" embodied in article 311 but the said law was subject to judicial review.
(vii) If a statute could be made by Legislatures within the foregoing permissible limits, the rules made by an authority in exercise of the power conferred thereunder would likewise be efficacious within the said limits.
N. W. F. Province vs Suraj Narain, A.I.R. 1949 P. C. 112, Shenton vs Smith, , Gould vs Stuart, , Reilly vs The King, , Terrell vs Secretary of State, , State of Bihar vs Abdul Majid; , , Parshotam Lal Dhingra vs Union of India, , R. T. Rangachari vs Secretary of State for India, (1936) L.R. 64 I.A. 40 and High Commissioner for India and High Commissioner for Pakistan vs I. M. Lall, (1948) L.R. 75 I.A. 225, referred to.
The Police Act and the rules made thereunder constituted a self contained code providing for the appointment of police officers and prescribing the procedure for their removal.
Any authority taking action under the Police Act or the rules made thereunder must conform to the provisions thereof and if there was any violation of those provisions the public servant had a right to challenge the order of the authority if the rules were mandatory Paragraph 486 of the Police Regulations was mandatory and not directory.
The rules were made in the interests of both the department and the police officers.
The word used in para 486 was "shall" and in the context it could not be read as "may".
Hari Vishnu Kamath vs Syed Ahmed Ishaque, , State of U. P. vs Manbodhan Lal Srivastava, [1958] S.C.R. 533 and Montreal Street Railway Company v Noymandin, L.R. ; , referred to.
Subject to the overriding power of the President or the Governor under article 310, as qualified by article 311, rules governing disciplinary proceeding could not be treated as administrative directions, but had the same effect as the provisions of the statute whereunder they were made, in so far as they were not inconsistent with the provisions thereof.
The Governor did not exercise his pleasure through the officers specified in section 7 of the Police Act, and the Governor 's pleasure.
could not be equated with the statutory power of the officers specified An inquiry under the Act had to be made in accordance with the provisions of the Act and the rules made thereunder.
R. T. Rangachari vs Secretary of State for India, L.R. 64 I.A. 40, High Commissioner for India and High Commissioner for Pakistan vs I. M. Lall, (1948) L.R. 75 I.A. 225, R. Venkata Rao vs Secretary of State for India, (1936) L.R. 64 I.A. 55, section A. Venkataraman V. Union of India, [1954] S.C.R. 1150 and Khem Chand vs The Union of India, [1958] S.C.R. 1080, referred to.
Per Gajendragadkar and Wanchoo, JJ.
The provisions of para 486 were merely directory and a non compliance therewith did not invalidate the disciplinary action taken against the respondent.
All public servants, other than those excepted expressly by the Constitution, held office during the pleasure of the President or the Governor, and no law or rule framed under article 300 or article I54(2)(b) could cut down the content of the pleasure tenure in article 310 subject to article 31i.
The Police Act could not stand higher than a law passed under article 309 or article 154(2)(b) and could not cut down the content of the pleasure tenure in article 310 682 The Police officers held office during the pleasure of the Governor and the only protection they could claim was the two guarantees contained in article 311.
The rules framed under section 7 Police Act would be of two kinds, namely (1) those which defined the jurisdiction of the four grades of officers specified in section 7 to inflict particular kind of punishment on particular police officers of the subordinate ranks such rules would be mandatory but they could not go against the provisions of article 311, and (2) procedural rules.
The procedural rules could be of two kinds: (i) those that prescribed the manner in which the guarantee contained in article 311(2) May be carried out such rules would be mandatory, and (ii) other merely procedural rules they could only be directory.
The power of the Governor to dismiss was executive power of the State and could be exercised under article 154(i) by the Governor himself directly or indirectly through officers subordinate to him.
The officers specified in section 7 of the Police Act were exercising the powers of the Governor to dismiss at pleasure and their powers were subject to the same limitations to which the Governor was subject.
Whether it was delegation by the Governor himself or whether it was delegation by law under article 154(2)(b) or by the existing law, which must be treated as analogous to a law under article 154(2)(b), the officer exercising the power of dismissal was only indirectly exercising the Governor 's power to dismiss at pleasure.
His order also was subject to the two fetters under article 311 and could not be subjected to any more fetters by procedural rules other than those framed for carrying out the objects of article 311(2).
R. Venkata Rao vs Secretary of State for India in Council, [1936] 64 I.A. 55, referred to.
Paragraph 486 was not meant for the purpose of carrying out the object of article 311(2) and could not be mandatory and could not add a further fetter on the exercise of the power to dismiss at the pleasure of the Governor over and above the fetters contained in article 311.
This rule was only meant to gather materials for the satisfaction of the authority concerned, whether to take action or not.
As such para 486 was merely directory and a failure to comply therewith strictly or otherwise did not vitiate the disciplinary action.
