The appellant who was carrying on business in food grains in partnership with another person submitted the returns of the income of the firm for the accounting years even after his partner 's death.
It was found that certain income of the firm was concealed and the Income tax Officer not only assessed the firm to tax for the suppressed income but also imposed penalties for concealing the said income.
Appeals to the higher income tax authorities failed and the appellant then applied to the High Court for a writ of certiorari quashing the orders of assessment and imposition of penalty on the ground inter alia that the firm was dissolved by his partner 's death and no penalty could be imposed after dissolution of the firm, The High Court rejected the petition.
On appeal with the certificate of the High Court, Held, that by virtue of section 44 and other provisions of the Income Tax Act a partner of a dissolved partnership firm may not only be made liable to assessment for income tax for the accounting years but despite dissolution of the firm he may be made liable to pay penalty for concealing the income of the firm under section 28(1)(c) of the Act.
The analogy of dissolution of a Hindu joint Family does not apply to dissolution of a partnership.
Mareddi Krishna Reddy vs Income tax Officer, Tenali, , approved.
Commissioner of Income tax vs Ravalaseema Oil Mills, and section V. Veerappan Chettiar vs Commissioner of Income tax, Madras, , disapproved.
Mahankali Subbarao vs Commissioner of Income tax, , distinguished.
The Legislature intended that the provisions of Ch.
IV of the Act shall apply to a firm even after discontinuance of its business.
In interpreting a fiscal statute the Court cannot proceed to make good deficiencies if there be any.
In case of doubt it should be interpreted in favour of the tax payer.
The expression "assessment" has different connotations an has been used in its widest connotation in Ch.
IV and section 44 97 766 he Act.
It is not restricted only to computation of tax but includes imposition of penalty on tax payers found in the process of assessment guilty of concealing income.
Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay Presidency and Aden vs Khemchand Ramdas, , referred to.
The Income tax Act provided a complete machinery for obtaining relief against improper orders passed by the Income tax Authorities and the appellant could not be permitted to abandon that machinery, and invoke the jurisdiction of the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution against the orders of the taxing authorities.
