A who was the Dewan of the State of Bhavnagar before responsible government was introduced in the State, was granted a monthly pension of Rs. 2,000 by the Maharaja of the State by an order dated January 15, 1948.
On March 1, 1948 the State of Bhavnagar was merged in the United States of Saurashtra and the Maharajah ceased to be the Ruler of the State.
Subsequently on May 31, 1950, the Maharaja directed his banker in Bombay to pay A a sum of Rs. 5 lakhs out of the amount lying to his credit and when he was asked for instructions as to how that sum was to be entered in the books of account he passed an order on December 27, 1950, to the effect that in consideration of A having rendered loyal and meritorious services the said sum was given to him as a gift and that the amount should be debited to his personal expense account.
The liability of the above sum for income tax was raised during the course of the assessment proceedings of A for the year 1951 52, and the assessee produced a letter dated March 10, 1953, written by the Maharajah at the request of the former, as follows: "I confirm that in June 1950, I gave you a sum of Rs. 5 lakhs which was a gift as a token of my affection and regard for you and your family. .
The Income tax Officer held that the amount was liable to income tax under section 7(1), read with explanation (2), of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922.
The Appellate Tribunal took into account the two documents dated December 27, 1950, and March 10, 1953, written by the Maharajah and considered that the first which clearly mentioned why the said sum was paid to the assessee, was more reliable for the reason that it was contemporaneous, than the second which was written more than 2 years later and the correctness of which they were not inclined to accept.
The Tribunal agreed with the Income tax Officer that the amount was a taxable receipt.
Held, (per Kapur and Shah, JJ.; Hidayatullah, J., dissenting), that on the facts of the case the sum of Rs. 5 lakhs was given to the assessee not as a payment in consideration of the services already rendered by him as the Dewan of the State, but merely as a gift in token of the Maharajah 's affection and regard for the assessee, and, therefore, was not liable to be assessed to tax 743 under section 7(1), explanation (2), of the Indian Income tax Act,1922.
The Tribunal was in error in treating the document dated December 27, 1950, 'as a contemporaneous document while as a matter of fact it was written six months after the fact of payment, and because of this erroneous approach as a result of which the second letter had been rejected, the finding given by the Tribunal could not be treated as binding on the Court.
P. Krishna Menon vs The Commissioner of Income tax, Mysore, Travancore Cochin and Coorg, Bangalore, [1959] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 133, distinguished.
Per Hidayatullah, J.
The use of the word "contemporaneous" to describe the order to the banker meant no more than this that it was earlier in time and very soon after the amount was given.
The word "gift" did not alter the nature of pay ment; the Maharaja indeed made a gift, as he had stated over again, but the order disclosed that it was by way of remuneration for past services.
The Tribunal was within its rights in accepting one piece of evidence in preference to another, and the finding on the evidentiary value of the letter of the Maharaja was a matter essentially for the Tribunal to decide finally.
The decision in P. Krishna Menon vs The Commissioner of Income tax, Mysore, Travancore Cochin and Coorg, Bangalore, [1959] Supp. 11 S.C.R. 133, was applicable and concluded the present case.
