A Subordinate Judge dismissed an application by a decree holder for adjournment of an execution case and by the same order dismissed the execution case itself without informing the decree.
holder 's pleader that the application for adjournment had been dismissed and asking him whether be had to make any submission in 137 the matter of the execution case, and an application for restoration of the execution case setting aside the order of dismissal, the Subordinate Judge, finding that he had committed an error which had resulted in denial of justice restored the execution case in the exercise of the inherent powers of the court under section 151, Civil Procedure Code.
The judgment debtor preferred an appeal and an application, for revision to the High Court against this order.
The High Court held that the appeal was not maintainable but set aside the order of the Subordinate Judge in the exercise of its revisional powers and remanded the case to the Subordinate Judge for fresh disposal after considering whether it would have been possible for the decree holder to take any further steps in connection with the execution application after the dismissal of the application for adjournment: Held, (i) that the order of the Subordinate Judge dismissing the execution case without giving an opportunity to the decree holder 's pleader to state what he had to say the case itself was bad and was rightly set aside by the court its own initiative in exercise of its inherent powers.
(ii)The High Court had no jurisdiction in the exercise of its appellate powers to reverse the order of restoration as that order by itself did not amount to a final determination of any question relating to execution, discharge or satisfaction of a decree within the meaning of section 47, Criminal Procedure Code, and an order made under section 151, Criminal Procedure Code, simpliciter is not an appealable order.
Akshia Pillai vs Govindarajulu Chetty (A.I.R. 1924 Mad.
778), Govinda Padayachi vs Velu Murugiah Chettiar (A.I.R. and Noor Mohammad vs Sulaiman Khan (A.I.R. 1943 Oudh 35) distinguished.
(iii)As the order of the Subordinate Judge was one that he had jurisdiction to make, and as he had, in making that order, neither acted in excess of his jurisdiction or with material irregularity nor committed any breach of procedure, the High Court acted in excess of its revisional jurisdiction under section 115, Civil Procedure Code, and the order of remand and all proceedings taken subsequent to that order were illegal.
Section 115, Civil Procedure Code, applies to matters of jurisdiction alone, the irregular exercise or non exercise of it or the illegal assumption of it, and if a subordinate court had jurisdiction to make the order it has made and has not acted in breach of any provision of law or committed any error of procedure which is material and may have affected the ultimate decision, the High Court has no power to interfere, however profoundly it may differ from the conclusions of that court questions of fact or law.
Rajah Amir Hassan Khan vs Sheo Baksh Singh (1883 83) 11 I.A. 237, Bala Krishna Udayar vs Vasudeva Aiyar (1917) 44 IA.
261, Venkatagiri Ayyangar vs Hindu Religious Endowments Board 138 1949) 76 I.A. 67, Joy Chand Lal Babu vs Kamalaksha Chowdhury 1949)76 I.A.131 and Narayan Sonaji vs Sheshrao Vithoba (I.L.R. referred to.
Mohunt Bhagwan Ramanuj Das vs Khettar Moni Dassi and Gulab Chand Bargur vs Kabiruddin Ahmed , dissented from.
