The appellant carried on various businesses and one such was the running of a Theatre and Restaurant.
In October, 1943, a subsidiary company was formed which was using the premises of the Theatre under a lease granted to it from April, 1944.
In working out the capital of the two companies for excess profits tax, a claim of rupees five lakhs for goodwill as part of the capital of the subsidiary company was not taken into account.
On reference to the High Court it held that the Tribunal should have allowed the value of the goodwill whatever it thought was reasonable at the date of transfer.
Thereafter the Tribunal took into account only the value lease hold of the site to the subsidiary company and came to the conclusion that no goodwill had been acquired by the business of the Theatre as such and whatever goodwill there was related to the site of building itself, and estimated the value of goodwill at rupees two lakhs.
Petition under sections 66(1) and 66(2) read with section 21 of the Excess Profits Tax Act being rejected by the Tribunal and the High Court, the appellants came appeal by special leave.
Held, that the goodwill of a business needed to be considered in a broader way.
It depended upon a variety of circumstances or a combination of them.
The nature, the location, the (1) 102 806 service, the standing of the business, the honesty of those who run it, and the lack of competition and many other factors went individually or together to make up the goodwill, though the locality always played a considerable part.
Shift the locality, and the goodwill may be lost but it was not everything.
The power to attract custom depended on one or more of the other factors as well.
In the instant case a question of law did arise, whether the goodwill of the Eros Theatre and Restaurant Ltd. was calculated in accordance with law.
Cruttwell vs Lye, (1810) 17 ves.
335, Trego vs Hunt, L.), Inland Revenue Commissioners vs Muller & Co. 's Margarin, Ltd., 9101 A. C. 217 (H. L.), Daniell vs Federal Commissioner of Taxation; , and Federal Commissioner of Taxation vs Williamson, ; , discussed.
