The object with which the appellant company was formed was to promote and regulate the business in shares, stocks and securities etc., and to establish and conduct a Stock Exchange in order to facilitate the transaction of such business.
Its capital was divided into shares on which dividend could be earned.
it provided a building wherein business was to be transacted under its supervision and control.
It made rules for the conduct of business of sale and purchase of shares in the Exchange premises.
During the assessment year in question the company 's receipts consisted of certain amounts received as admission fee from Members and Authorised Assistants and the question stated to the High Court for its opinion was whether these fees in the hands of the appellant were taxable income.
The High Court answered the question in the affirmative.
It held that the appellant was not a mutual society, that dividends could be earned on its share capital, that any person could become a share holder but every share holder was not a member unless he paid the admission fee and the real object of the company was to carry on business of exchange of stocks and earn profits.
The case of the appellant, inter alia, was that as the amount received as membership fee was shown as capital in the books of the company and there was no periodicity, it should be treated as capital receipt exempt from assessment.
799 Held, that the High Court was right in its decision and the appeals must be dismissed.
It was wholly immaterial how the appellant treated the amounts in question.
It is the nature of the receipt and not how the assessee treated it that must determine its taxability.
AS: Since the fee received on account of Authorised Assisstants fall within the decision of this Court in Commissioner of Income tax vs Calcutta Stock Exchange Association Ltd., , it must be held to be taxable income.
The question as to whether the Members ' admission fee was taxable income was to be determined by the nature of the business of the company, its profits and the distribution thereof as disclosed by its Memorandum and Articles of Association and the rules made for the conduct of business.
They showed that the income of the company was distributable amongst its shareholders ;is in any other joint stock company, and the body of trading members who paid the entrance fees and share holders were not identical.
The element of mutuality was, therefore, lacking.
Liverpool Corn Trade Association vs Monks, (1926) 2 K. B. 110, applied.
Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay City vs Royal Western India Turf Club Ltd., ; and Styles vs New York Life Insurance Co., ; , referred to.
