The respondent, the Textile Labour Association at Ahmedabad, entered into a five years pact with the Ahmedabad Mill Owners ' Association, representing the member mills, in regard to payment of bonus to the employees of the mills for the years 1953 57.
The Labour Union demanded bonus for the year 1958 on the basis of the pact, but the mill owners claimed that the pact was contrary to the formula evolved by the Full Bench in Mill Owners ' Association, Bombay vs The Rashtriya Mill Mazdoor Sangh, Bombay, , which was approved by the Supreme Court in The Associated Cement Companies Ltd. vs Its Workmen, , inasmuch as (1) rehabilitation provided in the Agreement differed vitally from rehabilitation as explained in that decision, (2) the Agreement provided for payment of a minimum bonus even though there may be no available surplus and even though the particular mill might have made actual loss, and (3) while the Full Bench Formula, as approved by the Supreme Court treated a particular year as a self sufficient unit, there was provision for set off and set on in the Agreement.
The Industrial Tribunal to which the dispute was referred in the.
form of sixty six references, one relating to each mill, took the view that the pact did not in any way run counter to the law laid down by the Supreme Court, and that the extension of the agreement for one more year would help in promoting peace in the industry in Ahmedabad.
Held (Subba Rao, J. dissenting) that the Agreement in question departed from the Full Bench Formula in the matter of bonus, in certain vital aspects and that the Tribunal when it extended the Agreement for the year 1958 was ignoring the law as laid down by the Supreme Court as, to what profit, bonus,was and how it should be worked out.
2 The Tribunal had no power by extending the Agreement to make it possible for payment of a minimum bonus for the year 1958 even when there was either insufficient available surplus to pay bonus or no available surplus at all or even actual loss.
The jurisdiction of the Tribunal was limited by its terms of reference, which was not on industry cum region basis, but one for each mill to consider the question of bonus for each mill for the year 1958 and, consequently, it had no jurisdiction to apply the principle of set off and set on to be found in the Agreement in respect of payment of bonus or take into account the profits of the industry as a whole in Ahmedabad.
Per Gajendragadkar, Sarkar, Wanchoo and Mudholkar, JJ.It is open to an industrial court in an appropriate case to impose new obligations on the parties before it or modify contracts in the interest of industrial peace or give awards which may have the effect of extending Agreement or making new one, but this power is conditioned by the subject matter with which it is dealing and also by the existing industrial law and it would,not be open to it while dealing with a particular matter before it to overlook the industrial law relating to that matter as laid down by the legislature or by the Supreme Court.
Western India Automobile Association vs Industrial Tribunal, Bombay, , Rohtas Industries Limited vs Brijnandan Pandey; , and Patna Electricity Supply Co.v.
Patna Electric Supply Workers ' Union, [1959] SUPP.
2 S.C.R. 761, relied on.
Per Subba Rao, J. (1) The impugned five years pact was not contrary to industrial law as laid down by the Supreme Court.
(2) The pact also did not infringe the principle that bonus depends upon profits; but it applied the same by evolving a formula of set off and set on to a complicated situation of the entire industry in a particular area for a number of years.
(3) The Full Bench Formula in regard to rehabilitation was not contravened by the pact.
The decisions of the Supreme Court did not preclude employers and employees from agreeing to a particular valuation of the block having regard to the circumstances obtaining at the time of the agreement.
(4) Neither the Full Bench Formula nor the decisions of the Supreme Court affirming it precluded the Tribunal from extending the terms of the pact by another year if that was necessary to maintain industrial peace.
