The respondent, holding the substantive rank of a Head Constable in the Madras Police Service, was promoted to officiate as a probationary Sub Inspector and, on the completion of the period of probation, placed in the category of approved probationers for confirmation when substantive vacancies arose.
Instead of being confirmed he was, for administrative reasons, reverted to his substantive post as the number of vacancies in the post of Sub Inspectors was not sufficient to include him.
Having failed to obtain redress from the Government, he moved the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution.
Annexure 1 of r. 3 of the service rules provided that the percentage of promotions from the rank of Head Constable to that of Sub Inspector was to be "upto not more than 30% of the cadre", but provided no limitation for direct recruitment, r. 4 provided that no vacancy shall be filled by the appointment of a person who had not yet commenced his probation when an approved probationer or a probationer was available; cl.
(a) of r. 5 provided that, for want of vacancy, the probationers were to be discharged first in order of juniority and thereafter the approved probationers in order of juniority and cl.
(b) provided that this order of discharge might be departed from in cases involving, among others, exceptional administrative inconvenience.
The Single judge, who heard the matter, held that there was a violation of r. 3 of the Service Rules and directed the State not to give effect to the order of reversion if by virtue of his seniority he could be included within the 30% prescribed for rank promotees by that rule.
The Division Bench, on appeal, disagreed with the trial judge as to the scope of r. 3 but dismissed the appeal holding that the rule as to juniority prescribed by r. 5 of the service rules had not been strictly observed.
The State filed an appeal on a certificate granted by the High Court.
Held, that the words "upto and not more than 30% Of the cadre" in the Annexure 1 to r. 3, construed in the context of the provision relating to direct recruits which prescribes no limitation, clearly fix 30 as the maximum percentage of promotions 46 from the rank of Head Constables to the post of Sub Inspectors and leave the appointing authorities free to adopt any other percentage below that figure.
There could, therefore, be no infraction of the rule if the percentage of rank promotees was less than 30% of the total number of the Sub Inspectors on ' the date of the reversion in question.
Rule 4, which regulates the right of probationers and approved probationers to confirmation, applies only to the stage prior to confirmation when the integration of the rank promotees and the direct recruits takes place so as to form a united service and the proportion prescribed by r. 3 has effect.
That rule has to be separately applied to the two classes and, consequently, there was no violation of that rule in appointing direct recruits to substantive posts in preference to the respondent.
Under r. 5(a) the juniority for purposes of reversion has, on the same reasoning, to be determined separately for the direct recruits and the rank promotees who constitute separate classes.
Even otherwise, the impugned order could be sustained under r. 5(b) in view of the case of administrative inconvenience made by the Government and accepted by the Courts below.
