By article 20(2) of the Constitution "No person shall be prose cuted and punished for the same offence more than once.
" Section 26 of the , provides, "Where an act or omission constitutes an offence under two or more enactments, then the offender shall be liable to be prosecuted and punished under either or any of those enactments, but shall not be liable to be punished twice for the same offence.
" The respondents were both convicted and sentenced by the Magistrate under section 409 Of the Indian Penal Code and section 105 Of the Insurance Act.
The Sessions judge on appeal upheld the conviction and sentence under section 409 of the Indian Penal Code, but set aside the conviction and sentence under section 105 of the Insurance Act on the ground that no sanction under section 107 of the Insurance Act had been obtained.
Sanction was thereafter obtained and a fresh complaint was filed against the respondents under section 105 of the Insurance Act.
The trial ended in an acquittal by the Magistrate who held that article 20(2) Of the Constitution and also section 26 of the were a bar to conviction.
The State appealed to the High Court against the 108 order of acquittal but the appeal was dismissed.
On further appeal by the State, Held, that the crucial requirement to attract article 202) Of the Constitution is that the two offences should be identical.
it is, therefore, necessary to analyse and compare the ingredients of the two offences, and not the allegations made in the two complaints, to see whether their identity is established.
So judged, there can be no doubt that in spite of the presence of certain common elements between the two, the offences under section 409 of the Indian Penal Code and section, 105 of the Insurance Act are distinct in their ingredients, content and scope and cannot be said to be identical.
Om Prakash Gupta vs State of U. P., ; and State of Madhya Pradesh vs Veereshw ar Rao Agnihotry; , , referred to.
A similar view of the scope of the rule as to double jeopardy has always been taken by the American Courts.
Albrecht vs United States, ; 71 Law Ed. 505, referred to.
In section 26 of the also the emphasis is not on the facts alleged in the two complaints but on the ingredients of the two offences charged.
This construction of article 20(2) of the Constitution and section 26 of the , is precisely in line with section 403(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Consequently, it could not be said, in the instant case, that the respondents were being sought to be punished for the same offence so as to attract either article 20(2) Of the Constitution or section 26 of the .
