The respondents, a firm carrying on business in dyes and chemicals under the name and style of Colours Trading Com pany, with their head office at Madurai and thirteen branch offices in different towns, were the chief representatives in South India of the products of the I. C. I., a manufacturing concern.
M was employed as the General Manager of the respondents and by virtue of an agreement, he was to be paid remuneration at the rate of Rs. 3,000 per annum and 12 1/2% of the net profits of the company calculated by deducting from the gross profits of the business the salaries, wages and other outgoings.
The branch offices were managed by local managers and assistant managers who were paid in addition to monthly salary, annual and special bonus and dearness allowance.
The respondents received from the I. C. I. commission at varying rates on the different products sold to them and with effect from April 1, 1944, the I.C.I. allowed a special emergency commission of 5% recommending that 1% out of the commission allowed may be passed on by the respondents to their sub distributors.
The respondents claimed to have distributed to their employees commission pursuant to the recommendation of the I.C.I. at rates varying between 2% and 7 1/2% and in some cases at a rate as high as 12%.
Though under the service agreement, commission was payable to the employees only if the turnover exceeded Rs. 1,00,000 net in any year, the respondents claimed to have paid them commission at generous rates even when the turnover fell far short of that amount.
In the year of account ending April 12, 1945, there was a revision of the scales of salaries of the employees, as a result of which the employees received an amount equal to 2 1/2 times the enhanced basic salary and also commission sometimes exceeding 12 times the basic salary.
In computing the total income of the respondents for the years 1943 44 and 1944 45 for purposes of income tax, the income tax Officer disallowed the payment Of 12 1/2% of the net 61 profits to M, and for the years 1945 49 he disallowed the commission paid to the branch managers and other employees on the ground that taking into account all the circumstances the remuneration paid to the employees was adequate and that any additional commission paid was in excess of what was reasonable or necessary.
The Appellate Tribunal confirmed the order of the Income tax Officer except in the case of M to whom payment of 5% of the net profits without deduction of Excess Profits Tax or Business Profits Tax, or 12% after deduction of Excess Profits Tax or Business Profits Tax, whichever was higher, was regarded as permissible deduction.
The High Court, on reference, took the view, inter alia, that in determining the net profits under the agreement with M, the excess profits tax could not be deducted, that in considering the question whether the bonus or commission paid to the employees in the present case might be permitted as a justifiable deduction, in the light of section 10(2)(X) Of the Income tax Act and r. 12 of Sch. 1 of the Excess Profits Tax Act, the test of reasonableness of the expenditure was to be judged from the point of view of a business man and not by the application of any subjective standard of a taxing officer, and that on an analysis of the materials furnished, there was nothing per se unreasonable in the amounts of commission actually paid by the respondents to the branch managers and assistant managers.
Held: (i) that the question whether in the computation of the taxbale income, the commission payable to M under the agreement entered into with him by the respondents should be allowed before deducting the excess profits tax, depended on the true interpretation of the agreement; the expression "outgoing" in the agreement was not restricted to business or commercial outgoings but included the excess profits tax paid by the assessees, and that, consequently, the net profits of which M was to be given a percentage by way of commission should be computed after deducting the excess profits tax paid.
Commissioner of Income tax, Delhi vs Delhi Flour Mills Co., Ltd., [1959] SUPP.
1 S.C.R. 28, relied on.
(2) that under cl.
(12) Of Sch.
1 of the Excess Profits Tax Act, 1940, it was for the Excess Profits Tax Officer, subject to review by the Tribunal, to decide whether the deduction was reasonable and necessary, having regard to the requirements of the business and in case of payments for services, to the actual services rendered by the persons concerned; it was not open to the High Court exercising its jurisdiction on questions referred to it under the Excess Profits Tax Act, to substitute its own view as to what may be regarded as reasonable and necessary and to set aside the decision of the taxing authorities on a re appreciation of the evidence.
If the High Court considered that the taxing authorities had committed an error in law by misconceiving the evidence or by applying erroneous tests or 62 otherwise by acting perversely, the proper course for it was in answering the questions submitted, to lay down the true principles applicable to the ascertainment of the permissible deductions and to leave it to the taxing authorities to adjudicate upon the reasonableness and necessity of the expenses in the light of the requirements of the business.
(3) that there was ample evidence in support of the conclu sion of the Excess Profits Tax Officer which was confirmed by the Tribunal, and that the question, whether the disallowance by the excess profits tax authorities of the commission paid to branch managers was justified under r. 12 of Sch.
1 of the Excess Profits Tax Act, should have been answered in the affirmative.
