There were two rival factions in a certain village one con sisting of Rajputs and the other of cultivators.
On a particular festival day both the groups went to a temple for worship and cultivators who reached the temple first occupied a place therein which was usually occupied by Rajputs.
Subsequently Rajputs arrived and resented the occupation of the sitting place by the cultivators.
They shifted to a short distance and after holding a brief conference came back to the temple and attacked the cultivators with guns, swords and lathis as a result of which several persons were injured and two were killed.
43 persons alleged to have taken part in the rioting were put up for trial before the Sessions judge for having committed offences under section 302 read with section 149 and section 148 of the Indian Penal Code.
The Sessions judge held that a common object on the part of the accused to kill the cultivators had not been established and that it had also not been proved beyond reasonable doubt that the accused were guilty of a particular offence.
On these findings the Sessions judge acquitted all the accused.
On appeal the High Court after examining the entire evidence found some of the accused guilty of culpable homicide not amounting to murder under section 304 read with section 149 and section 148 of the Indian Penal Code and sentenced them to various terms of imprisonment.
The appeal in respect of some other accused was dismissed as no case had been made out against them beyond any reasonable doubt On appeal by special leave against the conviction and sentence by the High Court, Held, that the words "substantial and compelling reasons" for setting aside an order of acquittal used by this Court in its decisions were intended to convey the idea that an appellate court shall not only bear in mind the principles laid down by the Privy Council in Sheo Swarup 's case but must also give its clear reasons for coming to the conclusion that the order of acquittal was wrong.
The following results emanate from a discussion of the case law on appeals against acquittal: (1)an appellate court has full power to review the evidence upon which the order of acquittal is founded; (2) the principles 121 laid down in Sheo Swarup 's case afford a correct guide for the appellate court 's approach to a case disposing of such an appeal; (3) the different phraseology used in the judgments of this Court, such as (1) "substantial and compelling reasons", (II) "good and sufficiently cogent reasons", and (III) "strong reasons", are not intended to curtail the undoubted power of an appellate Court in an appeal against acquittal to review the entire evidence and to come to its own conclusion, but in doing so it should not only consider every matter on record having a bearing on the questions of fact and the reasons given by the Court below in support of its order of acquittal in arriving at a conclusion on those facts, but should express the reasons in its judgment, which led it to hold that the acquittal was not justified.
Sheo Swarup vs King Emperor, (1934) L. R. 61 I. A. 398, con sidered and followed.
Nur Mohammad vs Emperoy, A.I.R. 1945 P.C. 151, Surajpal Singh vs The State, ; , Ajmer Singh vs The State of Punjab, ; , Puran vs State of Punjab, A.I.R. 1953 S.C. 459, C. M. narayan vs State of Travancore Cochin, , Tulsiram Kanu vs The State, A.I.R. 1954 S.C. 1, Madan Mohan Singh 's case, A.I.R. 1954 S.C. 637, Zwinglee Ariel vs State of U. P., A.I.R. 1954 S.C. 15, Rao Shiv Bahadur Singh vs State of Vixdhya Pradesh, ; , section A. A. Biyabani vs The State of Madras, A.I. R. , Aher Raja Khima vs The State of Saurashtra, ; , Bhagwan Das vs The State of Rajasthan, ; and Balbir Singh vs State of Punjab, A.I.R. 1957 S.C. 216, discussed.
The High Court approached the instant case from a correct perspective and gave definite findings on a consideration of the entire evidence, and in so doing it did not depart from any of the principles laid down by the Privy Council in Sheo Swarup 's case and also gave reasons for holding that the acquittal was not justified.
Abdul Gani vs State of M. P., A.I.R. 1954 S.C. 31, referred to.
Although the powers of this Court under article 136 of the Constitution are very wide, interference is not permitted unless "by disregard to the forms of legal process or some violation of the principles of natural justice or otherwise, substantial and grave injustice has been done," on questions of fact the practice of this Court is not to interfere except in exceptional cases when the finding is such that it shocks the conscience of this Court,
