An award, called the Standardisation Award, fixing the wages for different categories of workers in the textile mills at Ahmedabad was made by the Industrial Tribunal.
The wages of clerks were, however, settled by a subsequent agreement bet ween the Ahmedabad Mill Owners ' Association and the Textile 221 Labour Association.
Clauses 2 and 5 of the said agreement were as follows, " 2.
That this agreement shall apply to all the Clerks employed in the local mills, i. e., persons doing clerical work, that is those who do routine work of writing, copying or making calculations and shall also include compounders and assistant compounders who are qualified and who are employed in the local mills.
A separate scale for those of the employees who occupy the position lower than that of a full fledged Clerk but higher than that of an operative will be provided as under: Rs. 40 3 70 EB 4 90 5 105 This scale will be applicable in case of ticket checker, coupons seller, tally boy, scale boy, production checker, third counter, cloth measurer or yard counter, fine reporter, cloth/ yarn examiner, department store man, cut looker and those others who have not been included above but who can properly fall under the above category.
" The respondents moved the Authority under section 16 of the (4 of 1936), for an order against the appellant for payment of.
their delayed wages.
They claimed to be semi clerks, lower than full fledged clerks but higher than operatives, and as such governed by cl. 5 of the agreement.
The Authority held against them and the appellate Authority affirmed its decision holding that Cl.
2 Of the agreement determined the applicability of cl. 5 and since the respondents did not come within Cl.
2 they could not maintain their claim under cl. 5.
The High Court, on an application under article 226 and article 227 of the Constitution, took a contrary view and set aside the orders of the Authorities and directed a rehearing.
In this Court the appellant mills urged that (1) the High Court had exceeded its jurisdiction under articles 226 and 227 in setting aside the order of the appellate Authority and (2) the Authority had itself exceeded its jurisdiction under section 15 of the Act in entertaining the applications of the respondents made under section 16 of the Act.
Held, that both the contentions must be negatived.
The High Court has power under article 226 of the Constitution to issue a writ of certiorari not only in cases of illegal exercise of jurisdiction but also to correct errors of law apparent on the face of the record, although not errors of fact even though so apparent.
No unfailing test can, however, be laid down when an error of law is an error apparent on the face of the record and the rule that it must be self evident, requiring no elaborate examination of the record, is a satisfactory practical test in a large majority of cases.
Rex vs Northumberland Compensation Appeal Tribunal, ; and Nagendra Nath Bora V. Commissioner of Hills Division and Appeals, Assam, ; , referred to.
222 Viswanath Tukaram vs The General Manager, Central Railway, V. T., Bombay, , considered.
A look at the two clauses is enough to show that the appel late Authority in construing them in the way it did committed an obvious and manifest error of law.
It was clear that the two clauses applied to two distinct categories of persons and persons falling under cl. 5 could not be governed by cl. 2 and were not expected to satisfy the test prescribed by it.
Under section 15 of the , the Authority in exercising its jurisdiction, made exclusive by section 22 of the Act, has necessarily to consider various questions incidental to the claims falling thereunder and, although it would be inexpedient to lay down any hard and fast rule for determining the scope of such questions, care should be taken not to unduly extend or curtail its jurisdiction.
Whether a particular employee was an operative or one above the rank of an operative and below that of clerk arid, therefore within cl. 5 of the agreement, was a question intimately and integrally connected with wages as defined by the Act and as such fell within the jurisdiction of the Authority under section 15 of the Act.
There could, therefore, be no substance in the contention that an employee falling within the category of those others mentioned in the last part of cl. 5, to whom no designation was attached, could not apply under section 15 of the Act.
A. V. D 'Costa vs B. C. Patel, ; , referred to.
Anthony Sabastin Almeda vs R. M. T. Taylor, (1956) 58 Bom.
L.R. 899, distinguished.
