The Travancore Cochin Land Tax Act, 1955 was passed by the legislature of the State of Travancore Cochin and was amended by Act 10 of 057, by the State of Kerala.
By section 4 Of the Act all lands in the State of whatever description and held under whatever tenure were to be charged and levied a uniform rate of tax to be called the basic tax.
Section 7 gave power to the Government to exempt from the operation of the Act such 78 lands or class of lands which the Government may, by notification, decide.
Section 5A which was introduced into the Act by the Amending Act enabled the Government to make a provisional assessment of the basic tax in respect of the lands which had not been surveyed by the Government and provided that the Government after conducting the survey shall make a regular assessment and make the necessary adjustments in respect of the amounts paid already.
There was, however, no time fixed for the conduct of the survey.
The petitioners who owned forest in the State, challenged the constitutional validity of the Act on the grounds that the provisions of the Act contravened articles 14, 19(i)(f) and 31(1) of the Constitution of India inasmuch as (1) the Act did not have any regard to the quality of the land or its productive capacity and the levy of a tax at a flat rate of RS.
2 per acre imposed very unreasonable restrictions on the right to hold property, (2) the.
Act did not lay down any provision calling for a return from the assessee for an enquiry or investigation of facts before the provisional assessment was made or any right of appeal to any higher authority and, in fact, did not make any provision for hearing the assessee at any stage, (3) section 7 gave arbitrary power to the Government to pick and choose in the matter of grant of total or partial exemption from the provisions of the Act, and (4) the tax proposed to be levied had absolutely no relation to the production capacity of the land sought to be taxed or to the income they could derive, and therefore the Act had been conceived with a view to confiscating private property, there being no question of any compensation being paid to those who may be expropriated as a result of the working of the Act.
The petitioners also challenged the legislative competence of the legislature of the State to levy a tax on lands on which forests stood.
The case on behalf of the State of Kerala, inter alia, was that the Act had its justification in article 265 Of the Constitution of India, which was not subject to the provisions of Part III of the Constitution and that, therefore, articles 14, 19 and 31 could not be pressed in aid of the petitioners.
, Held, (Sarkar, J., dissenting), that the Travancore Cochin Land Tax Act, 1955, infringed the provisions of article 14 Of the Constitution of India.
The Act obliged every person who held land to pay the tax at the flat rate prescribed, whether or not he made any income out of the property, or whether or not the property was capable of yielding any income.
Consequently, there was no attempt at classification in the provisions of the Act and it was one of those cases where the lack of classification created inequality.
It was therefore hit by the prohibition to deny equality before the law contained in article 14.
Section 5A of the Act which enabled the Government to make a provisional assessment of the basic tax payable by the 79 holder of unsurveyed land imposed unreasonable restrictions on the rights to hold property safeguarded by article 19(1)(f) of the Constitution, inasmuch as (1) the Act did not impose an obligation on the Government to undertake survey proceedings within any prescribed or ascertainable period, with the result that a landholder might be subjected to repeated annual provisional assessments on more or less conjectural basis and liable to pay the tax assessed, and (2) the Act being silent as to the machinery and procedure to be followed in making the assessment left it to the Executive, completely ignoring the legal position that the assessment of a tax on a person or property was at least of a quasijudicial character.
Section 7 of the Act which vested the Government with the power wholly or partially to exempt any land from the provi sions of the Act did not lay down any principle or policy for the guidance of the exercise of discretion by the Government in respect of the selection contemplated by the section, and was, therefore, discriminatory in effect and offended article 14.
The section was not severable from the rest of the Act as both the charging sections, section 4 and section 7, authorising the Government to grant exemptions from the provisions of the Act were the main provisions of the statute.
Shri Ram Krishna Dalmia vs Sri justice section R. Tendolkar; , , relied on.
The Act was also confiscatory in character inasmuch as the provisions of the Act had the effect of eliminating the private owners through the machinery of the Act, without proposing to acquire the privately owned forests in the State after satisfying the conditions laid down in article 31 of the Constitution.
Per Sinha, C.J., Imam, Subba Rao and Shah, JJ.
Article 265 of the Constitution which provided that the State shall not levy or collect a tax except by authority of law referred to a valid law, and in order that the law might be valid, the tax proposed to be levied must be within the legislative competence of the Legislature imposing a tax and authorising the collection thereof and, secondly, the tax must be subject to the conditions laid down in article 13, by which all laws inconsistent with or in derogation of the fundamental rights in Part III shall be void.
Per Sarkar, J. (1) The object of the Act was to tax land in the State for raising revenues by providing for a low and uniform rate of basic tax replacing all other dues payable to the Government and the tax payers were classified according to the area of lands held by them.
Such a classification had an intelligible basis and had a rational relation to the object of the Act.
As tax was to be levied not because the land was productive but because the land was held in the State, the classification did not offend article 14 Of the Constitution, even though it might impose unequal burden of the tax on the owners of land on account of owners of less productive land being put on a larger burden.
80 (2)Section 5A did not offend article 14 and in the absence of express provisions laying down the procedure according to which the provisional assessment was to be made, the Act could not be held invalid on the ground that it was against the rules of natural justice.
(3)Section 7, even if it were considered invalid on the ground that it gave arbitrary power to the Government and offended article 14, was severable from the rest of the Act and would not affect the other provisions of the Act.
(4)The Act did not infringe the fundamental rights in article 19(1)(f) as the rate of tax fixed by the Act was a very low rate and the restrictions on those rights were reasonable.
(5) The Act was not in its nature expropriatary and did not offend article 31.
As there was no want of legislative competence, theAct could not be assailed as a piece of colourable legislation on the ground that though in form a taxing statute it, in effect, was intended to expropriate lands by imposing a tax too heavy for the land to bear.
(6)The word "land" in Entry 49 of List II, Sch. 7, of the Constitution, included "land on which a forest stands" and, therefore, under that Entry taxation on land on which forests stood was permissible and legal.
The Act, therefore, could not be challenged as being beyond the legislative competence of the State Legislature.
