The appellant used to invest his cash surplus in shares and securities and maintained an account book called Book No. 1 relating thereto.
During the period from 1930 to 1941 42 he purchased a large number of shares and securities which by the accounting year 1941 42 were of a value Rs. 1491 lacs.
He sold certain shares and securities of the value of several lacs and made certain amount of profit on those sales.
In 1940 the appellant borrowed a large amount of money from his brother, the Maharaja of Darbhanga and opened a new account named account No. 2 which contained all entries regarding shares purchased and sold out of the money borrowed from the Maharaja.
In the assessment year 1944 45 to 1948 49 the profits made by the (1) ; 288 appellant from purchase and sale of shares amounted to several lacs and the Income tax Officer held those to be liable to income tax as business profits.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner upheld the assessments but excluded the profits for the years 1944 45.
On appeal by both the parties the Appellate Tribunal held on the evidence that the appellant was to be regarded as a dealer in shares and securities and therefore the profits were assessable to income tax.
The High Court stated the following two questions under section 66(2) of the Income tax Act and answered them in the affirmative: "(1) Whether in the circumstances of the case, there is material to support the finding of the Appellate Tribunal that the assessee was a dealer in shares and securities with respect to each of the account and, therefore, liable to be taxed? (2)Whether having regard to the finding of the Appellate Tribunal in respect of 1941 42 assessment, it was open to the Appellate Tribunal in the present case to hold that the profits and transactions of sale and purchase of shares and securities amounted to profits of business and so liable to be taxed?" On appeal by special leave the appellant contended inter alia, that being a Zamindar the buying and selling of shares was not his normal activity and he did not carry on any such business but his purchases and sales were in the nature of investments of his surplus monies and therefore the excess amounts received by sales were capital receipts being merely surplus and not profits.
Held, that on the materials produced and on the facts proved the appellant must be held to have been rightly assessed.
The principle applicable to such transactions is that when an owner of an ordinary investment chooses to realise it and obtains a higher price for it than the original price paid by him, the enhanced price is not a profit assessable to income tax, but where as in the present case what is done is not merely a realisation or a change of investment but an act done in what is truly the carrying on of a business the amount recovered as appreciation will be assessable.
G.Venkataswami Naidu & Co. vs The Commissioner of Income tax, [1959] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 464, Oriental Investment Company Ltd. vs The Commissioner of Income tax, ; , Raja Bahadur Kamakshya Narain Singh vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bihar and Orissa, (1943) L.R. 70 I.A. 180, discussed.
The substantial nature of the transactions, the manner in which the books were maintained, the magnitude of the shares purchased and sold and the ratio between the purchases and sales and the holding justified tile Tribunal to come to the conclusion that the appellant was dealing in shares as business.
The High Court could not interfere with those findings and it rightly answered the questions in the affirmative.
There is no such thing as res judicata in income tax matters 289 and it was quite open to the Appellate Tribunal to give the finding that it did.
