The appellant, who was an elected member of the West Bengal Legislative Assembly, gave notice of his intention to put certain questions in the Assembly and on those questions being disallowed by the Speaker published them in a journal called Janamat of Ghatal, his own constituency.
The first respondent who was then the Sub Divisional Magistrate of Ghatal and whose conduct was the subject matter of some of those questions, filed a complaint against the appellant and two others, the editor and the printer and publisher of the janamat, under sections 500 and 501 of the Indian Penal Code.
The appellant pleaded privilege and immunity under article 194 of the Constitution as a bar to criminal prosecution.
The trial Magistrate as also the High Court found against him.
On appeal by special leave it was claimed on his behalf that he had an absolute privilege under article 194 of the Constitution to publish the disallowed questions and could not be prosecuted therefor.
Held, that the claim of immunity under article 194 of the Constitution must be negatived.
Clause (1) of article 194 had no application since the matter was clearly outside the scope of that clause.
Clause (2) of that Article was also inapplicable since it was not the case of the appellant that the publication was under the authority of the Legislative Assembly and it could not also be said that it came within the expression " anything said or any vote given " in that clause.
The publication of a disallowed question by a member of the Assembly does not come within the powers, privileges and immunities enjoyed by a member of the House of Commons and, consequently, cl.
(3) of article 194 also cannot be of any help to the appellant.
The immunity enjoyed by a member of the House of Commons is clearly confined to speeches made in Parliament and does not extend to the publication of the debate outside.
If he publishes his speech, made in the House, separately from the rest of the proceedings of the House, he is liable for defamation, in case.it is defamatory.
Abingdon 's case, Espinasse 's Reports, Nisi Prius 1793 1810, 228 and Creevey 's case, I Maule and Selwyn 's Reports, King 's Bench, 1813 1817, 273, referred to.
487 There is no absolute privilege attaching to the publication of extracts from the proceedings in the House of Commons and a member, who has absolute privilege in respect of his speech in) the House itself, can claim only a qualified privilege in respect of it if he causes the same to be published in the public press.
Quaere: Whether publication of parliamentary proceedings, not authorised by the House, stands on the same footing as the publication of proceedings in a court of law.
Wason vs Walter, (1868 69) L.R. 4 Q.B. 73, referred to.
M. section M. Sharma vs Sri Krishna Sinha, [1959] SUPP.
1 S.C.R. 806, distinguished.
Dr. Suresh Chandra Banerjee vs Punit Goala, , referred to.
