The respondent company was a manufacturer of edible and non edible oils and was registered as a " dealer " under the United Provinces Sales Tax Act, 1948.
Its year of account commenced on June 1, and ended on May 31 of the next year.
Under section 7(1) of the Act read.
with rule 39 of the rules framed thereunder the respondent exercised the option of being assessed on the turnover of the previous year and submitted its return for the assessment year 1948 49 on its taxable turnover of the previous year ending May 31, 1947.
The Sales Tax Officer assessed the turnover in respect of edible oil at 3 pies per rupee under section 3, but in respect of non edible oil he held that since a notification dated June 8, 1948, issued under section 3(A) had come into force from June 9, of the assessment year providing for the levy of tax at 6 pies per rupee, the assessee was liable to be assessed at 3 pies per rupee on the turnover during the first 69 days of the year and at 6 pies per rupee for the remaining days of the year.
On appeal by the assessee the appellate authority modified the order and directed that the tax be levied at a flat rate of 3 Pies on both edible and non edible oils.
This order was set aside by the revising authority and the order of the Sales Tax Officer was restored.
On a direction made by the High Court the revising authority submitted a question for opinion.
The High Court held that the assessee was liable to pay the tax at a flat rate of 3 pies per rupee.
On appeal by the Commissioner of Sales Tax by special leave, Held (per Hidayatullah, Das Gupta and Sliah, jj.), affirming the view of the High Court, that the assessee who elected to submit his return on the turnover of the previous year, is liable to be assessed to sales tax at the rate in force on the first day of the year of assessment because the liability arises on that date, and any subsequent enhancement of the rate by virtue of a notification under section 3(A) does not alter that liability.
A taxing statute must be interpreted in the light of what 190 is clearly expressed therein and nothing can be implied nor can provisions be imported into them so as to supply an assumed deficiency.
Per section K. Das and Ayyangar, JJ.
The rate of tax as applied by the sales tax officer was in accordance with law.
Having regard to the scheme underlying the option to elect for a previous year turnover conferred by section 7(1) of the Act the change in the law and in the rate of tax effected during the assessment year must apply to the turnover of the previous year which is deemed to be the turnover of the assessment year and sales effected during that period have to be assessed at the rate prevailing in that year.
Although the notification was prospective and was made with the object of changing the rate of taxation during the assessment year, the date mentioned therein did not prevent the application of the assessment year rate to the opted previous year turnover.
It is not correct to say that there is absence of machinery for reassessment and refund of tax to justify the conclusion that the basis of the tax liablity for an assessment year is that which prevailed on the first day of that year since there are provisions in the Act such as for instance sections 10 and 22 which provide for reductions, refunds and rectification of errors regarding taxation and even for enhancement of the tax already levied.
There was no ambiguity in the notification and the principle of resolving ambiguities in favour of the assessee could not be applied in this case.
