In respect of a decree passed against T, who was the owner of certain watan properties, a building standing on watan land comprised in the said properties, was sought to be attached and sold in execution of the decree.
The appellant, who was the legal representative of T, claimed that the building:was not liable for attachment and sale because (1) the building, being part of watan property within the meaning of section 4 of the Bombay Hereditary Offices Act, 1874, was not saleable property under sub section
(1) of section 60 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and (2) in any case, he was an agriculturist and the building belonging to and occupied by him was protected from attachment and sale by cl.
(c) of the proviso to sub section
(i) of section 60 of the Code.
The facts showed that the building was not in existence when the watan was first created but had been built subsequently by one of the watandars and there was no indication on the record that the building was constructed for the purpose of providing remuneration for the performance of the duty appertaining to a hereditary office.
The evidence also showed that the appellant was not entirely dependent for his livelihood upon the income from the home farm, that he had substantial income from other lands and that there was nothing to show that this income derived from his other lands was the result of cultivation by him.
Held, that the building in question was not an accession to the land so as to partake of the character of the land on which it was constructed and did not come within the definition of watan property in section 4 of ' the Bombay Hereditary Offices Act, 1874.
Held, further (per jafer Imam and Raghubar Dayal, jj.
Sarkar, J., dissenting), that the word " agriculturist " in cl.
(c) of the proviso to sub section
(1) of section 60 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, must carry the same meaning as the word in cl.
(b) and that in order that a person might come within the meaning of the word in those clauses it must be shown that, he was really dependent for his living on tilling the soil and was unable to 164 maintain himself otherwise, though it was not necessary that he must till the land with his own hands.
That on the facts the appellant was not an agriculturist within the meaning of the word in section 60 of the Code.
Case law reviewed.
Per Sarkar, J. (1) On the plain meaning of the word agriculturist " in cls.
(b) and (c) of the proviso to sub section
(1) of section 60 of the Code an agriculturist is any person who occupies himself with agriculture.
There is nothing in cl.
(c) to indicate that the agriculturist there mentioned must be one who depends for his living on agriculture.
A person occupying himself with agriculture would be an agriculturist though he did not cultivate with his own hands and carried on, agriculture in a very large scale.
He would still be an agriculturist even if he had other means of livelihood besides agriculture.
(2) Under cl.
(c) in order that houses and buildings belonging to an agriculturist might be protected from attachment and sale they must be occupied by him for the purpose of agriculture.
