A police officer made a report under section 11 of the Essential Supplies (Temporary Powers) Act, 1946, regarding a contravention of cl. 11 B(III), Iron and Steel (Control of Production and Distribution) Order, 1941, read with section 8 of the Essential Commodities Ordinance, 1955, to the Magistrate against the appellants who were registered stockholders that they had sold iron bars at prices higher than the controlled rate.
After enquiry the Magistrate framed a charge against the appellant under section 7, Essential Supplies (Temporary Powers) Act, 1946, read with cl. 11 B(III) of the Control Order.
The appellants contended that the charge ought to be quashed on the grounds, (i) that the notification of the Controller fixing the maximum sale price of the several categories of iron and steel was ultra vires the rule making power in cl.
11 B(i) of the Control Order, (ii) that the notification was discriminatory and violated article 14, and (iii) that the complaint could not be taken cognisance of by the Magistrate because the report of the police officer did not set out the facts constituting the offence as required by section II of the Act.
The first two grounds were raised for the first time before the Supreme Court.
Held, that the notification fixing the rates was intra vires cl.
11 B(i) of the Control Order.
The notification did not omit any class mentioned in cl.
11 B(1) from its purview; it included 564 "registered producers" and it was not shown that there were any "producers " other than " registered producers " enumerated in the notification.
The notification governed " registered stockholders " also as they were included in the residuary category of persons other than " registered producers " and " controlled stockholders ".
The notification was not discriminatory and did not offend article 14 of the Constitution.
The notification no doubt permitted the grant of credit facilities and the right to charge for cutting and wastage in sales to " controlled stockholders " but not to " registered stockholders " in regard to sales by them.
Differentiation was not per se discrimination.
There was no material to show that there was any unfair or irrational discrimination which could attract article 14.
Held, further, that the police report on which the prosecu tion was launched satisfied the requirements of section II of the Act.
The purpose of section II was to eliminate private persons from initiating prosecutions and to confine it to public servants.
The requirement of the section that the report should be in writing and should set out the facts constituting the offence was to ensure that there was a record that the public servant was satisfied that a contravention of the law had taken place.
If the contravention was sufficiently designated in the report the requirements of the section were satisfied.
Section II did not require the mention in the report of details which would be necessary to be proved to bring home the guilt to the accused.
Dr. N. G. Chatterji vs Emperor and Rachpal Singh vs Rex , not applicable.
Additional grounds, other than those urged before the High Court, would not be permitted to be raised before the Supreme Court as a matter of course, but only, in exceptional circumstances like cases of subsequent legislation or where questions of fundamental and general importance were raised.
