The appellants were carrying on the business of cement and lime manufacture and supply thereof.
By a deed dated May 7 ' 1935, the appellants conveyed to the Associated Cement Ltd. the rights which had vested in them under an earlier conveyance made in their favour by a company known as Karanpura Cod Under the deed the appellants reserved to themselves the right to receive from the Associated Cement Company a sum equal to thirteen annas in respect of every ton of cement sold by it which shall have been manufactured from the limestone won by it from the lands transferred and comprised in the leases and agreements.
Pursuant to this stipulation in the year of account, the appellants I received from the Associated Cement Ltd. Rs. 77,820.
The Income tax Officer included this amount in the total assessable income of the appellants in the assesment year and his order was confirmed by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and by the Income tax Appellate Tribunal.
The contention of the appellants before the High Court in a reference under section 66 of the Indian Income tax Act that on a proper construction of the deed and on the facts and circumstances of the case the sum of Rs ' 77,820 did not represent receipt of a revenue nature in the hands of the appellants and was not assessable as such, was negatived.
Held, that the deed did not incorporate a transaction of either sale or lease.
The conveyance was subject to several restrictions and the appellants retained in part, rights in the land conveyed.
The transaction was substantially a transaction for sharing the profits of the commercial activities of the Associated Cement Ltd. and the receipt under cl. 1 of the deed was of the nature of income and not capital and as such assessable to tax.
503 Foley vs Fletcher, ; , Secretary of State in Council of India vs Andrew Scoble, ; , Oswald vs Kirkcaldy Magistrates, , Commissioners of Inland Revenue vs N Ramsay, (1935) 20 T.C. 79, State of Bihar vs Sir Kameshwar Singh, [1952] 21 I.T.R. 382, Captain Maharajkumar Gopal Saran vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bihar & Orissa, and Chadwick vs Pearl Life Assurance CO., , considered and applied.
In assessing the true character of the receipt for the purpose of the Income tax Act, inability to ascribe to the transaction a definite category is of little consequence.
It is not the nature of the receipt under the general law but in commerce that is material.
It is often difficult to distinguish whether an agreement is for payment of a debt by instalments or for making annual payments in the nature of income.
The court has, on an appraisal of all the facts, to assess whether a transaction is commercial in character yielding income or is one in consideration of parting with property for repayment of capital in instalments.
No single test of universal application can be discovered for solution of the problem.
The name which the parties may give to the transaction which is the source of the receipt and the characterization of the receipt by them are of little moment, and the true nature and character of the transaction have to be ascertained from the covenants of the contract in the light of the surrounding circumstances.
The decision of the question is however not left to the application of any arbitrary standards.
There are certain broad principles which guide the determination of the character of the receipt.
The distinction between a capital receipt and revenue receipt though fine is real.
The dividing line may be thin, and often at first sight imperceptible.
