The first respondent, the then Commissioner of the Corpora tion of Calcutta, was after a protracted trial for an alleged offence under section 497 of the Indian Penal Code discharged by the Magistrate under section 253(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
The Sessions judge, on a petition in revision filed by the complainant, holding that the said respondent had suborned the complainants witnesses, set aside the order of discharge and directed further enquiry by another Magistrate who permitted the complainant to tender further evidence.
The respondent moved the High Court in revision and a Division Bench issued a Rule and stayed further proceedings.
While the matter was thus pending before the High Court, the Corporation of Calcutta by a resolution appointed the three appellants members of a Special Committee which ran as follows : " That a Special Committee consisting of Councillors Shri section K. Gupta, Shri R. N. Majumdar and Shri section K. Roy be set up to enquire into the allegations levelled against certain officials of the, Corporation who are alleged to have been taking advantage of, their high offices in carrying on business in their own names, The Committee will take up only those matters that relate to the Corporation.
" Subsequent to the passing of the said resolution, the Mayor handed over to the Committee certain papers from a Councillor containing certain allegations against the Commissioner.
It was the case of the said respondent that the Special Committee there, upon examined the complainant and another and issued to him a notice along with a questionnaire, the relevant portions of which were as follows: "As you probably know, we have been appointed to make an enquiry into certain allegations relating to the administration of the Corporation of Calcutta and specially into certain steps taken by you in the matter of assessment and appointments and few order matters, we are giving you a synopsis of the cases in which the enquiry is being held and we shall Se glad if you kindly give us some time between 10 a. m. and 11 a. m. tomorrow (the 16th instant) so that we can get the facts from you." * * * 461 " III (a).
It is alleged that between 4th January, 1956, and 20th September, 1957, i.e., at or about the time when the case under section 497, I.P.C., was being tried, you gave appointments to the following persons: (1) Anil Koyal (2) jogendra Nath Mondal (3) Ahi Kanta Choudhury (4) Govinda Banerjee (5) Narendra Nath Naskar, who are related respectively to Palan Koyal, Haradhan (alias Haridhan) Mondal, Tripti Choudhury, Thakur Raj Smriti Tirtha and Upendra Naskar, who were cited as witnesses in the case.
(b)It is alleged that about the same time you gave appoint ments to Tarak Nath Day, Hardhan Day, Pradip Bhaduri, Ardharigsu Mondal etc.
and condoned the punishment previously inflicted on Dhiren Mondal as they were helping you in conducting your defence in the case.
(c) It is alleged that you were instrumental in securing the appointment of another probable prosecution witness Kamakshya Chatterjee through one M. L. Ghose against whom a demolition case was pending.
" Thereupon the first respondent filed a complaint in the High Court charging the appellants with contempt of the High Court as well as the trial court.
The High Court found the appellants guilty and convicted them for contempt of Court.
Hence this appeal.
Held (per Imam and Raghubar Dayal, JJ., Subba Rao, J. dissenting), that the appellants were not guilty of contempt of Court and the appeal must succeed.
It could not be said that the Special Committee had consti tuted itself a court of parallel enquiry with regard to matters in issue either before the trial Magistrate or the High Court.
There can be no comparison between the present case and a trial conducted by a newspaper.
The Special Committee was directed by the Corporation to enquire into malpractices on the part of its employees, necessarily including unworthy appointments, and the ascertainment of the motive could only be incidental to the main purpose of the enquiry and could not lead to the conclusion that the Special Committee was holding a parallel enquiry on matters pending before the Court and thereby intended to interfere with the course of justice.
The record clearly showed that the appellants had at no time intended to interfere with the course of justice, nor had their conduct tended to do so.
They had taken care not to comment on any proceedings pending in I court or the issues arising out of them.
Per Subba Rao, J. The appellants obviously initiated an enquiry which went beyond the scope of the resolution passed by the Corporation.
With the knowledge that criminal proceedings were pending, they examined witnesses and served the 462 questionnaire.
They permitted councillors and others to attend the enquiry which was in no sense confidential.
It is settled law that a person is guilty of contempt of court if the act done by him is intended or calculated or likely to interfere with the course of justice.
Re Read & Huggonson, ; , The Queen V. Payne, , The Queen vs Gray, , R. V. Odham 's Press Ltd., , R. vs Duffy Mohapatra, I.L.R. [1955] Cuttack 305 and Ganesh Shankay Vidyarthi 's case, A.I.R. 1929 All.81, referred to.
It could not be said in the instant case that the enquiry, initiated by the committee to ascertain whether the first respondent had suborned witnesses cited or examined against him, could not have serious repercussions on the proceedings pending in the Magistrate 's court or in the High Court.
Although a strong willed ' Magistrate might not be influenced by the enquiry, it might unconsciously affect a weaker mind and thug obstruct the even course of justice.
Even though a judge of the High Court might withstand the effect of such an enquiry, that would not prevent the public and the parties, especially in a criminal case, from reasonably apprehending that the enquiry or the findings made by the committee might affect a fair hearing of the matter.
The contempt, in the instant case, was not merely of a technical nature but of a serious character calculated to interfere with and obstruct the due course of justice and as such was preeminently one against which the court must take action.
