The respondent served on the Railway Administration a composite notice under s 77 of the Indian Railways Act and under section So of the Code of Civil Procedure and sued for price of goods and for loss on account of nondelivery.
The claim was resisted by the Railway Administration on pleas amongst others that the suit was not maintainable without an effective notice under section 77 of the Railway Act and that the suit was barred because at the date of the suit the period of limitation prescribed by article 31 of the Indian Limitation Act had expired.
A full bench of the Allahabad High Court upheld the decree of the trial court in favour of the respondent holding that a claim for compensation for non delivery of goods was a claim distinct from the claim for compensation for loss, destruction or deterioration of the goods, and to the enforcement of a claim of the former variety by action in a court of law under section 77 was not a condition precedent.
Held, that section 77 of the Indian Railways Act imposes a restriction on the enforcement of liability declared by section 72 of the Act and prescribes a condition precedent to the maintainability of a claim for compensation for goods lost, destroyed or deteriorated while in the custody of the railway Administration who are bailers and not insurer of goods.
The section is enacted with a view to enable the railway administration to make enquiries and if possible to recover the goods and deliver them to the consignee and to prevent stale claims.
Failure to deliver goods is the con sequence of loss or destruction and the cause of action for it is not distinct from the cause of action for loss or destruction, 83 648 Held, further, that merely because articles 30 and 3r of the Indian Limitation Act prescribe different points of time from which the limitation is to run for suits against carriers it cannot be inferred that the claim covered by either article is not for compensation for loss, destruction or deterioration of the goods; and the said articles 30 and 31 cannot be projected upon sections 72 and 77 of the Indian Railways Act for holding that suit for compensation for non delivery of goods does not fall within section 77.
The Madras and Southern Mahratta Railway Co. Ltd. vs Haridoss Banmalidoss, Mad. 871, Hill Sawyers and Co. vs Secretary of State,, Lah.
133, Martab Ali vs Union of India, , Union of India vs Mitayagiri Pullappa, I.L.R. [1958] A.P. 323, Assam Bengal Railway Co. Ltd. vs Radhika Mohan Nath and Others, and Bengal Nagpur Railway Co. Ltd. vs Hamir Mull Chhagan Mull and Another Pat. 106, approved.
Governor General in Council and Others vs Mahabir Ram and Another, (1953) I.L.R.
I All. 64 and Jais Ram Ramrekha Das V. G.I.P. Railway and Another (1929) I.L.R. 8 Pat.
545, overruled.
