The workmen claimed bonus for the year 1956 equivalent to nine months ' total earnings on the ground that the employers had admitted their capacity to pay and that there was a big gap between the wage actually received and the living wage.
The employers contended that they were paying the workmen a living wage and they were not entitled to any bonus.
The employers relying mainly on the Report of the Textile Labour Committee, 1940, contended that if the living wage in 1940, i.e., Rs. 55/ was multiplied by 35 (due to rise in prices) it gave Rs. 192.50 as the living wage in 1956 and they were paying their workmen at a higher rate.
The workmen relied on the recommendations of the Indian Labour Conference, 1957, to show that Rs. 209.70 approximated to the standard of the need based minimum wage and that the average wage paid by the employers was nothing more than this.
The Tribunal held that the wages paid were fair but that there was still a gap between the actual wage and the living wage and awarded bonus equivalent to five months ' basic wages.
Held, that the employers had failed to establish that they were paying a living wage to the workmen.
In construing wage structure the considerations of right and wrong, propriety and impropriety, fairness and unfairness are also taken into account to some extent.
As the social conscience of the general community becomes more alive and active, as the welfare policy of the State takes a more dynamic form, as the national economy progresses from stage to stage, and as under the.
growing strength of the trade union movement collective bargaining enters the field, wage structure ceases to be a purely arithmetical problem.
Wages are usually divided into three broad categories: the basic minimum wage, the fair wage and the living wage.
The concept of these three wages cannot be described in definite words ,is their contents are elastic and vary from time to time and from place to place.
The concept of a living wage is not a static concept; it is expanding and the number of its constituents and their 537 respective contents are bound to expand and widen with the development and growth of national economy.
In an under developed country no wage structure could be described as reaching the ideal of a living wage.
It is unreasonable and unsafe to treat the Report of the Textile Labour Committee, 1940, as to the monetary value of the living wage in 1940 as sound.
The figure reached by the committee in 1940 did not represent anything like a living wage; it really represented the minimum need based wage.
Besides, the method of multiplying the figure by 35 was materially defective ; the proper approach was to evaluate each constituent of the concept of the living wage in the light of the present day prices.
Even the highest average wage paid by the employers was much below the standard of the living wage though it was above the need based minimum.
Express Newspapers (P.) Ltd. vs Union of India, , Standard Vacuum Oil Company vs Their Workmen, , Burmah Shell, etc., Oil Companies in Madras vs Their Employees, , Woykers of S.V.O.C., Ltd. (Standayd Vacuum Employees ' Union) vs Standard Vacuum Oil Co. Ltd., and Standard Vacuum Oil Company vs Their Employees, , referred to.
Burmah Shell Oil Storage and Distributing Co. of India, Ltd., Bombay vs Their Workmen, , approved.
Quaeye: Whether the workmen would be entitled to bonus even if a living wage is paid to them by the employers.
Muir Mills Co. Ltd. vs Suti Mills Mazdoor Union, Kanpur, and Syee Meenakshi Mills Ltd. vs Their Workmen, ; , referred to.
