The appellant entered into an agreement with the respondent who was a building contractor entrusting him with the work of constructing a house and shops.
The respondent undertook the work but before it could be completed disputes arose between them and the appellant claimed compensation for effecting repairs to rectify defective work done by the respondent, and the respondent claimed compensation at certain rates set up by him for work for which there was no express provision in the written agreement.
Suits based on their respective claims were filed by the appellant and the respondent which were partly decreed by the trial court.
The High Court dismissed the appellant 's suit in its.
entirety and remanded the respondent 's suit directing the appointment of a qualified engineer for determining, according to the directions given in the judgment, the amount payable to the respondent for work done in addition to the agreed work under the contract.
The appellant contended that the respondent having failed to prove the oral agreement pleaded the respondents ' suit should have been dismissed and compensation quantum meruit which was not claimed should not have been awarded.
Held, that if a party to a contract rendered service to the other not intending to do so gratuitously and the other party had obtained some benefit, the former was entitled to compensation for the value of the services rendered by him.
The respondent not intending to do gratuitous work was entitled to compensation for additional work not covered by the written agreement.
Even if the respondent failed to prove his claim for compensation at the prevailing market rate under an oral agreement the court had jurisdiction to award compensation for work done under section 70 of the Contract Act.
The appellant 's suit having been dismissed by the High Court and no appeal having been preferred against it, it was not open to him to reagitate the same question of compensation in the companion suits in which no equitable set off was claimed.
