The City of Bangalore Municipal Corporation resolved to levy octroi on cotton and wool and the resolution was notified in the Official Gazette as required by section 98(1) of the City of Bangalore Municipal Corporation Act.
Objections were invited and the appellants filed their objections to the tax.
Final resolution in regard to the tax was passed under section 98(2) of the Act which was published in local newspapers but not in the Official Gazette.
Notices were also sent to the appellants to the effect that after considering their objections the Municipality had decided to levy octroi on the goods at the rate already notified.
The appellants then filed applications in the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution challenging the legality of the levy of octroi but the High Court dismissed the applications.
On appeal with a certificate of the High Court: Held, that publication of the resolution in the Official Gazette and invitation of objections under section 98(1) which were filed, were sufficient compliance with the provisions of the Act.
The notice stating that the tax had been resolved to be levied instead of stating that it was intended to be levied was at the most only technically defective but all such defects were validated by section 38 of the Act.
It was not necessary first to pass a resolution specifying the goods and then another resolution showing the intention of the Municipality to tax those goods.
The goods and the rate of tax were specified and the resolution, was passed after following the procedure laid down in section 98(1).
This amounted to substantial compliance with the provisions of the Act.
The legislature has laid down the powers of the Municipality to tax various goods and enumerated certain goods; Class VIII in Part V of Schedule III read with section 97(e) of the Act authorised the Municipality to impose tax on other articles and goods.
In 699 the present case there was a resolution which sought to include the goods in dispute in the Schedule for the purpose of imposing the tax.
Bijay Colton Mills Ltd. vs Their Workmen [1960] 2 S.C.R. 982, distinguished.
The conferment of power upon the Municipality to specify goods under Class VIII is in the nature of conditional delegation and does not amount to excessive delegation.
Baxter vs Ah Way ; , followed.
Hamdard Dawakhana vs Union of India ; , held not applicable.
The High Court was right in holding that Cotton and Wool do not cease to be raw materials for the purposes of the Act, merely because they are ginned and pressed in bales.
The resolution in the present case covered the articles imported by the appellants into the limits of the Corporation of Bangalore.
