Section 76 of the , provides that where the owner of a mine is a private company any one of the shareholders thereof may be prosecuted and punished under this Act for any offence for which the owner of the mine is punishable.
The appellant who was a shareholder and a director of a private company owning a colliery, was prosecuted for an offence under section 74 Of the Act for contravention of Regulations 107 and 127 Of the Coal Mines Regulations, 1957.
He challenged the validity of the prosecution on the grounds (1) that section 76 of the Act in pur suance of which he who was not himself the owner of the colliery but only one of the directors and shareholders had been prosecuted, was void as it violated article 14 of 'the Constitution of India, and (2) that the Coal Mines Regulations, 1957, were invalid as they had been framed in contravention of section 59 (3) of the Act, inasmuch as there was no consultation with a Mining Board before they were published as required by that sub section.
It was not disputed that when the Regulations were framed, no Mining Board as required under section 12 Of the Act had been con stituted.
and so there had been no reference to any such Board, 34 but it was alleged that there was consultation with the Mining Board constituted under section 10 of the Mines Act, 1923.
Held: (1) that the words "any one" in section 76 of the , should be interpreted as "every one" and that under that section every one of the shareholders of a private company owning the mine was liable to prosecution.
Accordingly, section 76 did not contravene article 14 Of the Con stitution.
Chief Inspector of Mines vs Lala Karam Chand Thapar, , followed.
(2) that compliance with the provisions in section 59 (3) Of the Act was mandatory.
State of U. P. vs Manbodhan Lai Srivastava, [1958] section C. R. 533, distinguished.
Quaere, whether consultation with the Mining Boards con stituted under the provisions of the Mines Act, 1923, would be sufficient compliance with section 59 (3) Of the .
