The Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition and Development) Act, 1957, was enacted, as indicated in the preamble, for providing for the acquisition by the State of unworked land containing or likely to contain coal deposits, and under section 4(1) of the Act, the Central Government was empowered to issue a notification with reference to its intention to prospect for coal from land in any locality.
By section 5(b) any mining lease granted to a person and in respect of which a notification had been issued shall cease to have effect, and under section 7 the Central Government was entitled to acquire the mining rights within a period of two or three years from the date of the notification.
On July 29, 1960, the Central Government published a notification under s, 4(1) of the Act in respect of an area included in the colliery in which the petitioners had acquired mining rights.
Between the year 1932 and the month of May, 1960, the colliery was not worked because it was uneconomical to work it, but the petitioners made an application on December 3, 1959, to the Coal Board for permission to reopen the Colliery and though no reply was received from the Board, the petitioners commenced drilling operations in May, 1960, but discontinued them from August 12, 1960, in view of the notification.
The petitioners challenged the validity of the notification on the ground that the preamble of the Act and sections 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 show that the Act was applicable only to unworked mines which must mean virgin lands,, and not to those which were being worked at the time of notification or which were worked in the past, whereas the petitioners ' coal field had been worked and the working had ceased for some time only due to the unremunerative market for the produce.
The petitioners also contended that the Act contravened articles 19(1)(g) and 31(2) of the Constitution of India on the grounds (1) that the effect of a notification under the Act was to prevent an owner or lessee of a mine from working for two or three years, which was too long a period and, therefore, the restrictions could not be regarded as 45 reasonable, (2) that the Act did not contain any provision for compensation for the deprivation of the petitioners ' right to carry on their business for two or three years, and (3) that section 13 of the Act, though it dealt with the payment of compensation, did not provide for compensation for mineral rights.
Held: (1) that the expression "unworked land" occurring in the preamble of the Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition and Development) Act, 1957, means land which was not being worked at the time of the notification issued under the Act and includes dormant mines.
Where the object or meaning of a enactment is not clear, the preamble may be resorted to to explain it.
In re the Kerala Educatiion Bill, 1957, [1959] S.C.R. 995.
referred.
(2) that the Act is applicable not only to virgin lands but also to dormant collieries or unworked lands, including mines which were worked in the past but mining operations therein are not being carried on at present.
(3) that the expression "to undertake any operation in the land" in section 5(b) of the Act refers to the undertaking of an operation on land not for the first time only but at the resumption of an operation which had been abandoned or discontinued.
The resumption of the working of a mine after a casual closure or a closure in the ordinary course of the working of a mine would not fall within the bar created by section 5(b).
(4) that the restrictions imposed upon an owner or lessee of a mine by which he is prevented from working his mine for a certain period of time under ss.4 and 5 of the Act are not unreasonable and that the Act does not contravene article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution.
(5) that such restrictions amount to a modification of his rights within the meaning of article 31A(1)(e) of the Constitution; and that the validity Of sections 4 and 5 Of the Act cannot be challenged on the ground that they infringe article 31(2) in view of the provisions of article 31A(1)(e).
Thakur Raghbir.
Singh vs Court of Wards, Ajmer, ; , explained.
Sri Ram Ram Narain Medhi vs State of Bombay, [1959] Supp.
1 section C. R. 489, Atma Ram vs The State of Punjab, [1959] Supp.
r S.C.R. 748 and In re , [1951] S.C.R. 793, relied on.
(6) that the Act cannot be challenged on the ground that sections 5(a) and 13 do not provide for payment of compensation for mineral rights, because sections 13 and 14 lay down the principles on which compensation is to be determined, and under Art 31(2) such a law cannot be called in question on the ground of the inadequacy of the compensation provided.
