The appellant Devasthanam had certain properties, granted to it in inam by the Rajas of Tanjore centuries ago, which com prised salt pans.
After the passing of Regulation 1 of 1805 which prohibited manufacture of salt except on account of the Government or with their express sanction, the East India Company in 1806 took over possession of those properties and the agreement between the parties as recorded in the order passed on behalf of the Board of Revenue, was as follows, "As the Government have taken charge of the pagoda salt pans and Sea Customs of Thopputhurai, belonging to the above temple, the sum of 1848 Pagodas shall be given to the temple annually in cash from the treasury being calculated on the average amount of 10 years ' revenue besides which every possible assistance will be given to the temple." The previous correspondence between the Collector and the Board of Revenue showed that the properties were intended to be acquired permanently for the purpose of manufacturing salt and compensation was determined on that basis.
From 1886 till 1941 the appellant allowed the company and its successors, the respondents 1 and 2, to be in quiet possession of the properties in dispute on receipt of the said annual compensation.
Its case, negatived both by the trial Court as well as the High Court in appeal, was that the agreement represented a lease from year to year and it was contended on its behalf in this Court that in construing the document regard must be had to the limited powers of a manager of a Hindu Temple to alienate trust property and he must be held to have intended to act within his powers and not beyond them.
Held, that the transaction in question was a permanent lease and the appeal must fail.
Although it is indisputable that in construing a document executed by the manager of a Hindu temple the fair and reasonable rule would be to treat it as executed in pursuance of his legitimate authority and not in breach of it, that rule could have no application in the instant case, for the facts that more than a century had admittedly elapsed since the document in question had been executed and, further, that the then manager, 88 faced by the prohibition of the manufacture of salt by Regulation 1 of 1805, had no option, in the interest of the Devasthanam itself, but to enter into the agreement in order that he could provide for a recurring income to the temple, could not be ignored.
Bawa Magniram Sitaram vs Kasturbai Manibhai, (1921) L.R.49 I.A. 54, applied.
Maharanee Shibessouree Debta vs Mothoranath Acharjo, (1809) L.R. 13 Moo.
I.A. 270, Nainapillai Marakayar vs Ramanathan Chettiar, (1923) L.R. 51.
I.A. 83 and Palaniappa Chetty vs Deivasikamony Pandara, (1917) L.R. 44 I.A. 147, referred to.
