In execution of a decree the Amin attached, inter alia, two buffaloes from the house of the judgment debtor and entrusted them to the custody of a sapurdar.
As the sapurdar had no accommodation in his house for keeping the buffaloes he kept them for the night in the enclosure of the decree holder with his permission.
Early next morning the appellants armed with 76 lathies, went to the enclosure of the decree holder and began to untie the two.
buffaloes; the decree holder, his son and nephew protested whereupon they and another person, who tried to intervene, were beaten by the appellant with lathies and the two buffaloes were taken away.
Afterwards appellant No. 1 made a claim petition before the executing court and that court held that the two buffaloes belonged to him.
The appellants were convicted of offenses under sections 147, 452, 424, 325/149 and 323/149 Indian Penal Code.
They challenged their convictions on the grounds: (i) that the custody of the decree bolder over the buffaloes was illegal as neither the a minor had any authority to give them in the custody of the sapurdar nor had the sapurdar any power to keep them in the custody of the decree holder, (ii) that the appellants bad entered the enclosure of the decree holder only to recover their buffaloes and had not acted dishonestly.
Held, that the appellants were rightly convicted.
The decree holder 's possession of the buffaloes was as a bailee of the sapurdar.
Order 21, Rule 43 read with R. 116 (framed by the Allahabad High Court) empowered the amin to keep the attached buffaloes in the custody of a sapurdar.
The sapurdar could, for convenience or necessity, keep them with a third person as bailee and such third person could be the decree holder also.
Attachment involved a change of possession from the judgment debtor to the Court; and whoever was entrusted with the possession held it on behalf of the Court until the attachment was raised.
So long as the attachment lasted or the claim of a person for the thing attached was not allowed, that person was not legally entitled to get possession of the thing attached.
If he unlawfully took possession of that thing he caused "wrongful gain" to himself and "wrongful loss to the Court.
Rex vs Thomas Knight, , Sarsay Singh vs Emperor, and Emperor vs Gurdial, All. 119 distinguished.
Emperor vs Ghasi, All. 214, disapproved.
Dalganjan vs State, A.I.R. 1956 All.
630, State vs Rama, Raj 772 and Emperor vs Kamla Pat, All. 368, applied.
