The parties were members of a joint Hindu family possessed of considerable property movable and immovable.
They volun tarily appointed Panchas to determine the shares of the parties and to divide the property.
The Panchas first determined the shares of the parties and reduced the determination to writing.
It was accepted by the parties and was signed by all of them and the Panchas.
Thereafter, on various dates the Panchas divided several items of movable and immovable properties and the parties entered into possession of their shares.
These divisions were duly entered in the " partition books " and were signed by the parties and the Panchas.
The Panchas were unable to divide the remaining properties and with the consent of the parties they appointed one G to divide them.
G divided some of the properties but he too was unable to divide the remaining properties.
One of the parties served a notice cancelling the authority of the Panchas and filed a suit for partition of the remaining properties.
Upon an application made by the plaintiff for revoking the reference the Trial Court cancelled the arbitration as one of the Panchas was unwilling to proceed with the division.
Another party filed a suit for partition of all the properties contending that the division made by the Panchas was not binding as the award had not been made a rule of the court and the reference had been revoked and as the award was not registered.
Held, that the divisions already made by the Panchas were binding on the parties and only the remaining properties were liable to be partitioned.
By the reference to the Panchas, the 793 parties ceased to be members of the joint Hindu family.
Thereafter, by the division of the family assets which was accepted by the parties and by the taking into possession of their shares by the parties, the properties came under the individual ownerships of the parties to whom they were allotted; and in respect of the remaining properties they became tenants in common.
The proceedings taken by the Panchas were not revoked by the order of the trial Court revoking the reference as they had been accepted and acted upon by the parties.
Where an award made in arbitration out of court is voluntarily accepted and acted upon by the parties and a suit is thereafter filed by one of the parties ignoring the acts done in pursuance of the acceptance of the award, the defence that the suit is not maintainable is not founded on the plea that there is an award which bars the suit but that the parties have by mutual agreement settled the dispute, and that the agreement and the subsequent actings of the parties are binding.
Such a plea is not barred by section 32 of the Arbitration Act.
The records made by the Panchas were documents which merely acknowledged partitions already made and were not required to be registered.
