The Government of India entered into an agreement with the President of Argentine Institute for Promotion of Trade to supply Hessian in return for licences for.
shipment to India of food stuff purchased there and with a view to implement that agreement issued orders under r. 75A(i) of the Defence of India Rules, 1939, on the managing agents of certain jute mills on September 30, 1946, requisitioning hessian and directing them and any other person in possession of the said goods to deliver them to the Director of Supplies, Calcutta.
Although in the heading of the notices after the names of the managing agents it was not stated that they were being addressed as managing agents of such and such mills, the schedules attached to them made it clear that they were addressed 'as managing agents of such and such mills.
On the same day notices of acquisition under r. 75A(2) were served on the said managing agents and they were further informed that under r. 75A(3) the goods would vest in the Government at the beginning of the same day free from any mortgage, pledge, lien and other similar encumbrance.
The notices of acquisition were also accompanied by schedules similar to those accompanying the requisition orders.
The 821 Government of India tried to take possession of the hessian but was resisted by the mills and the holders of pucca delivery orders and brought the suit, out of which the present appeals arose, for enforcing the said orders of requisition and acquisition.
The Defence of India Act, 1939, and the Rules made thereunder, had in the meantime come to an end and the question before the courts below was whether the orders of requisition and acquisition as served were effective in law.
The trial judge held that as there were no valid orders of requisition as the mills had not been properly served and since the goods were subject to pucca delivery orders, the mills as well as the Government were estopped from challenging the ownership of the holders of the said delivery orders.
The appeal court held that the orders of requisition were valid and binding, that the mills, and not the holders of the delivery orders, were the owners of the goods but that the notices of acquisition had not been served as required by r. 75A(2) Of the Rules and, therefore, there was no valid acquisition under r. 75A(3) Of the Rules.
Held, that the requisition of the goods could be effected either by taking possession of them or by requiring them to be placed at the disposal of the requisitioning authority.
Since in the present case, the mills and not the holders of the delivery orders were admittedly in possession of the goods on the date of the requisition, the proper persons to be served with the orders were the mills.
Since the Rules did not expressly provide as to the manner in which orders of requisition in writing under r. 75A had to be served, r. 119(i) must apply and as the orders in the present case concerned an individual corporation, they had to be served in the, manner prescribed by 0.
XXIX, r. 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
The word "officer" as defined by section 2(ii) Of the Indian Companies Act, 1913, includes a managing agent and such definition can be utilised for the purpose of the Code and regard being ha to the nature of his duties there can be no doubt that a managing agent would be within the expression " other principal officer" in O. XXIX, r. 2(1) of the Code.
There was no basis for the contention that service under r.2 must be on some human being or that there could be no effective service on a corporation by serving another corporation which might be its principal officer.
The service of the orders of requisition on the managing agents obviously meant for the mills in the instant case, was, therefore, good service under 0.
XXIX, r. 3 Of the Code.
Since r. 75A(2) itself did not provide for any mode of service of notice under it, either the one or the other of the modes specified in section I48 of the Indian Companies Act, 1913, or 0.
XXIX, r. 2 Of the Code would be a reasonable mode of effecting service thereunder.
In the instant case the notices of 822 acquisition having been served under 0.
XXIX, r. 2(a), as the orders of requisition had also been, such service was good service and the acquisition was effective in law.
It was not correct to say that the property in the goods represented by the pucca delivery orders had passed to their holders.
The contract involved in such delivery orders is a contract of sale of unascertained goods and in view of section 18 of the Indian , title cannot pass to the buyer till the goods are ascertained by appropriation.
Anglo India jute Mills Co. vs Omademull Cal.
127, explained.
It was not correct to say that the Government of India in acquiring the requisitioned goods was claiming title through the mills and would be, like them, estopped qua the holders of pucca delivery orders.
The power to acquire the property flowed from the Defence of India Act and the Rules made thereunder and covered not merely the rights of the owners but the entire goods.
Rule 75A(3) of the said Rules made it quite clear the acquisition thereunder was of a title paramount and of the whole of the property freed from all kinds of encumbrances.
No question of serving any notice on the holders of pucca delivery orders, therefore, arose in the present case as the property in the goods had not in law passed to them.
