The disputes regarding bonus to be paid to the ' workmen of the appellant mill and other cotton textile mills in Greater Bombay for the year 1952 and 1953 were referred to the Industrial Court under the provisions of the Bombay Industrial Relations Act, 1946, and while the references were pending, an agreement was arrived at between the Mill owners ' Association, Bombay, and the Rashtriya Mills Mazdoor Sangh, a Representative Union of workmen in the cotton textile industry with respect, to payment of bonus for the years 1952 to 1957, providing inter alia for payment of bonus even where a mill made actual loss, the minimum bonus being 4.8 per cent.
, of the basic wages earned during the year, subject to such mill being entitled to adjust the amount thus paid by it as the minimum bonus against any available surplus in any subsequent year or years.
This agreement was registered and was made enforceable as an award (1) L.L.R. (2) A.I.R. 1937 Mad.
763. 106 against those mills which were parties thereto.
The appellant; however, did not sign, the agreement, and its case before the Industrial Court was that it had been continuously making losses from 1950 to 1955.
On July 31, 1956, the Government of Bombay issued a notification under section 114(2) Of the Act directing that the award made by the Industrial Court aforesaid, for payment of bonus for the years 1952 and 1953 and also for the years 1954 to 1957 be enforced against the appellant.
The appellant challenged the validity of section 114 on the grounds (1) that it offended article 14 Of the Constitution inasmuch as it gave an unguided and arbitrary power to the State Government to discriminate between various sets of employers and employees and make an order on any one set at its pleasure leaving out others, (2) that it offended article 19(i)(g) in that it put an unrea sonable restriction on a person 's right to carry on business, and (3) that it prevented a party from having an industrial dispute decided by an Industrial Court under the Act.
In any event, the appellant contended that the notification was bad, because (a) it was made while a reference was pending in an Industrial Court and, therefore, took away the jurisdiction of, that Court to decide the pending references and (b) the notification went beyond the powers conferred on the State Government by section 114 since under that section the Government was bound by the decisions of the Full Bench in view of section 95A, but in the present case it ignored a decision of the Full Bench which provided that no bonus would be payable by an employer where it had made no profits.
Held (Sarkar, j., dissenting), that the notification dated July 31, 1956, was beyond the powers conferred on the State Government under section 114(2) Of the Bombay Industrial Relations Act, 1946, and must, therefore, be struck down, There are three limitations on.
the power of the State Government when acting under section 114(2): (1) that it is limited by the subject matter of the agreements, or settlement, submission or award sought to be extended, (2) that it has to be in conformity with the industrial law laid down by the Full Bench of the Industrial Court and also by any decision of the Supreme Court, and (3) that the State Government 's power to make a direction under that section is co terminus with the power of an adjudicator and the State cannot do 'what an 'adjudicator cannot do under the Act.
Action taken by the State Government under section 114(2) is a proceeding under the Act within the meaning Of section 95A of the Act.
The New Maneckchowk Spining Co. Ltd. and others vs The Textile Labouy Association, [1961] 3 S.C.R. I, relied on.
Per Sarkar, J. (1) Section 114 of the Bombay Industrial Relations Act, 1946, does not offend article 14 Of the Constitution.
The object of the Act is the settlement of industrial disputes and 107 attainment of industrial peace and the section does not confer absolute and arbitrary power.
(2) The restrictions imposed by section 114(2) are reasonable and have been put in the interest of the general public.
Consequently, the section does not contravene article 19(i)(g).
Bijay Cotton Mills Ltd. vs The State of Ajmer, ; , referred to.
(3) The provisions of the Act must be read together and in cases in which power under section 114(2): has been exercised, the right to ask for an adjudication by an Industrial Court must be considered either as taken away or unavailing.
(4) The issue of a notification under section 114(2) is not a proceeding as contemplated by section 95A and, therefore, any question of complying with any Full Bench decision does not arise.
(5) Section 114 directly permits and contemplates a notification which would produce a result in variance with a decision of the Supreme Court and, therefore, a notification duly issued under that section cannot be said to have been issued, mala fide.
Muir Mills Co. Ltd. vs Suti Mills Mazdoor Union, Kanpur, ; , referred to.
(6) The Act is not invalid and the notification of July 31, 1956, is unobjectionable and cannot be set aside.
