In a mortgage suit brought by him, the respondent 1, the mortgagee, pleaded that limitation was saved by a letter written to him by the mortgagor, the respondent 2, which amounted to acknowledgment under section 19 of the Indian Limitation Act.
There was a prior mortgage and before writing the letter in question the mortgagor had written another letter appealing to respondent 1 to save the property from being sold at the instance of the prior mortgagee.
Thereupon the respondent No. 1 paid the required amount and the threatened sale was averted.
The property was again advertised for sale and that was why the letter in question was written; it ran as follows, "Chandni Bazar is again advertised for sale on Friday the 11th instant.
I am afraid it will go very cheap.
I had a private offer of Rs. 2,75,000 a few days ago but as soon as they heard it was advertised by the Registrar they withdrew.
As you are interested why do not you take up the whole.
There is only about 70,000 due to the mortgagee a payment of Rs. 10,000 will stop the sale".
The question was whether this letter amounted to an acknow ledgment of the respondent 1 's right as mortgagee under section 19 of the Indian Limitation Act.
The trial judge held that it did not, but the Court of appeal took the contrary view.
The auction purchaser appealed to this Court.
Held, that it was obvious that the interest mentioned in the letter in the context of the previous one was none other than that of respondent 1 as a puisne mortgagee and the appeal to take up the whole meant the entirety of the mortgagee 's interest including that of the prior mortgagee.
Since admittedly the only subsisting relation between the parties at the date of the letter was that of mortgagee and mortgagor and the letter acknowledged the existence of that jural relationship, it clearly amounted to an acknowledgment under section 19 of the Act.
Held, further, that the essential requirement for sustaining a plea of acknowledgment under section 19 of the Act is that the statement on which it is sought to be founded must relate to a 141 subsisting liability, indicate the existence of the jural relationship between the parties and must be intended, either expressly or impliedly, to admit that jural relationship.
The words used in a particular statement must be construed in the light of its own tenor and according to the context and unless the words used are identical and the interest is similar, previous decisions interpreting somewhat similar documents are not of much help.
Green vs Humphreys,, , referred to.
Beti Maharani vs Gollector of Etawah, (1894) L.R. 22 I.A. 3,, Sukkamoni Choudhrani vs Ishan Chunder Roy, (1897) L.R. 25 I.A. 95, Munshi Lal vs Hira Lal, I.L.R. 1947 All.
II and Swaminatha Odayar vs Subbarama Ayyar, Mad. 548, considered.
Dharma Vithal vs Govind Sadvalkar, Bom.
99, held inapplicable.
