One Ramchandar executed a simple mortgage deed without possession of his share in the property in dispute in favour of the respondents and others the relevant Portion of which ran thus :" I do hereby mortgage without possession half share, five annas and four pies, area 678 31 acres, jama sarkar Rs. 326/10/8 together with Khudkashat, chbotaghas, big shrubs, abadi, gair abadi, cultivated and that lying vacant, and the rights and privileges appertaining to water, forests, chahat, gardens, and right of cultivation, malguzari and trees of every kind whether giving fruits or no fruits and prohibited and unprohibited wood with entire rights and privileges appertaining to the 'village." After the mortgage Ramchandar 's share was sold to the appellants and certain other lands recorded in Ramchandar 's mother 's name also came into the possession of the appellant.
The main questions arising for decision were whether the mortgage included the sir land of Ramchandar and whether the other lands coming into the possession of the appellant were accession to the mortgage.
Held, that as the mortgage deed stood it was a mortgage of all the proprietary rights in the mortgagor 's share in the property including the proprietary right in the sir pertaining to that share.
As the mortgage was without possession the mortgagor was not losing possession of his sir and it was not necessary for him to make an application under section 50 of the Central Provinces Tenancy Act relating to the reservation of a right of occupancy.
Sections 49 and 50 come into play when the proprietor making a transfer loses his right to occupy any portion of his sir land temporarily or permanently.
Although in the plaint of the suit based on the mortgage no mention was made of sir, the entire proprietary right in sir, khudkashat etc.
relating to the mortgagor 's share would be sold on a decree passed in the suit.
The words " all rights pertaining to the share " appearing in the sale certificate following the execution of the decree in the mortgage suit passed in favour of the respondents would include the mortgagor 's proprietary rights in the sir land and the respondents by their sale certificate would get a right 'in the sir land also.
914 As the appellant had purchased the entire share of Ram chandar who was later ejected from his ex proprietary tenancy which came into the possession of the appellant as lambardar his sir land which thus came into the appellant 's possession while the mortgage was subsisting became an accession to the mortgage under section 70 Of the and the mortgagees were entitled to half share in the lands which came into the appellant 's possession.
The lands recorded nominally in the name of Ramchandar 's mother but in the actual possession of the former having also came into the possession of the appellant as lambardar were held by him for the entire body of proprietors and the respondent would be entitled to a share in them.
The respondent 's claim to those lands were not barred by 0.
II, r. 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure merely because they were not mentioned in the plaint of the mortgage suit.
Hazarilal vs Hazarimal, A.I.R. 1923 Nag.
130 and Seth Manakchand vs Chaube Manohar Lal, A. I.R. , held not applicable.
