The appellant filed a suit for the recovery of money as price of goods supplied against the Ex Ruler of Jaipur.
Subsequently section 87 B was introduced in the Code of Civil Procedure making the provisions of section 86 in respect of suits against rulers of foreign States applicable to the rulers of former Indian States.
The Ex Ruler raised the plea that the suit was incompetent as the consent of the Central Government had not been obtained as required by section 87 B.
The appellant contended: (i) that section 87 B violated article 14 Of the Constitution and was void, (ii) that section 87 B did not apply to the continuation of a suit pending at the time when section 87 B was enacted but only to the filing of a suit after the enactment of that section.
Held, that section 87 B did not violate article 14 Of the Constitu tion and was not void.
Section 87 B of the Code of Civil Procedure merely continued the privilege which was formerly enjoyed by the Rulers of Indian States and in regard to which the covenants entered into by the Ex Rulers and the Government of India provided for their continuance.
This agreement about the privileges was further assured by article 362 Of the Constitution.
The Ex Rulers thus formed a class and the special legislation was based upon historical considerations applicable to them as a class.
The classification was based on a distinction which was real and substantial and it bore a just relation to the object sought to be attained.
Held, further, that the suit was incompetent against the Ex Ruler of Jaipur.
The protection of section 87 B read with section 86 applied both to the filing of a suit and to its, pursuit through the courts.
Section 86 provides that "No Ruler. . may be sued in any court. . .
A person is "sued" not only when the plaint is filed against him, but is "sued" also when the suit remained pending against him.
The word "sued" covers the entire proceedings in an action.
Consequently, the consent of the Central Government was necessary not only for the filing of the suit against the Ex Ruler but also for its continuation from the time consent was required.
703 Held, further, that section 87 B was on its terms applicable to pending suits and there was no saving in favour of pending actions.
K. C. Mukherjee vs Mst.
Rath Ratan Kuer, Pat. 268, applied.
