These appeals arose out of.
two petitions filed in the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution challenging the constitutional validity of the Assam Fixation of Ceiling on Land Holding Act, 1957.
The High Court in dismissing the petitions held that the impugned Act was protected by Art, 31A of the Constitution.
The Act was a measure of agrarian reform and imposed limits on land to be held by persons in order to bring about its equitable distribution.
The Act as originally passed as also its subsequent amendment received the assent of the President and this satisfied the requirement of the proviso to article 31A(1)(a) of the Constitution.
The question, therefore, was whether the rights of the appellants which were taken away or abridged by the impugned Act were "rights" in relation to an estate within the meaning of article 31A(2)(b) of the Constitution.
Held, that the expression " 'rights ', in relation to an estate" in article 31A(2)(b) of the Constitution is of a very wide amplitude and construed liberally, as it must be, and considered in the light of the provisions of sections 3(g) and 9 of the Assam Land and Revenue Regulation, 1886, the existing law relating to tenures, and the relevant definitions contained in the impugned Act, there could be no doubt that the rights of the petitioners, which the impugned Act extinguished, fell within the expression.
Thakur Raghubir Singh vs The State of Ajmer, [1959] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 478, Sri Ram Reim Narain Medhi vs The State of Bombay, [1959] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 489 and Atma Ram vs The State of Punjab, [1959] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 748, referred to.
A colourable legislation is one in which the Legislature transgresses the lawful limits of its legislative powers ,and "conceals its real purpose under the cover of apparently legitimate and reasonable provisions and thus seeks to do indirectly what it cannot do directly.
K. G. Gajapathi Narayan Deo vs The State of [1954] S.C.R. 1, referred to.
725 It was not correct to say that the impugned Act was a colourable legislation whose concealed purpose was to make profit by disposing of land in the manner provided by Ch.
III or that by pith and substance it was a profit making measure or that sections 16 and 18 of the Act were devices to that end.
This is broadly contradicted by the whole object of the Act which is a measure of agrarian reform, writ large on all its provisions and clearly negatived by section 4 Of the Act which provides that in no case can the payment made by the tenant in getting the settlement exceed the amount of compensation payable by the Government in acquiring the land.
