There were certain charges of immorality, corruption and gross dereliction of duty against the appellant who was a police officer.
After an enquiry, the Governor of U. P. referred the case under section 4 Of the U. P. Disciplinary Proceedings (Administrative Tribunal) Rules, 1947, to a Tribunal.
The Tribunal recommended on February 4, 1950, that the appellant be dismissed from service.
The Governor then served a notice on the appellant to show cause why he should not be dismissed from service and after considering the explanation submitted by him dismissed him with effect from December 5, 1950.
The appellant challenged the order of dismissal, inter alia, on the grounds: (i) that the Governor had no power under section 7 of the Police Act and the U. P. Police Regulations framed thereunder to dismiss a police officer and (ii) that the enquiry held by the Tribunal violated 152 article 14 Of the Constitution as of the two parallel procedures available under the Tribunal Rules and under the U. P. Police Regulations, the mode prejudicial to the appellant under the Tribunal Rules was adopted.
Held (per Das, Hidayatullah, Shah and Ayyangar, JJ.) that the enquiry by the Tribunal and the order of dismissal passed by the Governor were legal and valid.
Under para.
479(a) of the U. P. Police Regulations, framed under section 7 Of the Police Act, the Governor bad the power to dismiss a police officer.
Under the Tribunal Rules also, which were framed in exercise of the various powers vested in the Governor including the power under section 7 Of the Police Act, the Governor was authorised to dismiss a police officer.
By virtue of article 313 Of the Constitution these provisions remained in operation even after the coming into force of the Constitution.
The authority vested in the Inspector General of Police and his subordinates by section 7 of the Police Act, was not exclusive; it was controlled by the Government of India Act, 1935, and the Constitution which made the tenure of all civil servants of a province or state during the pleasure of the Governor.
The procedure adopted did not violate article 14 Of the Con stitution.
Though at the time when proceedings were started against the appellant two distinct procedures for holding the enquiry were open for selection by the authorities, the order by the Governor referring the case under the Tribunal Rules having been passed before the Constitution, article 14 could have no application to it even if it was discriminatory.
The procedure ire scribed in the Police Regulations is substantially the same as the procedure prescribed by the Tribunal Rules, and by continuing the enquiry after the Constitution under the Tribunal Rules and not under the Police Regulations, a more onerous procedure prejudicial to the appellant was not adopted.
The fact that an order made by a police authority under the Police Regulations is made appealable whereas an order passed by the Governor under the Tribunal Rules is not made appealable does not amount to discrimination within the meaning of article 14.
The Tribunal Rules provide for the giving of reasonable opportunity to a public servant in ill its aspects, viz., opportunity to deny his guilt, opportunity to defend himself and opportunity ,to make his representation against the proposed punishment.
The mere existence of two sets of parallel procedures is not discriminatory unless it was shown that one set is more onerous than the other.
Syed Qasim Rozvi vs The State of Hyderabad and Lackhmandas Kewalram.
Abuja vs The State of Bombay, ; , applied.
Khem Chand vs The Union of India and others, [1954] S.C. R. 1080 and Sardar Kapur Singh V: Union of India, (1960) 2 S.C. R. 569, referred to.
153 State Of Orissa vs Dhirendranath Das, A.I.R. 1961 S.C. 1715, distinguished.
Per Das Gupta, J. The U.P., Disciplinary Proceedings (Administrative Tribunal) Rules, 1947, are hit by article 14 Of the Constitution.
The absence of the right of appeal under the Tribunal Rules while a right of appeal is given to a police officer under the Police Regulations, results in unequal treatment in a substantial matter between police officers proceeded against under the two procedures.
Further, there is no principle.
to guide the Government in selecting which of the two procedures is to be applied in a particular case.
