The appellant and the respondent, who were displaced persons from West Pakistan, were allotted lands in the same village.
At the instance of certain persons, the first allotment was cancelled and there was a re allotment.
The respondent was aggrieved by this order and on September 27, 195o, he filed a review application before the Deputy Commissioner for restoration of the original allotment but it Was dismissed on May 12 , 1951 Against this order the respondent preferred a revision application to the Additional Custodian.
who dismissed the same on August 25, 1952.
Thereupon, the respondent filed a revision application before the Custodian General on October 30, 1952.
To this revision on the Custodian was made a party; but the appellant was made a party by order of the Custodian General on August 25, 1953.
After bearing the parties the Custodian General on September 29, 1954, cancelled part of the re allotment made in favour of the appellant.
appellant contended: (i) that the revision application to the Custodian General was barred by time, and (ii)that the ' Custodian General had no power to cancel the allotment.
Hold, that the revision application was not barred by time.
Rule 31(5) provides that :a revision petition to the Custodian General "shall ordinarly be made within sixty days of the 38 298 order sought to be revised".
This rule is only a rule of guidance and not one of limitation and in law a revision can be entertained even after sixty days if the Custodian General in his discretion thinks fit to entertain it.
In the present case the revision was filed within the time but the appellant was impleaded after the period of sixty days had expired.
But it could not be said that the Custodian General acted perversely or unreasonably in entertaining the revision.
Held, further, that the Custodian General had the power to cancel the allotment made on December 2, 1949.
Under r. 14(6) the Custodian could not, after July 22, 1952, cancel an allotment except under certain specified circumstances; but the second proviso to r. 14(6) permitted the Custodian General, in exercise of his powers of revision under section 27 , to cancel an allotment made by a lower authority on or before July 22, 1952.
