On an application made by the appellant, the Calcutta High Court granted a certificate on May 18, 1956, enabling him to appeal to the Supreme Court against the judgment and decree of the High Court.
Under 0. 45, r. 7(1)(a), of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, the appellant had to deposit the security amount for costs of the respondent within ninety days or such further period, not exceeding sixty days, as the court may upon cause shown allow, from the date of the decree complained of, or within six weeks from the date of the grant of the certificate, whichever was the later date.
Being unable to deposit 644 the amount on the due date, the appellant filed an application on July 4, 1956, before the High Court praying that the amount tendered by him be accepted after condoning the delay, but the High Court rejected it on the ground that according to the uniform current of decisions of that Court it had no jurisdiction to extend the time for depositing the amount.
Held, that reading 0.
45" r. 7, of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, along with the other relevant provisions Of the said Order, a High Court has jurisdiction to extend time for furnishing security under the rule, and that the decisions of the Calcutta High Court to the contrary are erroneous.
Order XII, r. 3, of the Supreme Court Rules, 1950, expressly recognises and gives jurisdiction to the High Courts to extend the time for furnishing the security in a proper case.
Raja Kumar Govind Narayan Singh and others vs Shamlal Singh and others, 1 and Akimuddin Chowdhury vs Fateh Chand Mahesri & others, , disap proved.
Roy Jyotindranath Chowdhury & Ors.
vs Rai Prasanna Kumar Banerjee Bahadur, (1906) 11 C.W.N. I 104, Harendra Lal Choudhry vs Sm.
Hari Dasi Debei, , Nilkanth Balwant Natu & Ors.
vs Shri Satchidanand Vidya Narsinha Bharati & Ors., Bom.
430, Bishnath Singh & Ors.
vs Balwant Rao Naik Kalia & Ors., I.L.R. [1939] All 549, Ismail Piperdi vs Momin BiBi & Ors, , Lachmeshway Prasad Shukul vs Girdhari Lal Choudhuri, Pat. 123, Ghulam Rasul vs Ghulam Qutabud din, (1942) I.L.R.23 Lah.447, Gulam Hussain vs Mansurbeg & Ors., I.L.R. and Thota Pitchaiah Andhra 55, approved.
