The petitioners who were partners of a registered firm hold ing public carrier and stage carriage permits challenged the constutionality of certain provisions of the Rajasthan Passengers and Goods Taxation Act, 1959, the Rajasthan Passengers and Goods Taxation Rules, 959, and a notification issued under r. 8.
The Act was passed for levying a tax on passengers and goods 518 carried by road in motor vehicles the power to enact being derived from Entry 56 of the State List in Sch.
VII of the Constitution.
Section 3(4) of the Act prescribed the method of collection of the tax and provided that the State Government may accept a lump sum in lieu of the tax chargeable".
Rule 8(i) prescribed the method of payment and provided that the tax "shall be paid in lump sum" and the notification in question prescribed the rates of the tax.
Held, that the incidence of the tax was upon "passengers and goods" and not upon income of the petitioners though the amount of the tax was measured by the fares and freights.
The charging section, namely, section 3 did not go outside Entry 56.
Mathurai vs State of Madras, I.L.R. , Alma Ram Budhia vs State of Bihar, Pat. 493, referred to.
The tax did not offend articles 301 and 304 of the Constitution and no inter State trade, commerce or intercourse was affected by it.
Although the tax fell upon passengers and goods proceeding to or from an extra State point, it was limited only to the fare and freight proportionate to the route within the State.
The word "shall" is ordinarily mandatory but it is sometimes interpreted as directory, and in the present case the word "shall" used in rr. 8 and 8A and the notification should be interpreted as directory as section 4 of the Act from which the Rules and the notification derive their authority, creates an option by using the words "may accept".
The Act, the Rules and the notification must be read harmoniously.
The mandatory language was used to fix peremptorily the amount of the lump sum if paid in lieu of the tax.
In Re Lord Thurlow Ex Parte Official Receiver, (1895) 1 Q.B. 724, Mannikam Patter vs Nanchappa Chettiar, (1928) M.W.N. 441, In re Rustom, 369, jethaji Peraji Firm v: Krishnayya, Mad.
648 and Burjore and Bhavant Pershad vs Mussumat Bhagana, (1883) L.R. II I.A. 7, followed.
The lump sum figure was based on averages and could not be impeached by reference to a possibility that on some days no business might be done.
Comparison with Railways which is a union subject was not admissible.
There was no discrimination between operators of public motor vehicles using roads all of whom were affected by the Act, There could be no comparison between persons using better kind of roads and those using roads which were not so good.
All operators using better kind of roads had to pay heavier tax, and there was no discrimination between them as a class.
