The appellant entered into a contract with the respondent for the sale of certain canvas at Re. 1 per yard under which the delivery was to be made through railway receipt for Calcutta for Kanpur.
The cost of transport from Kanpur to Calcutta and the labour charges in that connection were to be borne by the respondent and it was agreed that the railway receipt would be delivered on August 5, 1947.
The appellant was unable to deliver the railway receipt on the due date because booking from Kanpur to Calcutta was closed, and, therefore, cancelled the contract.
The respondent instituted a suit for the recovery of damages for the breach of the contract and claimed that as the seller knew that the goods were to be sent to Calcutta and must therefore be presumed to know that the goods would be sold in Calcutta, any loss of profit to the buyer resulting from the difference between the rate in Calcutta on the date of the breach and the contract rate would be the measure of damages.
Held: (1) that it is well settled that the two principles relating to compensation for loss or damage caused by breach of contract as laid down in section 73 Of the , read with the Explanation thereof, are (i) that, as far as possible, he who has proved a breach of a bargain to supply what he contracted to get is to be placed, as far as money can do it, in as good a situation as if the contract had been performed, but (ii) that there is a duty on him of taking all reasonable steps to mitigate the loss consequent on the breach and debars him from claiming any part of the damage which is due to his neglect to take such steps.
British Westinghouse Electric and Manufacturing Company, Limited vs Underground Electric Railway Company of London, , relied on.
(2) that the contract in the present case was for delivery for.
Kanpur in which it was open to the buyer to sell the goods where it liked, and no inference could be drawn from the mere fact that goods were to be booked for Calcutta that the seller knew that the goods were for resale in Calcutta only.
The contract was therefore not of the special type to which the words "which the parties knew, when they made the contract, 654 to be likely to result from the breach of it" appearing in section 73 of the , would apply, but an ordinary contract, for which the measure of damages would be such as "naturally arose in the usual course of things from such breach" within the meaning of that section.
The damages would be the difference between the market price in Kanpur on the date of breach and the contract price.
But as the respondent bad failed to prove the rate for similar canvas in Kanpur on the date of breach, it was not entitled to any damages as there was no measure for arriving at the quantum.
Chao and others vs British Traders and Shippers Ltd., , relied on.
Re. R and H. Hall Ltd. and W.P. Pim (junior) & Co. 's Arbi tration, and Victoria Laundry (Winsdsor) Ltd.v.
Newman Industries Ltd., , distinguished.
