The Madras Sales of Motor Spirit Taxation Act (Mad. VI of 1939) was made applicable to the, State of Andhra Pradesh by the Madras Sales of Motor Spirit Taxation (Andhra Pradesh Extension and Amendment) Act (Andhra Pradesh V of 1958).
The purpose and object of the Act was to levy and collect tax on retail sales of motor spirit and the liability for payment was placed upon the person effecting the sale.
In order that the State may know the persons from whom tax was due section 4(1) provided for registration of dealers and section 4(6) provided for the suspension of such registration in the event of some contraventions.
All that any one who wanted to carry on business had to do was to ask for registration which he would get under the rules.
The petitioners who were dealers in motor spirit in Hyderabad filed writ petition challenging the provisions of the said section 4 Of sub sections (1) and (6) on the ground that such registration and cancellation were not reasonable restrictions on the fundamental rights of the petitioners to carry on business under article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution particularly as the cancellation of registration resulted in the total extinction of the business and was an unreasonable restriction and prayed that sub sections
(1) and (4) Of section 4 Of the Act and r. 14 framed under section 26 of the Act be declared ultra vires.
Held, that the provisions of section 4(1) of the Act were consti tutional.
Registration of dealers under section 4(1)was an eminently reasonable provision in order to carry out the object of the Act, the purpose behind the registration being that those on whom the liability to pay tax under section 3 of the Act lay, were known to the State, so that it could realise the tax from them.
The provision Of section 4(6) for cancellation of registration for failure to pay the tax or for fraudulently evading the payment of it was an additional coercive process which was expected to be immediately effective and enabled the State to realise its revenue.
The fact that in some cases restriction might result in the extinction of the business of a dealer would not by itself 695 make the provision as to cancellation of registration an un reasonable restriction on the fundamental right guaranteed by article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution.
Narendra Kumar vs The Union of India, ; , referred to.
