Under a licence granted for the import of fountain pens at not less than Rs. 25 C.I.F. value, the respondent imported Sheaffer pens from Australia, which had nibs which were gold plated and also caps and clips of similar composition.
The imported goods were assessed to duty by the customs authorities under item 61(8) of the First Schedule to the Indian Tariff Act, 1934, dealing with "Articles, other than cutlery and surgical instruments, plated with gold or silver" which provided for a duty Of 781 per cent.
ad valorem, while the respondent claimed that the goods fell within item 45(3) which related to the article described as "Fountain pens, complete", the rate of duty being 30 per cent.
ad valorem.
Section 191of the , enabled any person aggrieved by an order of the Collector of Customs to file a revision to the Central Government, but the respondent, without resorting to this remedy filed a writ application in the High Court of Bombay under article 226 of the Constitution of India to quash the imposition of the duty at the higher rate and to direct the release of the goods on payment of duty at 30 per cent.
The Single judge who disposed of the application took the view that fountain pens did not cease to be fountain pens though they contained parts which were plated with gold, that so long as they were "Fountain pens, complete" only duty under item 45(3) could be levied and that, in the context of the items in the Tariff Schedule, it was not reasonably possible for any person to take a contrary view.
Accordingly, the customs authorities were restrained from enforcing payment of any duty higher than 30 per cent.
On appeal, the Appellate Bench of the High Court agreed with the interpretation of the tariff items and held that, though it was not the practice to entertain writ petitions by parties who had not exhausted their statutory remedies, as the remedy of applying in revision to the 95 754 Central Government had become time barred by the date of hearing of the appeal, it would not interfere with the order of the Single judge.
Held, that the High Court was in error in its view that though the respondent had failed to exercise his statutory remedy, the fact that it had become time barred at the date of the hearing of the appeal against the order in the petition under article 22 6, was a good ground for the Court to exercise its discretion in granting the relief prayed for by the respondent in his petition.
Held, further (Sarkar, J., dissenting): (i) that the consignment imported by the respondent was liable only to a duty of 30 per cent.
under item 45(3) in the First Schedule to the Indian Tariff Act, 1934, and that the tariff items in the Schedule were not reasonably capable of any other construction.
(2) that as in the present case the levy of the duty under entry 61(8) was manifestly erroneous, and the Central Board of Revenue had issued a ruling to the effect that fountain pens with nibs or caps which were gold plated fell with entry 61(8), it could not be said that the High Court had exercised its discretion improperly in entertaining the writ application so as to justify interference in an appeal under article I36 of the Constitution.
Per Gajendragadkar, Wanchoo, Das Gupta and Rajagopala Ayyangar, JJ.
The rule that a party who applies for the issue of a high prerogative writ should, before he approaches the court, have exhausted other remedies open to him under the law, is not one which bars the jurisdiction of the Court to entertain the petition or to deal with it, but is rather a rule which courts have laid down for the exercise of their discretion.
Union of India vs T. R. Varma, [1958] S.C.R. 499 and The State of Uttar Pradesh vs Mohammad Nook, ; , relied on.
Per Sarkar, J. Item 61(8) in the First Schedule to the Indian Tariff Act, 1934, is intended to apply to all gold plated articles other than cutlery and surgical instruments, while item 45(3) is applicable to fountain pens simpliciter, that is, without gold plating.
Such a view would harmonise the different items in the Tariff Schedule and carry out the intention of the legislature.
The customs authorities were correct in assessing gold plated fountain pens under entry 61(8).
