A dispute between the respondent company and the Government of Bihar over the bills for the amount payable to tile company in respect of the construction works carried out by it for the Government was referred to arbitration.
The agreement to refer to arbitration was executed on behalf of the Governor by L, an executive engineer, who had been specifically authorised to do so by a Secretary to the Government.
The arbitrator made his award and sent copies thereof to the parties.
The respondent applied to the Court under the provisions of the , for a decree in terms of the award.
The State filed objections thereto and the matter was registered as a suit.
While the suit was pending the arbitrator sent to the court a copy of the award duly signed by him for being filed as provided in the Act, and on the receipt thereof the respondent bad it validated on payment of the requisite stamp duty under section 35 of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899.
The appellant, the State of Bihar, contended that no decree could be passed on the basis of the award on the grounds (1) that the agreement for reference to arbitration did not comply with the requirements of section 175(3) of the Government of India Act, 1935, inasmuch as it was not signed by the person authorised to do so under the notification issued by the Government of Bihar on April 1, 1937, in exercise of the powers conferred by section 175(3), and (2) that the instrument before the court was a certified copy and that under section 35 of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899, a copy Could not be validated or acted upon.
Held, that section 175(3) of the Government of India Act, 1935, does not prescribe any particular mode in which authority must be conferred and that where authorisation is conferred ad hoc on any person, the requirements of the section must be held to be satisfied.
828 Held, further, that the award sent by the arbitrator to the court was the original and not a copy of the award and by applying the provisions of section 35 of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899, it was effectively validated.
The Rajah of Bobbili vs Inuganti China Sitaramasami Garu (1899) L.R. 26 I.A. 262, referred to.
