The assessee company was promoted with the idea of obtaining the Managing Agency of the Appollo Mills from M/s. Sassoon total of 25 lakhs shares of RS.
2 each.
According to the agreement the assessee company bad to take the whole of the block of shares belonging to the Sassoons and pay at Rs. 4 4 0 per share Rs. 12 1/2 lakhs for the managing agency.
As the assessee company had only RS.
20 lakhs as its paid up capital, it was necessary to sell 13 lakhs odd shares in order to pay off the Sassoons both for the Managing Agency and the shares.
Therefore during the course of negotiations the promoters of the assessee company entered into an agreement with some brokers for the sale of Rs. 19,76,000 shares.
As a result of the sale of shares the assessee company received a sum of Rs. 16,52.600 as excess over the purchase price which amount on taxation was held by the Income tax Officer not to be profits and therefore not taxable.
The case of the assessee company was referred to the Investigation Commission.
The Commission found that it was not the intention of the assessee company to retain the whole block of shares and that the sale of 13 lakhs odd shares was an adventure in the nature of trade, and directed that appropriate assessment be made, under the Indian Income tax Act and Excess Profits Tax Act.
At the instance of the assessee company the question was referred to the High Court under section 8(5) of the Taxation on Income (Investigation Commission) Act, 1947, which held that there were materials to justify the finding of the Commission that the purchase and sale of about 13 lakhs odd shares was an adventure in the nature of trade.
An appeal was taken to the Supreme Court against this order.
Held, that in considering the question whether the transac tion was or was not an adventure in the nature of trade, the court had to take into consideration the intention of the assessee 918 keeping in view the "legal requirements which are associated with the concept of trade or business" In the present case, the transaction that consisted of buy ing the managing agency of the Mill Company and the block of shares held by Sassoons was inescapably one of a commercial nature and had all the attributes of an adventure in the nature If of trade.
Held, further, that the jurisdiction which this Court would exercise in appeal was of the same character that a High Court would exercise.
Thus the question under article 14 of the Constitution could not be raised in these proceedings because this Court like the High Court was exercising its advisory jurisdiction and its power was confined to the question which arose before the High Court.
M/s. Ramnarain Sons (Pr.) Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay; , , Tata Hydro Electric Agencies, Bombay vs The Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay Presidency & Aden, (1037) L.R. 64 I.A. 215, Commissioner of, Income tax, Central and United Provinces, Lucknow vs M/s. Motiram Nandram, (1939) L.R. 67 I.A. 71, Jones vs Leeming, [1930) A.C. 415, Commissioner of Inland Revenue vs Reinhold, and Saroj Kumar Mazumdar vs Commissioner of Income tax, West Bengal, Calcutta, [1959] SUPP.
2 S.C.R. 846, distinguished.
Kishan Prasad & Co. vs Commissioner of Income tax, Punjab, , Edwards vs Bairstow, ; and G. Venkataswami Naidu & Co. vs The Commissioner of Income tax, [1959] SUPP.
1 S.C.R. 646, discussed.
