The respondents 1 and 2 constructed a bund on their own land and dug trenches with a view to protect their lands from being inundated by the flood waters of the Vakada drain; as a result of that, the flood water flowing from appellant 's field in the Northerly direction could not find an outlet and stagnated on his land thus doing damage to his crops.
The appellant based the right of drainage in the Northerly direction of all water falling on or invading his land including flood water on immemorial user, and not on the natural right of the owner of higher land to drain off water failing on his land on to lower lands.
The Courts below found inter alia that the inundation of the appellant 's land was not unusual, abnormal or occasional but was.
an event which occurred every year in the usual course of nature, and was a happening from time immemorial.
The High Court came to the conclusion that the flooding of the fields was not an event recurring periodically from time immemorial but something unusual and that water being a common enemy of all, the defendants Nos. 1 and 2 were within their rights in constructing the bunds and digging the trenches.
The point was whether a person had right to create an impediment in the flow of water along its natural direction.
Held, that a 'phenomenon ' can be said to have been happening from time immemorial if the date when it first occurred was not within the memory of a man or was shrouded in the mist of antiquity.
Where the court upon the evidence available was unable to fix the precise year of commencement of the phenomenon, the proper inference would be that the phenomenon had been known to occur from time immemorial.
Held, further, that the only right the riparian owner may have, is to protect himself against extraordinary floods, but even then he would not be entitled to impede the flow of the stream along its natural course.
When the owner of the lower ground by creating an embankment impedes the natural flow of water he would be obstructing the natural outlet for that water.
It would make little difference that the water happened to be not merely rain water, but flood water provided the flood water was of a kind to which higher land was subjected perodically.
837 In the present case the bund erected and the trenches dug up by the respondents 1 and 2 causing stagnation of flood water constituted a wrongful act.
