The assessee entered into a contract for working certain collieries.
As he did not have the requisite funds, he entered into an agreement with M whereunder M was to advance a sum upto Rs. 11/2 lacs, but could withdraw the money at any time and stop further advances and was not liable for any losses; the assessee was to pay interest on the advances at 6% per annum in addition to a sum equivalent to 11/16th of the net profits of the business.
In pursuance of the agreement M made advances to the assessee and the assessee paid interest and 11/16th of his net profits to M.
The assessee claimed these amounts paid to M as allowable deductions under section 10(2)(iii) or under section 10(2)(xv) of the Income tax Act.
The amount paid as interest was allowed but the other sums paid were not allowed on the ground that these sums were not wholly and exclusively laid out for the purpose of the business.
Held, that the assessee was entitled to the deductions claimed.
The case had to be decided according to the tenor of the agreement and the circumstances of the case.
In order to justify the deduction of the sum given up had to be for reasons of commercial expediency; it may be voluntary but so long as it was incurred for the assessee 's benefit, e.g., the carrying on of his business, the deduction was claimable.
In the present case there was nothing to show that the assessee could have made any better arrangements or would not have lost the contract had he not entered into the agreement with M. Therefore in a commercial sense the payments were an expenditure wholly and exclusively laid out for the purpose of the business.
Commissioner of Income tax vs Chandulal Keshavlal, , followed.
Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay vs M/s. jaggannath Kissonlal; , , M/s. Haji Aziz & Abdul Shakoor Bros. vs The Commissioner of Income tax, ; , and Strong vs Woodifield, ; , relied on.
Pondicherry Railway Company vs Commissioner of Income tax, Madras, (1931) L.R. 58 I.A. 239, distinguished.
Union Cold Storage Co. Ltd. vs Adamson, , 360 Tata Hydro Electric Agencies Ltd., Bombay vs The Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay Presidency.
(1937) L.R. 64 I.A. 215, Robert Addie & Sons ' Colleries, Ltd, vs Commissioners of Inland Revenue, , Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay Presidency vs Tata Sons Ltd. , The Indian Radio and Cable Communications Company Ltd. vs The Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay, , British Sugar Manufacturers Ltd. vs Harris, , referred to.
