By section 68 D(2) of the , "The State Government may, after considering the objections and after giving an opportunity to the objector or his representatives and the representatives of the State Transport Undertaking to be heard in the matter, it they so desire, approve or modify the scheme".
The appellant 's objections to the draft scheme in question were heard by the Legal Remembrance, appointed by the State Government to hear such objections, under r. 7(6) of the Rajasthan State Transport Services (Development) Rules, 1960, framed under section 68 1 of the Act.
The appellant applied to the said Officer for permission to give evidence in order that he could show that the entire scheme ought to be rejected.
His applications were rejected by the Officer holding that the Rules did not provide for recording of evidence and that according to a decision of the Rajasthan High Court, dated November 9, 1960, section 68 D(2) of the Act did not empower him to cancel the draft scheme in its entirety.
He, therefore, heard the arguments addressed on behalf of the appellant and approved the scheme.
After moving unsuccessfully the Rajasthan High Court, the appellant appealed to this Court by special leave, Held, that the Officer was in error on both the points.
Section 68 D(2) of the Act clearly implies that the authority which has to approve or modify the scheme, has also the power, if it thinks proper, to disapprove the scheme altogether.
The words " may approve" in the section, properly construed, must also include "may not approve".
The use of the word "shall" in r. 7(6) of the Rules instead of the word "may", which is otherwise similar in its terms to section 68 D(2) of the Act,.can make no difference.
In hearing objections under section 68 D(2) of the Act, the State Government or its Officers act as a quasi judicial tribunal and regard being to the nature of the objections and the purpose of the hearing thereunder, there can be no doubt that production of evidence, both oral and documentary, is clearly contemplated by the section.
979 Gullapalli Nageswara Rao vs Andhra Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation, [1959] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 319, referred to.
Bat that does not mean that the parties can produce any amount of evidence merely to prolong the proceeding.
It is for the State Government or the Officer to decide whether the evidence sought to be adduced is necessary and relevant to the enquiry and, if so, they will have all the powers that a court has of controlling the giving and recording of such evidence.
Where a draft scheme is disapproved under section 68 D(2) and thus stands rejected, any fresh scheme that may have to be framed, must be framed according to the procedure prescribed by Ch.
IVA of the Act.
