The petitioners, representing certain tile factories, challenged the validity of the , as also the notification issued by the Kerala Government prescribing minimum rates of wages in respect of employment in the tile industry on the report of a committee constituted under the Act and consisting of the representatives both of the employers and employees who agreed with its recommendations.
The case of the petitioners was that the notification had in effect fixed not minimum wages but fair wages and since neither the committee nor the Government in fixing them had considered the capacity of the employers to pay, the notification was void.
Held, that in view of the decisions of this Court the con stitutional validity of the Act could no longer be in doubt and any hardship that may be caused to employers by the wages fixed under the Act or their incapacity to pay the same are irrelevant considerations in fixing such wages.
947 The Edward Mills Co. Ltd. vs The State of Ajmer, ; , Bijay Cotton Mills Ltd. vs State of Ajmer, ; and M/s. Crown Aluminium Works vs Their Workmen; , , referred to.
While, therefore, in fixing the minimum wage nothing can be added to its components that may take it near the lower level of the fair wage, the minimum wage must ensure not only the sustenance of the employee and his family but also preserve his efficiency as a worker and that is what is contemplated by the Act.
It is an error to think that the minimum wage is just what a worker requires to cover his physical needs and to keep himself above starvation.
There can be no analogy between the which prescribes the economic and industrial minimum and a statute which prescribes its own minimum that approximates more or less to the fair wage standard and so makes it necessary to consider the employer 's capacity to pay.
Express Newspapers (P.) Ltd. vs The Union of India, , explained and distinguished.
This Court would ordinarily refuse to consider the merits of the wage structure set up by the Notification on the recommendations of the committee, agreed to by the representatives of the employers and the employees.
The fact that wages paid in other industries in the State or in other States in comparable concerns are lower does not necessarily show that the rates prescribed by the Notification are unduly high.
A notification under the Act must apply to all the factories in the State and the State cannot permit or be associated with a departure from it for that would amount to a contravention of SS. 22 and 25 of the Act.
If a departure is considered necessary, the proper course would be to withdraw the notification in respect of the area concerned or to reconsider and modify it if necessary.
