The appellant was convicted by the Court of Session, High Court, Calcutta, of offences under section 120B read with section 471 and section 471 read with section 466 of the Indian Penal Code in respect of an import licence.
His appeal against the order of conviction and sentence passed by the trial judge was summarily dismissed by the High Court.
Although the conspiracy was entered into at Calcutta the offences of using the forged documents as genuine were committed at Madras.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant in this Court that the said offences having been committed outside the territorial jurisdiction of the Calcutta Courts, they had no jurisdiction to try the offences under section 471 read with section 466 of the Indian Penal Code, even though committed in pursuance of the conspiracy and in course of the same transaction.
Held, that the desirability of trying all the overt acts committed in pursuance of a conspiracy together is obvious and SS.
177 and 239 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, properly construed, leave no manner of doubt that the court which has the jurisdiction to try the offence of criminal conspiracy has also the jurisdiction to try all the overt acts committed in pursuance of it even though outside its territorial jurisdiction.
jiban Banerjee vs State, A.I.R. 1959 Cal.
500, overruled.
Pritam Singh vs The State of Punjab, A.I.R. 1956 S.C. 415, referred to.
Babulal Choukhani vs The King Emperor, (1938) L.R. 65 I.A. 158, relied on.
It is evident from the relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure that of the two types of jurisdiction of a criminal court, namely, (1) that of trying a particular offence and (2) its territorial jurisdiction, while the former goes to the root of the matter and any transgression of it renders the entire trial void, the latter is not of a peremptory character and leaves the place of trial open.
Assistant Sessions judge, North Arcot vs Ramaswami Asari, Mad. 779, referred to.
Although SS. 235 and 239(a) of the Code of Criminal Proce dure do not expressly so provide, there can be no doubt that 102 they contemplate the joint trial of offences and persons mentioned therein in a court whether or not all the offences to be tried by it are committed within its territorial jurisdiction, the only limitation being that the offences must have been committed in the course of the same transaction.
Section 177 of the Code, therefore, does not control section 239.
No presumption as to the approval of the Legislature of a particular construction of a statute can be drawn from the absence of any statutory modification of its provisions unless there is a consistent series of decisions in favour of that construction.
Case law discussed.
