In 1948 the Central Government referred a number of cases in which the petitioner was concerned, to the Income tax Inves tigation Commission set up under the relevant provisions of the Taxation on Income (Investigation Commission) Act, 1947.
After the Commission had submitted the report under section 8 A(1) of the Act, in which the total tax payable on the undisclosed income upto March 31, 1947, was estimated, the petitioner applied for a settlement of his case by offering to pay the amount of tax in instalments and by agreeing to pay the whole amount immediately in case of default in payment of any of the instalments in time.
The Central Government accepted the terms suggested by the petitioner and passed an order on November, 21, 1949, under section 8 A(2) of the Act directing the service of a demand notice on the petitioner and recovery of the tax in accordance with the terms and conditions of the settlement.
On December 2, 1949, a notice of demand was issued to the petitioner who, in pursuance thereof, made certain payments.
But as the petitioner was unable to make full payment within the stipulated periods, the whole amount outstanding became immediately payable and certain properties belonging to him and his family were attached by the Collector of the district Concerned for the recovery of the amount.
On June 8, 1959, the petitioner filed a writ petition tinder article 32 of the Constitution of India challenging the legality of the demand notice dated December 2, 1049, and the subsequent proceedings taken in pursuance of that notice on the ground that after the coming into force of the Constitution of India on January 26, 1950, they were violative of the fundamental right of equal protection of the laws guaranteed under article 14, inasmuch as what he had agreed to pay the Government as a result of the settlement was really a debt, and he had been dealt with differently from other debtors who owed money to the State under a contractual liability.
Held, (1) that the proceedings against the petitioner cul minating in the service of the notice of demand against him were all completed before the coming into force of the Constitution and the petitioner cannot challenge those proceedings under 967 article 14 of the Constitution, because it is well settled that the Constitution is prospective and not retrospective; (2) that the true scope and effect of sub section
(2) of section 8 A is to enforce the terms of any settlement arrived at in pursuance of sub section
(1), which was really income tax which had escaped assessment; (3) that the petitioner belonged not to the larger class of debtors of Government but to a special class which had evaded payment of income tax for which the procedure laid down in section 8 A(2) was one and the same, and that the classification being reasonable having a just relation to the object of the provision, the recovery procedure cannot be challenged as discriminatory under article 14.
Suraj Mail Mohta and Co. vs A. V. Visvanatha Sastri and Another, [1955] 1 S.C.R.448, M. CT.
Muthiah & two Others vs The Commissioner of Income tax, Madras & Another, ; and Basheshar Nath vs The Commissioner of Income tax, Delhi & Rajasthan and Another, [1959] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 528, distinguished.
