The wajib ul arz of village Buland, teshil and district Rohtak, provided as follows: "No non proprietor can settle in the village or build a house without the consent of the owner of the estate.
Whenever anybody settles, he obtains land or house from the proprietor of the same and he can live there so long as he pleases.
Whenever he abandons the village, if the house belongs to the Shamlat of it falls into the possession of the proprietor About the houses of non proprietors there is no customary right to sell or mortgage residential houses, remove the material or build burnt brick house without the consent of the proprietor If any person dies heirless his house reverts 152 to the possession, of the proprietor of the estate in which it is situate", and mentioned the mendicants as a type of non proprietors settled in the village.
One F, a Muslim belonging to that class, migrated to Pakistan.
The appellants, who were proprietors, took possession of his dwelling house.
The Custo dian of Evacuee Property claimed it as evacuee property.
The appellants ' objection was finally dismissed by the Custodian General who held that the house was evacuee property and vested in the Custodian.
The High Court dismissed the appellants ' petition under article 226 of the Constitution holding that the right of a non proprietor to occupy a village site was a right in property and vested in the Custodian when the non proprietor became an evacuee.
In this Court, while the appellants relied on the wajib ul arz, on behalf of the respondents reliance was placed on section 18 of the .
Held, that section 18(1) of the Administration of Evacuee Pro perty Act, 1950, contemplated tenants, whether occupancy tenants or tenants for a certain time and applied only to the occupancy rights of a tenant.
Under the wajib ul arz, however, a non proprietor could have no such right in the site occupied by him as would make him a tenant of it.
Section 18(1) of the Act, therefore, had no application and the house in question reverted to the proprietors under the provisions of the wajib ul arz when the non proprietor abandoned the village and migrated to Pakistan.
It could not, therefore, vest in the Custodian.
It was not correct to say that under the wajib ul arz that F 's interest in the house was that of a lessee.
Associated Hotels of India vs R. N. Kapur, [1960] 1 S.C.R. 368, held inapplicable,
