In 1946 the appellant was granted a right to cut and remove bamboos and certain other timber to be found in a specific area of the forest Village of Jun by certain persons known as Manjhis who held under a mokarari lease granted by the Raja of Ranka and whose names had been entered in the revenue records.
Meanwhile, the Bihar Private Forests Act, 1046, was enacted and it came into force on February 25, 1946.
This Act was repealed and reenacted by Bihar Act 9 Of 1948.
On October 14, 1946, the Governor of Bihar issued a notification under sections 14 and 21 of the Bihar Private Forests Act, 1946, declaring the forest of Jun as a protected forest.
Though in the Schedule to the said notification, against the column headed "name of the proprietor" the name of Raja of Ranka was entered, a copy of the notification was however served on the Manjhis.
Immediately on the issue of the notification the officials of the Government of Bihar prevented the appellant from working the forest any further.
The appellant challenged the validity of the proceedings under the Act by filing a suit.
The trial court held that the Act was valid but decreed the suit on the ground that the notification issued under section 14 was invalid, primarily for the reason that the name of the Manjhis as landlord had not been mentioned in it.
The High Court on appeal reversed the decree and dismissed the suit, holding that the omission of the name of the Manjhis in the notification did not render the same invalid and that even otherwise the proceedings under Ch.
III of the Act had been validated by section 2 of Bihar Act 12 Of 1949.
Held, that the Bihar Private Forests Acts of 1946 and 1948 were validly enacted and were within the Legislative compe tence of the Province under the Government of India Act, 1935, and were not otherwise obnoxious to its provisions.
Bihar Act 3 Of 1946 was an Act supplementary to, or rather a complement of the Indian Forests Act of 1927 and was clearly 293 covered by the Entry 'Forests ' in item 22 of Provincial Legislative List under which the Province could enact legislation not merely generally in relation to "Forests" but also to enable the Government to assume management and control of forests belonging to private proprietors.
Such a legislation involved no violation of the guarantee against "acquisition by the State without compensation" contained in section 299(2) of the Government of India Act, 1935.
Property, as a legal concept, was the sum of a bundle of rights and the imposition of a compulsory Governmental agency for the purpose of managing the forest with a liability imposed to account to the proprietor for the income derived as laid down by the statute was not an "acquisition" of the property itself within section 299(2) of the Government of India Act, 1935.
Nor does section 299(5) affect the matter.
The rights referred to in it are derivative rights, like interests carved by an owner a lessee, mortgagee etc.
and not an incident of a property right.
Held, further, that the correct specification of the name of the landlord was not a legal pre requisite of a valid notification under section 14 Of the Bihar Act 3 Of 1946 but the emphasis was on specification of the land and not so much on the owner or the person interested in it.
The proceedings taken under Ch.
III of the Act including the notification issued under section 14 Of the Act were valid and in accordance with the law and the validity of the service of notices required by section 14 or other provisions of the Act could not be challenged in view of the provisions of section 2 Of the Bihar Private Forests (Validating) Act, 1949.
Held, also, that the legislation under which the appellant 's rights were extinguished, subject to his claim for compensation, was a valid law which took effect in 1946, long before the Constitution came into force and the appellant had therefore no rights which could survive the Constitution so as to enable him to invoke the protection of Part III thereof.
M.D. Sir Kameshway Singh vs State of Bihar, Pat.
790 and Dwarkadas Shrinivas of Bombay vs Sholapur Spinning & Weaving Co., Ltd. ; , distinguished.
Khemi Mahatani vs Charan Napit, A.I.R. 1953 Pat. 365, K.B.N. Singh vs State, Pat. 69, Administrator, Lahore Municipality vs Daulat Ram Kapur, , State of West Bengal vs Subodh Gopal Bose, ; , Bhikaji Narain Dhakras vs State of Madhya Pradesh, ; , Slattery vs Naylor, and Shanti Sarup vs Union of India, A.I.R. , referred to.
Belfast Corporation vs O. D. Cars Ltd., , applied.
