The appellant was tried along with two others under sections 302 and 307 read with section 149 of the Indian Penal Code.
The prosecution case against them was that they along with ten others had taken part in a free fight resulting in the death of one belonging to the other side.
The Sessions judge held that the accused were accompanied by nine or ten others but that it was not proved who they were.
He, therefore, gave them the benefit of the doubt and acquitted them.
The High Court on appeal affirmed that decision.
It was urged on behalf of the appellant in this Court that (1) the offence of unlawful assembly had not been made out and (2) that in a free fight each participant is liable for his own act and the conviction of the appellant, who had caused no injury to the deceased, was untenable under sections 302 and 307 of the Indian Penal Code.
Held, that the contentions must fail.
It is only when the number of the alleged assailants is definite and all of them are named and the number of persons proved to have taken part in the incident is less than five that it can be said that there was no unlawful assembly.
The acquittal of the remaining named persons must mean that they were not in the incident.
The fact that they were named, excludes the possibility of other persons to be in the appellant 's party and especially when there can be no occasion to think that the witnesses naming all the accused could have committed mistakes in recognising them.
Since this was not the position in the instant case, it could not be said that the courts below were wrong in holding that there was unlawful assembly.
Dalip Singh vs State of Punjab, ; , referred to.
It is not correct to say that in a premeditated free fight each is liable for his individual act.
Where the accused party prepare for a free fight and can, therefore, have no right of private defence, their intention to fight and cause injuries to the other party amounts to a common object so as to constitute unlawful assembly.
Gore Lal vs State of U. P., Cr. A. No. 129 of 1959 dated 15 12 1960, referred to.
396 Even assuming that in the instant case the finding that there were more than five persons in the appeLlant 's party was wrong, the conviction of the appellant would be maintainable under section 302 and section 307 read with section 34 of the Indian Penal Code.
