On the failure of the appellant to carry out the requisition by the Municipality to execute certain repairs to its property the Municipality carried out the said repairs after giving due notice, the cost of which became recoverable from the appellant as tax under section 222(4) of the Ajmer Merwara Municipalities Regulation.
The Municipality applied under section 234 Of the Regulation to the Additional Tehsildar and Magistrate, II Class, Ajmer for the recovery of the amount of cost incurred by them, and the magistrate passed an order calling upon the appellant to pay the dues.
Against this order the appellant preferred a criminal revision application in the court of Sessions judge which was rejected as there was no ground to interfere in revision.
The appellant then moved the High Court in its revisional jurisdiction wherein the respondents raised preliminary objection that the criminal revision application filed by the appellant was incompetent since the Magistrate who entertained respondent No. 2 Municipal Committee 's application under section 234 was not an inferior criminal court under section 439 of the Criminal Procedure 266 Code, the said objection was upheld and the criminal revision application dismissed on that ground.
The question was whether the Magistrate who entertained the application made before him by the Municipality under section 234 of the Regulation was an inferior criminal court under section 439 Of the Code of Criminal Procedure, and also whether an application under section 234 could be made unless the rules were framed and the forms of the notice for making a demand under section 222 were prescribed.
Held, that the Proceedings initiated before a Magistrate under section 234 of the Ajmer Merwara Municipalities Regulation were merely in the nature of recovery proceedings and no other questions could be raised in the said proceedings.
The nature of the enquiry contemplated by section 234 was very limited; it prima facie partook of the character of a ministerial enquiry rather than judicial enquiry and at the best could be treated as a proceeding of a civil nature but not a criminal proceeding and the Magistrate who entertained the application was not an inferior criminal court.
Whatever may be the character of the proceedings, whether it was purely ministerial or judicial or quasi judicial, the Magistrate who entertained the application and held the enquiry did so because he was designated in that behalf and so he must be treated as a persona designate and not as a Magistrate functioning and exercising his authority under the Code of Criminal Procedure.
He could not therefore be regarded as an inferior criminal court.
Held, further, that if the rules were not prescribed as required by section 234 of the Regulation then all that could be said was that there was no form prescribed for issuing a demand notice, that did not mean that the statutory power conferred on the committee by section 222(1) to make a demand was unenforceable and an amount which was claimable by virtue of section 222(1) did not cease to be claimable just because rules had not been framed prescribing the form for making the said demand.
Crown through Municipal Committee, Ajmer vs Amba Lal, Ajmer Merwara Law journal, Vol.
V, 92, Re Dinbai Jijibhai Khambatta, Bom. 864, V. B. D 'Monte vs Bandra Borough Municipality, I.L.R. , Emperor vs Devappa Ramappa, , Re Dalsukhram Hurgovandas, and Municipal Committee, Lashkay vs Shahbuddin, A.I.R. 1952 M. B. 48, referred to.
