The respondent as the aradanaikar and trustee of the Emberumanar temple, dedicated to Sri Ramanujacharya, which was one of the group of temples built around the main temple of Athinathalwar in the Tirunelveli District, brought the two suits, out of which present appeals arose, for declaration of his right to the first theertham and other honours and perquisites in precedence over all other worshippers in the temple of Athinathalwar and his case was that he was entitled to them by virtue of his office in the Emberumanar temple.
The matters came up to the High Court.
There was a remand order and the Subordinate Judge who tried the suits thereafter held that the Emberumanar temple was a sub shrine attached to the main temple and as such the plaintiff was virtually an office holder in the main temple and the precedence claimed by him was attached to that office as part of the remuneration and decreed the suits.
On appeal the District judge, on a review of the entire evidence, set aside the findings arrived at by the trial court and dismissed the suits as not maintainable.
The appeals to the High Court were heard by a single judge who, on a reconsideration of the evidence, reversed the findings of the District judge and affirmed those of the Subordinate judge and decreed the suits.
It was, further, held by the High Court that, as one of the theerthakars, the appellant could be considered to be the holder of the office of arulipad in the main temple.
Held, that although it was not permissible under section 9 of the Code of Civil Procedure for a civil Court to entertain a suit for a declaration of religious honours and privileges simpliciter, it could entertain a suit to establish one 's right to an office in a temple and to the honours and privileges attached to such office as its remuneration or perquisites.
But the essential condition for the existence of an office was that its holder must be under a legal obligation to discharge the duties attached to it and be liable to penalty on failure to do so.
So judged, there could neither be an independent office of theerthakar, for he had no obligatory duties to perform, nor that of an arulipad, since that word only connoted that the names of theerthakays were called out by the archaka in a particular order.
65 510 The question whether first theertham or any other honours shown to a person were merely as a mark of respect on the occasion of his visit to the temple, or were part of the remunera tion attached to his office, must in every case be decided on evidence and in the latter case such honours must be shown to have formed an integral part of the ritual to be performed by the recipient as the holder of the office.
Athan Sadagopachariar Swamigal vs Elayavalli Srinivasa chariar, , approved.
Striman Sadagopa vs Krishna Tatachariyar, (1863) 1 M.H.C.R. 301, Sri Rungachariar vs Rungasami Buttachar, (1909) I.L.R. and Vathiar Venkatachariar vs P. Ponappa Ayyangar, , referred to.
Sri Emberumanar jeer Swamigal vs The Board of Commissioners for Hindu Religious Endowments, Madras, (1936) 71 M.L.J. 588, considered.
Held, further, that it was well settled that the High Court bad no jurisdiction to entertain a second appeal on the ground of erroneous finding of fact, however gross the error might seem to be.
In the instant case, the High Court was clearly in error in reversing the finding of the District judge, which was one of fact, that the Emberumanar temple was neither subordinate to, nore part of the Athinathalwar temple and no office holder of the former could, therefore, become an office holder of the latter.
