P died on July 14, 1932, leaving behind his widow, L as his heir.
On June 21, 1935, L executed a Zerpeshgi in favour of the respondents for an admittedly binding purpose, and on June 17, 1943, she sold to the appellant a portion of the properties which were the subject matter of the Zerpeshgi deed for the purpose of redeeming the Zerpeshgi and for certain other necessary purposes.
The respondents who were the reversioners 559 instituted a suit challenging the validity of the sale.
The trial court and the lower appellate court held that the sale was a proper one binding on the reversioners.
On second appeal, a Division Bench of the Patna High Court took a contrary view and allowed the appeal.
One of the judges while he did not disagree with the findings of fact of the courts below as to the necessity for the sale followed a decision of the same High Court to the effect that a widow cannot by selling properties subject to usufructuary mortgage jeopardise the right of reversioners to redeem them.
A different view of the law had been taken in a later decision of that court, but the learned judge declined to follow that decision observing that the practice of that Court was either to follow the previous Division Bench ruling in preference to the later or to refer the case to a larger Bench for settling the position, but that in the present case it was not desirable to adopt the latter course.
The other learned judge was of the opinion that the sale deed was not supported by necessity.
Held, that the High Court was in error in holding that the sale deed in favour of the appellant was not binding on the reversioners.
When there is a mortgage subsisting on the property, the question whether the widow could sell it in discharge of it is a question which must be determined on the facts of each case, there being no absolute prohibition against her effecting a sale in a proper case.
What has to be determined is whether the act is one which can be justified as that of a prudent owner managing his or her own properties.
Hanooman Persaud vs Mussamat Babooee, , Vankaji vs Vishnu, Bom.
534 and Viraraju vs Vankataratnam, I.L.R. , relied on.
Dasrath Singh vs Damri Singh, A.I.R. 1927 Pat.
219, dis approved.
Lal Ram Asre Singh vs Ambica Lal, 1929 Pat.
216, approved.
Held, further, that when a Bench of the High Court gives a decision on a question of law, it should in general be followed by other Benches unless they have reasons to differ from it, in which case the proper course to adopt would be to refer the question for the decision of a Full Bench.
Where two conflicting decisions are placed before a later Bench, the better course for the latter is to refer the matter to a Full Bench without taking upon itself to decide whether it should follow the one Bench decision or the other.
Buddha Singh vs Laltu Singh, All. 604, Seshamma vs Venkata Narasimharao, I.I.R. , Bilimoria vs Central Bank of India, A.I.R. 1943 Nag.
340 and Virayya vs Venkata Subbayya, A.I.R. 1955 Andhra 215, con sidered.
