The appellant brought a suit for the recovery of his moiety share of the joint family properties against his father and alienees from the latter and his case was that the alienations made by the father were not binding on his share of the properties.
The trial court dismissed the suit but the High Court on appeal reversed the decision of the trial court in respect of some of the properties, passed a preliminary decree for partition of those properties and confirmed the rest of the decree of the trial court.
The appellant applied for a certificate under article 133(1) Of the Constitution but the High Court rejected the same holding that the decree was one of affirmance and involved no substantial 453 question of law, following a decision of the Full Bench of that Court in Chittam Subba Rao vs Vela Mankanni Chellamayya.
The case admittedly satisfied the test of valuation prescribed by article 133(1)(a).
Held, that in construing the relevant clause of article 133(1) of the Constitution, which gives a constitutional right to the litigant to appeal to this Court, it would be inappropriate to adopt a technical or pendantic approach and the clause must be read as a whole and its material words given their plain grammatical meaning.
So construed, the correct test to determine whether an appellate decree affirmed the decision of the court below would be to compare the appellate decree, taken in its entirety, with the decision of the trial court taken as a whole.
If on such comparison it was found to do so, it was a decree of affirmance; but if it made a variation, whether for or against the appellant, it would be a decree of variation, the extent of the variation being wholly immaterial.
Chittam Subba Rao vs Vela Mankanni Chelamayya, I.L.R. [1953] Mad.
i, disapproved.
The words "appealed from" in the last part of article 133(1) are not words of limitation, and they do not refer to a part of the decree, that may be under appeal, but simply describe the decree viewed as a whole.
So also the word "decision" therein means the decision of the trial court as a whole and not the decision on any point falling for determination.
Rajah Tasadduq Rasul Khan vs Manik Chand, (1902) L.R. 30 I.A. 35, referred to.
Dhirendra Nath Sarkar vs Nischintapore Company, , held inapplicable.
The test in respect of value laid down by article 133(1)(a) is an independent condition that cannot control the meaning of the word 'decree ' in the last part of article 133(1), which provides for another additional and independent condition.
Raja Sree Nath Roy Bahadur vs The Secretary of State for India in Council, , Annapurnabai vs Ruprao (1924) L.R. 51 I.A. 319 and Narendra Lal Das Chaudhury vs Gopendya Lal Das Chaudhury, A.I.R. 1927 Cal.
543, considered.
Case law reviewed.
While any variation of the order as to costs, which is in the discretion of the Court under section 35 of the Code of Civil Procedure, cannot change the character of the appellate decree which is otherwise one of affirmance, variation of the order as to interest under section 34 of the Code must affect its character.
Any variation by concession or consent of parties or withdrawal of part of the subject matter of the decree cannot, however, affect its character.
58 454
