P executed a sale deed on January 31, 1946, in respect of a house in favour of D and presented it for registration on the same day.
On coming to know of the execution of the sale deed, the appellant who had a right of preemption, made the talab i mowasibat on February 2, 1946.
The deed was copied out in the Registrar 's books on February 9, 1946, and thereupon the registration became complete as provided in section 61 of the .
The appellant filed a suit for preemption.
D resisted the suit on the ground that the sale was completed on February 9, 1946, and the talab had been made prematurely.
The appellant contended that in view Of section 47 a registered document operated from the time it would have otherwise operated and the sale was completed on the date of its execution.
Held (per Sinha, C. J., Sarkar and Mudholkar, jj.) that the sale was completed only on February 9, 1946, when the registration was complete, that the talab was made prematurely and that the suit must fail.
Section 47 merely permitted a document when registered to operate from a date which may be earlier than the date on which it was registered, it did not say when the sale would be deemed to be complete.
A sale which was required to be registered was not completed until the registration of the deed was completed.
Tilakdhari Singh vs Gour Narain, A.I.R. (1921) Pat. 150, Nareshchandra Datta vs Gireeshchandra Das, Cal. 979, and Gobardhan Bar vs Guna Dhar Bar, I.L.R. (1940) II Cal.
270, approved.
Bindeshri vs Somnath Bhadry, A.I.R. (1916) All. 199 and Gopal Ram vs Lachmi Himir, A.I.R. (1926) All. 549, distin guished.
Per Das Gupta and Ayyangar, jj.
The sale was completed on the day of execution and the talab was made at the right time.
Section 61 had nothing to do with the time when the sale evidenced by the registered deed became complete; it refers merely to the fact that the registering officer had completed his duty.
Section 47 provided when a sale was deemed to be completed.
There was no difference between the time when a sale 475 became effective and the time it could be held to be completed.
Under section 47 the crucial test for determining the time from which the registered document was to have effect or be deemed to be completed was the intention of the parties.
The sale deed shows that the parties intended that the deed should be effective from the date of execution.
