The Bombay Agricultural Produce Markets Act, 1939, was enacted by the Bombay Legislature to provide for the better regulation of buying and selling of agricultural produce in the State of Bombay and the establishment of markets for such produce.
Under the provisions of the Act power was given to the commissioner by notification to declare certain areas as market areas as a result of which such areas could not thereafter be used for the purchase or sale of any agricultural produce specified in the notification, except under a licence.
Markets were to be established and market committees constituted with power to grant licences for operation in the market.
By section 11 a market committee may, subject to the provisions of the Rules and subject to such maxima as may be prescribed, levy fees on the agricultural produce bought and sold by licencees in the market area.
Section 29 enabled the State Government by notification in tile official Gazette to add to, amend or cancel any of the items of agricultural produce specified in the Schedule to the Act.
The petitioners challenged the validity of the Act and the rules framed thereunder, and in particular sections 4, 4A, 5, 5A, and 5AA which provided for the declaration of a market area and the establishment of a market, as unconstitutional on the ground that they placed unreasonable restrictions on their right to carry oil trade in agricultural produce and thus infringed their fundamental right guaranteed under article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution of India.
They also attacked the validity of sections 11 and 29 and rr. 53, 64, 65, 66 and 67.
Held: (1) that sections 4, 4A, 5, 5A and 5AA of the Act are constitutional and intra vires and do not impose unreasonable restrictions on the right to carry on trade in the agricultural produce regulated under the Act.
M. C. V. section Arunachala Nadar vs The State of Madras, [1959] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 92, followed.
660 (2) that the fee provided by section 11 though calculated on the amount of produce bought and sold, is not in the nature of sales tax as it is only a levy charged for services rendered by the market committee in connection with the enforcement of the various provisions of the Act.
Accordingly, section 11 is valid.
(3) that r. 53 in so far as it enables the market committee to fix any rates as it liked of the fees to be collected on agricultural produce bought and sold in the market area, is not valid, because under section 11 unless the State Government fixes the maxima by rule it is not open to the committee to fix any fees at all.
(4) that under section 29, the power given to the State Govern ment to add to, or amend, or cancel any of the items of the agricultural produce specified in the Schedule in accordance with the local conditions prevailing in different parts of the State is only in pursuance of the legislative policy which is apparent on the face of the Act, and, therefore, the section is intra vires.
The Edwards Mills Co. Ltd., Beaway vs State of Ajmer and Another, ; , applied.
(5) that r. 64 is merely a method of enforcing the regu latory provisions with respect to market yards and sub market yards and is valid.
(6) that rr.
65, 66 and 67, in so far as they authorise the market committee to grant a licence for doing business in any market area, go beyond the power conferred on the market committee by section 5A, and are ultra vires.
