Respondents Nos. 4 to 9 who were displaced persons from Pakistan, were allotted certain rural lands in village Karodian on a quasi permanent basis.
On information being received from Pakistan that they were entitled to urban allotment their allotment in village Karodian was cancelled and they were allotted urban land.
The land thus vacated in village Karodian was allotted to the appellants.
On July 22, 1952, r. 14(6) of the Administration of Evacuee Property Rules was amended and the power of the custodian to cancel quasi permanent allotments of rural evacuee property was taken away except in certain enumerated circumstances.
Thereafter respondents Nos. 4 to 9 applied to the Custodian for shifting back their allotment to village Karodian on the ground that they were really ' entitled to allotment of rural property.
The Custodian dismissed the application holding that r. 14(6) did not permit the cancellation of the allotment of the appellants.
Respondents Nos. 4 to 9 filed a revision application before the Custodian General who allowed the application and cancelled the allotment of the appellants.
The appellants contended that the Custodian General had no power to cancel their allotment.
The respondents replied that the wide powers of the Custodian General under s.27 of , were not affected by the restrictions imposed by the amended r. 14 (6) on the power of the Custodian to cancel allotments.
Held, that the Custodian General had no power to cancel an allotment of rural property made on a quasi permanent basis in a revision application against an order of the Custodian made after July 22, 1952.
The power of the Custodian under section 10 of the Act to cancel allotments was subject to the rules.
The amended r. 14(6) restricted the power of the Custodian to cancel such an allotment to the circumstances mentioned therein and the present case did not fall within any of those excep 739 tions.
Amended r. 14(6) could not be resorted to for cancellation of allotments made before July, 22, 1952.
The power of the Custodian General under section 27 of the Act was to see whether the order passed by the Custodian was legal and proper ; he had no power to do something which the Custodian could not have done or which he was prohibited from doing.
