The appellant supported his brother and his nephew for a number of years as they were doing no work.
In the year 1943 he made a gift of Rs. 7,60,000 odd to them though he had to overdraw his account with the Bank and to pay interest or the amount borrowed to raise the money.
He also made a transfer of some of his businesses to them.
His explanation was that these gifts were made to set these two persons up in business.
The Income tax Officer held that the gifts were riot bonafide and he assessed, the income of all the businesses in the hands of the appellant.
The appellant had produced letters from some businessmen in support of his case.
One such person was one M. who was examined by the Income tax Officer without notice to the appellant.
Later, however, a copy of the statement of M. was taken by the appellant 's counsel and at his request M. was summoned for cross examination but on the date fixed none appeared for the appellant who was also absent.
The appellant made a petition under section 66(1) of the Income tax Act to the Tribunal asking that a number of questions of law be referred to the High Court.
Only one question was referred by the Tribunal which declined to refer the other questions.
In the High Court the question referred by the Tribunal was answered against the appellant on the admission of his counsel.
The High Court was moved also under section 66(2) to order a reference of the remaining questions but the High Court rejected the application.
The appellant did not appeal against these two orders of the High Court and instead filed appeals against the orders of the Tribunal.
The appellant relied upon two cases of this Court viz. Dhakeshwari Colton Hills ' Case and Baldev Singh 's case and contended that tile appeal to this court was competent.
Held, that the appeals were incompetent in view of the decisions of this Court in Chandi Prasad Chokhani vs State of Bihar and The Indian Aluminium Co., Ltd. 840 Held.
further, that an appeal against an order of the High Court deciding a question referred or against a refusal to call for a statement can only be brought before the Supreme Court under section 66(A) of the Income tax Act, if the High Court decides the question referred, and under article 136 of the Constitution if the High Court refuses to call for a statement.
There can be no direct appeal to the Supreme Court by passing the decisions of the High Court.
Held,.
also, that there was neither any breach of the principles of natural justice in this case nor the existence of circumstances as existed in Baldev Singh 's case to justify the appeal.
Held, that where a witness has been examined by the Income tax Officer behind the back of the assessee but a copy of the statement of the witness is made available, to the assessee and an opportunity is given to him to cross examine the witness, thereis no breach of the principle of natural justice.
ChandiPrasad Chokhani vs State of Bihar.
(1962) 2 S.C.R. 276and Indian Aluminium Co., Ltd., vs Commissioner of Income tax.
(Civil Appeal No. 176 of 1959, decided on April 24, 1961) followed.
Dhakeshwari Cotton Mills Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income.
tax ; and Sardar Baldev Singh vs Commissioner of Income tax, Delhi and Ajmer.
; , explained. ,
