The constituent members of the appellant Association, who carried on business in iron and steel articles were assessed to sales tax for the years 1953 54 and 1954 55 under a notification dated October 24, 1953, issued by the State of Madhya Bharat under section 5(2) of the Madhya Bharat Sales Tax Act, Samvat 2007, (Act No. 30 of 1950).
The appellant moved the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution challenging the validity of the assessment on the ground that the said articles were covered by the declaration made by Parliament by section 2 of the Essential Goods (Declaration and Regulation of Tax on Sale or Purchase) Act, 1952, that iron and steel were essential commodities within the meaning of article 286(3) of the Constitution which was operative from August 9, 1952.
The High Court found against the appellant.
Held, that even assuming that the words "iron and steel" in Entry 14 of the Schedule to the Act were comprehensive enough to include articles made of iron and steel, that would not necessarily render the notification invalid under article 286(3) of the Constitution.
Article 286(3), as it stood before the Constitution (Sixth Amendment) Act, 1956, could be successfully invoked only if three conditions were satisfied, (1) that the impugned legisla.
tion was one by the Legislature of a State, constituted under the Constitution, (2) that it was subsequent to the declaration made by the Parliament as to the essential character of the commodity and (3) that it could be, but was not, reserved for the President 's consideration and assent.
It was obvious, therefore, that a subsequent Parliamentary 925 declaration could not affect the validity of an enactment retrospectively.
Sardar Soma Singh vs The State of Pepsu and Union of India, ; and Firm of A. 'Gowrishankar vs Sales Tax Officer, Secunderabad, A. I. R. , referred to.
Although the Art, tinder which the impugned notification was made, satisfied the first condition, it did not satisfy the second or the third and, consequently, its validity could not be questioned under article 286(3) of the Constitution.
Held, further, that it was apparent from section 3 of the Essential Goods (Declaration and Regulation of Tax on Sale or Purchase) Act, 1952, that if a law had been passed prior to the commencement of the Act authorising the imposition of a tax its validity could not be challenged on the ground that the said commodity was subsequently declared by the Act to be essential for the life of the community.
The impugned notification and the State Act under which it was made were, therefore, outside the purview of section 3 of the Act.
