Section 73 of the Indian Evidence Act empowers the court to, obtain specimen writing or signature and finger impressions of an accused person for purposes of Comparison.
11 Sections 5 and 6 of the Identification of Prisoners Act empower a Magistrate to obtain the photograph or measurements of an accused person.
Section 27 of the Indian Evidence Act permits the reception in evidence of statements made by an accused person in police custody which lead to a discovery.
It was contended by the accused persons that the obtaining of evidence in any of these ways amounted to compelling the person accused of an offence "to be a witness against himself" in contravention of article 20(3) of the Constitution.
It was further contended that it 'was implicitly the fact that the accused was in police custody when ' the specimen signatures or thumb impressions etc.
were obtained that compulsion was used.
Held, that there was no infringement of article 20(3) of the Constitution in compelling an accused person to give his specimen handwriting or signature, or impressions of his thumb, fingers, palm or foot to the investigating officer or under orders of a court for the purposes of comparison.
Held, further, that the provisions of section 27 of the Indian Evidence Act did not offend article 20(3) unless compulsion was used in obtaining the information.
Compulsion was not inherent in the receipt of information from an accused person in the custody of a lice officer; it will be a question of fact in each case to be determined by the court on the evidence before it whether compulsion had been used in obtaining the information.
M.P. Sharma vs Satish Chandra, ; , reconsidered.
Per Sinha, C.J., Imam, Gajendragadkar, Subba Rao, Wanchoo, Raghubar Dayal, Rajagopala Ayyangar and Mudholkar, jj.
The correct position with respect to the guarantee under article 20(3) is that (i) the guarantee includes not only oral testimony given in court or out of court but also statements in writing which incriminate the maker when figuring as an accused person; (ii) the words "to be a witness" in article 20(3) do not include the giving of thumb impression or impression of palm, foot or fingers or specimen writing or exposing a part of the body by an accused person for identification; (iii) "self incrimination" means conveying information based upon the personal knowledge of the given and does not include the mere mechanical process of 12 producing documents in court which do not contain ' any statement of the accused based on his personal knowledge; (iv) in order to come within the prohibition of article 20(3) the testimony must be of such a character that by itself it should have the, tendency to incriminate the accused; and (V) to avail of the protection of article 20(3) the person must have stood in the character of an accused person at the time he made the statement.
Per section K. Das, Sarkar and Das Gupta, JJ. (i) The protection afforded by article 20(3) is not merely in respect of testimonial compulsion in the court room but extends also to compelled testimony previously obtained from the accused.
(ii) The words "to be a witness" in article 20(3) mean,, to furnish evidence" and cannot be confined to imparting personal knowledge; such evidence can be furnished through lips or by production of a thing or of a document or in other modes.
(iii) An accused person furnishes evidence when he gives his specimen handwriting or impressions of his fingers or palm or foot.
(iv) But in doing so the accused does not furnish evidence against himself as by themselves these specimens or impressions do not incriminate or even tend to incriminate the accused and he cannot be said to be compelled "to be a witness against himself " when he is compelled to give the specimen or impression.
