Government of India published a 'scheme known as the "Export Promotion Scheme" according to which the value of import licence for raw materials in an industry depended upon the value of specified varieties of goods exported by the applicant for an import licence.
It also empowered the Controller of Imports and Exports under cl. 2 'of Appendix 42 of the Import (Control) order 1955 to issue a license up to 66 2/3 per cent of the export value in the case of Indian artsilk sarees and up to 100 per cent in the case of other Indian artsilk fabrics.
The appellant firm R of exporters and importers relying upon cl.2 of the Export Promotion Scheme applied for an import licence equivalent to the value of the goods it had exported and earned foreign exchange.
In view of certain malpractices the Government of India suspended the "Export Promotion" scheme and set up a committee for verification of the values of goods exported.
The Committee after scrutinising the firm 's claim found that rates of some of the items could not be accepted as reasonable, and recommended an import licence approximately of the value of 45 per cent of the goods exported.
The firm R after making an infructuous demand for a licence for the full value of the goods exported filed a writ petition.
They submitted that the Controller of Licences had arbitrarily reduced the value of their import licence and had thereby unlawfully infringed their fundamental right.
They also claimed that the Controller was bound to grant licence under the Export Promotion Scheme for the full value of the goods exported by them and in failing to do so had practised discrimination 73 against them, because several other importers during the identical period were given licences for the full value of goods exported.
Held, that the fundamental right of a citizen to carry on any occupation, trade or business under article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution is not absolute; it is subject to reasonable restrictions which may be imposed by the State in the interest of the general public.
The right of the State to impose control in the larger interest of the general public on imports has accordingly not been denied; nor is the authority of the State to issue the Imports (Control) Order, 1955 in exercise of the powers conferred by the Imports and Exports (Control) Act providing for imposition of restrictions by permitting import of certain goods only in accordance with the licences or customs permits granted by the Central Government, open to challenge.
The authority to grant or refuse to grant the licence is conferred upon high officers of the State and the grant of licence is governed by the Import Trade Control Policy and detailed provisions are made setting out the grounds on which licences may be refused, suspended or cancelled and provision to afford a hearing before action is taken is also made; thus the powers conferred under cl.3 of the Imports (Control) Order, 1955 are not uncanalised or arbitrary.
The power granted to the licensing authority to grant licences only up to the maximum specified in cl.2 of the appendix 42 is by itself not an unreasonable restriction, nor will the notification directing scrutiny of all applications amount to imposing an unreasonable restriction.
The clause invests the Controller with authority, it does not impose an obligation upon him enforceable at the instance of the exporter, to issue a licence for the amount (subject to the maximum prescribed) claimed by the exporter.
The power is plainly discretionary and the orderd by the Controller granting a licence only for 45% of the goods exported does not infringe the fundamental right of the petitioner under article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution by imposing an unreasonable restriction.
Held, further that in the absence of evidence to show that discriminatory treatment was made between the aggrieved person and to persons similarly circumstanced, there can be no violation of article 14 of the Constitution which confers a guarantee against arbitrary discrimination between persons similarly circumstanced .
Held, also that where an application for writ of mandamus, direction or order under article 226 of the 74 Constitution is dismissed by the High Court, the only remedy to the aggrieved person is to come up by appeal and he has no right to be heard as an intervener.
