The appellant obtained a preliminary and then a final mort gage decree against the respondent and thereafter a personal decree for the debt remaining due to him 'after sale of the property mortgaged.
The appellant applied for execution of the personal decree and thereupon the respondent sued for relief under section 36 of the Bengal Money lenders Act, 1940, by reopening the personal decree.
In the suit relief for reopening the preliminary decree and final decree was not claimed.
The personal decree was reopened in that suit and an instalment decree for a smaller amount passed instead, which was ultimately upheld by the High Court.
The respondent failed to pay the instalments and the appellant applied for executing the decree.
The respondent then filed another suit under section 36 of the Act for reopening the preliminary and final decrees.
The Subordinate judge dismissed the suit holding that it wag barred as res judicata and the District judge on appeal affirmed that decision.
But the 881 High Court in second appeal reversed those decisions and directed the preliminary and the final decrees be reopened and remanded the case to the trial court for passing a fresh preliminary decree.
Hence this appeal with special leave.
Held (per Kapur and Shah, JJ.), that section 36 of the Bengal Money lenders Act, 1940, contemplated the filing of one and not successive suits for the reopening of transactions including decrees and obtaining relief under the Act.
If in such a suit, the borrower failed to seek the entire relief he was entitled to and abandoned his right to a part of the relief, he would be precluded from seeking that relief in another suit.
The principle underlying r. 2 of 0. 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure as also the principle of res judicata applied to a suit under section 36 of the Act.
Per Hidayatullah, J. When the respondent moved the executing court under section 36 of the Act he had not filed a suit but only an application.
It was the duty of the court thereunder to give him full relief although he might not have asked for it.
If the court failed in its duty and he filed a suit no question of waiver or constructive res judicata could at all arise.
This was made clear by the non obstante words of sub sections
(1) and (6) Of section 36 and the question that arose under the section was not s? much of the right of a party as of the duty of the court to give entire relief under the Act.
The remedies enjoined by the Act were not exclusive of one another, either expressly or by necessary intendment, and were intended to give the widest possible relief to the borrowers.
jadhunath Roy vs Kshitish Chandra Achariya Choudhury (1949) L.R. 76 I.A. I79 and joy Chand Lal Babu vs Kamalaksha Choudhury, (1949) L.R. 76 I.A. 131, referred to.
Since the Act required that the decrees passed against the respondent had to be reopened, no provision of the Code of Civil Procedure or of equity could bar the suit, the former being expressly excluded and the latter made inapplicable by the substantive provisions of the Act.
