The material terms of the lease in.
controversy provided that for the first 20 years the lessee was to pay a fixed rent of Rs. 350/ every year in advance and if if removed his factory within that period be would still have to pay the 'said rent for the twenty years retaining his right to possession; that thereafter he would be free to continue the lease, as long as he liked subject to the payment of the annual rent of Rs. 400/for the first 10 years and thereafter of Rs. 500/ per year, with the right ' to terminate the, lease at any time and the lessor would not have the right to call upon him to give up possession at any time as long as if wanted to, keep the land for his purposes observing the terms of the agreement; that the lessee would be entitled to raise buildings godowns, factories, bunglows or any other structures as he desired; that the lessor would pay the annual land assessment to the Government and the lessee would pay any fines and taxes imposed by the Government for using. agricultural land for building purposes; that the lessee would be free to sublet or relet without affecting the terms and conditions of the lease and that the heirs, executors, administrators, successors and assigns of the lessee as much as those of the lessee would remain bound by the lease.
After more than twenty years had elapsed since the lease, which was a registered one, had been executed between the predecessors in interest of the parties, the respondent who succeeded to the original lessor 's title, brought the suit, out of which the present appeal arose, for ejectment of the assignee of the lessee 's interest on the ground that the lease created a tenancy at will and stood determined on service of notice to quit.
The trial court and the court of first appeal found in favour of the respondent and decreed the suit.
The High Court in second appeal confirmed the decree but relying on a decision of the Bombay High Court in Bavasaheb vs West Patent Co, Ltd. I.L.R. , held that after the lapse of the twenty years the lease was one for an indefinite period and could enure only during the lifetime of the lessee and such 877 assignees as bad been accepted by the original lessor and since the present assignee was not one of them he acquired no right under the lease.
Held, that the lease, read as whole and properly construed, created a permanent tenancy and not a tenancy at will or one for an indefinite period valid only during the life of the lessee.
It was not correct to say that the stipulation, granting the lessee the right to surrender the lease at any time after the first twenty years gave to the lessor in the absence of such a provision in the lease itself, the, right to call upon the lessee to at quit any time or that the stipulation was inconsistent with a permanent tenancy.
The presumption attaching to a lease for building purposes for no fixed period, therefore, was not weakened in the instant case.
Janaki Nath Boy vs Dina Nath Kundu, (1931) 35 C.W.N. 982 and Baboo Lekhraj Boy vs Kunhya Singh, (1877) L.R. 4 I.A. 233, referred to.
Babasaheb vs West Patent Co., Ltd., I.L.R. , distinguished, Navalram vs Javerilal, , Promada Nath Roy vs Srigobind Choudhry Cal.
648, Forbes vs Hanuman Bhagat, Pat. 452 and Commissioner of Income tax vs Maharajadhiraj Kumar Visheshwar Singh, Pat. 805, discussed.
Held, further, that it is always open to a lessee of any description to surrender his lease hold interest to the lessor by mutual consent.
It is not necessary in law that there should be such consent at the time when the surrender is made.
Since in the instant case, the surrender after the lapse of twenty ) cars had in terms been agreed to by the parties and that stipulation was for the benefit of the lessee, it could not be construed as in derogation of his right to a permanent tenancy.
