In exercise of the powers conferred by section 3 of the: Essential commodities Art, 1955, the Assam Government made the Assam Foodgrains (Licensing and Control) Order, 1961.
This Order provided that no person could do business in foodgrains including, rice and paddy, in wholesale quantities except under a licence issued thereunder.
Clause 5 of, the Order laid down in sub.
(a) to (e) matters which the licensing authority shall, among other matters, which have regard to in granting or refusing a license sub cl.
(e) being whether the applicant is a co operative society".
In 1959, directions had been issued to all, licensing authorities by the Government that the rights of monopoly procurement had been given to Apex Co operative Society.
The petitioner applied for a licence but was refused in view of the provisions of sub cl.
(e) of cl. 5 of the Order.
The petitioner challenged the order refusing the licence on the grounds: (1) that sub clause (e) was ultra vires 937 as ' it was beyond the powers granted to the State Government under section 3 read with section 5 of the Act, and (ii) that sub cl (e) had been applied in a discriminatory manner with a view to create a monopoly in favour of the Apex Co operative Society.
Held, (per C.J., Das and Ayyangar, JJ.), that sub cl.
(c) of cl.
5 of the Order was not ultra vires section 3 read with section 5 of the Act, but the impugned,order rejecting the application of the petitioner was bad as it infringed the rights of the petitioner guaranteed under Arts, 14 and 19 of the Constitution.
Section 3 of the Act authorised the making of an order to achieve two objects, for maintaining or increasing supplies of essential commodities and for securing their equitable distribution and availability at fair prices.
Sub clause (e) of cl. 5 of the Control Order,, 1961, which enabled the licensing authority to ' prefer a cooperative society in certain circumstances in the matter of granting a licence, was not unrelated to the objects mentioned in s.3 of the Act.
A co operative society may, by reason of the place which it occupies in the village economy of a particular area, be in a better position for maintaining or increasing supplies of rice and paddy and even for securing their equitable distribution and availability at fair prices.
Ramanlal Nagardas vs M. section Palnitkar, A. I.R. 1961 Guj.
38, distinguished.
Sub clause (e) permitted the licensing authority to give preference to co operative societies in certain cases but it did not.
have the effect of creating a monopoly in favour of co operative societies.
In the present case the licensing authority refused licence to the petitioner for the only reason and purpose of granting a monopoly to co operative societies; it had administered the law in a discriminatory manner and for the purpose of achieving the ulterior object of creating a monopoly in favour of co operatives which object was not within sub cl.
(a), The licensing Authority was influenced, not by considerations mentioned in cl. 5 of the Order, but by the instruction issued by the ' State Government to grant licences to cooperatives only.
It was not proper for the, Government to issue instructions to the licensing authorities when they were required to act according to the provisions of law.
Per Sarkar and Mudholkar,JJ.
Sub clause (e) of cl. 5 of the Order served the object of section 3 of the Act to maintain or increase the supplies of essential 'commodities and to secure their equitable distribution and availability at fair prices and Was not ultra vires.
Even it the Order allowed only one class, namely cooperative societies, to do the business and prohibited others.
it would; still advance the objects, of, the Act; and the prohibition of the others.
doing the business would amount.
to, reasonable restrictions under article 19(6).
938 Narendra Kumar vs The Union of india, (ISM 2 S.C.R. 375 and Glass Chatons Imports a Users ' Association vs The Union of India, (W.P. 65 of 1959, unreported), relied on.
The licensing authority had not exercised its power under sub cl.
(e) in a discriminatory manner in the prevent case.
The authority was entitled to give preference to a co operative society and that is what it has done.
Though the result of this preference was to prevent the petitioner from carrying on his business, it was in the circumstances, a reasonable restriction on his right as it was necessary for securing foodgrains at reasonable prices and in adequate quantities.
There were no directions given, by the State Government in 1961 to licensing authorities to grant licences only to co operative societies and it could not be said that the licencing authority had only carried out the directions of the Government and had not acted independently.
In fact, the Order itself carried a direction in sub cl.
(e) to give preference to co operative societies.
The co operative societics formed a class by themselves and a provision giving preference to such a class better served the objects of the Act, and had a clear nexus with the object of the Act and did not offend article 14.
