The , and the Minimum Wages Rules, framed thereunder, laid down the principle that the Government should provide for a day of 1 est to the workers for every period of 7 days and also to make provisions for making some payment in connection therewith.
The dispute between the workers and employers of the present case related to (a) arrears of wages for Sunday, the "weekly off" day on which no work was done and (b) arrears of wages for work 37 done on Sundays which should have been given as a weekly off day but was not so given and no compensatory day was given in lieu thereof as contemplated under the Minimum Wages Rules.
As regards arrears of wages for Sundays on which no work was done the workmen 's case was that they were entitled to payment for each such Sunday amounts equal to their average daily wages during the preceding week, that for the work done on Sundays without the compensatory "off day" they were entitled to three times the ordinary rate.
The respondent 's case was that on a proper interpretation of r. 23 of the Minimum (Wages Central) Rules, 1960, the Workmen were not entitled to payment for Sundays on which no work was done and that in any case they had been constructively paid for Sundays inasmuch as the daily wages were fixed at I/26th of the monthly wages.
The Industrial Tribunal rejected all the claims of the workmen.
On appeal by special leave.
^ Held, that contravention of r. 23 of the Minimum Wages Rules was punishable under the but the Industrial Tribunal had no authority to impose penalty in the shape of making the employer pay in respect of work done on Sundays something more than what he would have otherwise to pay.
Neither the nor the Rules contain any provision for such additional payment over and above what would be payable for over time work as such.
The workmen therefore cannot get three times the ordinary rate.
The phrase "for which" in r. 23 referred to the weekly holiday whether it was on a Sunday or on any other day of the week as permitted under the Rules.
No distinction was made between the holiday on the first day of the week and holiday on one of the five days immediately before or after the said day.
The scheme was for one holiday in the week and it was for that holiday that payment was provided.
Trustees of the Port of Bombay vs Authority under the Payment of Wages Act, (1957) I L.L.J. 627, A. C. C. vs Labour Inspector, (1960) 1 L. L. J. 192 and Jaswani Sugar Mills vs Sub divisional Magistrate, , approved.
The Central Government clearly intended under the Minimum Wages Rules that for work on a holiday something more than what was actually paid for six days of the week should be paid.
This could not be defeated by a statement that in form six days wages were paid, but in fact and in substance seven days wages were paid.
The plea of constructive payment must fail.
The argument that r. 23 did not apply to the workmen of the present case after the introduction of the piece rate scheme introduced in this case must be rejected 38
