The appellant took lease of an open land for construction of buildings suitable for residential, business, industrial or office purposes.
The appellant brought suits in the City Civil court, Bombay, for the recovery of arrears of rent in respect of premises built on the said open land, all within the city of Bombay thus in the area specified in Schedule I of the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947.
The appellant stated in the Plaint itself that the Bombay Rent Control Act, 1947, did not apply to the dcmiscd premises.
The defendants pleaded that the Rent Act applied and the City Civil Court had no jurisdiction to try the suit.
The trial judge held that part II of the Rent Act applied to the premises and consequently only the special courts specified in section 28 of the Rent Act had jurisdiction to entertain the suit and ordered the plaints in the suits to be returned to the plaintiff, for presentation to the proper court.
The Bombay High Court summarily dismissed the appeals from the said orders.
The point at issue for decision was whether "when a lessee takes lease of open land for the purpose of constructing on it buildings intended to be used for residence or for business, this amounts to "Letting for residence" or "letting for business".
The appellants ' contention was that as open land not intended to be used, as it is, for residence or business but for construction of buildings for residence or business was taken on lease the land was not being let for residence or business.
Held, that the words "let for residence, education, business or storage" in s.6 of the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947, are wide enough to include a letting for the achievment of these purposes by construction of buildings as also without construction of buildings.
Held, further, that on the facts of the present case, in each of these cages, the lease was taken with a view to construct, buildings thereon for residential, business, industrial or office purposes and the land let was therefore 'premises ' to 929 which under section 6(1) of the Bombay Rent Act, the provisions of Part II of the Act applied.
Vinayak Gopal v Laxman Kashinath I. L. R. , approved.
