The High Court set aside the Trial Court 's order of acquittal of the appellants and convicted them on a charge of murder under section 302 of the Indian Penal Code.
On appeal by the appellants by special leave ^ Held, that this Court in its earlier decisions emphasised that interference with an order of acquittal should be based only on "complying and substantial reasons" and held that unless such reasons were present an Appeal Court should not interface with an order of acquittal, but this Court did not try to curtail the powers of the appe11ate court under section 423 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Though in its more recent pronouncements this Court laid less emphasis on 105 "compelling reasons" the principle has remained the same.
That principle is that in deciding appeals against acquittal the Court of Appeal must examine the evidence with particular care and must also examine the reasons on which the order of acquittal was based and should interfere with the order only when satisfied that the view taken by the acquitting judge was clearly unreasonable.
Once the Court came to the conclusion that the view of the lower court was unreasonable that itself was a "compelling reason" for interference.
Once it was found that the High Court applied the correct principles in setting aside the order of acquittal this Court will not ordinarily interfere with the High Court 's order of conviction in appeal against acquittal o enter into the evidence to ascertain whether the High Court was right in its view of the evidence.
Only such examination of the evidence would ordinarily be necessary as is needed to see that the High Court approached the question properly and applied the principle correctly.
If the judgment of the High Court did not disclose a careful examination of the evidence in coming to the conclusion that the view of the acquitting court was unreasonable or if it appeared that the High Court erred on questions of law or misread the evidence or the judgment of the trial court, this Court would, unless the case was sent back to the High Court for re hearing, appraise the evidence for itself to examine the reasons on which the lower court based its order of acquittal and then decide whether the High Courts view that the conditions of the lower court was unreasonable, was correct.
If on such examination it appeared to the Court that the view of the acquitting court was unreasonable the acquittal would be set aside and if on the other had it appeared that the view was not unreasonable the order of acquittal would be restored.
Suraj Pal Singh vs State, , Ajmer Singh vs State of Punjab ; , Puran vs State of Punjab A.I.R. 1953 S.C. 459, Chinta vs State of M. P., Cr. A. No. 178 of 59 and Ashrafkha Haibatkha Pathan vs State of Bombay, Cr. A. No. 38 of 1960, referred to.
It was neither a rule of law nor of prudence that a dying declaration should be corroborated by other evidence before a conviction could be ba ed thereon.
Ram Nath vs state of M. P. A.l.
R. 1953 S.C. 420, referred to.
Khushal Ram vs State of Bombay, [l958] S.C.R. 552, followed.
A dying declaration did not become less credible if a number of persons were names are culprits 106 Khurshaid Hussain.
vs Emperor,(1941) 43 Cr.L.J.59, held erroneous.
