The respondent purchased at a revenue auction sale eight anna share of and obtained formal possession of that share on September 23, 1938.
relinquished his share in Khudkasht lands and they were recorded as the occupancy lands of his wife and sons.
In 1940 the appellant got a lease of those fields.
The respondent instituted a suit for possession of the lands against the appellant basing his claim on his proprietary right to recover possession, and obtained a decree on July 12, 1944.
The trial court 's decree was confirmed on April 20, 1951, by the High Court which held that the respondent was entitled to the lands as they were originally Khudkasht fields as part and parcel of the eight anna share purchased by him.
In the meantime on March 31, 1951, the Madhya Pradesh Abolition of Proprietary Rights (Estates, Mahals, Alienated Lands) Act, 1950, had come into force but the High Court did not consider the effect of the Act on the appeal before it.
Under section 3 of the Act the proprietory rights in an estate specified in the notification passed from the proprietor and became vested in the State free from all encumbrances, rand by section 4, after the issue of the notification under section 3 124 notwithstanding anything contained in any contract, grant or document or any other law for the time being in force, all rights, title and interest which a proprietor possessed on account of his proprietorship of the land within the estate became vested in the State, except, inter alia, His home farm land and occupied land.
Under section 2(g) of the Act home farm lands were those which were recorded as Sir and Khudkasht in the name of a proprietor in the annual papers for the year 1948 49, but in the present case the lands in respect of which a decree had been passed in favour of the respondent, were not so recorded.
On the other hand, the lands were declared Malik Makbuza of the appellant under section 41 of the Act.
In the execution application for the recovery of possession filed by the respondent the appellant raised objections that the respondent was not entitled to execute the decree for possession as his proprietary rights except his home farm lands, ceased to exist on March 1, 1951, by virtue of sections 3 and 4 of the Act and became vested in the State thereafter, and that the State had, after the date of vesting recognized the lands in suit to be tenancy land of the appellant.
The respondent 's plea was that The appellant was not entitled to raise such objections ill the executing court, that the executing court could not go behind the decree and, therefore, must execute it and deliver possession to the respondent.
The executing court dismissed the objections raised by the appellant, and the High Court took the view, relying upon Rahmatullah Khan vs Mahabirsingh, I. L. R. , that the lands in suit must be treated as home farm as it was the duty of revenue authorities to make correct entries in the village papers.
^ Held, that: (1) the principle that the executing court cannot question the decree and has to execute the decree has no operation on the facts of the present case because the objection of the appellant was based not with respect to the invalidity of the decree but on the effect of the provisions of the Madhya Pradesh Abolition of Proprietary Rights (Estates, Mahals, Alienated Lands) Act, 1950, which deprive the respondent of his proprietary rights including the right to recover possession over the lands in suit; (2) the word "document" ill section 4(1) of the Act includes a decree of the court; (3) the lands in suit could not be the home farm of the respondent as they were not recorded as his khudkasht in the annual papers of 1948 49, and consequently, his proprietary right was lost and got vested in the State on the coming into force of the Act; Rahmatullah Khan vs Mahabir Singh, I. I,.
R. , disapproved.
125 Chhote Khan vs Mohammad Obedullakhan, I. L. R. , distinguished.
(4) since the Act did not provide for the outgoing proprietor to recover possession of land by any process of law if he had become entitled to the possession of that land before the date of vesting, his right to get possession by executing his decree got lost to him after the date of vesting; and (5) the executing court should, therefore, have refused to execute the decree holding that it became inexecutable on account of the change in law and its effect.
