The appellant mill produced electricity over 100 volts exclusively for its own consumption.
It challenged the levy of the electricity duty by the Government of Madhya Pradesh (1) ; 283 under the C. P. and Berar Electricity Act as 1949, by the Madhya Pradesh Act 7 of 1956, on the grounds, firstly that on proper construction of section 3 of the Act it was not liable to pay any duty at all as the Table of rates did not prescribe any rate for electricity consumed by producers and, secondly, the levy of duty on electricity consumed by producer himself being in substance an excise duty could be levied only by the Parliament under Entry 84 List I.
If it was not an excise duty the levying of it was beyond the competence of the State Legislature in the absence of any appropriate Entry in the List. ^ Held, that on a combined reading of the definition of 'consumer ' in section 2(a) and 'producer ' in section 2(d 1) of the C. P. & Berar Act, 10 of 1949, a producer, consuming the electrical energy generated by him is also a consumer as he consumes electrical energy supplied by himself, falls squarely within the Table under section 3 of the Act prescribing rates of duty payable by a consumer and is therefore liable to pay duty thereunder.
Held, further, that the present Act for levy of duty upon consumption of electric energy was enacted under Entry 45B of the List II of the Government of India Act, 1935, corresponding to Entry 53 of List II of the Constitution where as the levy of duty of excise on manufacturer production of goods by Parliament is under Entry 84 of List I. The taxable event with respect to a duty of excise is 'manufacture ' or 'production '; and not 'consumption '; the levy upon consumption of electric energy cannot be regarded as duty of excise falling within Entry 84 of List I. Held, also, the language used in the Legislative Entries in the Constitution must be interpreted in a broad way so as to give the widest amplitude of power to the Legislature to legislate and not in a narrow and pendantic sense.
