In 1933 there were proceedings before the Sikh Gurdwaras Tribunal under the Sikh Gurdwaras Act, 1925, for determining whether the bunga in suit was the property of the Golden Temple.
In these proceedings K and J claimed to be owners of the bunga and claimed that he was the descendant of Maharaja Sher Singh and as such was entitled to the bunga as a manager.
The Tribunal rejected the claims of the Golden Temple and of K and J and held that the bunga was wakf property under the management of the descendants of Maharaja Sher Singh.
Subsequently, B brought a civil suit for possession of the bunga by ejectment of K and J on the ground that they being servants or servitors of the wakf had forfeited their right of residence as they were claiming rights adverse to the wakf.
K and J resisted the suit mainly on the grounds that was not competent to maintain the suit as he was not a descendant of Maharaja Sher Singh and that they had prescribed title by adverse possession.
^ Held, that sections 36 and 37 of the Act barred K and J from raising the question before the Civil Court whether B was a descendant of Maharaja Sher Singh.
The Act had given full powers to the Tribunal to decide, not merely the claim of the Sikh Gurdwara, but also of all the rival claimants before it.
Section 36 barred any court from questioning anything done by the Tribunal in exercise of its powers under the Act.
Section 37 barred any court from passing any order or decree or executing any order or decree if the effect of doing so was inconsistent with decision of the tribunal.
The decision of the Tribunal that the bunga was wakf property and that the descendants of Maharaja Sher Singh were the managers had become final.
The claim of B that he was a descendant of Maharaja Sher Singh was never challenged before the Tribunal and its decision was given at the instance of B. Held, further, that the suit was not barred by limitation either under article 142 or article 144 of the Limitation Act.
K and 326 J were in possession as servants or servitors and their possession was permissive.
From the decision of the Tribunal it was clear that no hostile title was set up by K and J against B at any time before the proceedings of 1933, as such the suit which was filed in 1943 could not be barred by limitation.
