On receipt of information that some smugglers were transporting gold from Amritsar into Jullundur, the police made a raid of the house of the first appellant in Jullundur and in the course of the search certain bars of gold were found on the person of some of the inmates of the house and in the house itself.
The gold found was seized by the police and the appellants were prosecuted on a charge of receiving stolen property.
The case however was not proceeded with and, in the meantime, the customs authorities contacted the police and on the order of the Magistrate on an application under section 180 of the , made by them the gold bars were delivered to them.
Proceedings were taken by the Collector of Customs for confiscation of the gold under section 167 (8) of the Act, and the appellants were prosecuted for an offence under section 167 (81) of the Act on the ground that the gold was smuggled and that the appellants, did the acts specified in that section knowing that the gold was of that character.
The Magistrate took the view that section 178A of the Act was applicable to the case so that the burden of proving that the gold was not smuggled could be laid on the appellants.
The question was whether the possession obtained by the customs authorities under section 180 of the Act was such that the goods could be treated as that seized under the Act within the meaning of section 178A of the Act. ^ Held, that the taking possession of the goods by the customs authorities when they were delivered to them under section 180 of the , did not amount to a seizure under the Act within the meaning of section 178A of the Act.
A seizure under the authority of law involved a deprivation of possession and when the police seized the goods the appellants lost possession which vested in the police so 365 that when the possession was transferred to the customs authorities by virtue of the provisions in section 180 there was no fresh seizure under the Act.
Accordingly, section 178 was not applicable to the case.
The term "seized" in section 178A means "taken possession of contrary to the wishes of the owner of property".
