The order of dismissal against the appellant was set aside by the High Court, holding inter alia, that reasonable opportunity was set afforded to the appellant before imposing the penalty dismissed and the appellant must be deemed to continue in service.
Thereafter the appellant was reinstated, but he was awarded salary at the rate of Rs. 76 11 0 till the order of dismissal, and at a token rate of Rs. 1/ for the period between the order of dismissal and reinstatement.
The appellant was again suspended and enquiry was directed against him in respect of dereliction of duty for which he had already been once dismissed and re instated.
The appellant moved the High Court for a writ to quash the order directing the said enquiry.
He claimed that Government had no power to re open the enquiry concluded by the decision of the High Court and that the State was bound to pay him salary with increments for the period of suspension as if he was on duty during that period.
The High Court, inter alia, held that the second enquiry against the appellant was not barred by virtue of the previous decision, but the fixation of token salary amounted to punishment which could not be imposed without following the procedure laid down in article 311 of the Constitution, and there was no justification for not granting him full salary.
The appellant came up in appeal to the Supreme Court by certificate.
^ Held, that the State Government was competent in the circumstances, to direct a fresh enquiry against the public servant for dereliction of duty, and to suspend him.
Where the order of dismissal of a public servant was declared invalid by the decree of a Civil Court the effect was that the public servant was never to be deemed to have been lawfully dismissed from service, and the order of reinstatement was superfluous.
It was not open to the authority 316 to deprive the public servant of the remuneration which he would have earned has he been permitted to work.
Held, further, that r. 54 of the Fundamental Rules of the Uttar Pradesh Government enables the State Government of fix the pay of a public servant, when dismissed is set aside in a departmental appeal, but that rule has no application to cases in which the dismissal of a public servant is declared invalid by the decree of a Civil Court and he is consequently re instated.
Dwarkachand vs State of Rajasthan, I.L.R. , Nanak Chandra Bairagi vs Supdt.
of Police, Sibsagar, I.L.R. and Mohan Singh Choudhri vs Divisional Personnel Officer, Northern Railway, Ferozepore Cantt.
I.L.R. , not applicable.
