M filed a suit at Asansol against H for recovery of money.
Later, H filed a counter suit at Indore against M for recovery of money.
In the Asansol suit one of the defences raised by H was that the Asansol court had no jurisdiction to entertain the suit.
H applied to the Asansol court to stay the suit but the court refused the prayer.
An appeal to the Calcutta High Court against the refusal to stay was dismissed with the direction that the preliminary issue of jurisdiction should be disposed of by the trial court immediately.
Thereupon, H applied to the Indore court for an injunction to restrain M from proceeding with the Asansol suit pending the disposal of the Indore suit and the court purporting to act under O. 39 Code of Civil Procedure granted the injunction.
M appealed to the Madhya Bharat High Court which dismissed the appeal holding that though O. 39 was not applicable to the case the order of injunction could be made under the inherent powers of the court under section 151 Code of Civil Procedure. ^ Held, that the order of injunction was wrongly granted and should be vacated.
Per, Wanchoo, Das Gupta, and Dayal,JJ.
The Civil courts had inherent power to issue temporary injunctions in cases which were not covered by the provisions of O. 39 Civil Procedure Code.
The provisions of the Code were not 451 exhaustive.
There was no prohibition in section 94 against the grant of a temporay injunction in circumstances not covered by O. 39.
But inherent powers were not to be exercised when their exercise was in conflict with the express provisions of the Code or was against the intention of the legislature.
Such powers were to be exercised in very exceptional circumstances.
A plaintiff of a suit in another jurisdiction could only be restrained from proceeding with his suit if the suit was vexatious and useless.
It was not so in the present case.
It was proper that the issue as to jurisdiction should be decided by the Asansol court as directed by the Calcutta High Court.
The Indore court could not decide this issue.
Beside, it was open to the Asansol court to ignore the order of the Indore court and to proceed with the suit.
This would place M in an impossible position.
An order of a court should not lead to such a result.
Varadacharlu vs Narsimha Charlu, A.I.R. 1926 Mad.258; Govindarajalu vs Imperial Bank of India, A.I.R. 1932 Mad. 180 ; Karuppayya vs Ponnuswami, A.I.R. 1933 Mad.
500(2); Murugesa Mudali vs Angamuthu Madali, A.I.R. 1938 Mad. 190 and Subramanian vs Seetarama, A.I.R. 1940 Mad. 104, not approved.
Dhaneshwar Nath vs Ghanshyam Dhar, A.I.R. 1940 All.185, Firm Richchha Ram vs Firm Baldeo Sahai, A.I.R. 1940 All.241, Bhagat Singh vs Jagbir Sawhney, A.I.R. 1941 Cal.
670 and Chinese Tannery Owners ' Association vs Makhan Lal, A.I.R. 1952 Cal.
550, approved.
Padam Sen vs State of U.P. [1961] 1 section C. R. 884, Cohen vs Rothfield, L. R. and Hyman vs Helm, L. R.(1883) , relied on.
Per, Shah, J. Civil courts have no inherent power to issue injunctions in case not covered by O. 39, rr. 1 and 2 Code of Civil Procedure.
The power of civil courts, other than Chartered High Courts, to issue injunctions must be found within the terms of section 94 and O. 39, rr. 1 and 2.
Where an express provision is made to meet a particular situation the Code must be observed and departure therefrom is not permissible.
Where the Code deals expressly with a particular matter the provision should normally be regarded as exhaustive.
Padam Sen vs State of U. P. [1961] 1 section C. R. 884, relied upon.
