Appellant Nanavati, a Naval Officer, was put up on trial under sections 302 and 304 Part I of the Indian Penal Code for the alleged murder of his wife 's paramour.
The prosecution case in substance was that on the day of occurrence his wife Sylvia confessed to him of her illicit intimacy with Ahuja and the accused went to his ship, took from its stores a revolver and cartridges on a false pretext, loaded the same, went to Ahuja 's flat, entered his bed room and shot him dead.
The defence, inter alia, was that as his wife did not tell him if Ahuja would marry her and take charge of their children, he decided to go and settle the matter with him.
He drove his wife and children to a cinema where he dropped them promising to pick them up when the show ended at 6 p.m., drove to the ship and took the revolver and the cartridges on a false pretext intending to shoot himself.
Then he drove 568 his car to Ahuja 's office and not finding him there, drove to his flat.
After an altercation a struggle ensued between the two and in course of that struggle two shots went off accidentally and hit Ahuja.
Evidence, oral and documentary, was adduced in the case including three letters written by Sylvia to Ahuja.
Evidence was also given of an extra judicial confession made by the accused to prosecution witness 12 who deposed that the accused when leaving the place of occurrence told him that he had a quarrel with Ahuja as the latter had 'connections ' with his wife and therefore he killed him.
This witness also deposed that he told P. W. 13, Duty Officer at the Police Station, what the accused had told him.
This statement was not recorded by P. W. 13 and was denied by him in his cross examination.
In his statement to the investigation officer it was also not recorded.
The jury returned a verdict of 'not guilty ' on both the charges by a majority of 8: 1.
The Sessions Judge disagreed with that verdict, as in his view, no reasonable body of men could bring that verdict on the evidence and referred the matter to the High Court under section 307 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
The two Judges of the Division Bench who heard the matter agreed in holding that the appellant was guilty under section 302 of the Indian Penal Code and sentenced him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for life.
One of them held that there were misdirections in the Sessions Judge 's charge to the jury and on a review of the evidence came to the conclusion that the accused was guilty of murder and the verdict of the jury was perverse.
The other Judge based his conclusion on the ground that no reasonable body of persons could come to the conclusion that jury had arrived at.
On appeal to this Court by special leave it was contended on behalf of the appellant that under section 307 of the Code of Criminal Procedure it was incumbent on the High Court to decide the competency of the reference on a perusal of the order of reference itself since it had no jurisdiction to go into the evidence for that purpose, that the High Court was not empowered by section 307(3) of the Code to set aside the verdict of the jury on the ground that there were misdirections in the charge, that there were no misdirections in the charge nor was the verdict perverse and that since there was grave and sudden provocation the offence committed if any, was not murder but culpable homicide not amounting to murder.
^ Held, that the connections were without substance and the appeal must fail.
Judged by its historical background and properly construed, section 307 of the Code of Criminal Procedure was meant to confer wider powers of interference on the High Court than 569 in an appeal to safeguard against an erroneous verdict of the jury.
This special jurisdiction conferred on the High Court by section 307 of the Code is essentially different from its appellate jurisdiction under sections 410 and 417 of the code, section 423(2) conferring no powers but only saving the limitation under section 418(1), namely, that an appeal against an order of conviction or an acquittal in a jury trial must be confined to matters of law.
The words "for the ends of justice" in section 307(1) of the Code, which indicate that the Judge disagreeing with the verdict, must be of the opinion that the verdict was one which no reasonable body of men could reach on the evidence, coupled with the words 'clearly of the opinion ' gave the Judge a wide and comprehensive discretion to suit different situations.
Where.
therefore, the Judge disagreed with the verdict and recorded the grounds of his opinion, the reference was competent, irrespective of the question whether the Judge was right in so differing from the jury or forming such an opinion as to the verdict.
There is nothing in section 307(1) of the Code that lends support to the contention that though the Judge had complied with the necessary conditions, the High Court should reject the reference without going into the evidence if the reasons given in the order of reference did not sustain the view expressed by the Judge.
Section 307(3) of the Code by empowering the High Court either to acquit or convict the accused after considering the entire evidence, giving due weight to the opinions of the Sessions Judge and the jury, virtually conferred the functions both of the jury and the Judge on it.
Where, therefore, misdirections vitiated the verdict of the jury, the High Court had as much the power to go into the entire evidence in disregard of the verdict of the jury as it had when there were no misdirections and interfere with it if it was such as no reasonable body of persons could have returned on the evidence.
In disposing of the reference, the High Court could exercise any of the procedural powers conferred on it by section 423 or any other sections of the Code.
Ramanugarh Singh vs King Emperor, (1946) L.R. 73 I. A. 174, Akhlakali Hayatalli vs State of Bombay, ; , Ratan Rai vs State of Bihar, , Sashi Mohan Debnath vs State of West Bengal , and Emperor vs Ramdhar Kurmi, A. I. R. 1948 Pat.
79, referred to.
A misdirection is something which the judge in his charge tells the jury and is wrong or in a wrong manner 570 tending to mislead them.
Even an omission to mention matters which are essential to the prosecution or the defence case in order to help the jury to come to a correct verdict may also in certain circumstances amount to a misdirection.
But in either case, every misdirection or non direction is not in itself sufficient to set aside a verdict unless it can be said to have occasioned a failure of justice.
Mustak Hussein vs State of Bombay [1953] section C. R. 809 and Smt.
Nagindra Bala Mitra vs Sunil Chandra Roy, ; , referred to.
There is no conflict between the general burden that lies on the prosecution in a criminal case and the special burden imposed on the accused under section 105 of the Evidence Act where he pleads any of the General Exceptions mentioned in the Indian Penal Code.
The presumption of innocence in the favour of the accused continues all through and the burden that lies on the prosecution to prove his guilt, except where the statute provides otherwise, never shifts.
Even if the accused fails to prove the Exception the prosecution has to discharge its own burden and the evidence adduced, although insufficient to establish the Exception, may be sufficient to negative one or more of the ingredients of the offence.
Woolmington vs Director of Public Prosecutions, L. R. ; , considered.
Attygalle vs Emperor, A. I. R. 1936 P. C. 169, distinguished.
State of Madras vs A. Vaidyanatha Iyer, ; and C. section D. Swamy vs State, ; , referred to.
Consequently, where, as in the instant case, the accused relied on the Exception embodied in section 80 of the Indian Penal Code and the Sessions Judge omitted to point out to the jury the distinction between the burden that lay on the prosecution and that on the accused and explain the implications of the terms 'lawful act ', lawful manner ', 'unlawful means ' and 'with proper care and caution ' occurring in that section and point out their application to the facts of the case these were serious misdirections that vitiated the verdict of the jury.
Extra judicial confession made by the accused is a direct piece of evidence and the stringent rule of approach to circumstantial evidence has no application to it.
Since in the instant case, the Sessions Judge in summarising the circumstances mixed up the confession with the circumstances while directing the jury to apply the rule of circumstantial evidence and 571 it might well be that the jury applied that rule to it, his charge was vitiated by the grave misdirection that must effect that correctness of the jury 's verdict.
The question whether the omission to place certain evidence before the jury amounts to a misdirection has to be decided on the facts of each case.
Under section 297 of the Code of Criminal Procedure it is the duty of the Sessions Judge after the evidence is closed and the counsel for the accused and the prosecution have addressed the jury, to sum up the evidence from the correct perspective.
The omission of the Judge in instant case, therefore, to place the contents of the letters written by the wife to her paramour which in effect negatived the case made by the husband and the wife in their deposition was a clear misdirection.
Although the letters were read to jury by the counsel for the parties, that did not absolve the judge from his clear duty in the matter.
R. V. Roberts, and R. vs Affield, , held inapplicable.
The commencement of investigation under section 156 (1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure in a particular case, which is a question of fact, has to be decided on the facts of the case, irrespective of any irregularity committed by the Police Officer in recording the first information report under section 154 of the Code.
Where investigation had in fact commenced, as in the instant case, section 162 of the Code was immediately attracted.
But the proviso to that section did not permit the eliciting from a prosecution witness in course of his cross examination of any statement that he might have made to the investigation officer where such statement was not used to contradict his evidence.
The proviso also had no application to a oral statement made during investigation and not reduced to writing.
In the instant case, therefore, there could be no doubt that the Sessions Judge acted illegally in admitting the evidence of P. W. 13 to contradict P. W. 12 in regard to the confession of the accused and clearly misdirected himself in placing the said evidence before the jury.
Exception 1 to section 300 of the Indian Penal Code could have no application to the case.
The test of "grave and sudden" provocation under the Exception must be whether a reasonable person belonging to the same class of society as the accused, placed in a similar situation, would be so provoked as to lose his self control.
In India, unlike in England, words and gestures may, under certain circumstances cause grave and sudden provocation so as to attract that Exception.
The mental background created by any previous act of the victim can 572 also be taken into consideration in judging whether the subsequent act could cause grave and sudden provocation, but the fatal blow should be clearly traced to the influence of the passion arising from that provocation and not after the passion had cooled down by lapse of time or otherwise, giving room and scope for premeditation and calculation.
Mancini vs Director of Public Prosecutions, L.R. (1942) A.C.
I, Holmes vs Director of Public Prosecutions, L. R. Duffy 's case, [1949]1 All.
E. R. 932 and R. vs Thomas, ; , considered.
Empress vs Khogayi, Mad. 122, Boya Munigadu vs The Queen, Mad. 33, In re Murugian I. L. R. , In re C. Narayan, A.I.R. 1958 A. P. 235, Jan Muhammad vs Emperor, I. L. R. , Emperor vs Balku, I. L. R. (1938) All 789 and Babu Lal vs State A. I. R. 1960 All.
223, referred to.
Semble: Whether a reasonable person in the circumstances of a particular case committed the offence under grave and sudden provocation is a question of fact for the jury to decide.
Holmes vs Director of Public Prosecution, L. R. , considered.
