A non resident company manufactured textile goods at P out side British India and sold the goods ex mills.
A firm, R & Co., guaranteed the sale price of goods sold ex mills by the company to purchasers at Ahmedabad within British India.
As the company maintained its accounts according to the mercantile system, the company debited R & Co., with the price of goods sold and credited the sales account with the amount of the bills.
R & Co., collected the amounts of the bills from the purchasers on behalf of the company and credited the sums realised in the company 's account with banks at Ahmedabad and also disbursed them to creditors of the company in British India.
These payments were credited by the company to R & Co. During the relevant accounting year the company thus received Rs. 12,68,480.
The company also received Rs. 4,40,878 from sales to purchasers in British India.
The amount of the sales bills for which hundis were drawn on the purchasers in favour of banks were debited by the company to the accounts of the respective merchants and credited to the sales account and the sums received by the banks from the purchasers against delivery of the railway receipts were credited by the company to the accounts of the respective purchasers.
In either case there was no change in the relationship of vendor and purchaser between the company and the purchasers by reason of the entries made in the company 's books.
The question as re framed by the High Court was whether these two sums were sale proceeds of the goods sold by the assesses to merchants in British India and whether they were received in British India and could be included in the assessable income of the company in British India: Held, per Mehr Chand Mahajan, section B. Das and Bhagwati J.J., (Vivian Bose J. dissenting) that the two amounts in question were sale proceeds of the goods sold and delivered by the company to merchants in British India ; that they were neither received by the company nor could be deemed to have been received by it when the entries were made in the books of account at P but had 951 merely accrued or arisen to it there; that they were first received by R & Co. and by the banks through whom the railway receipts were negotiated on behalf of the company in British India; and that they were therefore liable to tax under section 4(l) (a) of the Indian Income tax Act as having been received in British India on its behalf.
Though it is true that in the case of residents, if the assessee employs the mercantile system regularly it is obligatory on the income tax authorities to compute the income according to that system, it is doubtful whether that position would be available to a non resident who maintains his books of account outside British India according to the mercantile system.
Section 13 would only be relevant where the total profits of the assessee have to be computed and in that event the assessee would be entitled to claim that they should be computed according to the system of accounts maintained by him; it would not be relevant when stray items of income are sought to be assessed in the taxable territories as received in the taxable territories by a non resident.
Bose J.
In the case of accounts kept in the mercantile system, the profit or loss at the end of the accounting year is based not on a difference between what was actually received and what was actually paid out, but on the difference between the right to receive and the liability to pay.
The taxation in such cases is not on income, profits or gains which were received but on profits which "accrued or arose" to the assessee in the accounting year.
This view excludes section 4(l) (a) and this means that a resident is taxed in such cases under section 4(l)(b) and a non resident under section 4(l) (c).
Applying section 4(l) (c) to the present case, in the case of the Rs. 4 lakhs odd the profits accrued or arose in British India where the right to take delivery of the goods accrued and where the price was actually paid, but what is really taxable under section 4 (1) (c) is not the Rs. 4 lakhs odd, but the figures entered in the accounting year as the price of the various transactions which the Rs. 4 lakhs represented.
Similarly, in the case of Rs. 12 lakhs odd, it is the figure entered in the books in the accounting year relating to the transactions which is taxable.
By the Full Court.
The expression "deemed to be received" in section 4 (1) (a) means deemed by the provisions of the Act to be received.
Subramaniyan (Chettiar vs Commissioner of Income tax (2 I. T. C. 365), Ahmed Din Alladitta vs Commissioner of Income tax, Punjab , Kanwal Yayan Hanir Singh vs Commissioner of Income tax, Ajmer Merwara , Commissioner of Incometax vs Singari Bai (13 l.
T.R. 224) distinguished.
B.M. Kamdar, In re , Pondicherry Railway Co. vs Commissioner of Income tax (58 I.A. 239) and Commissioner of 952 Income tax vs Mathias (66 I.A. 23), Commissioner of Income tax vs Kameswar Singh , Commissioner of Income tax vs Chunilal Mehta referred to.
