In an ejectment suit under the Delhi & Ajmer Rent Control Act, 1952, the trial Judge decreed the suit and on appeal under s.34 of the Act the Additional District Judge confirmed 934 the decision.
The Act did not provide for a second appeal, and under section 35 (1) a revision was filed against the Order of the Additional District Judge The single Judge of the Punjab High Court following a previous decision of the same High Court, was of opinion that in assessment as all the evidence was not considered it was competent for him to reconsider the concurrent findings of the courts below.
The question is whether the High Court in exercise of its revisional powers is entitled to re assess the value of the evidence and to substitute its own conclusions of facts in place of those reached by the courts below.
^ Held, (per Sinha, C. J., Hidayatullah and shah, JJ, that though section 35 of the Delhi and Ajmer Rent Control Act is worded in general terms, but it does not create a right to have the case re heard.
The distinction between an appeal and revision is a real one.
A right to appeal carries with it right of re hearing on law as well as fact, unless the statute conferring the right to appeal limits the re hearing in some way.
The power to hear a revision is generally given to a superior court so that it may satisfy, itself that a particular case decided according to law.
The phrase "according to law" in section 35 of the Act refers to the decision as a whole, and is not to be equated to errors of law or of fact simplicitor.
All that the High Court can see is that these has been no miscarriage of justice and that the decision is according to law in the sense mentioned.
per Kapur, J.
The power under section 35 (1) of the Act of interference by the High Court, is not restricted to a proper trial according to law or error in regard to onus of proof or proper opportunity of being heard.
It is very much wider than that when in the question of the High Court the decision is erroneous on a question of law which affects the merits of the case or decision is manifestly unjust the High Court is entitled to interfere.
Bell and Co. Ltd. vs Waman Hemraj approved.
