The appellant, whose permit for plying stage carriage was shortly to expire, applied for its renewal.
The renewal application was published in the Gazette calling for objections.
The State Government published a notification proposing to nationalise the route.
The permit was renewed for three years for a part of the route but an endorsement was made thereon authorising the appellant to ply on the remaining part of the route for four months.
The appellants filed objections to the proposed scheme for nationalisation.
The objections were heard by the Joint Secretary, Judicial Department, who approved the scheme with certain modifications.
The scheme was published in the Gazette.
Thereafter, a notification was issued under section 68F of the cancelling the appellant 's renewed permit.
Under the Scheme the stage carriages of the State Transport Undertaking could ply on the route without obtaining permits.
The appellant challenged the validity of the scheme and the cancellation of his licence.
^ Held, that the scheme was valid and the appellant 's licence was properly cancelled.
Section 68C of the required the scheme to be initiated by the State Transport Undertaking.
Even though the scheme in the present case was actually initiated by the State Government there was no non compliance with the provisions of section 68C.
There was no difference between an undertaking run by a department of the State Government and that run by the State Government.
In either case the undertaking was run by the State and it was a State transport undertaking within the meaning of section 68C. Initiation of the scheme by the State Government running an undertaking was initiation by the statutory authority i.e., the State Transport undertaking.
The appellant could not be allowed to challenge the validity of the scheme on the ground that the Joint Secretary was not lawfully invested with the authority to hear objections and to approve the scheme as the point was not raised at the proper stage.
77 Gullapalli Nageswara Rao vs Andhra Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation, [1959] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 319, applied.
The scheme having been validly promulgated and having become final under section 68D(3) it had the effect of extinguishing all rights of the appellant to ply his stage carriage under his permit and he could not maintain a petition under article 226 of the Constitution.
The order passed by the Regional Transport Authority cancelling the appellant 's permit was purely consequential on the scheme and could not be challenged if the scheme was valid.
Once the right of the appellant to ply his stage carriage was validly extinguished he could not question the right of the State transport authority to ply their stage carriages with or without permits.
Abdul Gafoor, Proprietor, Shaheen Motor Service vs State of Mysore, ; , applied.
