The respondent who held the substantive post of Inspector of Police and had been officiating as the Deputy Superintendent of Police was reverted to his original rank of Inspector without being given any opportunity of being heard in respect of the reversion.
His request to furnish him with reasons of his reversion was refused.
Later a Departmental enquiry was held behind his back in respect of certain allegations of misconduct made against him in a confidential communication from the District Superintendent of police to the Deputy Inspector General of Police but these allegations were not proved at the enquiry.
The Inspector General of Police however thereafter wrote to the Government that the respondent 's previous record was not satisfactory and that he had 93 been promoted to officiate as Deputy Superintendent of Police in the expectation that he would turn a new leaf but the complaint made in the confidential memorandum was a clear proof that the respondent was habitually dishonest and did not deserve promotion.
As the order of reversion was maintained by the Government inspite of the representations made by the respondent.
he filed a suit challenging the order.
The suit was decreed by the Court of first instance and the decree was affirmed by the High Court on appeal.
^ Held, that a person officiating in a post has no right to hold it for all times.
A person who is given an officiating post to test his suitability to be made permanent later, holds it on the implied term that he would have to be reverted if he was found unsuitable.
A reversion in such a case on the ground of unsuitability is an action in accordance with the terms on which the officiating post was being held and is not a reduction in rank by way of punishment to which section 240 of the Government of India Act, 1935, would be attracted.
The observation in M. A. Waheed vs State of Madhya Pradesh, (1954) N. L. J. 305, that when a person officiating in a post is reverted for unsatisfactory work, that reversion amounts to reduction in rank disapproved.
The Government 's refusal to supply the respondent with the reasons for reverting him could not proved that the reversion was by way of punishment.
The departmental enquiry held later in this case does not prove that the respondent was reverted by way of punishment.
The Government had the right to consider the suitability of the respondent to the post to which he had been appointed to officiate.
State of Bihar vs Gopi Kishore Prasad, A. I. R. , referred to.
