Rule 3 (1) of such.
I of the Gwalior War Profits Tax ordinance, Samvat 2001 provided: "Income received from investments shall be included in the profits of a business liable to the war Profits Tax, unless it is proved to satisfaction of the War Profits Tax officer that the investments have no connection whatever with the business." The respondent, a Hindu undivided family, was carrying on various businesses in the erstwhile State of Gwalior, and one of them was its employment as the Secretary, Treasurer and Managing Agent of, a limited company.
The respondent held a majority of the issued shares in the company.
For the accounting period July 1, 1944, to October 16, 1944, the War Profits Tax officer by his assessment order dated July 9, 1951, included in its assessable profits the sum received by the respondent on July s, 1944, as the dividend declare and paid by the company on its shares.
The respondent claimed that the said sum could not be included in its taxable profits on the ground that it did not deal in shares and that its holdings in the company were purely in the nature of investments having no connection with its business as defined section 2(5) of the ordinance Gwalior War Profits ordinance and that the business of the Secretaries, Treasurers and Managing Agent of the company which was carried on by it did not require any holding of the shares of the company and was not dependent on its investment in the said company.
The High Court of Madhya Pradesh took the view (1) that on a proper construction of the provisions of the ordinance, unless the acquisition of the shares was an adventure in the nature of trade or the respondent was a dealer in shares such that the shares held by it were part of its stock in trade, the income derived therefrom by way of dividends could not be characterised as profits from business, and (2) that Sch.
I of the Ordinance which 244 was headed "Rules for the computation of business", though it purported to be part of the Ordinance, in reality comprised rules made by Government under the rule making power conferred on it by section 50 of the ordinance and that r. 3 (I) of the Schedule, being subordinate legislation could not validly bring to charge an item of income which was not within the scope of the ordinance itself. ^ Held that : Schedule I of the Gwalior War Profits Tax Ordinance was part and parcel of the ordinance itself and, therefore, could not be considered to be subordinate legislation as rules framed under section 50 of the ordinance (2) the word "connection" in r. 3 (1) of Sch.
I of the Ordinance was not restricted to cases of "direct connection", in view of the expression "no connection whatever" in that rule; and (3) the respondent as the holder of the majority of the shares in the company, was enabled by reason of this investment to control the action of the company which was true other party under the Managing Agency Agreement, and therefore, the investment was connected with the business carried on by it within the meaning of r. 3(1) of Sch.
I of the ordinance.
Accordingly, the dividend received by the respondent from the company was properly included by the assessing authorities in the computation of its taxable profits under the ordinance.
