The respondent delivered certain sums of money to the appellant bank at Lahore for transmission to Calcutta, with instructions to await his directions regarding the opening of accounts for keeping the money in fixed deposit in the Calcutta Branch of the bank which was proposed to be opened in the near future.
The respondent did not however give any instruction for opening any account, fixed deposit or otherwise in regard to the amounts after they reached Calcutta.
Within a few days after the opening of the Calcutta branch of the bank it ceased making payments and a moratorium for a limited period was declared under an ordinance issued by the Governor General restraining the bank from making payments to its depositors.
After the expiry of the period of the moratorium the Calcutta branch of the bank raised objections to the respondent 's application for withdrawal of the amount 218 whereupon the respondent filed a suit in the Calcutta High Court for a decree for refund of the amount.
During the pendency of the suit the High Court of East Punjab sanctioned a scheme under sections 153 and 153A of the Indian Companies Act, 1913 for settlement of the liabilities of the Bank.
The courts below decreed the respondent 's suit.
On appeal by the bank by special leave, the questions which arose for decision were whether the bank was a trustee for transmission of the amounts to Calcutta and whether in the absence of any instruction for opening a fixed deposit account the bank was liable to refund the full amount or a reduced amount according to the scheme sanctioned by the Punjab High Court.
^ Held, that when a person dealing with a bank delivers money to the bank an intention to create a relation of creditor and debtor between him and the bank is presumed, but the presumption may be rebutted by proof of special instructions.
When money is paid to a bank with special instructions to retain the same pending further instructions, a trust is created and the presumption which ordinarily arises by reason of payment of money to the bank is rebutted.
Held, further, that the money delivered by the Respondent remained in trust with the bank and was not held by it as a deposit subject to any scheme for the settlement of the liabilities of the bank sanctioned by the High Court under the Companies Act.
The Official Assignee, Madras vs Natesam Pillai, I.L.R. , Arbuthnot vs D. Rajan Ayyar, I.L.R. and Farley vs Turner, , applied.
