After following the procedure prescribed by the Bombay District Municipal Act, 1901, and after obtaining the requisite sanction of the Government the appellant imposed an octroi tax on milk brought within its limits for consumption, use or sale therein.
Shortly afterwards the Government passed an 367 order directing that the octroi tax shall not be leviable by the appellant.
The appellant contented that the Government had no power to control the imposition of the tax once it had been properly imposed.
^ Held, that the Government was competent under section 59 of the Act to pass the order.
Section 59 provided that subject to any general or special orders which the State Government may make, a Municipality may "impose" the tax after following the procedure laid down and after obtaining the sanction of the Government.
The word "impose" in section 59 meant the actual levy of the tax after authority to levy it had been acquired by rules duly made and sanctioned and this imposition was subject to the general or special orders of the Government.
The general and special orders under section 59 could not be confined to orders under section 73 which gave the Government power to suspend the tax in certain cases.
Held, further, that the order of the Government was not discriminatory.
Subsequently the Government had prohibited all municipalities from levying octroi tax on milk.
For the same reason no question of mala fides could arise.
Per Ayyangar, J. Imposition of tax was a continuing power deriving vitality from the power of the authority to impose it.
The power of the Government to issue special or general order under section 59 was therefore not exhausted after "imposition" of the tax.
There were provisions in sections 47, 73 and 74 for other contingencies but except for the opening words of section 59 there was no provision to enable Government to intervene in cases where the continued levy was against public interest.
The opening words of section 59 clothed the Government with power to direct a municipality to desist from imposing a tax.
