M and S claiming to be reversioners to the estate of N sold the property in dispute to G predecessor in interest of the respondents.
The sale deed recited that the property belonged to the joint family of two brothers N and B, and on the death of N it was inherited by his widow and on her death it had devolved upon them as reversioners to the state.
G sued to recover possession of the properties.
The suit was contested by the widow of B(brother of N) claiming that the property was the self acquired property of her husband.
During the pendency of the litigation the widow died, and G applied to the revenue authorities to transfer the 'pattas ' in his name.
The appellants intervened alleging that the property was gifted to them by the widow, and S one of the reversioners had also executed a release of the said property for a consideration.
This objection was rejected.
The appellants then sued for possession of a half share in the properties held by the widow of B, relying upon the gift by the widow, and the deed of surrender by S one of the two reversioners to the estate of N.
They contended that the Vendors of the property to G had 555 only a spes successionis during the life time of the widow of B, and the transfer was on that account void and conferred no title.
The heirs of contended that the property was sold to by M and S on a representation that the Vendor had become entitled thereto, and the appellants as transferees from S were estopped from asserting that it was in fact the self acquisition of and that in consequence he had no title at the date of the sale.
^ Held, that where a person transfers property representing that he has a present interest therein, whereas he has, in fact, only a spes successions, the transferee is entitled to the benefit of section 43 of the , if he has taken the transfer for consideration and on the faith of the representation.
Held, further, that apart from the exception in favour of transferees for consideration in good faith and without notice of the rights under the prior transfer section 43 of the is absolute and unqualified in its operation.
It applies to all transfers which fulfil the conditions prescribed therein, and it makes no difference in its application whether the defect of title in the transferor arises by reason of his having no interest in the property, or of his interest therein being that of an expectant heir.
The section deals with transfers which fail for want of title in the transferor and not want of capacity in him at the time of transfer.
It embodies a rule of estoppel and enacts that a person who makes a representation shall not be heard to allege the contrary as against a person who acts on the representation.
It is immaterial whether the transferor acts bona fide or fraudulently in making the representation.
It is only material to find out whether in fact the transferee has been misled.
In view of the specific provision of section 43 the principle of estoppel against a statute does not apply to transfers prohibited by section 6 (a) of the Act.
The two provisions operate in different fields and under different conditions.
There is no necessary conflict between them, and the ambit of one cannot be cut down by reference to the other.
Section 6(a) enacts a rule of substantive law, while section 43 enacts a rule of estoppel which is one of evidence.
Held, also, that if the language of the section clearly excludes from its purview certain matters, it would not be legitimate to use the illustration to the section to enlarge it.
It is not to be readily assumed that an illustration to a section is repugnant to it and rejected.
Vickers vs Evans, (1910)79 L.J.K.B. 955, relied on.
556 Sadiq Ali Khan vs Jai Kishori, A.I.R. 1928 P.C. 152, Gadigeppa vs Balangauda, (1931) I.L.R. , Ajudhia Prasad vs Chandan Lal, I.L.R. (1937) All.
860 F.B.; Mohomed Syedol Ariffin vs Yeoh Ooi Gark; (1916) L.R. 43 I.A. 256; Levine vs Brougham, ; Leslie Ltd. vs Sheill, and Khan Gul vs Lakha Singh Lah.
701(F.B.), referred to.
Alamanaya Kunigari Nabi Sab vs Murukuti Papiah, , Shyam Narain vs Mangal Prasad, All. 474, Vithabai vs Mathar Shankar, I.L.R. , Ram Japan vs Jagesara Kuer, A.I.R. 1939 Pat. 116 and Syed Bismilla vs Munulal Chabildas, A.I R. , approved.
Official Assignee, Madras vs Sampath Naidu, and Bindeshwari Singh vs Har Narain Singh, Luck.
622, disapproved.
