The Emperor Aurangazeb made certain grants to one Mukuldas Babajee, founder of the institution Poohari Fakir Sadavarthy, for the purpose of his maintenance and to carry on the distribution of Sadavarthy to Fakirs etc.
The sixth head of the institution built a shrine for his private worship.
It was adjunct to the aforesaid institution, and the public had no access to it without the permission of Mahant.
The income from various properties granted to the founder and his disciples had been regularly utilised for the maintenance of the head of the institution and for distributing charities for the Sadhus and pilgrims; a part was spent on the expenses of the worship in the temple.
The Board of Commissioners for Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments, Madras held that the temple in suit was a public temple.
The sole question for determination was whether this institution was a public temple as defined in the Act. ^ Held, that an institution would be a public temple within the Hindu Religious Endowments Act, 1926, if two conditions are satisfied; firstly, that it was a place of public religious worship and secondly, that it was dedicated to, or was for the benefit of, or was used as of right by the Hindu Community, or any section thereof, as a place of religious worship.
When there be good evidence about the temple being a private one, the mere fact that a number of people worship at the temple, is not sufficient to come to the conclusion to the temple must be a public temple to which those people as a matter of right as it is not usual for the owner of together temple to disallow visitors to the temple, even if it be private one.
In the present case the description of the temple with respect to its construction, equipment, practices, observances 277 and the form of worship are not inconsistent with the inference from the other evidence that the temple is not a public temple.
The temple is not a temple as defined in the Act and it is not used as of right by Hindu Community, or any section thereof, as a place of religious worship.
Held, further that the Inam Register is of great evidentiary value, but that does not mean that the entry or entries in any particular column or columns be accepted at their face value without giving due consideration to other matters recorded in the entry itself.
