The appellant and five other persons, three of Them not being public servants, were charged with criminal conspiracy to dishonestly or fraudulently misappropriate or convert to their own use military stores and with dishonestly and fraudulently misappropriating the same.
Sanction for prosecution of the accused was given by a Deputy Secretary on behalf of the Central Government.
The accused were tried by a Special judge.
The main evidence led was that of one L, a security officer.
, who had been asked to join the conspiracy and who had joined it with a view to have the offenders apprehended.
The Special judge convicted all the accused persons.
On appeal the High Court confirmed the conviction of the appellant and one other accused now dead and acquitted the other four accused persons holding that the evidence of L was corroborated in material particulars in respect of the appellant and one other accused only.
The appellant contended: (i) that the appellant who was subject to the Army Act could only be tried by a Court Martial and the Special judge had no jurisdiction to try him, (ii) that the sanction to prosecute was void as it was not expressed to be 196 made in the name of the President, (iii) that the investigation by the Inspector of Police, was illegal, (iv) that there could be no legal charge of conspiracy between accused who were public servants and accused who were not, and (v) that L was a wholly unreliable witness whose testimony ought to have been rejected totally and no question of its corroboration arose.
Held, that the Special judge had jurisdiction to try the appellant for the offences charged.
The Army Act does not bar the jurisdiction of criminal courts in respect of acts or omissions which are punishable under the Army Act as well as under any other law in force.
The offences charged were triable both by the Special judge and by a Court Martial.
In such cases section 125 of the Army Act provides that if the designated officer decides that the proceedings should be before a Court Martial he may direct the accused to be detained in military custody.
But in the present case the designated officer bad not exercised his discretion and the Army Act was not in the way of the Special judge exercising his jurisdiction.
Rule 3 made under section 549, Code of Criminal Procedure for persons subject to military law was applicable only to magistrates and not to a Special judge who is not a magistrate within the meaning of r. 3.
Besides, section 7 of the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 952, provides that notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure or in "any other law" the offences specified in section 6(1) shall be triable by Special judges only.
The words "any other law" included the Army Act also.
The offences for which the appellant was convicted were offences specified in section 6(1) and were exclusively triable by a Special judge.
Held, further, that the sanction for the prosecution of the appellant was a good and valid sanction.
Article 77 of the Constitution which provides that all orders of the Central Government shall be expressed to be in the name of the President is only directory and not mandatory.
Where an order was not issued in strict compliance with the provisions of article 77 it could be established by extraneous evidence that the order was made by the appropriate authority.
In the present case there was uncontroverted evidence which established that the order of sanction was made by the Deputy Secretary on behalf of the Central Government in exercise of the power conferred on him under the rules delegating such power to him.
The State of Bombay vs Purushottam jog Naik, [1952] S.C.R. 674, Dattareya Moreshwar Pangarkar vs The State of Bombay, ; , J. K. Gas Plant Manufacturing Co., Ltd. vs The King Emperor, , P. Joseph John vs The State of Travancore Cochin; , and Ghaio Mall & Sons vs The State of Delhi, [1959] S.C.R. 1424, applied.
Held, further, that though the conditions of investigation by the Inspector of Police as laid down in section 5A, Prevention of Corruption Act were not complied with the trial.
was not vitiated 197 by the illegality as it did not result in any miscarriage of justice.
The powers and jurisdiction of members of the Delhi Special Police Establishment for investigation of offences in the State of Bombay had been duly extended by a notification of the Government of Bombay dated August 13, 1949, giving a general consent in respect of all the members of the establishment.
It was not necessary that the consent be given to every individual member of the Establishment.
H.N. Rishbud & Inder Singh vs State of Delhi, ; , followed, Held, further, that there was no defect in the charges.
It was not illegal to charge public servants and persons who were not public servants with the criminal conspiracy to do certain acts for which all of them could not be convicted separately.
Though all the accused were not liable for the individual offences, they were all guilty of the offence of conspiracy to do illegal acts.
Held, further, that the evidence of L was reliable and that it was corroborated in material particulars so far as the appellant was concerned.
Though L was not an accomplice, he was an interested witness and required corroboration.
The evidence of an approver and the corroborating pieces of evidence could not be treated in two different compartments; but had to be considered together.
Though some parts of the evidence of L were not accepted, his version was broadly accepted in regard to the conspiracy and the manner in which articles were smuggled out.
Sarwan Singh vs The State of Punjab, ; , explained.
