The Estate of Maharaja Man Singh of Ayodhya Raj devolved on his death successively on his two widows and thereafter, according to V the plaintiff a minor on his grandfather G, who died in 1942.
Respondent claimed the estate as adopted son of the junior widow of the Maharaja.
V filed a petition for leave to sue in forma pauperis for declaration of title to the estate making his father R a party.
The plaintiff 's petition was rejected by the Subordinate Judge, on the ground that it disclosed no cause of action.
R 's application to be transposed as petitioner was also rejected.
V and R preferred revision applications to the High Court of Allahabad.
The plaintiff 's application was rejected by the High Court holding inter alia that there was nothing in the petition to show that succeeded to the estate as the nearest male reversioner of the last male holder.
R 's application was rejected by the High Court on the ground that relief in an application to sue in forma pauperis is personal to the applicant and nobody else can be made a co applicant, because 1, R. 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure does not apply to a proceeding for permission to sue as a pauper.
^ Held, that O. XXXIII of the Code of Civil Procedure lays down the procedure for institution of a suit by pauper.
By cl. 5 (d) the court is required to ascertain whether the allegation made in the petition show a cause of action, but it does not enter upon a trial of the issues affecting the merits of the claim made by the petitioner.
By the statute, the jurisdiction of the Court is restricted to ascertaining whether on the allegations a cause of action is shown: the jurisdiction does not extended to trial of issues which must fairly be left for decision at the hearing of the suit.
An application to sue in forma pauperis, is but a method prescribed by the Code for institution of a suit by a pauper without payment of Court fee; and there is nothing personal in such an application.
The suit commences from the 676 moment an application for permission to sue in forma pauperis as required by O. 33 of the Code is presented, and O. 1 r. of the Code would be as much applicable in such a suit as in a suit in which court fee had been duly paid.
A person who claims to join a petitioner praying for leave to sue in forma pauperis must himself be a pauper.
Claim to join by transposition as an applicant must be investigated; it is not liable to be rejected on the ground that the claim made by the original applicant is personal to himself.
