The petitioners, who were tenure holders, challenged the constitutional validity of the Bombay Land Tenure Abolition Laws (Amendment) Act, 1958 and in particular sections 3 and 4 read with section 6 of that Act, as infringing their fundamental rights guaranteed by articles 14, 19 and 31 of the Constitution.
Their case in brief was that those provisions by making certain non permanent tenants permanent as from the commencement of the Bombay Taluqdari Tenure Abolition Act, 1949, enabled them to acquire occupancy right by payment of six times the assessment or the rent under section 5A of that Act instead of 20 times to 200 times the assessment under section 32H of the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1948, 412 as amended in 1956, and thereby substantially deprived the petitioners of the rights acquired by them on the 'tillers ' day, April 1, 1957, when they ceased to be tenure holders.
It was urged that the impugned Act was a piece of colourable legislation in that it had confiscated, under the guise of defining a permanent tenant or changing a rule of evidence, a large part of the purchase price the petitioners were entitled to from their tenants, and that the State Legislature had not the competence to enact it as it was not saved by article 31A of the Constitution.
^ Held, (Sarkar and Mudholkar, JJ., dissenting), that ss.3, 4 and 6 of the Bombay Land Tenure Abolition Laws (Amendment) Act, 1958, in so far as they deemed some tenants as permanent tenants in possession of Taluqudari land, were unconstitutional and void.
Under the guise of changing the definition of a permanent tenant and changing a rule of evidence, they really reduced the purchase price that the petitioners were entitled to receive under section 32H of the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1948, as amended in 1956, from some of their tenants on the "tillers ' day.
" Per Sinha, C.J., and Das, J. There can be no doubt that section 4 of the impugned Act, properly construed, created a new class of permanent tenants not contemplated by section 83 of the Bombay Land Revenue Code, 1879, and not in existence on the 'tillers ' day", and the combined effect of sections 3, 4 and 6 of the impugned Act was that if the tenure holder did not make an application under section 6 within six months from the commencement of the impugned Act for a declaration that a tenant under him was not a permanent tenant, the name of the tenant would be recorded as a permanent tenant if he fulfilled the conditions laid down by section 4 and thereafter he would be deemed under section 3 to be a permanent tenant and under section 4 all the provisions of the Taluqdari Abolition Act 1949, would apply to him.
The result of this combined effect would be to deprive the tenure holder of any real opportunity of contesting the claims of the tenant and deprive him of the purchase price prescribed by section 32H of the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1948.
The right of the petitioners to the said purchase price from those of their tenants who were non permanent on April 1, 1957, was a right of property guaranteed by article 19 (1) (f) and the impugned sections adversely affected that right with retrospective effect Section 6, tested in the light of article 19(5), could not be said to impose a reasonable restriction in the interest of the general public.
413 Bombay Dyeing and Manufacturing Co. Ltd. vs State of Bombay; , , applied.
Sri Ram Ram Narain Medhi vs The State of Bombay.
[1959] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 489, referred to.
Article 31A of the Constitution had no application.
The relation between the tenure holders and the tenants had changed from that of landlord and tenant to that of creditor and debtor on April 1, 1957, and the impugned Act which affected such rights, did not come within the protection of that Article.
In view of the true scope and effect of sections 3, 4 and 6, the impugned Act could not fall within any entry of List II or List III of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution and was a piece of colourable legislation.
K.C. Gajapati Narayan Deo vs State of Orissa ; , referred to.
Per Sarkar and Mudholkar, JJ.
Section 4 of the impugned Act did not expand the definition of a permanent tenant and did not take away any property that was vested in the landlord on the "tillers day".
Nor did it confer any new property on the tenant.
It only applied to and rescued a permanent tenant faced with the task of proving the nature of his tenancy, by raising a presumption of permanency in his favour.
If in fact his tenancy was not permanent and had been extinguished by law but he was tentatively recorded as permanent, the landlord could rebut the presumption in a proceeding under section 6 (1) by producing the documents in his possession or otherwise by showing that the tenancy was not in fact permanent and, therefore, had been extinguished by section 32(1) of the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1948, and claim compensation or the purchase money under section 32H(1)(II) of the Act, that right of his not having been affected in any way by the impugned Act.
If he failed, he would get the purchase price according to section 5A of the Bombay Taluqdari Tenure Abolition Act, 1949, which would not be and was not challenged.
Dhirubha Devisingh Gohil vs State of Bombay, ; , referred to.
The impugned Act dealt with matters arising out of the relationship between landlord and tenant.
Its provisions were not intended to apply where such relationship did not subsist.
The Act was, therefore, within the competence of the Legislature under entry 18 of List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution and was thus not a piece of colourable legislation.
414 There was, therefore, no infringement of article 31(1) and the Act was within the protection of article 31A of the Constitution and its Constitutional Validity could not be challenged under article 14 and 19(1)(f) of the Constitution.
Held, further, that the distinction made between tenure villages and non tenure ones was a classification based on the extent of availability of the material for raising the inference or the presumption and such classification had a reasonable nexus with the object sought to be achieved by the Act.
Per Ayyangar, J. There was no basis for the argument that section 4 of the impugned Act merely intended to provide a rule of evidence for determining who was a permanent tenant under section 83 of the Bombay Land Revenue Code, 1879, and did not extend the category of such tenants.
It enacts a positive rule of law by which a person in possession of holding of a tenure land must be "deemed" to be a permanent tenant on fulfilment of the three specified conditions.
This is evident from the provisions of section 6(1) under which every person who satisfied the definition of a permanent tenant under section 4 was entitled automatically and without applying for to be entered as a permanent tenant in the record of rights by the Mamlatdar unless the tenure holder filed an objection in writing.
Obviously such objection could only be on grounds open to him under section 4.
Section 4(b) and s.6(1) of the impugned Act had to be read together as forming an integrated whole.
The entire object and purpose of the impugned enactment was not, therefore, to enact a rule of evidence for determining who were permanent tenants under the pre existing law but to define and create a new class of permanent tenants who satisfied section 4 of the Act.
