The respondent was a company dealing in shares and securities and belonged to a group of companies all controlled by the same persons.
In the year of account, corresponding to the assessment year 1951 52, the respondent sold the shares relating to Madhusudan Mills Ltd., which it had acquired sometime earlier, suffering a loss for which it claimed a set off against the profits in that year.
The Income tax Officer found that the shares in question had been purchased by J, a company belonging to the group, at a price which was almost double the current market price, that it was so done with a view to removing the sellers from their managing agency and to securing for the respondent the purchasing and selling agency of the Mills, and that after the purchase J achieved the purpose in view of its controlling interest and the purchasing and selling agency of the Mills was given to the respondent, though the latter had done no more than give a loan to J.
It was also found that soon after the purchase the shares in question came into the possession of the respondent and that when the shares were sold it was not in the market but at a loss to another company belonging to the same group.
The Income tax Officer came to the conclusion that in getting the shares the respondent did not deal with them as stock in trade but was acquiring a capital asset of an enduring nature.
Accordingly, he disallowed the claim holding the loss to be a a capital loss.
The Appellate Tribunal, however, held in favour of the respondent on the view that a distinction must be made between the respondent company and J. The Commissioner of Income tax moved the Tribunal for a reference to the High Court, but it was dismissed on the ground that though it was barred only by one day and there was no negligence on the part of the Commissioner, the Tribunal had no power to extend time.
An application to the High Court was also dismissed.
The Commissioner of Income tax then applied for and got special leave to appeal against 866 the order passed by the Tribunal.
When the appeal came on for hearing in due course the respondent raised an objection that the appeal was not maintainable because no appeal was filed against the order of the High Court, and relied on the decision in Chandi Prasad Chokani vs State of Bihar, ; ^ Held, that the appeal was maintainable because there was no question of by passing the order of the High Court which only related to the correctness of the decision of the Tribunal on the question of limitation which was not the subject of the present appeal.
Held, further, that there were special circumstances which justified the grant of special leave.
Baldev Singh vs Commissioner of Income tax , applied.
Chandi Prasad Chokhani vs State of Bihar ; , distinghuished.
Held, also, that, on the facts, the object was to purchase a large block of shares at a much larger price than the market value to acquire certain agencies of a profitable character, that the purchase of the shares by J was merely a device but the controlling interest was acquired by the respondent, and that the transaction must be regarded as one on the capital side.
Ramanarain Sons (P.) Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, ; and Oriental Investment Co. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, ; , applied.
Salomon vs Salomon & Co. Ltd. ; , distinguished.
