The assessees were doing business principally as exporters of vegetable fibres to foreign countries.
The contracts of sale were C.I.F. or C.F. and were made by correspondence on approval of samples sent by the assessees to the foreign buyers.
The price was payable by draft upon bank credit to be opened by the buyer; who opened with his own bankers 955 an irrevocable letter of credit in favour of the assessees for 95% of the net invoice value.
Intimation of the opening of the letter of credit was then given to the assessees by the local bankers in India who were the agents of the foreign bankers.
The local bankers, however, did not by intimating the opening of the letter of credit undertake any liability, and the assessees were expressly informed that they would not be released from their liability under the Bill of Exchange drawn by them.
On receipt of the information about opening of the letter of credit the assessees shipped the goods, obtained bills of leading in their own names and lodged the shipping documents endorsed in blank with their own bankers together with the invoice and Bill of Exchange for 95% of the invoice value.
Bills of lading were handed over to the assessees bankers with the definite instructions to pass on the shipping documents to the buyers only on payment.
The assessees then discounted the Bills through their own bankers.
The shipping documents were forwarded to the foreign bankers who on presentation paid 95% of the invoice amount.
The Bill of lading was then delivered by the foreign banker to the buyer and goods were unloaded.
For the year 1945 46 the Commercial Tax officer taxed the assessees under the Madras General Sales Tax Act, 1930.
The Commercial Tax officer rejected the claim of the assessees that the amounts in respect of overseas transactions was exempt from liability to tax, because in his view the export transactions were sales within the province of Madras.
The Board of Revenue confirmed the order and held that the property in the goods passed to the buyers in a large majority of the export transaction when the goods were shipped.
The assessees contended that the export sales were at the material time totally outside the provisions of the Madras General Sales Tax Act and the order of the assessment was ultra vires and beyond the powers of the Authority.
The plea of the State of Madras was that the foreign bank opening the letter of credit is an agent of the buyer, and that the bank authorises its own branch to pay the price to the shippers and by the arrangements made by opening the letter of credit, price is paid to the vendor in his own country against the Bill of lading endorsed in blank.
^ Held, that the price in respect of the goods was not received in the Province of Madras and the property in the goods also did not pass to the buyer within the province.
Therefore tax in respect of the sale transactions was not exigible under the Madras General Sales Tax Act 1939.
The expansion of international trade involving overseas transactions has raised problems of peculiar difficulty.
The 956 parties to a contract (which is as a result of correspondence) are generally unknown to each other; often neither the seller nor the buyer is prepared to trust the other and the seller is reluctant to tie up his funds and the buyer is also unwilling to make payment in advance.
To tide over the problem created by this reluctance of the seller and the buyer, bankers of international repute and credit interpose.
They for small commission undertake by opening letters of credit to honour the bill of exchange drawn by the seller accompanied by the insurance policy and the invoice relating to goods forming the subject matter of the contract.
At the instance of the buyers the bank issues a letter of credit which is addressed to the world at large or more frequently to specified person or persons thereby the bank undertakes to honour the Bills of Exchange drawn on the faith of that letter.
Invariably the bills are payable in future but the exporters as the benefit ciaries under the contract, have the guarantee of the banker that payment will be forthcoming and are also entitled to discount the Bills with any party cognisant of the undertaking of the original banker.
The relation between the buyer and his issuing banker was not of principal and agent, nor was the relation between the issuing banker and the intermediary banker that of principal and agent.
The two bankers were interposed for the protection of the seller as well as the buyer.
The issuing banker did not purport to act as agent of the buyer and the intermediary bankers accepted the general offer of the issuing banker negotiating the draft.
By so accepting the offer and by taking over the Bill of Lading, the insurance certificate and the invoice which represented title to the goods the intermediary banker did not act as an agent of the seller.
