ln 1909 the Ruler of the erstwhile State of Cochin enacted the Cochin Tobacco Act of 1084 (M.E.) with the object of controlling the cultivation, production, manufacture, storage and sale of tobacco.
Rules were framed under the Act for regulating the cultivation, possession, transportation and sale of tobacco and a system of licensing was introduced for that purpose.
Licences for storage were to be annual and to be issued on payment of licence fee.
The authorities administering the provisionals of the Act and the Rules framed thereunder were the (commissioner of Excise and his subordinates.
The system in force for the collection of tobacco revenue was to auction what were called A class and class shops.
A law similar to that prevailing in Cochin was promulgated in 1911 by the Ruler of Travancore as the Travancore Tobacco Regulation of 1087 (M.E.).
The two States merged themselves in 1919 as the State of Travancore Cochin but the two Acts continued to remain in force in the respective territories.
On April 1, 1950, after the Constitution of India had come into force and Travancore cochin had become a 742 Part B State thereunder by s.11 of the Finance Act, 1950, the central Excises and Salt Act,194,was ex tended to that State.
Section 13(2) of the Finance Act, 1950,provided that "if immediately before the 1st day of April,.1950, there is in force in any State other than Jammu and Kashmir a law correspo nding to,but other than, an Act referred to in sub s.(1) or (2) of s.11, such law is repealed with effect from the said date.
" After this provision in the Finance Act, 1950, the Rules which were in force on April 1, 1950, were changed in the Cochin area by a notification dated August 3, 1950, and the system of auction sales of A Class and Class shops was done away with and instead graded licence fees were introduced for various classes of licensees.
Similar change was made for the Travancore area by notification dated January 25, 1951.
The appellants who were carrying on business in tobacco within the territories of Travancore and Cochin challenged the legal its of the notifications of August 3, 1950,and January 25, 1951, on the ground that the Cochin Tobacco Act and the Travancore Tobacco Regulation under which the notifications were purported to be issued, were law corresponding to the , and so they stood repealed from April 1, 1950, by virtue of the operation of sections 11 and 13(2) of the Finance Act.
It was contended for the State of Kerala that the main feature of the Central Excise and Salt Act, 1944, was the imposition of a duty of excise on goods produced or manufactured in ,India and that there was no provision for charging duty in the Cochin Act or the similar Travancore Act and therefore all these provisions in the Rules for the control of tobacco from the time of cultivation to the time of the final stage of sale to the consumer, even though they were similar to the Rules under the Central Act, would not make the Cochin Act or the similar Travancore Act a law corresponding to the Central Act.
^ Held, that the rules framed under the Cochin Tobacco Act of 1084(M.E.) and the Travancore Tobacco Regulation of 1087 (M E.) requiring licences to be taken out for storage and sale of tobacco and for payment of licence fee in respect thereof were law corresponding to the provisions of the , and, hence, were superseded on April 1, 1950, by virtue of section 1312) of the Finance Act, 1950.
consequently, the new Rules framed in August 1950 and January 1951 for the respective areas of Cochin and the respective areas of Cochin and Travancore for the issue of license and payment of fee therefore for storage of tobacco, were invalid ab initio.
Per Sinha, C. J., 'Gajendragadkar,Wanchoo and Hidayatullah, JJ. (I) The Cochin Tobacco Act, 1084 743 (M.E.), as well as the Travancore Tobacco Regulation, 1087(M.E.), were in substance law corresponding to the , and therefore, stood repealed on April 1, 1950.
(2) The auction system which was in force under the Cochin and Travancore Acts was only a method of realising duty through the grant of licences to those who made the highest bid at the auctions.
The fact that this system was used instead of the system of charging of duty as provided in s.3 of the Central Excise and Salt Act, 1944, would not make any difference to the nature of the impost; the income from auctions was in the nature of excise duty.
Per Shab, .J.
An Excise duty is, according to the Indian statute, a duty on the manufacture or production of goods and the duty which was levied in the States of Travancore and Cochin on the storage of tobacco cannot be regarded as a duty of excise.
In re The Central Provinces and Berar Sales of Motor Spirit and Lubricants Taxation Act, 1938, , The Province of Madras vs Messrs Boddu Paidanna and Sons, , Governor General in Council vs Province of Madras, (1945) ' L.R. 72 I.A. 91 and Chaturbhai, M. Petal vs The Union of India, ; , considered.
