The appellant being the highest bidder at a public auction got the right to collect the toll in respect of ferry for crossing the river of Piprighat for the year 1954.
The practice upto 1954 was to allow the licensee to collect the toll from every stage carriage bus.
Till March of the year 1954 only privately owned stage carriage buses used to ply on the route.
Thereafter the route was taken over by the Roadways department of the State of Uttar Pradesh.
The applicant was informed inter alia that no toll was leviable on the Roadways Vehicles and was asked to pay the monthly installments of the license fee without making any deduction therefore consequent upon the exemption of the Roadways buses from tolls.
The point for consideration inter alia is whether the 106 appellant was bound to allow the state carriage buses of U.P. Government to cross the river by ferry without collecting any toll.
Held, that the notification No. 252/IX 209/(10) dated March 16, 1925 exempts a vehicle crossing the river on 'public or district board service ', and it could not be said that plying motor buses by way of commercial activity is running it on a public service.
The vehicles of the Roadways department of the Government of Uttar Pradesh crossing over ferries cannot be regarded as crossing on public service.
It may be that plying stage carriage buses even though for hire is an activity undertaken by the Government for ensur ing the people a cheap, regular and reliable mode of transport and is in that sense beneficial to the public, but it does not cease to be a commercial activity if it is run with profit motive.
The vehicles of the Roadways crossing the river cannot be exempted under the Notification of March 15,1925.
Held, further that activities undertaken in the exercise of the sovereign power of the state or of Governmental functions are undoubtedly to be regarded as public services but a pure business undertaking though run by the Government cannot be classified as public service.
An activity however beneficial to the people and however useful cannot reasonably be regarded as public service and cease to be a commercial undertaking if it is of a type which may be carried on by private individuals and is carried on by Government with a distinct profit motive.
By reason of the fact that a commercial undertaking is owned and run by the State, it does not ipso facto become a "public service".
