K, H and M filed four suits each against four sets of defendants in respect of different sets of plots under section 175 U. P. Tenancy Act, 1939.
Since similar points were involved the twelve suits were tried together and were disposed of by a common judgment decreeing them.
Twelve decrees were prepared and the defendants preferred twelve appeals to the Additional Commissioner.
Three appeals by one set of the defendants B were dismissed for default and the remaining nine were dismissed on merits.
Against the dismissal of the nine appeals on merits the three sets of defendants preferred nine second appeals before the Board of Revenue but they were dismissed as barred by res judicata on May 7, 1954.
In November, 1954, the appellants filed petitions for special leave before the Supreme Court and on April 18, 1955, special leave was granted.
In July 1954, the villages in Which the lands in suit were situate came under consolidation operations under the U. P. Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953, and the operations were completed by the publication of a notification 218 under section 52 of the Act on October 17, 1953.
The appellants did not file any objections before the consolidation authorities.
The respondent contended that in view of the consolidation operations the appeals before the Supreme Court had become infructuous.
Held, that the appeals had not become infructuous.
There was nothing in the U. P. Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953, as it stood during the period the village in suit was under consolidation operations which could have in any way affected these appeals, during or after the consolidation operations.
The subsequent Amending Acts did not affect the appeals as they were prospective in operation and applied only to cases where the consolidation operations were started after the Amending Acts had come into force.
Held, further that the appeals before the Board of Revenue were not barred by resjudicata.
It was essential for the bar of res judicata that the previous and judication must have been between the same parties.
The three suits in which judgments had become final were against one B and not against any of the appellants .
The matter in issue in those three suits was different from that in the other nine suits as each of the suits related to different plots.
The common judgment was really twelve judgments in the twelve suits.
Badri Narayan Singh vs Kamdeo Prasad Singh, (1962) 3. section C. R. 759 referred to.
