The appellant Company was incorporated in 1908 and its principal activity then was to manufacture hosiery.
In 1924 when the appellant shifted its factor to Ahmedabad it installed spinning machinery with a view to ensure suitable and even supply of yarn for its hosiery manufacture.
Originally, a notification had been issued on May 30, 1939, under the Bombay Industrial Dispute Act, 1938, whereby hosiery concerns were included in the definition of "Cotton Textile Industry",, but subsequently on,July 17, 1945, another notification was issued as a result of which the Hosiery manufacture was excluded from the Cotton Textile Industry and it was covered by a separate notification.
For the purposes of the Bombay Industrial Relations Act, 1946, the appellant concern was recognised as an undertaking of the hosiery industry by the Registrar under section II of that Act.
Subsequently as a result of certain proceedings taken by the Textile Lobour Association of Ahmedabad, the Registrar decided 197 to recognise the appellant concern as consisting of two undertakings, the hosiery section and the rest excluding the hosiery section and this decision was confirmed by the Industrial Court.
The appellant challenged the order of the Industrial Court on the grounds (1) that the spinning and the hosiery sections in its establishment were one concern because (a) there was unity of ownership, management, supervision, con trol and employment, (b) there was complete functional integration, and (c) the two sections were functioning under the same roof, and (2) that, in any case, section 11 of the Act did not authorise the splitting up of a concern into two undertakings.
The evidence showed that though in 1924 the spinning section had begun as a subsidiary to the hosiery section in order to serve as its feeder, later on the spinning section developed to such an extent that it became a spinning mill by itself and could no longer be regarded as a minor section attached to the hosiery works, that only 20% of the yarn manufactured by the spinning section was con sumed for hosiery purposes while the rest was sold in the market, that the spinning department produced yarn of all counts, some of which could not be used for hosiery work, that when the knitting department was closed in '1948, the spinning department was not.
It was also found that the amount paid to the employees in each of the two departments by way of minimum wages and dearness allowance was different.
Held, that the decision of the Registrar recognising the hosiery and spinning departments of the appellant concern as separate undertakings under s.11 of the Bombay Industrial Relations Act, 1946, was correct, Held, further, that the question whether the several undertakings carried on by the same company are separate or not depends on whether they arc distinct and independent of each other or are functionally integral or inter department and that the Registrar was within his powers under section II of the Act to come to a decision on this question on the basis of the circumstances disclosed on evidence.
Associated Cement Companies Ltd. vs Their Workmen, (1960) 1 S.C.R.703, Pratap Press vs Their Workmen, (1960) 1 L. L. J. 497 Pakshiraja Studios vs Its Workmen.
and Honorary Secretary, The Soath India Millowrers 'Asso ciation vs The Secretary Coimbatore District Textile Workers ' Union, Coimbotore (1962) Supp. 2, S.C.R. 926 relied on.
