The appellant agreed to stand surety for an overdraft allowed by the respondent Bank to section A blank form of guarantee was given by the Bank to S, who then had it filled up by the appellant stating the maximum amount which he guaranteed as Rs. 25000/ .
When S brought the letter of guarantee duly signed by the appellant and himself to the Bank the latter refused to accept the guarantee up to that limit as it was not prepared to give S accommodation for a larger sum than Rs. 20000/ and wanted it to be limited to Rs. 20000/ .
S then made alterations in the letter with the amount of the maximum limit corrected to Rs. 20000/ and gave it to the Bank.
In a suit instituted by the Bank against the principal debtor, S, and the appellant on the basis of the contract of guarantee for Rs. 20000/ , the appellant pleaded that as the document was altered without his knowledge or consent, he was discharged from his liability.
Held, (per Kapur and Hidayatullah, JJ., Sarkar, J., dissenting), that the appellant was not discharged from his liability under the contract of guarantee.
64 per Kapur, J. S was acting for and on behalf of the appellant since it was at his instance that the appellant was standing surety and the appellant handed over the deed of guarantee to S for the purpose of being given to the Bank.
The plea of avoidance of contract by material alteration was of no avail to the appellant because the document was not altered while in possession of the promisee but was altered by S who was at the time acting as the agent of the appellant.
per Sarkar, J. The suit against the appellant as framed must fail.
The altered document was not binding on the appellant, for the alteration had not been made to carry out the intention of the parties.
If the alteration, is ignored as immaterial, then the document creates no liability in the appellant, for the Bank refused to accept a guarantee on the terms contained in it before it was altered and therefore there was no contract made between the parties by the document.
Further, the contract sued upon is different from the contract which might have been made by acceptance of the document as it stood before the alteration.
The unaltered document cannot establish the contract sued on.
per Hidayatullah, J. The document in this case could not be said to have been materially altered because it was not al tered in such a manner as to change its nature.
The alteration was made by a co executant who reduced not only his own liability but that of the surety also.
The document was altered while in the possession of S, the very person who, as the agent of the surety, brought it to the Bank.
The surety must be deemed to have held out S as his agent for this purpose and this created an estoppel against the surety because the Bank believed that S had the authority.
Accordingly, the alteration of the document did not save the surety from liability under it.
