The Punjab Resumption of jagirs Act, 1957, came into force on November 14, 1957, and the State of Punjab proceeded to take action thereunder for resuming the jagirs.
The petitioners who were holders of certain jagirs in that State known as the Cis Sutlej jagirs claimed that they could not be resumed under the provisions of the Act because they did not fall within the definition of jagir contained in section 2(1) of the Act on tile grounds that there was at no time any grant of the Cis Sutlej jagirs to their holders much less any assignment of land revenue to them, and that even if there was such a grant, it was not one made by or on behalf of the State Government as required by section 2(1) (a) of the Act.
The history or these jagirs showed that the jagirdars were originally rulers of the territories when they took possession of them by conquest in 1763, but in course of time after the British came on the scene, they were gradually stripped of all their powers as sovereigns, and in 1852 the British took over the collection of revenue of the jagir land , and out of the collections the jagirdars were paid their share.
Subsequent to 1852 there was a course of legislation relating to the jagirs.
The question was whether the assignment of land revenue to the Cis Sutlej jagirdars was made on the basis of an implied grant.
The petitioners case was that as the Cis Sutlej Chiefs were never conquered, the payment of land revenue to them must be related to their status as sovereigns and that the collection of the land revenue was made only under all im plied arrangement with them.
Held, that the status of the Cis Sutlej jagirdars was only that of subjects and that the payment of revenue to them by 347 the British Government was only on the basis of an implied grant to them.
Though the Cis Sutlej Chief were not conquered by the British, since the latter were in fact exercising sovereign powers over the area it must be held that sovereignty had passed to them otherwise than by conquest.
M/s. Dalmia Dadri Cement Co. Ltd. vs The Commissioner of Income tax, [1959] section C. R. 729, Thakur Amar Singji vs State of Rajasthan, and Vajesingji Jorawar Singji vs Secretary of State, [1924] L.R. 51 I.A. 357, relied on.
Held, further that the British Government which had made the grant was the "State Government" within the meaning of section 2(5) of the Punjab Resumption of jagirs Act 1957, and that the jagirs in question were within the definition of "jagir" in s.2(1) of the Act.
Held, also, that the Act was within the legislative com petence of the State of Punjab under entries 18 and 45 of List 11 of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India.
