G, a Digamber Jain of the, Porwal sect, died in 1934 leaving behind his widow Smt.
K, his son G who died in 1939 and three grandsons M, P and R.
In 1952 M 's son S filed a suit for partition of the joint family properties.
Rajkumar, claiming to be a son of P adopted by his widow, claimed a 1/4th share in the joint family property.
The adoption was challenged on the ground that no express authority had been given by P to his widow to adopt.
The trial court held that no express authority was required by a sinless Jain widow to adopt a son and that the adoption was duly and properly made.
Accordingly, a preliminary decree declaring the shares of Smt.
K, the branch of M, the branch of R and of Rajkumar to be 1/4th each was passed.
M and others pre ferred an appeal to the High Court mainly against the findings on the question of adoption.
During the pendency of the appeal, the , came into force.
Shortly thereafter Smt.
K died.
The High Court upheld '.he decision of the trial court on the question of the adoption of Rajkumar.
With respect to the share of Smt.
K the High Court held that her interest declared by the preliminary decree was inchoate, that she never became "possessed", 419 of any share within the meaning of s 14 of the Act and that it remained joint family property which became divisible amongst the parties proportionately to their shares.
The appellants contended that the adoption of Rajkumar was invalid as no custom applicable to the Porwal sect of the jains had been established empowering a widow to adopt without the authority of her husband and that the 1/4th share of Smt.
K declared by the preliminary decree had become her absolute property by virtue of section 14 of the Act and upon her death it descended to her grandsons M and R to the exclusion of other parties.
Held, that the adoption of Rajkumar was valid.
A sonless Jain widow could adopt a son without the express authority of her husband.
Such a custom among the Jains not domiciled in the States of Madras and the Punjab) has been recognised by judicial decisions spread over a period longer than a century.
Though none of these decisions related to the Porwal sect of Jabalpur to which the parties belonged.
They laid down a general custom of the jains which were applicable to the parties.
The decisions proceeded not upon.
any custom peculiar to any locality or to any sect of the jains but.
upon general custom which had by long acceptance become part of the law applicable to them.
Where a custom is repeatedly brought to the notice of the Courts, the courts may held that custom introduced into the law without the necessity of proof in each individual case.
Pemraj vs Mst.
Chand Kanwar, (1947) L. R. 74 1.
A. 224 and Mangibai Gulabchand vs Suganchand Bhikamchand, A.I.R. (1948) P. C. 177, relied on.
Sheokuarbai vs
Jeoraj, , Saraswathi Ammal vs ,Jagadambal, , Maharajah Govind nath Ray vs Gulal Chand, (1833) 5 Sel.
Rep. 276, Bhagwandas Tejmal vs Rajmal Alias Hiralal Lachmindas, (1873) 10 Bom.
H.C. Rep. 241, Sheo Singh Rai vs Mst.
Dakho and Morari Lal (1878) L.R. 5 1.
A. 87, Lakhmi Chand vs Gatto Bai, All. 319, Manik Cha nd Golecha vs Jagit Settani, Cal.
518, Harar nabh Parshad alias Rajajee vs Mangil Das, Cal. 379, ManoharLal vs Banarsi Das All.
495, Asharfi Kumar vs Rupchand, All. 197, Rup Chand vs Jambu, Prasad All, 2 47, Jiwaraj vs Mst.
Sheokuwarbai, A.I.R. (1920) Nag. 162, Banarsi Das vs Sumat Prasad, All.
1019 and Rama Rao vs Raja of Pittapur, (1918) L. R. 43 1.
A. 148, referred to.
Held, further that the 1/4th share of Smt.
K declared by the preliminury decree was "possessed" by her and on her 420 death it descended to her grandsons in accordance with provisions of sections 15 and 16 of the Act.
The word "possessed" in section 14 was used in a broad sense meaning the state of owing or having in one 's power.
The rule laid down by the Privy Council that till actual division of the share declared in her favour by a preliminary decree for partition of the,joint family prop" a Hindu wife or mother was not recognised as owner of that share cannot apply after the enactment of the .
Section 4 of the Act made it clear that the Legislature intended to supersede the rules of Hindu law on all rs in respect of which there was an express provision made in the Act.
Gumalapura Taggina Matada Kotturuswami vs Setra Veerayya, (1959) 1 Supp.
S.C.R. 968 and Pratapmull Agarwalla vs Dhanabati Bibi, (1935) L.R. 63 I.A. 33, referred to.
