The respondent company was incorporated in 1937 primarily with the object of acquiring and working a match factory.
Under the memorandum of association the company was also empowered, inter alia, to manufacture and deal in chemicals.
The business of manufacturing matches was carried on by the company till 1941.
Thereafter the profits became less and less due to war conditions.
On May 9, 1943, the company entered into an agreement with a third party for the sale of the lands, buildings, plant and machinery of its match factory for Rs. 5,75,000.
It was agreed that this price would not include manufactured goods, chemicals and other jaw materials or any other asset not shown in the agreement of sale.
Later, a fresh agreement was entered into on August 9, 1943, under which the sale included chemicals and paper for manufacture which had not been sold in the first instance and the price was Rs. 7,35,000.
In a report to the shareholders dated August 1, 1944, the Directors stated that the price obtained had shown a capital appreciation of about six times the cost price and that the sale of chemicals had resulted in ' substantial profit.
In proceedings for assessing income which had escaped assessment the income tax authorities, relying upon the memorandum of association which allowed the 961 company to manufacture and sell chemicals and on the Directors ' report, held that the profit from the sale of the chemicals and other raw materials was liable to income tax on a profit of Rs. 2,00,000 which was reduced later to Rs. 1, 15,259.
The company claimed that the stock of raw materials was sold not in the course of ordinary trading but only in a realisation sale after the company had been wound up.
The evidence showed that the clause in the memorandum of association giving power to the company to sell chemicals was seldom used and that prior to the sale of chemicals to the purchaser, two transactions of sale of chemicals for small amounts in 1943 were too petty in themselves to afford evidence of trading in chemicals.
Held, that though under the second agreement dated August 9, 1943, more price was paid, the transaction was still a winding up sale and no part of this slump price was identifiable as the price of the chemicals and other raw materials.
There was no evidence that before the winding up the company had sold chemicals as part of its business, and the two instances cited were too petty in themselves to afford evidence of a continued or sustained trading in chemicals.
A winding up sale is not "trading or doing business" and the sale of the raw materials including the chemicals was not part of any business done.
Accordingly, the sum of Rs. 1,15,259 was not liable to tax.
Doughty v Commissioner of Taxes, (1927) A. C. 327, di. ',Cussed and relied on.
Case law reviewed.
