Appellant Agarwal was an Income Tax Officer and appellant Kulkarni, a clerk under him.
They were put up for trial along with another clerk of the Department on several charge the principal charge being that they had entered into a criminal conspiracy to obtain for themselves pecuniary advantage in the form of income tax refund orders in the name of fictitious persons and had thereby fraudulently mis appropriated a large amount of Government money.
The trial judge held that the prosecution had failed to establish criminal conspiracy and acquitted the appellants of the charge under section 120B and the second appellant of all other charges under the Indian Penal ( ode but while acquitting the third person also under section 120B,, convicted him of other offends as he had pleaded guilty.
The State appealed against this order of acquittal.
The High Court allowed the appeal in part and convicted all the accused persons under section 120B of the Code and the second appellant also under the other charges.
Held, that there was no doubt that the powers of the High Court under section 423 (1) (a) of the Code of Criminal Procedure in dealing with an order of acquittal were as wide as those under section 423 (1) (b) in respect of orders of conviction; ' but in dealing with an appeal against acquittal that Court had to bear in mind the fact that the initial presumption of innocence in favour of the accused person is strengthened by the order of acquittal; But however cautious or circumspect the court might be, it was, nevertheless, free to arrive at its own conclusions as to the guilt or innocence of the accused on the evidence adduced before it by the prosecution; Sheo Swarup vs King Emperor , 934) L. R. 61 I. A. 398 and Nur Mohammad vs Emperor, A.I.R. 1945 P. C. 151., referred to.
406 Observations made on ' this point in certain decided cases of this Court were not intended to lay down a rigid or inflexible rule that should govern all such appeals and it is not necessary that the High Court must characterise the findings as perverse, before it can reverse a judgment of acquittal.
Surajpal Singh vs The State, ; and Ajmer Singh vs State, of Punjab, ; , considered.
Sanwat Singh v, State of Rajasthan; , and Harbans Singh vs State of Punjab, [1962]_"Supp. 1 section C. R. 104 referred to.
It was settled law that a conviction can be reasonably founded on circumstantial evidence if it is wholly inconsistent with the innocence of the accused and Consistent only with his guilt.
If the circumstances proved are consistent either with innocence or guilt, the accused person is entitled to the benefit of doubt.
But in applying this principle a distinction must be made between primary facts ' which have to be proved in the ordinary way and the inference of guilt to be drawn therefrom.
It is in connection with the latter aspect of the problem that the doctrine of benefit of doubt can apply ; and an inference of guilt can be drawn only if the proved facts are wholly inconsistent with innocence, and consistent only with guilt.
