Section 124A of the Indian Penal Code which makes sedition an offence is constitutionally valid.
Though the section imposes restrictions on the fundamental freedom of 770 speech and expression, the restrictions are in the interest of public order and are within the ambit of permissible legislative interference with the fundamental right.
There is a conflict on the question of the ambit of section 124A between decision of the federal Court and of the Privy Council.
The Federal Court has held that words, deeds or writings constituted an offence under section 124A only when they had the intention or tendency to disturb public tranquility.
to create public disturbance or to promote disorder, whilst the Privy Council has taken the view that it was not an essential ingredient of the offence of sedition under section 124A that the words etc, should be intended to or be likely to incite public disorder.
Either view can be taken and supported on good reasons.
If the view taken by the Federal Court was accepted section 124A would be use constitutional but if the view of the Privy Council was accepted it would be unconstitutional.
It is well settled that if certain provisions of law construed in one way would make them consistent with the constitution, and another interpretation would render them unconstitutional, the Court would lean in favour of the former construction.
Keeping in mind the reasons for the introduction of section 124A and the history of sedition the section must be so construed as to limit its application to acts involving intention or tendency to create disorder, or disturbance of law and order; or incitement to violence.
Niharendu Dutt Majumdar vs King Emperor, , followed.
King Emperor vs Sadashiv Narayan Bhalerao, (1947) L.R. 74 I.A. 89 and Wallace Johnson vs The King not followed.
Romesh Thapar vs The State of Madras.
(1050) S.C.R. 594.
Brij Bhushan vs The State of Delhi. ; and Ramji Lal Modi vs The State U.P. ; , referred to.
The Bengal Immunity Company Limited vs The State of Bihar, and R. M. D. Chamarbaugwala vs The Union of India, [1957] section C. R. 930 applied.
Each one of the constituent elements of the offence of making, publishing or circulating statements conducing to public mischief, punishable under section 505 of the Indian Penal Code, had reference to, and a direct effect on, the security of the State or public order.
Hence the provisions of section 505 were clearly saved by article 19(2). ^
