The plaintiff respondents sued the appellants for recovery of possession of the lands in dispute.
The appellants had entered into possession of the lands on the strength of a mortgage deed.
The mortgagors executed another mortgage with respect to their milkiat interest in favour of certain persons.
The plaintiff respondents bought the milkiat rights shares together with the kasht lands from the mortgagors and entered into possession of the milkiat property and subsequently redeemed the mortgage deeds in 1943.
The appellants however did not make over possession of the lands in dispute after the mortgages had been redeemed.
The trial court found that the plaintiff respondents had no subsisting title to the lands and that the suit was barred by adverse possession and limitation.
The High Court, on appeal filed by the plaintiff respondents, allowed the appeal on the 291 ground that the defendant appellants were in possession only as mortgagees and that after the redemption of the mortgage they had no right to continue in possession.
The appellants than appealed to the Supreme Court by certificate granted by the High Court.
Apart from the ques tions of estoppel and limitation by adverse possession the main point which was raised in the appeal was that the plaintiff respondent had no subsisting title to evict the appellant in view of the provisions of the Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950.
Held, that the suit was instituted within twelve years of the redemption of the mortgage deed and was not therefore barred by limitation.
Section 4 of the Act vests in the State all the interests of the proprietor or tenure holder, including the right to recover possession from the trespasser, except those interests which are expressly saved by the Act.
Since no mortgage subsisted on the date of the vesting in the State the respondent could not take advantage of section 6(1) (c) of the Act (as amended by Act XVI of 1959).
The mere fact that a proprietor had a subsisting title to possession over certain land on the date of vesting would not make that land under his 'Khas Possession '.
The res pondents lost their right to recover possession from the appellants even if they were trespassers, on their estate vesting in the State.
Brijnandan Singh vs Jamuna Prasad A. I. R., 1958 Pat. 589, Haji Sk.
Subhan vs Madhorao [1962] Supp.
I S.C.R. 123.
