The appellant has its factory at jamshedpur.
It manu factures cast iron sleepers, pipes, etc., in the said factory.
The raw materials mainly required for the manufacture of sleepers are pig iron, coke, limestone and moulding sand.
The Railway Board is the only buyer of sleepers, and the sleepers are manufactured only on receipt of orders from the said Board and not otherwise.
Inspite of its best efforts to secure the raw materials in 1959, the appellant failed to secure the same.
As the appellant found that the manufacture of sleepers could not be carried on, it issued a notice and laid off the workers of the sleeper factory.
The lay off continued from December 15, 1959 to September 11, 1960.
On September 12, 1960, the appellant closed the Sleeper Foundry Department and issued notice of retrenchment.
Retrenchment compensation was also paid to the workmen retrenched.
The appellant paid the respondents the, statutory compensation for the lay off period as prescribed by section 25C of the .
However, the respondents contended that the lay off was not justified, The dispute between the parties was referred for adjudication by the Government of Bihar to the Industrial Tribunal.
The Tribunal found that the appellant was in financial difficulties at the relevant time, the appellant was not actuated by any malafide intentions and the lay off was not the result of any ulterior motive.
However, it held that if the affairs of the appellant had been better managed and more foresight had been shown by the appellant prior to the time when the crisis was reached, pig iron could have been secured and lay off could have been avoided.
Under the circumstances, the Tribunal held that the lay off could not be held to be altogether justified, and awarded compensation to the respondents in excess of the amount fixed by the statute 796 Held, that the lay off was justified as raw materials were not available to the appellant at the relevant time.
The only relief to which the workmen were entitled was the statutory relief prescribed by section 25C.
If the lay off is malafide in the sense that the employer has deliberately and malaciously brought about a situation where lay off becomes necessary, it is not a lay off which in justified tinder section 2(kkk) and the relief provided under section 25C is not the only relief to which the workmen are en titled.
The malafides of the employer in declaring lay off really means that no lay off has in law taken place and a finding as to the malafide of the employer in declaring a layoff takes the lay off out of the definition of section 2(kkk).If lay off is declared in order to victimise workmen or for some, ulterior purpose, the position in the same.
