The appellant, tried with another, was convicted under section 411 Indian Penal Code while the other was convicted under sections 457 and 380 of the Code by the Assistant Sessions judge.
The appellant had stated to the police during investigation that she would show the place where he had hidden them (the ornaments)" and thereafter went to the garden and dug out two bundles containing the ornaments.
The other accused person had also similarly stated that he had given the 413 ornaments to one Bada Sab, took the police party to Bada Sab and asked him to return the ornament which he did.
The Sessions Judge on appeal took the view that that part of the statement of the appellant where he said that he 'had hidden the ornaments was not admissible in evidence and in the absence of any other evidence possession of the ornament could not be said to have been proved.
He, therefore, held that the appellant was entitled to the benefit of doubt and acquitted him.
He also took a similar view with regard to the other accused person and acquitted him.
The order of acquittal was set aside by the High Court in revision under section 439 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and a retrial was directed.
It was against the order of retrial that the appeal was directed.
Held, that it was open to a High Court in revision and at the instance of a private party to set aside an order of acquittal though the State might not have appealed.
But such jurisdiction should be exercised only in exceptional cases, as where a glaring defect in the procedure or a manifest error of law leading to a flagrant miscarriage of justice has taken place.
When section 439(4) of the Code forbids the High Court from converting a finding of acquittal into one of conviction, it is not proper that the High Court should do the same indirectly by ordering a retrial.
It was not possible to lay down the criteria for by which to judge such exceptional cases.
It was, however, clear that the High Court would be justified in interfering in cases such as (1) where the trial court had wrongly shut out evidence sought to be adduced by the prosecution, (2) where the appeal court had wrongly held evidence admitted by the trial court to be inadmissible, (3) where material evidence has been overlooked either by the trial court or the court of appeal or, (4) where the acquittal was based on a compounding of the offence not permitted by law and cases similar to the above.
D. Stephens vs Nosibolla, ; and Logendra nath Jha, vs Shri Polailal Biswas, ; , referred to.
There could be no doubt in the instant case that the entire statements of the appellant as well as of the other accused person would be admissible tinder section 27 of the Indian Evidence Act and the Sessions judge was in error in ruling out parts of them and the High Court was clearly justified in setting aside the acquittal in revision.
Pulukuri Kotayya vs King Emperor, (1946) L.R. 74 I.A. 65, referred to. 414
