The appellant, a practising lawyer engaged by.
the respondent to investigate title in respect of a property when the latter wanted to purchase, was prosecuted by him on a charge under a. 409 & the Indian Penal Code for misappro printing a sum of Rs. 50001 entrusted to him for that purpose.
The prosecution mainly depended on a letter written by the appellant which would show that a sum of Rs. 4200/ out of the said amount of Rs. 5000/ had been asked for by the appellant.
This letter was challenged as a forgery by the 565 appellant.
The respondent did not call a hand writing expert nor was he denied an opportunity to do so.
The trial Magistrate held that the prosecution case had not been proved and acquitted the appellant.
The High Court on appeal by the respondent set aside the order of acquittal on the ground that the appellant was a practicing lawyer in fiduciary relationship with his client and directed that the appellant be retried, by smother Magistrate with opportunity to the respondent to examine a hand writing expert in order to establish the genuineness of the said letter.
It held that since the case was one not between ordinary litigants but between a lawyer and his client, involving a fiduciary relationship, no steps should be spared to ensure complete justice between the parties and the case must be sent back even though the prosecution did not avail of the opportunity of proving its own case.
Held, that the order of the High Court were entirely erroneous and must, be set aside.
There was no ground for directing a retrial and the appellant could not be put to a second trial for the same offence simply because of the failure of the complainant to adduce all the evidence that should and could, have been adduced.
The fact that the appellant was a lawyer could make no difference and the same rules of criminal, jurisprudence that applied to all must apply to him.
Further, the High Court was not exercising disciplinary jurisdiction and no relationship of lawyer and client was involved in the criminal case.
