The appellant and three others 'were charged with the murder of B. The prosecution case was that there was a dispute between B and the accused over diverting the flow of water in the fields, that the appellant armed with a stick and the others with spear, kaholi and salang assaulted B and B died of the injuries infliced.
In his statement under section 342 Code of Criminal Procedure the appelant stated that B had thrown him on the ground and had 679 attempted to strangulate him whereupon the took out his kirpan and struck B in self defence.
The Sessions Judge disbelieved the prosecution evidence and acquitted the three other accused persons ; but he convicted the appellant under s.304 Part 11 Indian Penal Code relying on a part of his statement in which he admitted having strick blows but rejecting the part that B attempted to strangulate him.
He had that the only apprehension which the appellant could have was of simple hurt which did not give him the right to cause the death of B. On appeal the High Court confirmed the conviction.
Held, that the conviction of the appellant under s.304 Part 11 Indian Penal Code could not it and.
In convicting the appellant the courts below had accepted A case which was not the case of the prosecution but had relied only upon a part of the statement of the appellant made in his defence.
It was not open to the courts to dissect the statement and to pick out the incriminating part and to reject the excul patory part on the ground that it was not supported by evidence.
If in his statement the accused confesses to the commission of the offence charged he may be convicted upon that confession, but if he does not confess and sets up his own version and seeks to explain his conduct pleading that he has committed no offence, the statement can only be taken into consideration in its entirety.
Taking the statement of the appellant in its entirety, he had an apprehension that B was attempting to strangulate him and this gave him the right of defence of person extending even to causing the death of the assailant.
