The two appellants G and S together with three others B, D and A were tried for the muder of four persons by shooting them with guns.
Two spent cartridges were recovered at the spot; G produced a gun on the very day of occurrence and D produced a gun one week after the occurrence.
The cartridges and guns were sent for examination to the ballistic expert but neither he nor his report was produced before the Sessions judge.
The Sessions judge convicted the appellants and B and D but acquitted A.
The same judge tried G under s.19(f) Arms Act for being in possession of the unlicensed gun which G had surrendered but acquitted him of the charge.
On appeal against the conviction for murder the High Court confirmed the conviction and sentence of, death passed against the appellants but acquitted B and D.
The appellants contended (i) that in view of his acquittal in the s.19(f) Arms Act case, the allegation of the recovery of the gun from G in the murder case could not be accepted, (ii) that the failure to produce the ballistic expert and his report had introduced a serious infirmity in the prosecution case, and (iii) that the High Court had failed to deal with these and other points raised before it.
Held, that the conviction of the appellants was not vitiated by any infirmities.
The acquittal of G in section 19(f) Arms Act case did not affect his conviction in the murder case.
If the order of acquittal under s.19(f) had been pronounced before the judgment in the murder case, then in the latter case the prosecution could not contend that G was in illegal possession of the firearm.
Though the two judgment were pronounced on the same day there was nothing to show that the judgment in the s.19(f) Arms Act case was pronounced earlier.
On the other hand there were indications that it was pronounced 586 after the judgment in the murder case.
The evidence clearly established that G bad produced the gun.
Pritam Singh vs State of Punjab, A.I.R. 1956 section C. 415, referred to.
There is no inflexible rule that in every case when a person is charged with murder caused by a firearm, the prosecution can succeed only by examining an expert to prove that the in juries could be caused by the weapon alleged to have been used.
Where the direct evidence is not satisfactory or disinterested or where the injuries are alleged to have been caused with a gun and they prima facie appear to have been inflicted by a rifle, the apparent inconsistency can be cured or the oral evidence can be corroborated by the evidence of a ballistic expert.
In the present case there was no necessity to examine an expert.
Admittedly, G had fired twice and there was nothing to show that the injuries could not have been caused by the pun which was in his hands.
D had kept the gun with him for a week before surrendering it and it was unlike that D had not removed tracks of its use.
The report of the ballistic examiner, which was sent for by the Supreme Court did not help the defence and no inference could be drawn against the prosecution from its failure to produce it at the trial.
Mohinder Singh vs The State, 1, referred to.
In dealing with confirmation cases the High Court should consider the evidence carefully and record its conclusions clearly after dealing with all the points urged before it by the defence.
In all criminal appeals before it the Supreme Court is reluctant to interfere with the findings of fact recorded by the High Court.
In the present case some of the reasons given by the High Court were erroneous and some of the arguments urged before it were not duly considered and the Supreme Court had therefore to go into the evidence.
