Although section 135 of the Indian Contract Act does not in terms apply to a surety bond executed in favour of the court, there can be no doubt that the equitable rule underlying that section must apply to it.
The reason for the said rule which entitles the surety to a discharge is that he must be able at any time either to require the creditor to call upon the principal debtor to pay off his debt, or himself to pay the debt and seek his remedy against the principal debtor.
The question as to whether the liability of the surety is discharged by a compromise in the judicial proceeding in which the surety bond is executed must depend on the terms of the bond itself.
If the terms indicate that the surety undertook the liability on the basis that the dispute should be 922 decided on the merits by the court and not amicably settled, the compromise will effect a discharge of the surety.
The Official Liquidators, The Travancore National & Quilon Bank Ltd. vs The Official Assignee of Madras 1.
L. R , Parvatibai vs Vinayak Balvant, 1.
L. R. 1938 Bom.
Mahomedalli Ibrahimji vs Laxmibai, (1929) I. L. R. LIV Bom.
II 8, Narsingh on vs Nirpat Singh, (1932) I. L. R. XI Patna 590 and Muhammad Yusaf vs Ram GobindaOjha, (1927) 1.
L. R. LV Cal. 91, referred to.
But if the terms show that the parties and the surety contemplated that there might be an amicable settlement as well, anti the surety executed the bond knowing that he might be liable under the compromise decree, there can be no discharge and the surety will be liable under the compromise decree.
Haji Ahmed vs Maruti Ramji, (1930) 1.
L. R. LV Bom.
Appunni Nair vs Isack Mackadan,(1919) 1.
L. R. 43 Mad.
272 and Kanailal Mookerjee vs Kali Mohan Chatterjee, A. 1.
R. , referred to.
Consequently, in the present case where the surety bond was executed in favour of court and by it the sureties undertook to pay certain amount of money on behalf of the respondent if decreed by the court and the compromise decree between the parties introduced complicated provisions enabling the e appellant to take possession of the properties in adjustment of rival claims, granted time, albeit to both the parties, to discharge their obligations thereunder and included matters extraneous to the judicial proceedings in which the surety bond was executed.
Held, that the sureties stood discharged by the compromise decree.
