By Sub section
(8) of section 18 A, " where on making the regular assessment, the Income tax Officer finds that no payment of the tax has been made in accordance with the foregoing provisions of this section, interest calculated in the manner laid down in sub section (6) shall be added to the tax as determined on the basis of the regular assessment".
section (6) of section 18A provided, "where in any year an assessee has paid tax under . sub section(3) on the basis of his own estimate, and the tax so paid is less than eighty percent of the tax determined on the basis of regular assessment. . simple interest at the rate of six per cent per annum from the first day of. ' January in the financial year in which the tax was paid up to the date of the said regular assessment shall be payable by the assessee upon the amount by which the tax so paid falls short of the said eighty per cent.
" The assessee should have under sub s.(3) of s.18A made an estimate of his income and paid tax according to it but he did neither.
He was thereupon charged with interest under sub s.(8) of s.18A.
He contended that interest could 894 not be so charged because under sub s.(8) interest could be charged only in the manner laid down in sub section
(6) that is, from January 1.
of a year in which tax was paid and on the shortfall between eighty per cent of the tax payable on regular assessment and the amount actually paid, neither of which could be done in his case as he had not paid any tax at all.
Held, the rule that in a taxing statute one has to look merely at what is clearly said and that in such a statute there is no room for any intendment applies only to a taxing provision and does not apply to a provision not creating a charge for the tax but laying down the machinery for its calculation or procedure for its collection.
The provisions in a taxing statute dealing with machinery for assessment have to be construed by the ordinary rules of construction, that is to say, in accordance with the clear intention of the legislature which is to make a charge levied effective.
Commissioner of Income tax vs Mahaliram Ramjidas, A.I.R. , Indian United Mills Ltd. vs Commissioner of Excess Profits Tax, ; Whitney vs Commissioners of Inland Revenue, (1925) 10 'C. 88 and Allen vs Trehearne, , referred to.
Sub s of section 18A is a provision which lays down the machinery for(8) the assessment of interest.
Its plain affect is to impose a liability to pay interest and then it provides that in calculating the interest the machinery laid down in sub section
(6) should be applied.
Sub section
(6) should therefore be read in a manner which makes it workable and prevents the clear intention of the legislature from being defeated.
That sub.
section should, where it is to be applied because of sub section
(8), therefore, be read, as "from the 1st day of January in the financial year in which the tax ought to have been paid" and in such a case the shortfall contemplated in sub section
(6) would be the entire eighty per cent.
The penalty under sub section
(9) of section 18A is in addition to the liability under sub ss (6) and (8).
Sub section
(9) does not arise in the construction of sub sections
(6) and (8).
