A sum of about Rs. 9,000 was due from the appellant to the Government on account of excise dues.
The movable and immovable property of the appellant was several times put for sale by auction under Ch.
XI Bombay Land Revenue Code but the amount remained unrecovered and three items of lands remained unsold.
In view of a Government Order dated August, 30, 1933, which prescribed such a course, the Mahalkari sought permission of the Collector to make a nominal bid of Re. 1/for each item of land in the next auction.
The permission was granted and the Mahalkari informed the appellant that if no bidders came forward at the next auction the lands would be sold at the nominal price of Re. 1.
The auction was held and as no stranger came to bid the Mahalkari made the nominal bid of Re. 1 for each item of land.
The bid was accepted and the sales were later confirmed.
Subsequently, the Collector sold these lands for adequate consideration and the purchasers were put in possession.
The appellant filed a suit challenging the validity of these sales.
The purchasers contended that the suit not having been brought within one year of the sales was time barred, that the suit was barred by sections 4(c) and 1 1 of the Bombay Revenue jurisdiction Act and, that the appellant was disentitled to relief on the ground of acquiescence and estoppel.
Held, that the Sales were invalid and the suit was liable to be decreed.
The purchase for a predetermined nominal price of Re 1, irrespective of the actual market value was not a sale by public auction as contemplated by section 167 of the Bombay Land Revenue Code.
An auction is.
a proceeding at which people are invited to compete for purchase of property by successive offers of advancing sums and a sale by auction is a means of ascertaining what the property is worth i.e. its fair 323 market price If at the sale there are no bids there cannot be a sale.
The Government Order had no statutory force at all, and could not authorise or render valid the transaction if otherwise it lacked a legal basis.
There was no provision in the Code which authorised such a course which amounted to forfeiture of the property of a defaulter.
It was anomalous that the Collector who moved the machinery for realisation of arrears by sale and who was constituted the authority to determine judicially allegation of irregularity in the conduct of the sale should, without authority of any statutory power, bid at the auction conducted by his deputy.
The mere fact that the appellant had been informed before hand of the nominal bid did not render the sales valid.
Nor was the appellant estopped from questioning the legality of the sales.
Tumdu Dhansing vs Government for the Province of Bombay, I.L.R. , approved.
The suit was not barred by article 11 of the Limitation Act.
The article was applicable only to cases where there was need for setting aside a sale and not to cases where no sale as contemplated by law had taken place.
The provisions section 4(c) Bombay Revenue jurisdiction Act, 1876 applied to cases where there was a sale and it was sought to be set aside on the ground of irregularities other than fraud.
They did not apply where there was only a purported sale which did not pass title, Section 1 1 barred a suit when there was an appeal provided against the act or omission of a revenue officer and the party failed to avail of the remedy.
in the present case there was no order which was appealable under section 203 and section 1 I could not be applied.
There was no scope for invoking the aid of section 41 Transfer of Property Act.
The purchasers had not relied upon any representation, act or conduct of the appellants but on the belief that Government had acquired a good title to the lands.
If the Government had no title the purchasers could not acquire any.
