The appellant a public servant was served with a charge sheet and after enquiry was dismissed.
The filed a suit for a declaration that the order of dismissal was invalid and for a further declaration that he still continued to be in service.
The suit was ultimately decreed by the Supreme Court by making the declarations sought.
In the meantime the appellant filed another suit for recovery of arrears of salary and allowances.
The suit was stayed pending the disposal of the appeal before the Supreme Court.
After the judgment of the Supreme Court, the authorities decided to hold a further enquiry against the appellant on the original allegations.
In view of r. 12(4) Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1957, the trial court ordered that the proceedings shall remain stayed till the order of suspension was revoked or set aside.
Rule 12(4) provides that where a penalty of dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement is set aside by a court of law and the authorities decide to hold a further enquiry on the same allegations, the public servant shall be deemed to have been placed under suspension from the date of the original order of dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement.
The appellant contended that r. 12 (4) offended articles 14, 19 (1) (f), 31, 142 and 144 of the Constitution and was void.
Held, that r. 12(4) did not offend any of the Articles of the Constitution and 'was valid.
Article 142 provides that decrees passed by the Supreme Court shall be enforceable throughout the territory of India, and article 144 provides that all authorities, civil and judicial shall act in aid of the Supreme Court.
Rule 12 (4) did not go against the decree of the Supreme Court.
and accordingly it did not contravene articles 142 and 144.
The declaration by the 230 Supreme Court that the appellant was a member of the service at the date of the institution of the suit was not affected by the appellant being placed under suspension.
The only things affected by r. 12(4) were the salary and allowances of the appellant as to which the Supreme Court decree contained no directions.
Rule 12(4) did not contravene article 19(1) (f).
Conceding that the right to receive arrears of salary constituted the appellant 's property and that r. 12(4) placed substantial restrictions on the exercise of that right, the restrictions were in the interest of the general public.
The taking of disciplinary action against public servants for inefficiency, dishonesty etc.
was absolutely necessary in the interests of the general public.
Suspension of the public servant pending enquiry was a necessary and reaso nable part of the procedure.
Devendra Pratap vs State of U. P., [1962] Sapp.
1. section C. R. 315.1334, distinguished.
The argument that there was discrimination between a public servant the penalty of dismissal etc.
on whom was set aside by a court and another public servant a similar penalty on whom was set aside on appeal by the departmental disciplinary authority was incorrect.
Rule 12(3) provided that in the latter case also the suspension of the public servant shall be deemed to have continued in force from the date of the original order of dismissal etc.
Only in the case of a public servant who had not been placed under suspension pending enquiry, would r. 12 (3) not be operative.
But such cases were rare.
Rule 12(4) did n;t ' offend article 31 (1) and whatever deprivation of property resulted from r. 12 (4) was by authority of law.
