The appellants were tried and convicted for conspiracy to cheat certain banks.
The prosecution had put on record a letter from the Under Secretry to Government which stated that the Governor had been pleased to grant sanction for the prosecution of the appellants.
The sanction was not challenged before the trial court or the High Court, but before the Supreme Court the appellants contended that no sanction as required by section 196A, Code of Criminal Procedure was on record and that the document on record did not show on its face that the facts of the case had been considered by the Governor.
The appellant further contended that for conviction for cheating the prosecution had to establish both that the appellants had caused wrongful gain to themselves and caused wrongful loss to the banks and that as no wrongful loss to the banks had been established, the appellants could not be convicted of cheating or of conspiracy to cheat.
Held, that the appellants were not entitled to raise the question of sanction for the first time in the Supreme Court as it required for its decision investigation of facts.
The document on record was an official communication which recited the fact that the Governor had granted the sanction.
A presumption arose ,that the sanction had in fact been accorded.
A further presumption arose that the official act of granting sanction to which reference was made in the communication had been regularly performed.
The document on record prima facie satisfied the requirements of section 196A. Held, further, that to establish that the accused had disho nestly induced another to part with property within the meaning of section 420, Indian Penal Code, it was not necessary to prove both wrongful gain and wrongful loss.
Wrongful gain and wrongful 383 loss were two facets of the definition of dishonesty and it was enough to establish the existence of one of them.
In the present case, the appellants had made wrongful gain to themselves by obtaining credits by unlawful means and even if no wrongful loss was caused to the banks, the appellants were guilty of cheating.
Sanjiv Ratanappa Bonad vs Emperor, (1932) I. L. B, LVI Bom.
488, and Kotamraju Venkatarayudu vs Emperor, , distinguished.
The sentences of imprisonment imposed on four of the appellants were reduced to the period already undergone and a fine of Rs. 3,000/ was imposed on each on the grounds that no useful purpose would be served by sending these appellants to jail after a long interval of time, that these appellants were very young at the time of the commission of the offences and that they had acted under the influence of the dominating personality of the main accused.
