The properties in suit had been sold by A to the appellants on May 31; 1956, but the respondents, as the owners of certain agricultural land in the patti claimed that they had a right of preemption under section 15 (c) (ii) and (iii) of the Punjab Preemption Act, 1913.
In the suit instituted by the respondents for this purpose the appellants resisted the claim on the ground that the vendees from A had transferred by exchanges some of the items out of the lands purchased by them and that as a result of the said exchanges the appellants themselves had become entitled to preempt the said sales under the same statutory provision.
The suit was, however, decreed by the trial court and the decision was confirmed by the High Court of Punjab.
The appellants obtained special leave to appeal to the Supreme Court and during the pendency of 885 the appeal the Act was amended by Punjab Act 10 of 1960, by which, inter alia, (1) cls.
(ii) and (iii) of section 15 (c) of the original Act were deleted, (2) cl.4 of section 15 (1)(c) provided that the right of preemption in respect of agricultural land and village immoveable property shall vest in the tenants who held under tenancy of the vendors or anyone of them the land or property sold or a part thereof, and (3) section 31 provided that no court shall pass a decree in a suit for preemption whether instituted before or after the commencement of the amending Act of 1960 which was inconsistent with the provisions of the said Act.
In view of the new provisions introduced by the amending act the respondents raised a new contention that they were tenants who held under tenancy of the vendor of the lands in question and, as such, they were entitled to the right of preemption under cl.4 of s.15 (1)(c) of the Act, as amended, even if it be held that the right to claim pre emption under cls.
(ii) and (iii) of s.15 (c) of the unmended Act was taken away retrospectively by the amending Act.
The appellants pleaded that even assuming that cl.4 of s.15 (1)(c) was applicable, the respondents could not get a decree on the bassis of the new right of pre emption inasmuch as they had no such right on the date on which the suit was filed or when the sales were effected.
Held, that (1 the provisions of s.31 of the Punjab Pre emption Act, 1913, as amended by Punjab Act 10 of 1960, are retrospective in operation and, therefore, the decree passed in favour of the respondents by the trial court and affirmed by the High Court under the unmended section could not be sustained.
Ram Sarup V.Munshi [1963] 3 S.C.R. 858 followed.
(2) The retrospective operation of s.31 necessarily involves effect being given to the substantive provisions of amended s.15 retrospectively, and hence the rights which the respondents now claim under the amended provisions must be deemed to have vested in them at the relevant time, with the result that they are entitled, on remand, to ask for a decree passed on the basis of the said rights,
