The respondent, a firm consisting of four partners, was registered under the Indian Income tax Act, 1922.
For the assessment year 1946 47 it claimed to set off a sum of Rs. 1,05,641, as its share of the loss in respect of certain transactions said to have been carried on in the name of D by another partnership between it and D, which was not registered.
The income tax authorities rejected the claim and the Appellate Tribunal agreed with their decision on the grounds (1) that it being admitted that the ankdas were in the name of D, there was no satisfactory evidence that the assessee did business in the joint account, and (2) that, in any case, the assessee could not claim the set off as the loss was suffered by an unregistered firm.
610 On a reference, the High Court held (1) that there was no legal admissible evidence to justify the Tribunal 's finding that the transactions in question were not those of the assessee, and (2) that the assessee firm could claim a set off in respect of the share of loss in the unregistered firm "if the income tax authorities did not proceed to determine the losses of the unregistered firm and did not bring it to tax as permitted by section 23 (5) (b).
" Held, that the High Court erred in its view that the asses see firm could claim a set off in respect of the loss incurred in the unregistered firm.
Held, further (per Kapur and Hidayatullah,.
JJ.) : (1) that if under section 66 of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922, a finding given by the Appellate Tribunal is to be considered final, it is necessary that the reasons for reaching it should be stated by the Tribunal with sufficient fullness to inform all concerned what they are.
(2) that there could not be a partnership between D and the registered firm.
If there was a partnership it was between D and the four partners of the assessee firm in their individual capacity, and under the provisions of section 24 of the Act the loss of Rs. 1,05,641 could not be set off against the profits of the registered firm.
Per Sarkar, J.
In view of the decision in Dulichand Laksh minarayan vs The Commissioner of Income tax, Nagpur, [1956] section C R. 154, that a firm as such is not entitled to enter into partnership with another firm or individuals, the assessee firm could not in law enter into partnership with D, and the questions answered by the High Court did not really arise in the present case.
