For the year of account ending March 31, 1955, the appellant, a private limited company, earned a total income of Rs. 49,843.
The company declared a ' dividend of Rs. 11,712 on July 13, 1955, and before the close of the year of assessment 1955 55 declared an additional dividend of Rs. 5,612, thereby distributing in the aggregate dividend which was not less than 767 60% of the total income, reduced by the income tax and supertax payable by it.
The company then claimed rebate at the rate of one anna in the rupee on the amount computed according to Sch. 1, Part 1, Item B, read with section 2 of the Finance Act, 1955.
The Income tax authorities rejected the claim on the ground that the expression "company to which the provisions of section 23A of the Income tax Act cannot be made applicable" in the provision of law aforesaid in the Finance Act, 1955, on which the appellant company relied, referred to a company against which in no circumstances could an order under section 23A be made, and private limited companies being companies in respect of which an 'order under section 23A could be made if the conditions prescribed relating to distribution of dividend were fulfilled, the benefit of rebate was not admissible in favour of the appellant company.
The Appellate Tribunal and the High Court took the view that the benefit of a rebate provided by the Finance Act could not be denied to a private company if the conditions prescribed in section 23.A(1) of the Income tax Act were fulfilled, because, according to their view, the expression "can not be made applicable" only refers to a state of affairs in which having regard to the circumstances an order tinder section 23A could not be made.
Held, that the appellant company was entitled to the rebate claimed by it.
The expression "to which the provisions of section 23A of the Income tax Act can not be made applicable" in Sch. 1, Part 1, Item B, of the Finance Act, 1955, meant that the appli cability of section 23A of the Income tax Act depended upon an order to be made by the Income tax Officer, and not upon any exclusion by the provisions of the Act.
It was only when an order under section 23A would not, having regard to the circumstances, be.justified that the right to obtain rebate under the Finance Act was claimable.
