The appellant municipality imposed octroi duty on certain,goods brought within the octroi limits.
The by laws fixed the octroi limits to be the same as the Municipal District.
Section 4 of the Bombay District Municipal Act 1901, under which the municipality was constituted, empowered the Government to declare any local area to be 1 municipal district.
At the time of the 'imposition of the octroi (duty the respondent 's factory was situated outside the municipal district and was not subject to the octroi duty.
Subsequently, the Government extended the municipal district so that the factory came to be included within that district.
The appellant contended that upon such extension its octroi limits also stood extended to include the factory and the respondent became liable to pay octroi duty in respect of goods brought into, the factory.
711 Held (per Das, Kapur and Sarkar, jj., Hidayatullah and Dayal, jj., dissenting), that octroi duty was not leviable on the respondent.
The expression 'municipal district" in the by.
law referred to the municipal district as existing when the, bylaw was framed.
The context prevented the definition of "municipal district" in the Act, namely, the municipal district as from time to time existing, from being applied under s.20 of the Bombay General Clauses Act, to interpret the by law.
The by law had been made without being published to the respondent, and if it was so read referring to the municipal district from time to time existing it would be invalid for non compliance with the provisions of section 48 of the Act.
Per Hidayatullah and Dayal, JJ.
The octroi limits fixed under the by laws included the area newly added to the municipal district and the respondent was liable to pay octroi duty on the goods entering its premises.
In view of section 20 of the Bombay General Clauses Act, the expression "municipal district" in the by law will have the same mean ing as that expression has in the Act.
There is nothing repugnant in the subject or context which would make this definition inapplicable.
At the time when the municipal district was extended notice was published to the respondent and it could have objected to the inclusion of the area on the ground that the bye law imposing the octroi duty would affect it adversely.
There is no express provision in the Act that no rule or 'by law shall be applicable to the newly added area till it is freshly enacted.
Rajnarain Singh vs The Chairman, Patna Administration Committee, Patna, , referred to.
