The respondent had let out his house to a firm against whom he obtained permission from the Rent Control Authority to terminate the tenancy on the ground of arrears of rent.
Meanwhile, the tenant intimated to the respondent by telegram that he had vacated the premises, but prior to the receipt of the telegram, the appellant bad applied to the Additional Deputy Commissioner that since the premises were likely to fall vacant, they should be allotted to him as he was a displaced person, and provisional allotment was made in his favour and he continued to be in possession since then.
The respondent then moved for the cancellation of the said allotment on the ground that he needed the premises for his own use, but the allotment was confirmed in favour of the appellant by, the Additional Deputy Commissioner.
The respondent then filed a writ petition in the High Court for cancellation of the said order, which was set aside and the case was remanded for disposal in accordance with law; against this the appellant filed a Letters Patent Appeal.
On remand the earlier order was confirmed by the Additional Deputy Commissioner, against which the respondent filed another writ petition in the High Court.
The Letters 969 Patent Appeal and the subsequent writ petition were heard together and the High Court allowed the writ petition and set aside the order of allotment in favour of the appellant on the ground that as soon as it appeared that the appellant had a place of business of his own, he ceased to be a displaced person within the meaning of cl.
23(1) and the other relevant clauses.
Held, that cl.
23(1) refers to the persons in the specified categories and empowers the Deputy Commissioner to make an order of allotment in their favour.
There are no terms of limitation qualifying the said persons and the scheme of the relevant provision does not seem to contemplate any such limitation.
Clause 23(1), as well as cls.
24 and 24A do not necessarily exclude the cases of persons specified in them on the ground that the said persons already have an accommodation of their own and the High Court was in error in assuming that the provisions of cis.
23(1),24 and 24A impliedly postulated that the persons belonging to the respective categories specified by them could receive allotment only if they had no previous accommodation of their own.
Held, further, that after remand the Additional Deputy Commissioner did not properly appreciate the scope and effect of the provision contained in the relevant clause and he took an unduly narrow view of the limits of the enquiry which he was bound to hold as a result of the remand order and that has vitiated his final conclusion.
