The appellant purchased the suit property under a sale deed executed by defendant 4 on May 20, 1949.
Defendants 3 and 4 had been doing business in partnership, which, how.
ever, was dissolved on March 31, 1949.
The deed of dissolution showed that the partnership owed debts to the extent of Rs. 2 1/2 lakhs and that the suit property was allotted to defendant 4.
The first respondent to whom money was due from the partnership obtained a decree on june 19, 1951, and had the suit property attached.
The appellant filed a claim petition for raising the attachment but it was dismissed.
He then instituted a suit to set aside the summary order under O. 21, r. 63, of the Code of Civil Procedure.
The first respondent 's defence, inter alia, was that the sale was fraudulent intended to defeat or delay.
creditors and, therefore, was invalid under section 53 (1) of the .
The appellant pleaded that on a proper construction of section 53 (1) of the Act, a transfer which was voidable under the section could be avoided only by a representative suit filed on behalf of creditors and not by an individual creditor by way of defence to a suit to set aside a claim order.
The evidence in the case showed that the appellant was not a transferee in good faith and that the transferor itself was a scheme by the transferor with the knowledge and concurrence of the transferee to put the property out of the reach of the creditors.
Held : (1) that section 53 (1) of the , rendered a transaction voidable at the instance of the creditors if the transfer was effected with the particular intent specified and that the statute did not prescribe any particular method of avoidance.
There was nothing in section 53 (1), as 56 it originally stood before the amendment of the section in 1929, which precluded a defence by an attaching creditor to a suit to set aside a summary order under O. 2 1, r. 63, Code of Civil Procedure, that the sale in favour of the plaintiff was vitiated by fraud ; and the amendment made no change in this matter.
(2) that it was merely to have a uniform rule and to avoid conflicting decisions that the third paragraph was inserted in section 53 (1) so that after the amendment, the rule that a suit by a creditor should be brought in a representative capacity would apply as much to a suit to set aside a summary order under O. 21, r. 63, as to other suits.
(3) that the terms of section 53 (1) were satisfied even if the transfer did not "defeat" but only "delayed" the creditors.
The fact that the entirety of the debtor 's property was not sold could not by itself negative the applicability of the section unless it was proved that there was other property left, sufficient in value and of easy availability to render the alienation in question immaterial for the creditors.
Ramaswami Chettiar vs Mallappa Reddiar, Mad., 760, approved.
