Where a person is induced to purchase shares at a certain price by fraud the measure of damages which he is entitled to recover from the seller is the difference between the price which he paid for the shares and the real price of the shares on the date on which the shares were purchased.
Ordinarily the market rate of the shares on the date when the fraud was practised would represent their real price in the absence of any other circumstance.
If, however, the market was vitiated or was in a state of flux or 790 panic in consequence of the very fact that was fraudulently concealed, then the real value of the shares has to be determined on a Consideration of a variety of circumstances, disclosed by the violence led by the parties.
A firm of sharebrokers sold 3,000 shares to the plaintiff who was a constituent of the firm, on the 5th April, 1937, at Rs. 77 and Rs. 77 4as, per share without disclosing to the plaintiff the fact that the shares were owned by one of the partners of the firm and also the fact that they had received telephonic information on that day from a member of the Stock Exchange that there was going to be a sharp decline in the price of the shares.
On the 6th April the Stock Exchange Association passed a resolution for closing the Exchange on the 8th and 9th April.
The plaintiff had to sell 2,000 shares through the defendants on the 20th April at Rs. 47 to Rs. 42 per share, and 1,000 shares on the 22nd April at Rs. 428as.
The High Court awarded the difference between the price paid by the plaintiff and the prices fetched on resale as damages.
On appeal, Held, that the prices received at the resale on the 20th and 22nd April could not represent the true value of the shares on the 5th April.
The real question for determination was what the market value would have been on the 5th April of these shares if all the buyers and sellers know that the Stock Exchange was to be closed on the 8th and 9th April.
Held also that the plaintiff was entitled to get interest on the amount awarded as damages from the 5th April till the date of suit on the principle that where money is obtained or retained by fraud a court of equity will order it to be returned with interest.
Johnson vs Rex ([1904] A.C. 817) referred to.
It is well settled that the decision of a case cannot be 'based on grounds outside the pleadings of the parties and that it is the case pleaded that has to be found.
Where the plaintiff based his claim for a certain sum of money on the ground that the defendants had sold certain shares belonging to him without his instructions, but he was not able to prove that the sale was not authorised by him: Held, reversing the decision of the High Court, that the plaintiff could not be given a decree for the sum claimed on the ground of failure of consideration, as he had not set up any such alternative claim in the plaint or even at a later stage when he sought to amend the plaint.
