A registered partition award made by Panchas between all the co sharers provided : "Mouza Telibandha together with all rights and interests of proprietorship has been given to Ramsaranlal. for the undermentioned purposes.
From the profits and income Ramsaranlal shall incur expenses.
Shri Ramchandra Swami Math Shri Dudhaaherji, according as the same expenses have been continuing to be met up to this day.
If this work fails to be done . any cosharer who may benefit . shall take this Mouza telibandha together with all rights and interests into his possession and carry on the work of the temple .
None of the co sharers and Ramsaranlal have any rights over it.
Ramsaranlal or any other co sharers have neither got, nor shall have, any right to transfer.
Mouza Telibandha. , because Mauza Telibandha has been reserved for ever for the aforesaid purpose and it shall continue to be so only " Some of the co sharers filed a suit to set aside the award.
The parties referred the matter to one Mr. Bagchi and in view of his award a compromise petition was filed and the suit was dismissed.
The appellants contended that the partition award made an absolute dedication of the Monza in favour of the temple.
The respondent contended that the award gave the Monza in full proprietorship to Ramsaranlal with only a charge on it to meet the expenses of the temple that the partition award could not validly create a dedication and that the partition award was modified by the Bagchi award.
418 Held, that the partition award created an absolute dedi cation of Mouza Telibandha in favour of the temple.
Though the use of the words "Malik" and "Milkiyat" indicated the conferment of an absolute estate, it was not invariably so and it was necessary to examine the context in each case.
Where the intention is to grant an absolute estate, an attempt to reduce the powers of the owner by imposing restraints on alienation has to be repelled on the ground of repugnancy but where the restrictions arc the primary things intended and they are consistent with the whole tenor of document, it is a material circumstance for displacing the presumption of absolute ownership implied in the use of the word "Malik".
The use of the words "Kul haq haquq samet Milkiyat" in the opening clause of the award raised a presumption that absolute interest was given thereby to Ramsaranlal, but the later recitals rebutted this presumption.
Considering all the different provisions, it was clear that the intention was not to make Ramsaranlal absolute owner but to give him possession and management of the Mouza for the benefit of the temple.
Sahebzada Mohd. Kamgar Shah vs Jagdish Chandra Rao Dhabal Deo, ; , Lalit Mohan Singh Roy vs Chukkuna Lal Roy, [1897] L.R. 24 I.A. 76; Mst.
Surajmani vs Babi Nath Ojha, (1907) L.R. 35 1.
A. 17; Sarjoo Bara Devi vs Jyotirmoyee Debi, (1931) L. R. 58 r. A. 270, Mohamed Shamsool vs Shewukram, (1874) L. R. 2 I.A. 7 and Rai Bajrang Bahadur Singh vs Thakurain Bakhtrai Kuer, [1953] 3 S.C.R. 232, referred to.
The partition award validly dedicated the Mouza in favour of the temple.
The act of the Panchas in making the award was really the act of the owners of the property who had full right to make the dedication.
Once an obsolute dedication had been made by the partition award the former owners had no legal authority to go behind the dedication and accordingly the Bagchi award could not affect the dedication.
