The appellant entered India on May 9, 1956, on a Pakistani passport.
He had a visa permitting him to stay in India for three months.
He had to leave India on or before August 8, 1956.
As he failed to do so, a notice under section 3 (2) of the , as amended in 1957, was served on him on November 19, 1959, by the Delhi Administration.
As he did not comply with the requirements of the notice, he was prosecuted under section 14 of the and convicted.
His appeal and revision were dismissed.
All came to this court by special leave.
His contention was that he was not a foreigner within the meaning of the definition of a foreigner as it existed at the time he entered India, and he was not a foreigner even under the amended definition.
Held, that the appellant was a foreigner under the amended definition and he had committed a breach of the order served on him after the amended definition of foreigner came into force.
In disobeying the directions given to him by the Delhi Administration, he had committed an offence within the meaning of section 14 of the .
Before the amendment of the definition in 1957, a person born within His Majesty 's Dominion and owing allegiance was a citizen of India, but after the amendment in January, 1957 a person who was not a citizen of India became a foreigner.
After that date, if an order was issued by the Central Government in exercise of powers conferred on it under section 3 of the Act, it was the duty of such a foreigner to obey that order and if he did not do so, he committed an offence within the meaning of section 14 of the Act.
The appellant was certainly not a foreigner when he entered India, but in view of the amendment of the definition, he became a foreigner after January 19, 1957.
He could not be convicted for an offence for an act done by him before the amendment on the 561 basis that he was a foreigner, but in the present case he had been punished for not complying with an order passed after the amendment.
The burden of proving that he was not a foreigner was on the appellant and he had failed to discharge that burden.
The legality of an act done by a person must be judged on the basis of the existing law at the time the act is done.
Union of India vs Ghaus Mohammad, ; followed Fida Hussain vs State of Uttar Pradesh 11962] 1 S.C.R. 776, distinguished.
