The appellants, R and B, who were brothers, were pro.
secuted for having assaulted S who as a result suffered grievous injuries.
Both the appellants were found guilty by the Assistant Sessions judge, and sentenced to various terms of imprisonment.
While B was convicted under sections 307 and 326 of the Indian Penal Code, the conviction of R was under section 324.
Section 6 (1) of the , enacts "When any person under twenty one years of age is found guilty of having committed an offence punishable with imprisonment (but not with imprisonment for life), the Court by which the person is found guilty shall not sentence him to imprisonment. . .
Though B was 19 years old, section 6 (1 was inapplicable to him as he was found guilty of an offence punishable with imprisonment for life.
R, the older brother was aged 2 1, but the trial judge considered it inappropriate to afford him the benefit of the section on the ground that the. act of assault Was premeditated.
On appeal, the High Court set aside the convictions of B and in their place a finding of guilty under section 324 of the Indian Penal Code was recorded for which a sentence of 2 years was imposed, and, as regards R, his conviction under section 324 was maintained but the sentence was reduced from 2 years to 9 months.
On the question of the applicability of the provisions of the Act to the accused, the High Court took the view (1) that section 6 (1) was inapplicable to R because though lie might have been under 21 years of age an the date of the offence he was not a person under 21 years when the Sessions judge found him guilty, and (2) that though under section 1 1 of the Act, the High Court was competent to make an order in favour of B, it was entirely discretionary for that Court to exercise the power conferred on it under that section, and that in view of the fact that the court below had already dealt with the matter, it wag not desirable to deal with the case of the appellant under the provisions of the Act at that stage.
746 Held : (1) that the age referred to in section 6 (1) of the , is that when the courts deal; with the offender, that being the point of time when the court has to choose between the two alternatives, whether to sentence the offender to imprisonment or to apply to him the provisions of section 6(1) of the Act.
(2)that the courts mentioned in section 11 of the Act, be they trial courts or courts exercising appellate or revisional jurisdiction, are empowered to exercise the jurisdiction conferred on courts not only under sections 3 and 4 and the con.
sequential provisions but also under section 6.
(3)that the power conferred on appellate or other courts by section 1 1 (1) of the Act is of the same nature and chara cteristics and subject to the same criteria and limitations as that conferred on the courts under sections 3 and 4.
(4)that the provisions of section 6.
(1) restrict the absolute and unfettered discretion implied by the word ,may" in section 11 (1), and the entirety of section 6 (1) applies to guide or con dition the jurisdiction of the High Court under section 11(1).
(5)that the crucial date for reckoning the age where an appellate court modifies the judgment of the trial judge when section 6 becomes applicable to a person only on the decision of an appellate or a revisional court, is that upon which the trial court had to deal with the offender.
