Certain disputes arose between the appellant and the Cane Marketing Society Ltd., Bijnor.
The appellant preferred a claim to the Cane Commissioner for compensation for short supply of Sugar cane.
The Society also moved the Cane Commissioner for arbitration.
The Commissioner passed an order calling upon the parties to be present before him for a decision of the dispute.
It was then that the appellant filed a petition under article 226 of the Constitution of India for a writ of certiorari to quash the proceeding pending before the Cane Commissioner, for a write of prohibitation for restraining the Cane Commissioner from continuing quo warranto for a declaration that the Cane the proceedings and a writ of Commissioner had, no right to assume the office of arbitrator in the dispute.
The appellant contended that there could be no arbitration because the claim was not a proper claim as the Society had omitted to complete the prescribed form XII by leaving the schedule, the area of cultivation and the estimated yield blank and as the agreements were not signed by the Mills who did not accept them in their incomplete state.
In the alternative, it was contended that Rule 2 3 offended against article 14 of the Constitution.
It was also contended that r. 23(6) providing for an appeal went beyond the rule making power of the Provincial Government under section 30 of the Act.
The writ petition was dismissed by the High Court.
The Letters Patent appeal was also dismissed.
The appellant came to this Court by a certificate.
Held, that the agreement was a binding agreement.
The form prescribed set out a number of conditions and all of them have been incorporated in the agreement executed by the Society.
There has been no deviation from the prescribed form except some minor omission.
The failure to execute the 761 agreement in the form is made an offence but no other cons equence is indicated if the form is not followed.
The utmost that can be said is that if the form that was used included conditions which were at variance with the conditions in the prescribed form, a contract might not have resulted, but in the present case the terms as stated in the prescribed form are the terms in the form used.
No consequence attaches to the failure to observe the form except punishment by fine and section 18(2) is capable of being read as directory.
Even if it be read as mandatory, the failure of the appellant to sign the form is not a matter of which he can take advantage, regard being bad to his own conduct.
The blanks also do not matter in view of the existence of form 10, which supplied the information accidently omitted from the agreement.
The arbitration clause in the form was enforceable, if agreed to, even without the signature of the appellant as it is settled law that to constitute an arbitration agreement in writing it is not necessary that it should be signed by the parties and it is sufficient if the terms are reduced to writing an the agreement of the parties thereto is established.
Even if section 18(2) be held to be mandatory to the extent that the terms as prescribed should appear in writing, that is complied with in this case, Held (Raghubar Dayal, J., dissenting), that section 30(2 of the Act conferred a general power to make rules for the resol ving of disputes either by the Cane Commissioner or if he so directs, by arbitration and to give effect to the latter part of this provision arbitration with an appeal from the arbitrator 's decision would be giving effect to the provisions as a whole.
Rule 23(6) providing for an appeal against the decision of arbitrators must be considered as a rule giving effect to the provisions of section 30(2)(u) providing for the resolving of disputes by arbitration.
Sub rule (6) was thus within the rule making power of the Provincial Government.
Sections 8, 9 and 10 of the Arbitration Act do not apply being inconsistent with r. 23.
The decision by the Commis sioner is the normal mode, of disposing of disputes regarding the supply of sugar cane.
The Cane Commissioner has the power to direct that the dispute be referred to arbitration, but the rules show that there can be no arbitration unless the parties themselves agree.
If it is to a sole arbitrator, then the sole arbitrator must be acceptable to the parties concerned.
If the parties do not agree to the appointment of a sole arbitrator, the arbitration is by a Board of Arbitrators consisting of one representative of each party and an Umpire acceptable to both the representatives.
The Rule stops short of providing what is to happen if a party does not appoint his 762 representative and the Arbitration Act furnishes no answer because it is inconsistent with the Rule.
It is, therefore, obvious that the arbitration must be with the consent of the parties and they must express their consent either by selecting an agreed sole arbitrator or by appointing their representative on the Board.
This choice is entirely theirs.
If the parties do not agree, there can be no arbitration at all and the case must be disposed of by the Cane Commissioner himself.
Where there are two procedures, one for everyone and the other if the disputants voluntarily agree to follow it, there can be no discrimination because discrimination can only be found to exist if the election is with some one else who can exercise his will arbitrarily.
Rule 23 as a whole does not offend Art.14 of the Constitution.
Per Raghubar Dayal, J. It is true that the provisions of section 30(2)(u) relate to the settlement of disputes between the parties but that by itself does not mean that the State Government can provide for appeals against the orders of the arbitrator or arbitrators.
These provisions do not expressly state that the rule can provide for an appeal against the award of the arbitrator.
They make no reference either for the provision of an appeal or for the procedure to be followed by the Appellate Tribunal or for the enforcement of the order of the Appellate Tribunal.
The absence of such a reference establishes that cl.
(u) did neither contemplate nor empowered the State Government to make rules providing an appeal against the award of arbitrator or arbitrators.
Further, the order of the Commissioner is not an award and this is recognised by the language of r. 23(8) which refers to the decision of the Cane Commissioner to the award of the arbitrator or arbitrators and to the Commissioner 's order in appeal.
The provision for an appeal in r. 23(6), therefore, is not to be treated as something ancillary to the provision for settling disputes between the parties by the Cane Commissioner for which object cl.
(u) empowered the State Government to make rules with respect to certain matters.
The right to appeal is a substantive right and is to be conferred on a party by or under the Act.
The Act must either provide for the appeal or enact that the rules framed thereunder may provide for appeals against certain orders or decisions.
In the absence of such a provision in the Act, the rules cannot provide for appeals.
The result is that r. 23(6) is void.
It is clear from the various provisions of r. 23 that there is a difference in the procedure for the dispute being decided by the Cane Commissioner and the dispute being decided by the arbitrator or a Board of Arbitration.
In the former case, 763 the decision of the Cane Commissioner is final and enforceable by the Civil Court referred to in r. 23(8).
In the latter case, the award of the sole arbitrator or the Board of Arbitration is appealable to the Commissioner of the Division in which the factory is situated and the order of the Commissioner is final and enforceable by the Civil Court.
It follows that the procedure provided by r. 23 for decision of the dispute touching the agreement is such that parties similarly situated may have the dispute decided by different persons and by different procedures according to the inclination of the Cane Commissioner whose discretion in this matter is uncontrolled by any guiding principles.
The rule, therefore, offends against article 14 of the Constitution and is void.
The entire r. 23 is struck down both because in its present form it is discriminatory and because sub r.
(6) is void inasmuch as the State Government had no power to enact it and it is not severable from the rest of the rule.
Ruf (T. A.) & Co. vs Pauwels, ; State of U. P. vs Manbodhan Lal Srivastava, ; , Bhikraj vs Union of India, A. I. R. , Thomas vs Kelly, 888) 13 App.
506, Jagan Nath vs Jaswant Singh, ; , Kamaraja Nadar vs Kunju Thevar, , Hari Vishnu Kamath vs Syed Ahmed Ishaque, ; , Radhakinsson Gopikis8on vs Balmukund Ramchandra (1932) L. R. 60 I. A. 63 and Jugal Kishore Rameshwardas vs Mrs. Goolbai Hormusji, [1955] 2 section C. R. 857, referred to.
