The appellant was tried by the jury for kidnapping and committing the murder of one Pancham Sukla.
The jury returned a verdict of guilty against him under sections 364 and 302 of the Indian Penal Code.
The Sessions judge accepted the verdict and sentenced him to death under section 302 and to rigorous imprisonment for life under section 364.
The High Court acquitted appellant of the offence of kidnapping under section 364, but while confirming his conviction under section 302, reduced the sentence to imprisonment for life.
The appellant came to this Court on a certificate granted by the High Court.
In this Court, the appellant challenged the identification of the skeleton produced in the case as that of the deceased.
His other contentions were that the super imposed photograph was not admissible under any section of the Evidence Act, there was misdirection to the jury in setting out the statement of the accused to the police which led to the discovery of the skeleton and that he had no intention of killing deceased and killing must have taken place as a result of some quarrel between him and the deceased.
The super imposed photograph was admissible in evidence under section 9 of the Evidence Act.
That photograph was not any trick photograph seeking to make something appear different from what it was in reality.
There was no distortion of truth involved in it or attempted by it.
A superimposed photograph is really two photographs merged into one or rather one photograph seen beneath the other.
Both the photographs are of existing things and they are superimposed or brought into the same plane enlarged to the same size for the purpose of comparison.
Both the photographs would be admissible in evidence and no objection could be taken to their being examined together.
853 There was no misdirection to the jury insetting out the statement of the accused to the police which led to the dis covery of the skeleton.
There was no substance in the contention of the appellant that killing must have taken place as a result of some quarrel.
The jury had held appellant guilty of murder.
This Court is not concerned with the correctness of the acquittal of the appellant by the High Court under section 364 of Indian Penal Code.
No suggestion has been made before this Court that there was misdirection by the Sessions judge in his charge to the jury.
There is no scope for the argument that verdict of the jury should be interfered with or the conviction based on it altered on hypothetical considerations not founded on any facts on record.
Kotayya vs Emperor, A. 1.
R. and State of U.P. vs Deoman Upadhyaya, (19611 1 section C. R. 14, relied on.
