Under the Sugar and Sugar Products Control Order, 1946, the consuming States intimated to the Sugar Controller of India their requirements of sugar and the factory owners sent statements of stocks of sugar held by them.
The Controller made allotments to various States and addressed orders to the factory owners directing them to supply sugar to the States in question in accordance with the despatch instructions from the State Governments.
Under such allotment orders, the assesses, a sugar factory in Bihar, despatched sugar to the State of Madras.
The State of Bihar treated these transactions as sales and levied sales tax thereon, under the Bihar Sales Act, 1947.
The assesses contended that the despatches of the sugar pursuant to the directions of the Controller did not amount to sales and that no sales tax was exigible on such transactions.
Held (per Kapur and Shah, JJ.
Hidayatullah, J., dissenting), that the transactions did not amount to sales and were not liable to sales tax.
Under Entry 48, List II of Government of India Act, 1935, the Provincial Legislature had no power to levy sales taxes on a transaction which was not of the nature of a sale of goods, as understood in the Sale of Goods act.
To constitute a sale of goods, .
property in the goods must be transferred from the seller to the buyer under a contract of sale.
A contract of sale between the seller and the buyer is a prerequisite to a sale.
Despatches of sugar under the directions of the Controller were not the result of any such contract of sale.
There was no offer by the assesses to the State of Madras and no acceptance by the latter; the assessee was, under the Control Order, compelled to carry out the directions of the Controller and it had no volition in the matter.
Intimation by the State 460 of its requirement of sugar to the controller or communi cation of the allotment order to the assesses did not amount to an offer.
Nor did the mere compliance with despatch instructions issued by the Controller, which the assessee could not decline to carry out, amount to acceptance of an offer or to making of an offer.
A contract of sale postulates exercise of volition on the part of the contracting parties.
State of Madraa vs Gannon Dunkerky & Co., [1959] section C. R. 379; relied on.
The Tata Iron & Steel Co. Ltd. vs The State of Bihar, ; , explained.
Per Hidayatullah, J.
In these transactions there was a sale of sugar for a price and sales tax was payable in respect thereof.
Though consent is necessary for a sale, it may be express or implied, and it cannot be said that unless the offer and acceptance are in an elementary direct form there can be no taxable sale.
The controller permitted the assesses to supply sugar of a Stated quality and quantity to the State of Madras; thereafter the two parties agreed to "sell" and "purchase" the sugar.
So long as the parties trade under controls at fixed price they must be deemed to have agreed to such a price; there wasan implied contract with an implied offer and an implied acceptance.
The same is the position with respect to the quality and quantity fixed by the Controller.
when the State , after receiving the permit, sent instructions to the assesses to despatch sugar and the assesses despatched it a contract emerged and consent must be implied on both sides though not expressed antecedently to the prmit.
State, ofMadras vs Gannon Dunkerky Co.; , andThe Tata Iron and SPA Co. Ltd. vs The State of Bihar, ; , explained.
