The petitioner, a resident of Pondicherry, was an applicant for a stage carriage permit,.
before the State Transport authority pondicherry, alongwith 14 other persons.
The Permit was granted to one Perumal Padayatchi taking into account the fact that he was a native of Pondicherry along with other facts.
The petitioner, whose application for the permit was rejected, went in appeal to the Appellate Authority who dismissed the appeal .
The petitioner filed a writ petition under article 32 in this Court and contended that preference on the ground of place of birth is violative of article 15 of the Constitution.
On the dates of the orders sought to be impugned, Pondicherry was not yet part of the territory of India, but when the petition was heard it had become part of the territory of India.
It was contended on behalf of the respondent that in view of the observations in the decision in N. Masthan Sahib vs Chief Commissioner, [1962] Supp.
1 section C. R. 981, the writ petition was not maintainable.
Held, that in article 12 the words "under the control of the Government of India" qualify the word "authorities" and not the word "territory" and article 12 gives an iaclusive definition of the word "State".
Held, further, that if no writ could be issued at the time .
when the order was passed for the reason that Pondicherry was not part of India at that time, no such writ could be issued in respect of past acts after Pondicherry had become part of India 657 as that would be giving retrospective operation to the Constitution.
Janardan Reddy vs The State, ; referred to.
Held, also, that judicial or quasi judicial authorities out side the territory of India but under the administration of the Government of India cannot be said to be 'under the control of the Government of India ' as the expression "control" connotes power to issue directions regarding how a thing may be done by a superior authority to an inferior authority, and in the case of a quasi judicial authority no such directions or orders could be issued.
It is only in the case of executive action that a superior authority may direct that a particular thing may be done in a particular way by the subordinate authority.
In the very nature of things where rule of law prevails it is not open to a Government, be it the Government of India or the Government of a State, to direct a quasi judicial or judicial authority to decide Any particular matters before it in a particular manner.
N. Masthan Sahib vs Chief Commissioner, [1962] Supp.
1 section C. R. 981, referred to.
Held, also, that the Chief Commissioner who is the Appellate Authority in the case, fell outside the definition of 'State ', he being a quasi judicial authority not under the control of the Government of India and, therefore, article 15 of the Constitution did not apply to him and no protection under article 15 was available against the Chief Commissioner at the time the impugned order was made.
