The appellant was one of the sharers in the Inam village of vadner and brought a suit against respondents claiming relief on the basis of his title to the running water of river valdevi.
During World War 11, the military authorities constructed residential quarters within and outside the limits of vadner.
They built a dam across the river within the limits of vadner and dug a well near the bank of the river which was fed by the river water and the water was carried to the residential areas.
The diversion of water and the use of land continued from 1942 to 1959, which deprived the appellant and the other Inamdars of their right to utilise that water for their own gain and of others ; this had caused injury and damage to them, for which, the appellant claimed compensation from the respondents.
According to the respondents, by virtue of a notification under section 5 of the Bombay Irrigation Act, 1879, the river had become a notified canal and consequently the Inamdars had lost their rights, if any, in the waters of the said river.
They also took a plea of limitation.
The trial court decreed the suit and held that the appellant was entitled to the compensation only for two years before the date of the suit and the rest of his claim was barred by time.
The decree was challenged both by the 886 appellant and the respondents by cross appeals in the High Court.
The High Court dismissed the appeal with modifications.
Then followed an appeal to this court on certificate.
Held, that the use of the word "water " in the sanad, pro perly construed, excludes the running water of the river and it could not be said that title to the flowing water of the river went with the title to the bed of the river.
If the sanad made no grant of the running water in terms, the appellant could not claim the same as the riparian owner.
Anapurnabai Gopal vs Government of Bombay (1931) 47 Bom.
L. R. 839 and Lyen vs Fish Mongers ' Company [1876] 1 App.
Cas. 662, referred to.
Held, further, that the appellant could not be allowed to make an alternative case on the ground of his rights as a riparian owner as there was neither any allegation in the plaint nor any evidence on the record to that effect.
