The appellant challenged the validity of election of respondent on the grounds that he was below 30 years on the relevant date, that his election was vitiated by undue influence exercised on the voters by some Ministers of the State, that the secrecy of ballot was not maintained and that the election was void on account of improper deletion of names of voters from the final list.
All the objections were rejected by the Election Tribunal which dismissed the election petition.
On appeal, the High Court confirmed the findings of the Election Tribunal and dismissed the appeal.
The appellant came to this Court by special leave.
The appellant challenged the decision of the High Court mainly on the ground that in reaching its conclusion on the question of age of the respondent on the date of election, the High Court took into consideration evidence which was not legally available for consideration and that the additional evidence was admitted without complying with the provisions of law.
Held, that the High Court allowed additional evidence to be admitted as it required that evidence either to enable it to pronounce judgment or for any other substantial cause within the meaning of R. 2 7 (1) (b) of 0.
41 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
It could not be said that the High Court made the order for admission of additional evidence without applying its mind.
The appellate court has power to allow additional evidence not only if it requires such evidence "to enable it to 36 pronounce judgment" but also for "any other substantial cause.
" There may be cases where even though the court finds that it is able to pronounce judgment on the state of the record as it is and so it cannot strictly say that it requires additional evidence "to enable it to pronounce judgment," it still considers that in the interest of justice something which remains obscure should be filled up so that it can pronounce its judgment in a more satisfactory manner.
Such a case will be one for allowing additional evidence "for any other substantial cause.
" Held, also, that the omission of the High Court to record the reasons for allowing additional evidence does not vitiate such admission.
The provision is not mandatory although where a further appeal lies from the decision of the appellate Court, the recording of the reasons may be necessary and useful to the Court of further appeal for deciding whether the discretion had been judicially exercised by the Court below or not and the omission to record the reasons must be treated as a serious defect.
When additional evidence was taken with the assent of both sides or without objection at the time it was taken, it is not open to a party to complain of it later on.
As the appellant did not press his application against the admission of additional evidence, the objection must be over ruled.
Arjan Singh vs Kartar Singh.
[1951) section C. R. 258, Sreemanchunder vs Gopalchunder, (1866) 11 M. 1.
A. 28 Manmohan Dag vs Musammat Ramdie Gopal Singh vs Jhakri Rai, (1885) 1.
L. R. , Parsotim vs Lal Mohar, (1931) L. R. 58 I.A. 254 and Jagamath Prasad vs Hanuman Pershad (1909) L. R. 36 I.A. 221, referred to.
