The appellant runs a steel mill and there are various departments in the mill which are grouped under three headings.
By agreement between the management and the workmen different production targets and different incentive bonus schemes for different departments have been in force for some time.
The respondent No. 2 on behalf of the work men claimed that incentive bonus scheme at present in force should be revised so as to cover those categories of workmen who are at present out of it.
It was further claimed that the present targets of production should be refixed and brought to the 1948 level.
On the failure of the parties to come to a settlement the Government referred the matter to the Industrial Tribunal for adjudication.
The Tribunal by its award directed the revision of production targets in certain departments.
With regard to the claim for extension of the scheme to the clerical and Watch and Ward Staff and the workmen in the shopping depart ment the Tribunal awarded the extension at certain specified rates.
The claim for revision of the rates of bonus in the indirect productive department was rejected.
The Tribunal also rejected the claim of the workmen that the rates of production bonus to all catagoriesd of workmen should be made uniform.
The appellants thereupon appealed to this Court by way of special leave.
The main question raised in the appeal was whether the Tribunal had jurisdiction to refix the production targets as well as the rates of incentive bonus.
A further question raised was whether piece rate workmen are entitled to incentive bonus.
The appellants made a grievance of the fact that their request to appoint assessors for giving opinion on technical matters was rejected by the Tribunal.
They also alleged that the Tribunal had no adequate data before it to determine the proper production targets.
661 Held, that the Tribunal ought to have borne in mind the fact that for the determination of technical matters it is always desirable to have the assistance of persons who are familiar with the subject and it should not deny to itself the opportunity of obtaining the appropriate material.
While it is the function of the management whether or not to introduce a scheme of incentive bonus, once such a scheme is introduced the Industrial Tribunal has jurisdiction to vary the scheme including the rates of bonus.
But the scheme should not be interfered with lightly.
The Tribunal is entitled to consider whether the scheme is erroneous, unrealistic or unreasonable.
Where after consideration of relevant materials the Tribunal finds the targets are too high it can refix them.
But it should also see that the targets fixed are not too low.
Held, also, that piece rate workmen are entitled to be paid at a higher rate for the excess they have produced beyond a norm.
But in fixing the higher rate care should be taken to avoid glaring disparity between the total earnings of an average piece rate worker and of a time rate workman working over the same period.
