On abolition of his watan, the respondent applied to the Collector claiming compensation under section 9 of the Bombay Paragana and Kulkarni Watans (Abolition) Act, 1950, for extinction of his right in the watan land, and of his "right to enjoy part of the land revenue.
" The Collector rejected the application and in appeal the order was affirmed by the Revenue Tribunal.
The High Court in a petition under article 227 of the Constitution set aside the order of the Collector and directed him to assess and pay compensation to the respondent under section 9 (1) of the Act.
Held, that the watan property if any the hereditary ice, and the rights and privileges attached thereto, together 49 constitute a watan, and a hereditary ice does not lose its character merely because the service originally appertaining to the ice has ceased to be demanded.
Commutation of service does not in the absence of an express agreement to that effect alter the tenure of the land held as watan.
By agreement, the State may relieve the holder of the ice and his successors of the duty to perform the service for which the grant was made,but the ice and the grant continue, subject to the terms of the settlement under section 15 of the Bombay Hereditary Offices Act, 1874.
Appaji Bapuji vs Keshav Shamrav, (1890) 1.
L. R. and Bachharam Datta Patil vs Viswanath Pundalik Patil, ; , referred to.
Held, further, that after the commutation settlement, the holder being relieved of the obligation to perform service, the ice of watandar survives in name only but the land granted as watan remains subject to the restrictions imposed by the Watan Act.
By the regrant of the land in occupancy right, on abolition or extinction of the watan, the holder is not in truth prejudicially affected.
Loss of watan rights in land, and the watan ice is compensated by the regrant of occupancy rights in the land.
Grant of compensation was contemplated under sub section
(2) of section 9 of the Bombay Paragana and Kulkarni Watans (Abolition) Act for abolition, extinction or modification of rights other than the rights of a watandar, to land or cash allowance or remission of land revenue.
