The plaintiff, Ramanathan Chettiar, obtained a decree in O. section No. 45 of 1943 for the recovery of an amount due on promissory note against one Venkatachalam Chettiar and assigned the decree in favour of the appellant in C. A. 105 of 1961.
The execution application filed by him proved infructuous because the first defendant was adjudicated an insolvent on February 27, 1945.
On September 9, 1946 a composition of the debts due from the insolvent and his son, the second defendant, was arrived at.
To the deed of composition the second defendant was also a party though he was not adjudicated an insolvent.
Under that deed the creditors, including the four appellants in this case, agreed to take 40% of the dues.
Under the composition arrangement, the entire property of the defendants, both in India and in Burma was to vest in four trustees, one of whom was the insolvent that is, the first defendant to the suit.
Two of the trustees were the present appellant in C A. No. 104 of 1961 and the fourth trustee was an outsider.
The deed provided for the payment of the reduced amount by the trustees to different creditors from the income of the properties or by sale or mortgage of those properties within tour years from April 14, 1947.
Tile deed further provided for the extension of this time limit "according to exigencies and necessity it the discretion of the first two trustees" i. e., the first defendant and the appellant Chidambaram Chettiar.
The composition contemplated the realisation of the dues of the creditors front the income or sale or mortgage of the Barma property, in the first instance.
The composition scheme was accepted by the insolvency court and the adjudication of the first defendant as insolvent was annulled by the court on December 19, 1946.
Out of the Burma assets very little was realised within the period of four years prescribed in the composition deed and the trustees did not extend the time.
242 The appellants, therefore, sought execution of their decrees against the Indian assets.
The last execution application in O. section No. 46 of 1943 was dismissed on September 19, 1946, and no petition was filed thereafter till 'June 13, 1952.
Similarly in the other three appeals execution applications were filed more than three years after the dismissal of the previous applications.
In each of the execution applications, relief was claimed only against the second defendant.
The Subordinate Judge, before whom the execution applications were filed, held that the adjustment precluded each of the appellants from executing his decree for a period of four years from April 14, 1947 and, therefore, the execution applications were within time.
The High Court disagreed with the Subordinate Judge and holding that the execution petitions were barred by time allowed the appeals.
The main contention of the appellants in this Court was that the principle underlying section 15 (1) of the Limitation Act applied to the present case and at any rate the letter written by the second defendant to the trustees operated as an acknowledgment of liability under section 19 of the Limitation Act.
Held, that section 15 (1) of the Limitation Act is restricted in its application to a case where the execution of a decree has been stayed by an injunction or an order.
The Limitation Act is a piece of adjective or procedural law and not of substantive law.
Rules of Procedure cannot be extended by analogy or reference to proceedings to which they do not expressly apply or could be said to apply by necessary implication.
Suspension of Limitation in circumstances of the kind obtaining in these appeals is neither explicit nor implicit in section 15 upon which reliance is placed by the appellants.
Govind Naik Gurunathnaik vs Basawannawa Parutappa, 1.
L.R. , Pulin Chandra Sen vs Amin Mia Muzaffar Ahmad, A. I.R.1933 Cal.
508, Lakhan Chunder Sen vs Madhusudan Sen, (1907) 1.
L. R. , Nrityamoni Dassi vs Lakhan Chandra Sen, ( 1916) 1.
L. R. , Badruddin Khan vs Mahyar Khan, I. L. R. 1939 All.
103 and Managing Committee Sunder Singh Malha Singh Rajput High School, Indore vs Sunder Sigh Malha Singh Sanatan Dharma Rajput High School Trust, I. L. R. , distinguished.
Held, further, that in the present appeals two different sets of persons, the defendants and the Trustees were liable and their respective liablities were distinct.
To refer to a liablility resting on some one else was not to acknowledge one 's own liability within the meaning of the word in section 19.
The defendant No. 2 had not even indirectly referred to the 243 decree much less to the liability arising under any of them.
In the circumstances it must be held that the letter dated April 19, 1949, did not extend the period of limitation.
Khan Bahadur Shapoor Freedom Mazda vs Durga Prosad Ckamaria , held inapplicable
