The appellant is a firm carrying on business within the octroi limits of Ludhiana Municipality.
On the Sambhar salt imported by it into the limits of the Municipality terminal tax was imposed and the appellant made payment of the said tax.
Under item 68 of the Schedule to the relevant Government Notification the Municipality is entitled to impose a certain rate of tax on common salt and under item 69 it is entitled to impose a higher rate of tax in respect of salt of all kinds other than common salt.
In the present case the higher rate was imposed.
The appellant filed a suit against the respondent in the civil court, Ludhina, for the refund of the amount paid by him.
274 The Civil Court held that Sambhar salt was common salt within the meaning of item 68, that the imposition of tax on it by the respondent under item 69 was illegal and that there fore the court had jurisdiction to entertain the suit.
On appeal the High Court proceeded on the assumption that Sambhar salt was common salt but held that, even so, the Civil Court had no jurisdiction to entertain the suit as the Act provided a remedy by way of appeal against the wrong orders of the authorities thereunder.
The present appeal is by way of certificate granted by the High Court.
On behalf of the appellant it was contended that the respondent had no power to impose terminal tax on common salt under item 69 of the Schedule and therefore the tax having been imposed contrary to the provisions of the Act, the Civil Court has jurisdiction to entertain the suit.
The contention on behalf of the respondent was that the respondent has power to impose terminal tax on common salt under the provisions of the Act, that the imposition of tax under a wrong entry could be rectified only in the manner prescribed by the Act and that the Civil Court has no jurisdiction to entertain the suit for the refund of the tax collected when a specific remedy is available under the Act.
Held, that a statute can expressly or by necessary implica tion bar the jurisdiction of Civil Courts in respect of a particular matter.
The mere confirment of special jurisdiction on a tribunal in respect of the said matter does not in itself exclude the jurisdiction of civil Courts.
The statute may specifically provide for vesting the jurisdiction of civil Courts, even if there was no such specific exclusion, if it creates a liability not existing before and gives a special and particular remedy for the aggrieved party, the remedy provided by it must be followed.
The same principle would apply if the statute had provided for the particular forum in which the same remedy could be had.
Even in such cases the civil Court 's jurisdiction is not completely ousted.
A suit in a civil Court will always lie to question the order of a tribunal created by a statute, even if its order is, expressly or by necessary implication, made final, if the said tribunal abuses its power or does no act under the Act but in violation of its provision.
Wolverhamton New Watterworks Co. vs Hawkesford, (1859) 6 C. B. (N. section) 336, Secretary of State vs Mast & Co., (1940) L. R. 67 1.
A. 222, Bhaishankar Nanabhai vs Municipal Corporation of Bombay.
(1907) 1. L. R. , Zamindar of Ettayapuram vs Sankarappa, 1904) 1.
L. R. East Fremantle Corporation V., Annois, [1902] A. C. "21 275 Gaekwar Sarkar of Baroda vs Gandhi Kachrabhai, (1903) I.L.R. , Municipal Board, Banares vs Krishna & Co., All.
916, Municipal Committee, Montgomery vs Sant Singh, A. I. R. 1940 Lah.
(F. B.) 377 and Ad ministrator, Lahore vs Abdul Majid, A. I. R.
In the present case the liability to pay terminal tax is created by the Act and a remedy is given to a party aggrieved in the enforcement of the liability.
The party aggrieved can only pursue the remedy provided by the Act and he cannot file a suit in a civil court in that regard.
Provisions of sections 84 and 86 of the Act exclude the jurisdiction of the Civil Court in respect of the tax levied or the assessment under the Act.
In a case where the Municipal Committee has undoubted power to levy tax under a particular entry in respect of an article but it levies tax under a wrong entry not applicable to that article the said committee only commits a mistake or an error in fixing the rate (of tax payable) in respect of the said article and no question 'of jurisdiction but only a question of detail is involved.
Such a mistake can be corrected only in the manner prescribed by the Act.
