Double Jeopardy Applicability of rule Law finally and authoritatively decided by Supreme Court as to interpretation of the constitution If a substantial question of law Constitution of India, Arta.
20 (2), 145 (3).
After the discovery of the conspiracy, ten conspirators including the appellants were put to trial before the Sessions judge under section 120 B of the Indian Penal Code and also each one of them separately under section 409 read with section 109 of the said Code.
The charge was that they, alongwith one Shankar Lal and Doshi, both of them deceased entered into a criminal conspiracy at Bombay and elsewhere between or about the period from September 20, 1950 to December 31, 1950, to commit or cause to be committed criminal breach of trust in respect of Government securities or proceeds thereof or the funds of the Empire of India Life Assurance Co. Ltd., Bombay, acquiring its management and control and dominion over the said property in the way of business as Directors, Agents or attorneys of the said company.
The learned Sessions Judge convicted six accused persons under section 120 B, read with section 409 of the Indian Penal Code and sentenced them to various terms of imprisonment.
The rest four accused persons were acquitted.
Against the acquittal State preferred an appeal to the High Court and the convicted accused persons also filed appeals against their convictions.
Government appeal was allowed and the appeals of the convicted accused persons were dismissed by the High Court.
These appeals by special leave have been preferred only by five accused persons against their conviction and sentences.
In these appeals, the Court pro ceeded on the basis as it was manifest and indeed not disputed 379 that there was a conspiracy and the only question for con sideration was whether all or some of the appellants were parties to it.
Held, that the essence of conspiracy is that there should be an agreement between persons to do one or other of the acts described in the section.
The said agreement may be proved by direct evidence or may be inferred from acts and conduct of the parties.
But section 10 of the Evidence Act intro.
duces the doctrine of agency and if the conditions laid down therein are satisfied, the acts done by one are admissible against the co conspirators.
The section can be analysed as follows : (1) There shall be a prima facie evidence affording a reasonable ground for a court to believe that two or more persons are members of a conspiracy; (2) if the said condition is fulfilled, anything said, done or written by any one of them in reference to their common intention will be evidence against the other; (3) anything said, done or written by him after the intention was formed by any one of them; (4) if it would also be relevant for the said purpose against another who entered the conspiracy whether it was said, done or written before he entered the conspiracy or after he left it; and (5) it can only be used against a co conspirator and not in his favour.
Held, that so far as the appellant in criminal appeal No. 82/62 is concerned, applying the test laid down by this Court, the two conspiracies are not the same offence.
The ingredients of both the offences are totally different and they do not form the same offence within the meaning of article 20 (2) of the Constitution and, therefore, that Article has no relevance to the present case.
Further, there are no permissible grounds for upsetting the concurrent findings of both the courts below that the appellant was a member of the conspiracy.
Leo Boy Prey vs The Superintendent, District Jail, Amritsar, ; and The State of Bombay vs section L. Apte, ; , relied on.
Sardul Singh Caveeshar vs State of Bombay, [1958] S.C.R. 161, referred to.
As the question raised regarding interpretation of article 20 (2) of the constitution has already been decided by this Court, it cannot be held that the question raised involves a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of the Constitution within the meaning of article 145 (3) of the Constitution.
State of Jammu & Kashmir vs Thakur Ganga Singh, [1960] 2 section C. R. 346 relied on.
380 Held, that from the relevant provisions of section 53 and the Explanation to section 55 of the Evidence Act.
, it is clear that the evidence of general reputation and general disposition is relevant in a criminal proceeding.
Under the Indian Evidence Act, unlike in England, evidence can be given both of general character and general disposition.
Disposition means the inherent qualities of a person; reputation means the general credit of the person amongst the public.
There is a real distinction between reputation and disposition.
A man may be reputed to be a good man, but in reality be may have a bad disposition.
The value of evidence as regards disposition of a person depends not only upon the witness 's perspicacity but also on his opportunities to observe the person as well as the said person 's cleverness to hide his real traits.
But a disposition of a man may be made up of many traits, some good and some bad, and only evidence in regard to a particular trait with which the witness is familiar would be of some use.
But, in any case, the character evidence is a very week evidence; it cannot out weight the positive evidence in regard to the guilt of a person.
It may be useful in doubtful cases to tilt the balance in favour of the accused or it may also afford a background for appreciating his reactions in a given situation.
It must give place to acceptable positive evidence.
The opinion expressed by the witnesses does credit to the accused, but, in the face of the positive evidence it cannot turn the scale in his favour.
