Messrs Kotbari and Sons is a firm of stock brokers.
The firm consisted of Shri C. M. Kothari and his two sons, Shri D. C. Kothari and Shri H. C. Kothari.
The firm entered into an agreement for the purchase of a house and the earnest money was paid by it.
Later on, the house was bought in the name of Mrs. C. M. Kothari, Mrs. D. C. Kothari and Shri H. C. Kotliari.
The house was bought for Rs. 90,000/ and both Mrs. C. M Kothari and Mrs. D. C. Kothari received Rs. 30,000 each from the firm.
In the case of Mrs. C. M. Kothari, she got that amount in the form of birthday gift and Diwali gift from her son, D. C. Kothari.
Mrs. D. C. Kothari also received Rs. 30,000 from the firm as a gift from Shri C. M. Kothari, her father in law.
The Income tax Officer assessed the income of Mrs. C. M. Kothari and Mrs. 1).
C. Kotliari from the said house as the income of their husbands.
The appeals of the assessees were dismissed by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and the Tribunal.
The Tribunal confirmed the finding of the Income Tax Officer that the two ladies had acquired their shares in the house out of the assets of their husbands indirectly transferred to them.
However, the Tribunal did not hold that the transaction was benami.
The Tribunal referred the case to the High Court for opinion whether the income arising to Mrs. C. M. Kotbari and Mrs. D. C. Kothari from the property arose out of the assets transferred indirectly by their husbands so as to attract the provisions of section 16 (3) (a) (iii) of the Income tax Act, 1922.The High Court answered the reference in the negative.
The Commissioner of Income tax, Madras, came to this Court in appeal.
532 Held that the answer given by the High Court must be set aside and the reference made by the Tribunal must be answered in the affirmative.
The object of law is to tax the income of the wife in the hands of the husband if the income of the wife arises to her from assets transferred to her by her husband.
In the present case, the son transferred the assets to his mother and the father in law transferred his assets to his daughter in law.
The term "indirectly" is intended to cover such tricks.
If two transfers are inter connected and are parts of the same transaction in such a way that it can be said that a circuitous method has been adopted as a device to evade the implications of section 16 (3) (a) (iii), the case will fall within this section.
In the present case, the device is palpable and the two transferrers are so intimately connected that they cannot but be regarded as a part of a single transaction.
It was not successfully explained why the father in law made a big gift to his daughter in law and the son made an equally big gift to his mother.
