The assessee had encashed 51 high denomination notes of Rs. 1,000/ each in january, 1946.
The assessee 's explanation in his application for encashment of the notes was that he was a colliery proprietor and contractor, that for conducting the business and for payment to labour which came to about Rs.30,0001 to 40,000/ every week he had to keep large sums of money to meet emergency and that the sum of Rs. 50,000/realised by encashment of the notes was neither profit nor part of profit but was floating capital for the purpose of,conducting business.
The Income tax Officer did not accept this explanation and treated this amount as profit from some undisclosed 553 source and assessed it as assessable income.
The assessee contended that the burden lay on the department to establish that the amount in question was income liable to tax and that the department had failed to establish this.
Held that the department was justified in holding that Rs. 51,000/ was assessable income of the assessee from some undisclosed source.
It was not correct that the assessce was not required to prove anything and that the burden was entirely upon the department to prove that the amount received from the encashment of high denomination notes was income.
The correct position is as follows.
If there is an entry in the account books of the assessee which shows the receipt of a sum or conversion of the notes by the assessee himself, it is necessary for the asscssee to establish, if asked, what the source of that money was and to prove that it did not bear the nature of income.
The department is not at this stage required to prove anything.
If tile business, the state of accounts and dealing of the assewsee show that be might have, for convenience, kept the whole or part of a particular sum in high denomination notes, the assessee prima facie discharges his initial burden.
If the assessee does this the department cannot act unreasonably and reject that explanation to hold that it was income.
If the explanation is unconvincing, the department can reject it and draw the inference that the amount represents income either from the source already disclosed by the assessee or from some undisclosed source.
Before the department rejects such evidence it must either show an inherent weakness in the explanation or rebut it by putting to the assessee some information or evidence which it has in its possession.
The fact that there was receipt of money or conversion of notes is itself prima facie evidence against the assessee on which the department can Proceed in absence of good explanation.
In the present case though cash used to be received from Banks and sent to the various places where works were carried on by the asscssee and vice versa, no central account of such transfers was disclosed.
There was also no account of personal expenses of the assessee and he failed to prove why such large sums were kept at hand in one place when at each of the places where work was carried on, there were Banks with which he had accounts.
Further though this large sum was kept on hand, further cheques were drawn to meet current needs and this amount remained untouched.
Kanpur Steel Co. Ltd. vs C. I. T. , Lalchand Bhagat Ambica Ram vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bihar and Orissa, ; Mahindranath vs
Commissioner of Income tax, Bihar and Orissa, [1955] 554 27 , A. Govindarajulu Mudaliar vs Commissioner of Income tax, Hyderabad, [1958] 34 , Chunilal Ticamchand Coal Co. Ltd. vs Commissioner` of Income tax, Bihar and Orissa,[1955] , Mehta Parikh & Co. vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay [1956] 30 and Soyachand Baid vs Commissioner of Income tax, [1958] 34 1.
T. R. 650, referred to.
