The appellants and the respondents trace their interest and rights through their geneology to one Veeranna who died in 1906.
One of his sons Pitchayya, predeceased him in 1905 and it is alleged that sometime before his death Pitchayya took Venkayya, the son of his brother Chimpirayya, in adoption.
It is further alleged that a partition of the joint family properties between Veeranna and his four sons took place.
Venkayya died in 1938 having a son Subbarao.
Chimpirayya died in 1945 having executed a will whereunder he gave his properties in equal shares to Subbarao and Kamalamma, the daughter of his predeceased daughter.
He also directed Raghavamma, the wife of his brother Pitchayya, to take possession of the entire property belonging to him, manage it and to hand over the same to his two grand children when they attained majority.
Chimpirayya excluded his daughter in law Chenchamma from management as well as inheritance.
But Raghavamma allowed Chenchamma to take possession of the property.
Subbarao died in 1949.
In 1930, Raghavamma filed a suit for possession of the property impleading Chenchamma as the first defendant, Kamalamma as the second defendant and Punnayya as the third defendant.
934 Chenchamma, the first defendant and the present first respondent, contended that Venkayya was not given in adoption and that there was no partition as alleged by the plaintiff.
She averred that Chimpirayya died undivided from his grandson Subbarao and therefore, Subbarao became entitled to all the properties of the joint family by right of survivorship.
The trial Judge came to the conclusion that the plaintiff had not established adoption of Venkayya by her husband Pitchayya and that she also failed to prove that Chimpirayya and Pitchayya were divided from each other and in the result dismissed the suit.
On appeal, the High.
Court upheld the above two findings of the trial judge.
A new pica was raised by the appellant before the High Court that the will executed by Chimpirayya contained a clear intention to divide and that this declaration constituted a severance in status enabling him to execute a will.
The High Court rejected this contention also and in the result dismissed the appeal.
On appeal by certificate, the appellants contended that the findings of the High Court on adoption as well as on partition were vitiated by the High Court not drawing the relevant presumptions permissible in the case of old transactions, not appreciating the great evidentiary value of public documents, ignoring or at any rate nor giving weight to admissions made by parties and witnesses, adopting a mechanical instead of an intellectual approach and perspective and above all ignoring the consistent conduct of parties spread over a long period.
inevitably leading to the conclusion that the adoption and the partition set up by the appellant were true.
(2) On the assumption that there was no partition by metes and bounds, the court should have held on the basis of the entire evidence that there was a division in status between Chimpiravva and Pitchayya, conferring on Chimpirayya the right to , bequeath his divided share of the family property.
(3) The will itself contained recitals emphasizing the fact that he had all through been a divided member of the family and that on the date of execution of the will he continued to possess that character of a divided member so as to entitle him to execute the will in respect of his share and, therefore, the recitals in the will themselves constituted an unambiguous declaration of his intention to divide and the fact that the said manifestation of the intention was not communicated before his death to Subbarao or his guardian Chenchamma could not affect his status as a divided member.
(4) Chenchamma, the guardian of Subbarao, was present at the time of execution of the will and, therefore, even if communication was 935 necessary for bringing about a divided status, it was made in the present case.
The respondents raised a preliminary objection, that the certificate issued by the High Court did not contain any issue relating to adoption or partition.
Hence, this Court should not allow the appellants to raise these questions.
Secondly, it was contended that since the question, whether declaration in the will constituted a partition was raised in the High Court for the first time it should not be allowed to be raised.
It war.
further urged that on the issues of partition and adoption, there were concurrent findings of fact by the trial Court and the High Court and this Court should not interfere.
Held that a successful party can question the maintain ability of the appeal on the ground that a certificate was wrongly issued by the High Court in contravention of article 133 of the Constitution, but if the certificate was good, the provisions of that Article did not confine the scope of the appeal to the certificate.
This Court has the power to review the concurrent findings of fact arrived at by the lower courts in appropriate cases.
But this Court ordinarily will not interfere with concurrent findings of fact except in exceptional cases, where the findings are such as "shocks the conscience of the Court or by disregard to the forms of legal process or some violation of some principles of natural justice or otherwise substantial and grave , injustice has been done ' .
It is not possible nor advisable to define those circumstances.
It must necessarily be left to the discretion of this Court having regard to the facts of a particular case.
The present case is not one of those exceptional cases where a departure from the salutary practice adopted by this Court is justified.
Case Law referred to.
There is an essential distinction between burden or proof and onus of proof; burden of proof lies upon the person who has to prove a fact and it never shifts but the onus of proof shifts.
Such a shifting of onus is a continuous process in the evaluation of evidence.
The criticism levelled against the judgments of the lower courts, therefore, only pertain to the domain of appreciation of evidence.
It is well settled that a person who seeks to displace the natural succession to property by alleging an adoption must discharge the burden that lies upon him by proof of the factum of adoption and its validity.
In the present case, the appellant has failed to discharge that burden.
936 The burden is upon that person who sets up partition to prove that fact.
The general principle is that a Hindu family is presumed to be joint unless the contrary is proved.
The finding whether there was partition or not is a finding of fact.
An interference in the concurrent findings of fact on this point by the courts below is not justified.
Bhagavati Prasad Shah vs Dulbi Rameshwari Juar, , referred to.
It is settled law that a member of a joint Hindu family can bring about his separation in status by a definite and un equivocal and unilateral declaration of his intention to separate himself from the family and enjoy his share in severality.
One cannot declare or manifest his mental state in a vaccum.
To declare is to make known, to assert to others.
Others must necessarily be those affected by the said declaration.
Therefore, a member of a joint Hindu family seeking to separate himself from others will have to make known his intention to the other members of the family from whom he seeks to separate.
A declaration to be effective should reach the person or persons affected by one process or other appropriate to a given situation.
Adujallath Kathusumma vs Adujalath Beechu, I.L.R. 1950 Mad.
502, Suraj Narain vs Iqbal Narain, All.80 (P. C.), Ramalinga Annavi vs Narayanan Annavi, (1922) I. L. R. C.), Sayed Kasam vs Jorawar Singh, Cal. 84 (P. C.), Soundararayanl vs Arunachalam Chetty, Mad. 159 (P.C.), Bal Krishna vs Ram Krishna, C.), Babu Ramasaray Prasad Choudhary vs Radhika Devi, (1935) 43 L. W. 172 (P.C.), Kamepalli Avilamma vs Manmen Venketaswamy, , Rama Ayyar vs Meenakshi Ammal, (1930) 33 L. W. 384, Narayana Rao vs Purshothama Rao, I. L. R. and Indira vs Sivaprasad Rao, I. L. R. , discussed .
Once the declaration is expressed and brought to the knowledge of the person affected, it relates back to the date of 937 declaration or the expression of intention to separate.
As the doctrine of relation back involves retroactivity, it cannot affect vested rights.
It would follow that, though the date of severance is that of manifestation of the intention to separate, the rights accrued to others in the joint family property between the said manifestation and the knowledge of it by the other members would be saved.
Applying the above principles to the present case it must be held that on the death of Chimpirayya his interest devolved on Subbarao since it has not been established that Subbarao or his guardian had knowledge of the contents of Chimpirayya 's will before Chimpirayya died.
