The respondent was a Sub Inspector of Police in charge 01 a police station.
One D, suspected of having committed an offence, was apprehended by the village Munsif and was sent to the police station.
He was handed over to the respondent.
The respondent declined to give a written acknowledgment of having received 1)and made no entries in the station diary regarding him.
D was confined in the police station for several days without being produced before a Magistrate.
A departmental inquiry was started against him for reprehensible conduct in wrongfully confining D.
The defence set up by him was that D had never been handed over to him because he had escaped while on his way to the police station.
The Deputy Superintendent of Police, who held the enquiry, found him guilty of the charge.
The Deputy Inspector General of Police gave him a show cause notice and after considering his explanation ordered that he be dismissed from service.
On appeal, the Inspector General of Police modified the order of dismissal and converted it into one for removal from service.
The respondent filed a writ petition before the High Court challenging the validity of the order and the High Court quashed the orders.
Held that the High Court had no jurisdiction to interfere with the orders.
The High Court was wrong in its view that in a departmental enquiry the rule followed in a criminal trial that an offence is not established unless proved by evidence beyond reasonable doubt to the satisfaction of the court must be applied and that if such a rule was not applied the high court could set aside the order of the departmental authority in exercise of its power .under article 226 of the constitution.
The High Court does not sit as a court of appeal over the decision of the authority holding a departmental enquiry: 26 it has only to see whether the enquiry has been held by a competent authority and according to the procedure prescribed and whether the rules of natural justice have been observed.
Where there is some evidence which the authority has accepted and which evidence may reasonably support the conclusion that the officer is guilty, it is not the function of the High Court exercising its jurisdiction under article 226 to review the evidence and to arrive at an independent finding on the evidence.
If the enquiry has been properly held the question of adequacy or reliability of the evidence cannot be convassed before the High Court.
In the present case, the proceedings before the departmental authorities were regular, no rules of natural justice were voilated, the conclusions were borne out by the evidence and the respondent had ample opportunity of examining his witnesses.
Therefore, the conclusions of the punishing authority were not open tO be questioned before the High Court.
