The appellant, a company manufacturing sugar, shifted its factory from the old site to a new site and incurred a total expense of Rs. 3,19,766/ on the dismantling of buildings and machinery, transporting machinery from the original site to the new site and refitting the same there.
Held that the appellant was not entitled to a deduction of this expense for income tax purposes as an expense incurred for carrying on the concern or in earning profit, it was an expense incurred m effecting a permanent improvement in the profit making machinery and was, therefore, an expenditure on capital account.
The expense was on capital account also because it was made, "not only once for all, but with a view to bringing into existence an asset or an.
advantage for the enduring benefit of a trade" within the dictum of Viscount Cave in Atherton vs British Insulated and Helsby Cables Ltd. In order that that dictum may apply it is not necessary that by the expenditure a material asset or a permanent right in the nature of capital should be acquired.
There may be an expense incurred on capital account though nothing was thereby added to the capital value of an asset.
Atherton vs British Insulated and Helsby Cables Ltd. , Assam Bengal Cement Go.
Ltd. vs The Commissioner of Income tax, West Bengal, [1955] 1 S.C.R. 972, Granite Supply Association Ltd. v Kitton, and Bean vs Doncaster Amalgamated Collieries Ltd. , referred to.
18 An expense would not be on revenue account simply because it was incurred to turn a losing concern into a profitable one.
Though the expense incurred by the appellant was of a capital nature, it was not entitled to any depreciation on it under s.10 (2) (vi) of the Income tax Act because no tangible asset had been acquired by the expenditure which can be said to have depreciated.
Neither was the appellant entitled to depreciation under part V of the Form of Return given in the Rules framed under the Act which dealt with a claim for depreciation and by column 3 required a statement to be made for "capital cxpenditure during the year for additions, alternations, improvements and extensions," for to be so entitled to deductions under this part there has to be an improvement of the capital asset or increase in its value and there is no evidence of any such improvement or increase.
Further, no claim for depreciation on improvement to capital asset had been made.
