There was little internal demand for manganese ore and ' it was extracted mainly for exporting out of India.
Though previously there was no restriction on the grant of export licences from 1956, the Central Government started controlling and restricting the export of manganese ore ' On May 26, 1958, the Central Government issued a notification which contained the policy statement for the period July 1938 to June 1959 under which export quotas were to be granted only to established shippers and mineowners who had exported from 1953 onwards and to the State Trading Corporation.
Mine owners, like the ' appellant who did not have an) export performance in the earlier ),cars were excluded from the scheme.
They could sell their ore only to the established shippers are to the Corporation which they could do only.
at unremunerative prices.
By subsequent policy statements the export was canalised entirely through the Corporation.
Section 3 of the Imports and exports (Control) Act, 1947 empowered the Central Government to make orders restricting or controlling the imports and exports of goods.
The Central Government made the Exports Control Order, 1958, cl. 6(h) of which empowered the Central Government and the licensing authority to refuse to grant a licence "if the licensing authority decides to canalise exports through special or specialized agencies or channels".
The Notification of May 26, 1950, was issued under cl. 6(h).
The appellants contended: (I) that the withholding of the right to engage in the export trade from a class of mineowners constituted an unreasonable restriction on their fundamental right guaranteed under Art, 19(1)(g), (II) that cl. 6 (h) of the order was ultra vires the Central Government as section 3 of the Act 74 permitted it to place restrictions only on goods and not on the persons who might participate in the export, and (iii) that the notification by which canalisation of exports was affected was outside the contemplation of" agency and channel under 1. 6 (h).
Held (per Sinha, C.J., Ayyangar, Mudholkar and Aiyar, that the restrictions and control imposed on the export of manganese ore by the Central Government were legal and did not offend article 19(1) (g).
The restriction or control in the form of channelling or canalising the trade was not outside the limitations which night be imposed on export trading by section 3 of the Act and consequently cl. 6 (h) of the Order permitting canalisation of exports was within the rule making power of the Central Government.
The power to impose restrictions was not confined to goods but extended to persons also.
The canalising of the exports through the established shippers and mineowners was unobjectionable; canalising through the State adding Corporation and the progressive increase through he corporation was a reasonable restriction in the interests of he general public.
The object of these restrictions and control was to enable a regular supply of uniform quality of he ore to the foreign buyers so as to ensure the optimum earning of foreign exchange by the country, and this could rest be attained with the Corporation as the main agency engaged in the trade.
The State Trading ' Corporation was a "special" agency or channel as contemplated by cl.
(h) and the canalising could be done through it.
A special agency is one which is more likely to achieve the object than other gencies or to achieve it in a larger 'measure than others.
Canalising necessarily implied the exclusio n of some groups, and if the canalising was valid the appellant could not complain that he had been excluded from the export trade.
Per Subba Rao, J. The Notifications and policy statements which destroyed the trade of mine owners like the appellant did not impose reasonable restrictions on their fundamental rights and violated article 19 (1) (g).
The creation of a monopoly or near monopoly for the export of manganese ore in favour of the State Trading Corporation could only be achieved by a law made in conformity with article 19 (6) (ii) and not by administrative action like issuing of notifications and policy statement.
The power conferred on the authorities under cl. 6 (h) of the Order to canalise exports through special or specialized agencies or channels was well within the power conferred on the Central Govern ment by section 3 of the Act.
Further, the State Trading Corpo ration was a "special" agency within the meaning of cl. 6(h).
75 But the canalising had to be done in such manner that all persons engaged in the trade could participate in the export of the ore and no one was completely excluded.
