Nagappa and his sons who formed a joint family carried on business and they were assessed to income tax and super tax by the Income tax authorities.
As Nagappa did not pay the tax assessed, 51 items of immovable property belonging to the joint family were attached and 38 items were actually sold A suit was filed by the sons of Nagappa claiming a decree declaring that the assessment orders were unenforceable against the property attached and the sale of the property by the revenue authorities was without jurisdiction, void and illegal and an order restraining the Union of India and the authorities of the State of Madras from selling the scheduled properties or confirming the sales already held.
The plaintiffs contended that the items 46 to 51 did not belong to the joint family at all as these were acquired by them with funds provided by their maternal grand mother and the remaining items of property were not liable to be attached and sold as those had been allotted to them on a partition of the joint family estate on March 14, 1947, before the order of assessment was made by the Income tax authorities.
The contention of the Union of India was that the plaintiffs were not entitled to question the correctness of the assessment of tax in a Civil Court because the jurisdiction of the court was excluded by section 67 of the Indian Income tax Act, that the plaintiffs were precluded from setting up the plea of partition between them and their father as their defence to the enforcement of liability for the payment of tax in view of the provisions of section 25 A (3), that the partition was sham and not intended to be operative and items 46 to 51 were not the separate estate of the plaintiff.
192 In another case, the High Court passed on March 5, 1947, a decree for Rs. 10.000/ against Nagappa and in favour am of Kumaji Sure Mal.
On March 14, 1947, a deed of partition was executed by which the joint family estate of Nagappa and his sons was divided and separate shares were given to Nagappa and his sons.
Kumaji got certain properties attached in execution proceedings.
A suit was filed by the sons of Nagappa claiming that the debt incurred by Nagappa being Avyavaharika, the plaintiffs were not liable to satisfy the debt and Kumaji was not.
competent to bring to sale in execution of the decree obtained against Nagappa in his individual capacity, the interest of the plaintiffs in the joint family property after the joint family status was severed and the properties of the families were partitioned.
Held that both the suits of the appellants must be dismissed.
The suit against the Union of India must fail on three independent grounds; The suit which was in substance one for setting aside an assessment was in law not maintainable because of section 67 of the Indian Incometax Act, 1922.
In the absence of an order under section 25 A (1), the assessment of the Hindu joint family was properly made.
Even if an order recording partition was made, the liability of the plaintiffs to pay income tax assessed on the family could still be enforced against them jointly and severally under section 25 A (2) proviso.
Under section 25 A of the Income tax Act, if at the date when the liability to pay tax arose ' there was in existence a joint family, the fax Will still be assessed on the joint family notwithstanding its disruption after the crucial date.
The machinery for recovery of the tax differs according as an order regarding partition is made or not made.
If the Income tax Officer is satisfied that the joint family property has, since the close of the year of account, been partitioned among the various members or groups of members in definite portions, he must record an order to that effect and thereupon each member or group of members is liable, in addition to any income tax for which he is separately liable, for a share of the tax on the income so assessed according to the portion of the joint family property allotted to him.
But even after this apportionment of liability for the tax assessed on the total income of the joint family, the members of the family or groups thereof remain jointly and severally liable for the tax assessed on the total income received by the family as such.
If no order is recorded under section 25 A (1), the family shall be deemed, for the purpose of the Income tax Act, to continue to remain a Hindu undivided 193 family.
Section 25 A merely sets up machinery for avoiding difficulties encountered in levying and collecting tax Held also, that properties items 46 to 51 belonged to the joint family and were liable to be attached and sold in enforcement of the liability for payment of income tax, because the alleged partition between Nagappa and his sons was a sham transaction which was not intended to be operative.
The question of onus probandi is important in the early stages of a case.
It may assume importance where no evidence at all is led on the question in dispute by either side. ' In such a contingency, the party on whom the onus lies to prove a certain fact, must fail.
Where, however, evidence had been led by the contesting parties on the question in issue, abstract considerations of onus are out of place.
Truth or otherwise of the case must always be adjudged on the evidence led by the parties.
Schwebo K.8.R.M. Firm through partner Govindan alias Ramanatham Chettiar vs Subbiah alias Shanmugham Chettiar, I.L.R. , Wallace Brothers & Co. Ltd. vs The Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay City and Bombay Suburban District, (1948) L.R. 75 I.A. 86, Sir Sunder Singh Majithia vs Commissioner of Income tax, United and Central Provinces (1942) L.R. 69 I.A. 119; Commissioner of Income tax West Punjab, North West Frontier and Delhi Provinces vs Tribune Trust, Lahore: (1947) L.R, 74 I.A. 306, Katragadda China Ramayya vs Chirwvella Venkanraju, A.I.R. , Ganapatrao Vishwanathappa vs Bhimrao Sahibrao, I.L.R. 1950 Born.
414 and S.M. Jakati
S.M. Borkar, , referred to.
