The reapondent 's services as a correspondent at Guntur under the appellant were terminated.
The Andhra Union of Working Journalists, Elluru, took up the respondent 's cause and alleged that his services had been terminated by the appellant without any justification and that as a working journalist, he was entitled to reinstatement and compensation.
the dispute was referred to the Labour Court, Gunrut, by the Government of Andhra Pradesh.
The appellant raised preliminary objections before the Labour Court, which were all rejected.
On the merits, the appellant contended that the avocation of a moffusil correspondent was not the respondent 's principal avocation, and so, he could not claim the benefit of the status of a working journalist under section 2 (b) of the Act.
The Labour Court decided the matter against the respondent solely on the ground that as a part time worker he could not be regarded as a working journalist, and it made no finding on the question as to whether his principal avocation at the time when his services were terminated could be said to satisfy the teat prescribed by the definition under section 2 (b) of the Act.
The award was challenged by the respondent by a writ petition before the High Court of Andhra Pradesh.
The High Court held that the respondent was a working journalist under section 2 (b) of the Act and so it set aside the award.
On appeal by certificate the appellant 's principal contention in this Court was that the High Court was in error in holding that the respondent was a working journalist under section 2 (b) of the Act.
Held that whenever an employee working in a newspaper establishment claims the status of a working journalist, 101 he has to establish first that he is a journalist, and then that journalism is his principal avocation and he has been employed as such journalist.
In proving the fact that he is a journalist, the employees specified in the latter clause of section 2 (b) of the Act need not prove anything more than this that they fail under one or the other category specified in the said clause.
But that only proves their status as journalist; they have still further to show that their principal avocation is that of a journalist and that they have been employed as such by the newspaper establishment in question.
The object of the artificial extention made by the including clause is not to dispense with the two main conditions prescribed by the definition before a journalist can be regarded as a working journalist.
Having regard to the context of section 2 (b) it would be inappropriate to adopt the dictionary or the etymological meaning of the word "avocation" in construing s 2 (b)of the Act.
Held further that normally employment contemplated by 2 (b) would be full time employment but part time employment is not excluded from section 2 (b) either.
On a fair construction of section 2 (b), it would be impossible to hold that a part time employee who satisfies the test prescribed by section 2 (b) can be excluded from its purview merely because his employment is part time.
In the present case, the onus to prove the issue as to whether the work of a correspondent was his principal avocation at the relevant time in the light of the relevant facts.
as well as, the issue as to whether he was in the exclusive employment of the appellant lies on the respondent and it is only if he establishes the fact that he is a working journalist, the question as to determining the relief to which he is entitled may arise.
