A and B were tried together at one trial, A of offences under sections 120 B, 409,477 A and 471 read with section 476 Indian Penal Code and B of offences under sections 120 B,409 read with 109 298 and 471 read with 467 Indian Penal Code.
The Sessions judge who tried them convicted A of all the offences charged and B of the first two charges.
On appeal the High Court acquitted both of them.
The State appealed to the Supreme Court.
The respondents contended: (i) that there was a misjoinder of charges and persons on account of the cumulative use of the various clauses of section 239 of the Code of Criminal Procedure which was not permissible, (ii) that no charge of conspiracy could be framed after the conspiracy had fructified, (iii) that the Sessions judge had failed to inform the accused of their right under 3. 342 ( 4 ) of the Code to examine themselves as witnesses, (iv) that the pardon had been granted to the approver illegally, (v) that the approver had been allowed illegally to refresh his memory by reference to documents at the time when he was examined before the Court, and (vi) that the account books of certain firms which contained no entries regarding payments alleged to have been made to them were inadmissible in evidence.
Held that there was no misjoinder of charges and of accused persons.
It is open to the Court to avail itself cumula tively of the provisions of the different clauses of section 239 of the Code for the purpose of framing charges.
Sections 233 to 236 do not override the provisions of section 239.
But the provisions of sections 234 to 236 can also be resorted to in the case of a joint trial of several persons permissible under section 239.
Even if there was a misjoinder the High Court was incompetent to set aside the convictions without coming to the definite conclusion that the misjoinder bad occasioned failure of justice.
Re: Fankaralapati Gopala Rao, A.I.R. 1936 Andhra 21 and T.B. Mukherji vs State, A.I.R. 1954 All.
501, not approved.
State of Andhra Pradesh vs Kandimalla Subbaiah, , K.V. Kriahna Murthy Iyer vs State of Madras, A.I.R. 1954 S.C. 406, Willi (William) Slaney vs State of Madhya Pradesh.
; , Birichh Bhuian vs The State of Bihar.
(1964) Supp.
2 S.C.R. 328.
Held further that where offences have been committed in pursuance of a conspiracy, it is legally permissible to charge the accused with these offences as well as with the conspiracy to commit those offences.
Conspiracy is an entirely independent offence and though other offences are committed in pursuance of the conspiracy, the liability of the conspirators for the conspiracy itself cannot disappear.
299 State of Andhra Pradesh vs Kandimalla Subbaiah. , relied on.
S, Swamirathnam vs State of Madras, A.I.R. 1957 S.C. 340 and Natwarlal Sakarlal Mody vs State of Bombay, Cr.
A. No. 111 of 1959, dt 19.1.196 1, referred to.
Held further, that there was no violation of the provisions of section 342 of the Code.
The Sessions Judge had erred on the side of overcautiousness by putting every circumstance appearing in the evidence to the accused.
Copies of the questions put to the accused were given to them before hand.
Any point left over in the questions was covered in the written statements filed by the accused.
In such circumstance the length of the questions or of the examination could not prejudice the accused.
Further, there was no duty cast on the Court to inform the accused of their right under section 342 (4) to examine themselves as witnesses.
They were represented by counsel who must have been aware of this provision.
Held further, that the pardon was legally granted to the approver under section 337 of the Code and was a valid pardon.
The offences with which the accused were charged were all such in respect of which a pardon could be granted under section 337 (1).
The offences under section 467 read with section 471 which was exclusively triable by a court of sessions and the offence under section 477 A which was mentioned in section 337 (1) itself and thus both fell within the ambit of section 377 (1).
the offence under section 409.
and consequently the offence under section 120 B also, was punishable with imprisonment for life or with imprisonment not exceeding ten years and was an "offence punishable with imprisonment which may extend to ten years" within the meaning of section 337 (1).
Further, tinder G.O. No. 3106 dated September 9, 1949, the Madras Government, the power of a District Magistrate to grant pardon was specifically conferred on Additional District Magistrates, and the Additional District Magistrate, (Independent) who granted the pardon in the present case was competent to do so.
Held further, that the Sessions judge acted legally and properly in allowing the approver to refresh his memory, while deposing, by referring to the account books and other documents produced in the case.
Where a witness has to depose to a large number of transactions and those transactions are referred to or mentioned either in the account books or in other documents there is nothing wrong in allowing the witness to refer to the account books and the documents 300 while questions are put to him.
Such a course is specifically permitted by sections 19 and 160 of the Evidence Act.
Held further, that the account books of the firms which contained no entries with respect to payments alleged to have been made were not relevant under section 34 of the Evidence Act, as that section is applicable only to entries in account books regularly kept and says nothing about non existence of entries.
But they were relevant under section I I of the Act as the absence of the entries would be inconsistent with the receipt of the amounts which was a fact in issue.
They were also relevant under section 5 to prove the facts alleged by the prosecution that payments were never made to these firms and that those firms maintained their accounts in the regular course of business, and both these were relevant facts.
Queen Empress V. Grees Chander Banerjee (1884) I.L.R. IO Cal, 1024, and Ram Pershad Singh vs Lakhpati Koer, Cal. 231, referred to.
