In these two appeals the same questions of law arise and the facts in C.A. No. 166 of 1962 are similar to those in C.A. 167 of 1962 which are stated below.
The appellant in C.A. No. 167 of 1962 is the owner of certain lands situated in the city of Kanpur.
The land is occupied by a Mill and godowns and no part of the land is waste land or arable land.
In 1932 the U. P. Government sanctioned by a notification a Scheme (Scheme No. XX) of the improvement Trust, Kanpur.
This Trust has been replaced by the Development Board, Kanpur, by reason of the Kanpur Urban Area Development Act, 1945.
426 In 1955 the Housing Department of the Government of U.P, sponsored a scheme for building industrial tenements.
Part of the scheme concerned the locality in which the land in dispute is situated.
In 1956 a notification was issued under section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, by the Governor of U.P. to the effect that the plots in dispute were required for the construction of tenements tinder the subsidized industrial.housing scheme of the U.P. Government as well as for general improvement and street scheme No. XX of the Board.
This was followed by a notification under section 6 of the Land Acquisition Act stating that the case being one of urgency the Governor was pleased under sub sections
(1) and (I A) of section 17 of that Act to direct that the Collector of Kanpur, though no award under section II had been given, might on the expiration of the notice mentioned vs 9(1) take possession of land mentioned in the schedule.
Subsequently a notice under section 9 was issued which stated that possession of the land will be taken within 15 days.
The appellant thereupon filed a writ petition under article 226 of the Constitution in the High Court.
Two main points were raised in the petition.
Firstly, it was contended that as the acquisition was for the purpose of Scheme No. XX of the Board action had to be taken in accordance with section 114 of the Kanpur Act and the schedule thereto and as no action had been so taken the proceedings for acquisition were bad.
In the second place, it was urged that it was not open to the Governor to issue the notification under section 6 of the Land Acquisition Act without first taking action under section 5A thereof.
The High Court rejected both these contentions and in the result dismissed the writ petition.
The present appeal was filed with a certificate issued by the High Court.
In the appeal before this Court the same questions which were agitated before the High Court were raised.
Held it is only when the Board proceeds to acquire land by virtue of its powers under section 71 that section 114 comes into play and the proceedings for acquisition have to take place under the Land Acquisition Act as modified by section 114 read with the schedule.
But where the acquisition is, as in the present case, by the Government under the Land Acquisition Act, for public purposes though that purpose may be the purpose of the Board, the Kanpur Act has no application at all and the Government proceeds to acquire under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act alone.
From the scheme of the Act it is clear that compliance with the provisions of s.5 A is necessary before a notification 427 can be issued under section 6.
Even where the Government makes a direction under section 17(1) it is not necessary that it should also make a direction under section 17(4).
If the Government makes a direction only under section 17(1) the procedure under section 5 A would stil have to be followed before a notification under section 6 is issued.
It is only when the Government also makes a declaration under section 17(4) that it becomes necessary to take action under section 5 A and make a report thereunder.
Under the Land Acquisition Act an order under section 17(1) or section 17(4) can only be passed with respect to waste or arable land and it cannot be passed with respect to land which is not waste or arable land on which buildings stand.
just as section 17(1) and section 17(4) are independent of each other, section 17(1.A) and section 17(4) are independent of each other and an order under section 17 (I A) would not necessarily mean that an order under section 17(4) must be passed.
The right to file objections under section 5 A is a substantial right when a person 's property is being threatened with acquisition and that right cannot be taken away as if by a side wind because section 17(1 A) mentions section 17(1).
Section 17(1 A) mentions section 17(1) merely to indicate the circumstances and the conditions under which possession can be taken.
It was not open to the State Government to say in the notification under section 4 that proceedings under section 5 A will not take place.
This part of the notification under section 4 is beyond the powers of the State Government and in consequence the notification under section 6 also, as it was issued without taking action under section 5 A, must fail.
