The plaintiff respondent instituted a suit in the court of the Additional Subordinate Judge, Gauhati, against the Union of India and the Northern Frontier Railway represented by the General Manager, having its headquarters at Pandu.
Pandu is within the jurisdiction of the Subordinate judge.
The claim was for the recovery of a sum of Rs. 8,250/ on account of nondelivery of the goods which had been consigned to the plaintiffs firms, The consignment was booked from Kalyanganj station of defendant No. 2 fair carriage to Kanki, a station of the same defendant.
It was alleged in the plaint that the cause of action arose at Pandu within the jurisdiction of the Court, where the defendant railway had its principal place of business by virtue of its headquarters being at Pandu.
The suit was resisted by the defendants on the ground that the court bad no jurisdiction to entertain the suit.
Relying on the decision of the Assam High Court in P. C. Biswas vs Union of India, A. I. R. , the court of first instance held that the principal place from which the railway administration in a particular area is carried on is the principal place of business for the purpose of jurisdiction under section 20 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and decided the issue in favour of the plaintiff.
The revision petition filed by the appellants was rejected by the High Court.
The present appeal was filed with special leave granted by this Court.
It was contended in the appeal by the appellants that the running of the railway by the Union of lndia could not be said to amount to carrying on of business and that therefore the fact that the headquarters of Northern Frontier Railway Administration was at Pandu within the jurisdiction of the 625 Court at Gauhati did not give the Court jurisdiction under section 20 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
Held that articles 19 (6) and 298 of the Constitution clearly indicate that the State can carry on business and can even exclude citizens completely or partially from carrying on that business.
The running of railways which is a business when carried on by private companies or individuals does not cease to be a business when they are run by the Government.
It is the nature of the activity which determines the character of an activity.
The fact as to who runs it and with what motive cannot affect it. 'Profit element ' is not a necessary ingredient of carrying on of business, though usually business is carried on for profit.
The fact that the Government runs the railways for providing cheap transport for the people and goods and for strategic reasons will not convert what amounts to carrying on of business into an activity of the State as a sovereign body.
The Union of India carries on the business of running railways and can be sued in the court of the Subordinate judge of Gauhati within whose territorial jurisdiction the headquarters of one of the railways run by the Union is situated.
Case Law reviewed.
State of Bombay vs Hospital Mazdoor Sabha [1960] 2 S.C.R. 866, The Corporation of the City of Nagpur vs Ito Employees, ; and Satya Narain vs District Engineer, P. W. D., A. I. R.
