The appellant company was engaged in the manufacture and sale of matches in four places in India, including Bareilly, in which there were factories as well as sales offices.
As an incentive to larger production of matches the company introduced in 1945 a Production Bonus Scheme which was made 561 applicable to workmen engaged in the factory in making matches as also to those working in the factory office.
In 1947, it was withdrawn in its application to the sales office.
The workmen of the sales office consisting of clerical staff as also salesmen and inspectors of salesmen made a claim to Production bonus painting out that there should be no discrimination between the employees in the same company.
The company resisted the claim on the grounds : (1) that the sales office was entirely independent of the factory; and (2) that the salesmen, retail salesmen and inspectors employed by the sales office were not workmen within the meaning of the U.P.
The facts showed : (1) that there was interdependence of the two activities viz., manufacture of matches in the factory and their sale by the sales office, inasmuch as (a) the sales office could not exist without the factory, (b) the factory itself could not conveniently function without a sales organization.
and (c) the factory arranged its volume of production in accordance with the programme made from time to time by the sales manager; (2) that the sales office and the factory had the same banking account, though separate cheque books were maintained and operated upon ; (3) that the financial forecasts that were made for the Bareilly branch from time to time made no distinction between the disbursements in the sales office and the factory ; (4) the rules and practice in connection with the recruitment, control and discipline of man power, as also documents, including letters of appointment and standing orders and the muster rolls were kept distinct and separate between the factory and the sales office; and (5) the sales office paid rent to the factory fir the area occupied by it by means of book adjustments.
The evideuce also showed that 75% of the time of the workmen in the sales office was devoted to writing work.
Held that, on the facts, there was functional integrality and inter dependence or community of financial control and management of the sales office and the factory in the appellant company and that the two must be considered part of one and the same unit of industrial production.
Held further, that the inspectors, salesmen and retail salesmen were workmen as defined in the U.P.
