Ram Charan obtained a money decree against the Union of India.
An appeal was filed against that decree in the High Court.
Ram Charan respondent died on july 21, 1957.
On March 18, 1958, an application was filed in the High Court under 0.22, R .4 read with section 151 of the Code by Civil Procedure stating that the respondent had died on July 21, 1957 and the Divisional Engineer, Telegraphs, learnt of his death on February 3, 1958 and the deceased had left his widow and an adopted son as his legal representatives.
A prayer was made to bring the legal respresentatives of the deceased on record.
The High Court dismissed the application on the ground that the appellant had failed to show sufficient cause for not bringing the legal representatives of the deceased on record within time.
The appeal was also dismissed.
In the appeal before this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellant that the mere ignorance of death of the respondent was sufficient cause for the appellant 's inability to apply for the impleading of legal representatives within time unless the appellant was guilty of some negligence or some act or omission which led to delay in his making the application, that once the respondent was served no duty was cast on the appellant to make further enquiries about the state of health of the respondent, that expresssion sufficient cause ' should be liberally construed in order to advance the cause of justice, that the Court itself had inherent power to add legal representatives to do justice to the party and that the High Court misapplied the decision of the Full Bench 468 in Firm Dittu Ram Eyedan vs Om Press Co. Ltd. to the facts of the present case.
Held that limitation for an application to set aside the abatement of an appeal starts on the death of the respondent and not from the date of the appellant 's knowledge thereof.
Held also that the Court is not to invoke its inherent powers under section 151 C.P.C. for the purpose of impleading legal representatives of a deceased respondent, if the suit had abated on account of the appellant not taking appropriate steps within time to bring legal representatives of the deceased on the record and when its application for setting aside abatement was not allowed on account of its failure to satisfy the court that there was sufficient cause for not impleading the legal representatives of the deceased in time and for not applying for setting aside of the abatement within time.
Held also that the expression sufficient cause ' is not to be liberally construed either because the party in default was the Government or because the question arose in connection with the impleading of the legal representatives of the deceased respondent.
The Court should not readily accept whatever is alleged to explain away the default.
The delay in making the application should not be for reasons which indicate the negligence of the party making the application in not taking certain steps which he could have and should have taken The court has to be satisfied that there were certain valid reasons for the applicant not knowing the death within a reasonable time.
The bare statement of the applicant is not enough.
Firm Dittu Ram Eyedan vs Om Press Co. Ltd. (1960) 1 I.L.R Punjab. 935 (F.B.), State of Punjab vs Nathu Ram ; and Jhanda Singh vs Gurmukh Singh C. A. No. 344 of 1936 dated 10.4.62, referred to.
