The appellant, a Sub Inspector of Police in Mysore State, was committed to Sessions Court for trial on the complaint of K. K alleged that the appellant and another person had severely beaten T, and that the appellant, when forcibly taking away T, and requested by K to excuse T, wantonly fired on two persons.
The appellant 's case, on which his counter case is based, is that while he and a constable, after arresting, were taking T to the P. )lice Station, 20 or 30 persons attacked them and rescued T. Not heeding to appellant 's advice to desist from violence.
the crowed asked him to wait till K came.
On appellant 's refusal, the crowd threatened.
just then K came.
Apprehending danger to their lives, the appellant first fired in the air, but when the people pelted stones and grappled him, two shots went off injuring two persons.
K snatched his revolver and two mazahars.
prepared by the appellant in T 's case, and the people beat him.
These persons have also been committed to the Sesions Court for trial.
The Sesions Judge made the reference for quashing the commitment of the appellant, holding that the Magistrate could not have taken cognizance of the offences without the sanction of the State Government in view of the provisions of sections 132 and 197 Code of Criminal Procedure.
The High Court rejected the reference of the Sessions Judge for quashing the commitment order.
On appeal by special leave, the appellant contended that (1) the appellant could be dismissed by the State Government alone and, therefore, sanction under section 197 Code of Criminal Procedure was necessary ; (2) a police officer cannot be prosecuted without a sanction for an offence which the police officer alleges took place in course of his duty ; (3) when a case and 672 a counter case are both committed to Sessions Court, it should be inferred that the appellant has prima facie established his version of the incident and that his Producing a copy of the committal order in the counter case is sufficient for holding that sanction under section 132 Code of Criminal Procedure was necessary, and (4) it is not necessary for the police officer to prove conclusively that he was dispersing an unlawfull assembly before he can raise the plea of want of sanction.
Hold that (1) in view of the provisions of sections 4 (C), 8 and sub sections
(1) & (3) of section 26 of the Mysore Police Act, the Inspector General of Police can dismiss Sub Inspector and therefore, no sanction of the State Government for prosecution of the appellant was necessary even if he had committed the offences alleged while acting or purporting to act in discharge of his official duty ; (2) the court can consider the necessity of sanction only when from the evidence recorded in the proceedings or the circumstances of the case it be possible to hold either definitely that the alleged offence was committed or was probably committed in connection with action under sections 127 and 128 of the Code.
If at any stage of the proceedings it 'appears to the court that the action of the police officer complained of comes within the provisions of sections 127 and 128 of the Code, the court should hold that sanction was necessary.
The jurisdiction of the court to proceed with the complaint emanates from the allegations made in the complaint and not from what is alleged by the accused or what is finally established in the case as a result of the evidence recorded.
Majajoj Dobey vs H. C. Bhari, ; , referred to.
(3) in the present case it does not appear from the record that the evidence prima facie establishes the appellant 's contention that be could not be prosecuted without the sanction of the Government.
This question is to be decided on the evidence in this case and not on the basis of evidence and inferences drawn in the other case ; (4) in order that the appellant can get the benefit of the provisions of section 132 of the Code, he has to establish that (i) there was an unlawful assembly likely to cause disturbance of public peace, (ii) the assembly was commanded to disperse,(iii) the assembly did not disperse on the command or, if no command had been given, its conduct had shown a determination not to disperse; and (iv) in the circumstances he had 673 used force against the members of such assembly.
This he has to do in the same manner as an accused has to establish an exception he pleads in his defence.
Therefore, the accused in the present case has to show to the court that the alleged offences were committed during the performance of his duties and on his so doing the court would hold that the complaint could not proceed without the sanction of the Government under section 132 of the Code.
Held further, that if the court decides that section 132 of the Code applies to the case the proceedings on the complaint instituted without the sanction would be void and the proper order for it to pass would be that the proceeding be dropped and the complaint rejected.
