The respondent company, which was incorporated in New York and carried on business in spices, brought a suit in the original side of the Bombay High Court against the appellant for recovery of a sum of Rs. 92,884 4 10 on the basis of a judgment of the Supreme Court of the State of New York affirming two awards obtained by it and also on the awards in the alternative.
20 The respondent was a partnership firm carrying on import and export business in Bombay.
By two letters exchanged between them, the appellant and the respondent agreed to do business in turmeric fingers on the terms and conditions of the American Spice Trade Association, one of which was an arbitration clause which ran as follows : "All questions and controversies and all claims arising under this contract shall be submitted to and settled by Arbitration under the Rules of the American Spice Trade Asso ciation printed on the reverse side thereof.
This contract is made as of in New York.
" The appellant failed to supply turmeric in terms of the two contracts it entered into with the respondent.
The respondent put the matter into arbitration in pursuance of the arbitration clause.
The appellant took no part in it.
The arbitrators gave the two awards in favour of the respondent for damages.
The appellant did not pay.
The respondent then took appropriate proceedings and got the awards confirmed by the judgment of the Supreme Court of the State of New York.
The single judge of the Bombay High Court who tried the suit held that it was not maintainable either on the foreign judgment or on the awards and (dismissed the suit.
The Division Bench on appeal held that the suit was maintainable on the awards, though not on the judgment, as part of the cause of action had arisen in Bombay and the relevant facts had been proved by the Public documents produced by the respondent and the admissions made by the appellant and decreed the suit.
Held, (per Dayal and Mudholkar JJ.) The decision of the Single judge of the High Court that the suit was not maintainable on the foreign judgment must be affirmed but on other grounds.
Apart from the provisions of the Arbitration Protocol and Conventions Act, 1937, foreign awards and foreign judgments based upon award arc enforceable in India on the same grounds and in the same circumstances in which they are enforceable in England under the Common Law on grounds of justice, equity and good conscience.
On the original side of the Bombay High Court English Common Law is also applicable under cl. 19 of the Letters Patent read with cl.
XLI of the Charter of that Court.
If the award is followed by a judgment which is rendered in a proceeding in which the person against whom judgment is sought can take objections as to the validity of the award, the judgement will be enforceable in England.
Even then the plaintiff will have the right to sue on the original course of action.
Secondly, even a foreign award will be enforced only if it satisfies mutate 's mutandis the tests applicable to the enforcement of foreign judgments on the ground that it creates a contractual obligation arising out of submission to arbitration.
But there is a difference of opinion in this connection on two matters, (1) whether an award which 21.
is followed by a judgment can be enforced as an award or whether the judgment alone can be enforced, and (2) whether an award which is not enforceable in the country in which it was made without an enforcement order or a judgement, can be enforced or in such a case the only remedy is to sue on the original cause of action.
Thirdly, both a foreign judgment and a foreign award may be sued upon provided certain conditions are fulfilled one of which is that it has become final.
Although, therefore, the respondent could sue on the original cause of action in the Bombay High Court that cause of action must be distinguished from the one furnished by the 'judgment of the New York Supreme Court which must be held to have arisen in New York and not in Bombay and was a cause of action independent of the one afforded by the contracts and the Bombay High Court would, consequently, have no jurisdiction to try the suit based on that judgment.
East India Trading Co. vs Carmel Exporters & Importers Ltd., , Schibsby vs Westenholz., and Re Davidson 's Settlement Trust, (1873) L. R. 15 Eq. 383, referred to.
In a suit based on a foreign award the plaintiff has to prove,.
(1) that the contract between the parties provided for arbitration by a tribunal in a foreign country, (2) that the award is in accordance with the agreement, (3) that the award is valid according to the law of that country (4) that it was final according to that law and, (5) that it was subsisting award at the date of the suit.
The essential difference between a foreign judgement and 2 foreign award is that while the former is a command of the foreign, sovereign and the coming of nations accords international recognition to it if it fulfill certain basic requirements, the latter is founded on the contract between the parties and is not given the status of a judgment in the country in which it is made 'and cannot claim the same international status as the act of a foreign sovereign.
Even though an award may not have obtained the status of judgment in the country in which it is made, if it possesses the essential attribute of a judgment, that is finality, it can be sued upon in in other country.
Union Nationaledes Cooperatives Agricoles de Careales vs Robert Catterall & Co. Ltd. ' , referred to.
But the finality that r. 15, cl.
(E) of the American Spice Trade Association gives to the awards in question is no more than a matter of contract between the parties and must be subject to the law of the State.
A reference to the laws of the State of New York makes it abundantly clear that the relevant provisions of the laws of the 22 State under which alone the awards could become final had not been complied with and they could not, therefore, provide a cause of action for the suit.
For an award to furnish a fresh cause of action, it must be final.
If the law of the country in which it was made gives finality to the judgment based on an award and not to the award itself, the award cannot furnish a cause of action in India.
Although the High Court of Bombay has jurisdiction to enforce a final award made in a foreign country in pursuance of a submission made within the limits of its original jurisdiction, the awards in question not being final the suit must fail.
Per Subba Rao J.
The doctrine of non merger of the original cause of action with the foreign judgment pronounced upon it is a well established doctrine.
Popat vs Damodar, , Oppenbeim and Co. vs Mohmed Haneef, Mad. 496 and Nil Ratan Mukhopahya vs Cooch Behar Loan Office, Ltd. I.L.R. , referred to.
If the contract does not merge in the judgment, by a parity of reasoning an award on which a foreign judgment is passed cannot also merge in the judgment.
There is no distinction between a foreign award which would require an enforcement order to be enforceable in law and an award which cannot be enforced except by a judgment.
An en forcement order as well as a judgment on an award serves the same purpose and they are two different procedures for enforcing, an award.
Meerifield Ziegler & Co. vs Liverpool Cotton Association Ltd., , referred to.
A suit would, therefore, lie on a foreign award completed according to the law of that country and before a decree can be passed on it three things must be proved, (1) arbitration agreement, (2) that the arbitration was conducted in accordance with the agreement, and (3) that the award was valid according to the law of the country when it was made.
Norske Atlas Insurance Co. Ltd. vs London General Insurance Company Limited. , referred to.
It was not correct to say that the High Court had gone wrong in holding that the three necessary conditions had been proved by the admission of the appellants in their pleadings.
Rules 3, 4 and 5 of the Order VIII of the Code of Civil Procedure form an integrated code dealing with the manner in ,which the allegations of fact made in a plaint has to be traversed :and the legal consequences that follow from its non compliance.
23 The written statement must deal specifically with each allegation of fact made in the plaint and if the defendant denies any such fact, such denial must not be evasive, he must answer the point of substance and if he fails to do so the said fact must be take to be admitted.
The discretion under the proviso to r. 5 has to be exercise by the court as justice demands and particularly according to the nature of the parties, standard of drafting prevailing in the locality and the practice of the court.
There can be no doubt that pleadings on the original side of the Bombay High Court have to be strictly construed in the light of the said provisions unless the court thinks fit to exercise it discretion under the proviso.
Tildesley vs Harper, and Laxmi narayan vs Chimniram Girdharilal, Bom. 89 referred to.
The said three conditions were also proved by the exhibited record of the proceedings of the Supreme Court of New York containing the certificate of the Consul General of India in New York and certified copies of the order and judgment of the Supreme Court.
While under section 78(6) of the Indian Evidence Act, proof of the character of the document according to the law of the foreign country, is condition precedent to its admission, such admission is not a condition precedent for drawing the requisite presumption under section 86 of the Act.
That presumption can be drawn before the document is admitted.
The judgment of the Supreme Court of New York, therefore, which satisfied the first two conditions laid down by section 78(6), could be legitimately admitted into evidence.
The contracts between the parties having been concluded within the local limits of the original jurisdiction of the Bombay High Court, a part of the cause of action must have arisen there.
and that court had jurisdiction to try the suit on the awards.
