The plaintiffs brought a suit for partition, two of them claimed to be the reversioners of Chandrappa and the third a purchaser of the interest of the reversioners, defendants 4, 5 and 7.
They were thus entitled to a 5/6th share of the properties while the 6th defendant was entitled as a reversioner of Chandrappa to the remaining 1/6th share.
The property was in the possession of the three sons of Nagayya, the first three 986 defendants, who denied these properties ever belonged to Chandrappa and also that the plaintiffs 1 and 2 or defendants 4 to 7 were his reversioners.
The main defence was that even if the properties belonged to Chandrappa, the defendants ' father Nagayya became entitled to these as Chandrappa 's illatom son in law, on the basis that Chandrappa had brought Nagayya into his family under an arrangement that the latter would marry his wife 's sister 's daughter Mangamma and inherit the entire property after Chandrappa 's death.
The trial court dismissed the suit.
On appeal the High Court set aside the order and decreed the suit.
On certificate, the only contention, raised by the appellant in this court was that even though specific performance had not been sought, the contract itself would have the effect of transferring interest in the property to Nagayya on Chandrappa 's death.
Held that after enactment of section 53A in the , the only case in which the English doctrine of equity of part performance could be applied in India is where the requirements of section 53A are satisfied.
In the instant Case, 53A has no application.
It must be held therefore that the considerations of equity cannot confer on Nagayya or his heirs any title in the lands which under the statute could be conferred only by a registered instrument.
The appeal, therefore, must be dismissed.
Challa Papi Reddi vs Challa Koti Reddi, (1872) 7 Mad.
H C. R. 25; Bha 'a Nahana vs Parbhu Hari, (1877) 2 I.L.R. Bom.
67; Asita, Mohan Ghosh Moulik vs Mohan Ghosh Moulik, (1016) 20 G.W.N. 901; Venkatayyamma Rao vs Appa Rao, (1916) L. R. 43 1.
A. 138; Ariff vs Jadunath Majamdar, Cal. 1235, held inapplicable.
Ariff vs Jadunath Majumdar, (1931) L. R. 58 I.A. 91, relied on.
