The father of respondent No. 1, who was the Zamindar, filed a suit for the eviction of Ramprasad, the father of appell ants, from certain plots of land.
The suit was decreed and the Zamindar took possession of the land.
Ramprasad filed an appeal before the Additional Commissioner but the same was dismissed .
He preferred a second appeal before the Board of Revenue during the pendency of which the matter was compromised whereunder he was recognised as tenant of the land in dispute and the order of eviction was; thus nullified.
He applied for restitution of possession under section 144 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
The application was resisted by Dataram and others who had been inducted as tenants on these plots of land during the pendency of the appeals.
The trial court allowed the application but its order was reversed by the Additional Commissioner who held that the newly inducted tenants could not be dispossessed.
Its order was affirmed by the Board of Revenue in revision.
Thereafter fie filed a petition under article 226 of the Constitution in the High Court challenging the decision of the Board of Revenue, but that petition was dismissed on merits.
No appeal was attempted to be filed against the order of the High Court either by applying for a certificate or moving this Court for special leave under article 136.
The appellants have instead come to this Court in appeal by special leave against the order of the Board of Revenue.
A preliminary objection was raised on behalf of of the respondent that the appeal was not maintainable as it was barred by res judicata.
Held, that the appeal was barred by res judicata as the decision of the High Court was on merits and would bind the parties unless it was modified or reversed in appeal or by other appropriate proceedings. 829 Daryao vs State of U. P., [19621 1 section C. R. 574 and Indian Aluminium Co. Ltd. V. The Commissioner of Income tax, West Bengal, (1961) 43 , relied on.
Chandi Prasad Chokhani vs State of Bihar, [1962] 2 section C. R. 276, explained.
