Where an application is made under section 10(1)(a) of the , for a decree for judicial separation on the ground of desertion, the legal burden is upon the petitioning spouse to establish by convincing evidence beyond any reasonable doubt that the respondent intentionally forsook and abandoned him or her without reasonable cause.
The petitioner must also prove that there was desertion throughout the statutory period and there was no bona fide attempt on the respondent 's part to return to the matrimonial home and that the petitioner did not by his or her action by word or conduct provide a just cause to the other spouse to desist from, making any attempt at reconciliation or resuming cohabitation; but where, however, on the facts it is clear that the conduct of the deserted spouse has had no such effect on the mind of the deserting spouse there is no rule of law that desertion ter minates by reason of the conduct of the deserted spouse.
332 An offer to return to the matrimonial home after sometime, though desertion had started, if genuine and sincere and represented his or her true feelings and intention, would bring to an end the desertion because thereafter the animus deserendi would be ' lacking, though the factum of separation might continue; but on the other hand, if the offer was not sincere and there was in reality no intention to return, the mere fact that letters were written expressing such an intention would not interrupt the desertion from continuing.
Bipin Chander laisinghbhai Shah vs Prabhawati, ; , Dunn vs Dunn, and Brewer vs Brewer , relied on.
The parties were married in 1946 at Hyderabad in Sind (now in Pakistan) and a child, a son, was born in 1947.
The married life of the couple was not as harmonious as it should have been and it soon transpired that much of the trouble arose out of the fact that while the appellant and his parents appear to have been of an orthodox and conservative outlook and bent of mind the respondent and her parents apparently did not set much store by orthodoxy and were liberal and modern.
As a result of the partition in 1947 the parties had to leave Sind.
The appellant and his parents stayed in a house in Bombay, while the respondent 's parents went to Poona.
The appellant 's complaint was that the respondent was frequently going away to her parent 's house.
On February 26, 1954, the respondent left ' the appellant 's house and went to Poona.
The evidence was conflicting as to whether she obtained the permission of the appellant 'before going to Poona, but the facts showed that after that date the respondent did not go back to the appellant 's house.
The appellant along with a friend, Dr. Lulla, went to Poona with a view to bring back the respondent.
The evidence as to what transpired at the interview with the respondent was somewhat conflicting, and the appellant 's case was that the respondent intimated to him her fixed determination not to go back to him.
On July 7, 1954, the respondent along with her father went abroad to the Far Eastern countries, for the purpose of recouping her health, according to her.
Before going abroad the respondent had to go Bombay for getting the passport and going through the formalities; and while there she was staying in a house very near the appellant 's but she did not visit him nor see their child.
On learning that the respondent had gone abroad without intimation to him he cabled to her asking her to come back immediately but the respondent did not do so as required by the appellant.
There was some correspondence ' about the matter and the respondent continued to say in her letters that she would soon come back to his place.
By his letter dated April 1, 1955, the appellant used strong language passing severe strictures against her conduct &id in her continuing to be abroad without obeying his instructions.
The respondent replied by letter dated April 12, 1955, saying: "As soon as my.
333 health has completely improved I shall, of course come back to you and to our son.
" After this there was no further correspondence between the, parties.
In April, 1956, the respondent returned to India but she did not go to the appellant 's home nor did meet him.
On September 20, 1956, the appellant filed the present petition praying for judicial separation under section 10(1)(a) of the .
The respondent 's defenses to the petition, inter alia, were that she never left the appellant 's matrimonial home with the intention of breaking it and that, in any case, the appellant charged her falsely with immorality in his letter dated April 1, 1955, and so she was justified in living separately.
Held (Subba Rao, J. Dissenting), (1) that on the facts the respondent left the appellant 's matrimonial home On February 26,1954, with the intention of permanently, breaking it up, and thatsuch desertion continued during the requisite period of two years.
(2) that the appellant 's letter of April 1, 1955, did not con stitute an interruption of the respondent 's desertion by its being a just cause for her to remain away from the matrimonial home; and (3) that, in consequence, the appellant was entitled to a decree for judicial separation under section 10(1)(a) of the .
Per Subba Rao, I. (1) Where a spouse seeks judicial separation on the ground of desertion a heavy burden lies on him or her to prove four essential conditions, namely (1) the factum of separation, (2) animus deserendi, (3) absence of his or her consent, and (4) absence of his or her conduct giving reasonable cause to the deserting spouse to leave the matrimonial home.
The offence of desertion must be proved beyond any reasonable doubt and as a rule of prudence the evidence of the petitioner shall be corroborated.
(2) The expression "includes the wilful neglect" in the explanation to section 10(1) of the , does not enlarge the scope of the word desertion so as to take in by definition the conscious neglect on the part of that offending spouse without the requisite animus deserendi; it does not introduce a new concept in Indian law, but is only an affirmation of the doctrine of constructive desertion in English law.
The ingredients of desertion as well as constructive desertion are the same, though in one case there is actual abandonment and in the other there is expulsive conduct.
The said doctrine is not rigid but elastic and without doing violence to the principles governing it, it can be applied to the peculiar situations that arise in an Indian society and home.
(3) Sections 9 and 10 of the Act deal with different subjects and section 9 does not throw any light on the construction of the expression "without reasonable cause" in the explanation to section 10.
Whether there was a reasonable cause or not in a given case could 334 be decided only on the evidence and the peculiar circumstances of that case.
(4) In the present case, the evidence was clear that the respondent left her matrimonial home with the permission of her husband and his parents and that it was not possible to infer from the evidence given by Dr. Lulla that the respondent decided to abandon the appellant.
The letters demonstrated beyond any reasonable doubt that the wife did not demonstrated beyond band with the requisite animus, but on the other hand, showed her willingness to go over to Bombay as soon as she regained her health.
In view of the false allegations made by the appellant in his letter dated April 1, 1954, in which he charged the respondent with unchastity and leading a fast and reckless life, from that date the desertion, if any, on the part of the respondent came to an end and from that date the appellant was guilty of desertion.
