The respondent Venkatiah went on leave for six days and did not join duty on the expiry of the leave period but remained absent without sending to the appellant any communication for extending his leave.
Later, he sent 2 letter to the appellant accompanied by a medical certificate issued by a Civil Assistant Surgeon in respect of his illness for a period of nearly two months.
The Medical Officer of the appellant was unable to confirm that he was ailing for a period of two months.
Finding the explanation for his absence unsatisfactory the appellant refused to take him back in its employment.
Meanwhile he had applied to the Regional Director of the Employees ' State Insurance Corporation and obtained cash sickness benefit for the period covered by the Medical Certificate issued by the Civil Assistant Surgeon.
On the appellant 's refusal to take him back in its employment, the respondent union, referred his case for adjudication 18 2 section C. India/64 266 to the Labour Court and the management of the appellant was directed to reinstate him.
The appellant then moved a writ petition in the High Court and it was allowed by the learned single Judge.
The respondent then preferred a Letters Patent Appeal before a Division Bench of the High ' Court.
The appeal was allowed by the Division Bench and the award passed by the Labour Court was restored.
In his appeal against the said decision the appellant 's main contention in this Court was that the case of Venkatiah fell squarely within the provisions of Standing Order 8(ii) and the High Court was wrong in holding that the decision of the appellant in refusing to condone the absence of Venkatiah was either unfair or improper, or that it contravened the provisions of section 73 of the .
The respondent mainly contended that in the present case the employee received sickness benefit, and so, for the said sickness, no penalty could be imposed on him.
Held : (i) Standing Order 8(ii) was applicable to the present case and the fact that the same conduct was dealt with in two different standing orders, could not affect the applicability of Standing Order 8(ii) to the present case.
(ii) Whether or not the appellant should have accepted the certificate of the Civil Assistant Surgeon was primarily for the appellant to consider; as there was no allegation about mala fides in this case, it was not open to the High Court, in exercise of its writ jurisdiction, to consider the propriety of the conclusion reached by the Labour Court on this point.
(iii) On a proper construction of section 73(1) read with sub section
(2), it was impossible to invoke section 73 against the appellant, because the termination of Venkatiah 's services had not taken place during the period of his illness for which he received sickness benefit; the High Court was not justified in taking the view that the termination of Venkatiah 's services under S.O. 8(ii) contravened the pro visions of section 73(1).
(iv) The view taken by the Regional Director about the effect of the Civil Assistant Surgeon 's certificate under the proviso to regulation 53 could not be said to be binding on the appellant and in view of the construction put on section 73(1), there was no inconsistency between the said section and Standing Order 8(ii).
