The respondent was holding the post of an Assistant to the Additional Development Commissioner, Planning, Bangalore.
A departmental enquiry was held against him and the Enquiry Officer recommended that the respondent be reduced in rank.
After considering the report of Enquiry Officer, the Government issued a notice calling upon respondent to show cause why he should not be dismissed from service.
The reply of the respondent was that the entire case had been foisted on him.
After considering his representation, the Government passed an order dismissing him from service.
The reason given for his dismissal was that the respondent had on two earlier occasions committed certain offences and he had been punished for the same.
However, those facts were not given as reasons for the proposed punishment.
of dismissal from service.
541 The respondent filed a petition in the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution for quashing the order of his dismissal.
The High Court quashed the order of dismissal on the ground that the two circumstances on which the Government relied for the proposed infliction of punishment of dismissal were not put to the respondent for being explained by him in the show cause notice which was issued to him.
The appellant came to this Court by special leave.
The contentions of the appellant were that the Government was entitled to take into consideration the previous record of Government servant in awarding punishment to him and it was not incumbent on it to bring to the notice of the Government servant the said fact in the second notice.
Moreover, as the Government servant in this case had knowledge of his two.earlier punishments he was not in any way prejudiced by their non disclosure in the second notice.
Dismissing the appeal, Held, that it was incumbent upon the Government to give the Government servant at the second stage reasonable opportunity to show cause against the proposed punishment and if the proposed punishment was also based on his previous punishments or his previous bad record, that should be included in the second notice so that he may be able to give an explanation.
The doctrine of "presumptive knowledge" or that of "purposeless enquiry" is subversive of the principle of "reasonable opportunity".
Secretary of State for India, vs I. M. Lal, [1945] F.C.R. 103, Khern Chand vs Union of India, ; , Gopalrao vs State, I.L.R. , Shankar Shukla vs Senior Superintendent of Post Offices, Lucknow Division, A.I.R. 1959 All. 624 and State of Assam vs Bimal Kumar Pandit, [1964] 2 S.C.R. referred to.
