One Mammotty was married to Seinaba and he made a gift 550 of his properties including immovable property to Seinaba by a registered deed.
Mammotty died without an issue more than two years after the execution of the gift deed.
Later on, Seinaba also died without leaving an issue.
At the time of gift, Seinaba was fifteen years and nine months old.
Mammotty was iII for a long time and was in hospital.
He was discharged uncured a month before the execution of the gift deed and he remained in his mother in law 's house afterwards.
After the death of Seinaba, the present suit was brought by Kunharnu, an eider brother of Mammotty, for partition and possession of 6/16 share of the property which he claimed as an heir under Muhamrnadan law, challenging the gift as invalid.
Kunhamu 's contention was that when succession opened out on the death of Mammotty, his widow was entitled to one fourth share and the remaining three fourth share was divisible between him and his two sisters.
These shares were unaffected by the in .
valid gift in favour of Seinaba and accepted on her behalf by her mother.
The contention of Kunhamu was accepted by all the three courts below which held that a gift by the husband to his minor wife to be valid must be accepted on her behalf by a legal guardian of her property under Muhammadan law i.e. by the father or his executor or by grand father or his executor.
As the mother of Seinaba was not the legal guardian of the property of Scinaba, the gift was void.
The appellant came to this Court by special leave.
Held, that under Muhammadan law a gift by a husband to his minor wife of immovable property accepted on her behalf by her mother is valid if none of the guardians of the property of the minor is available provided there is a clear and manifest intention to make the gift and the husband divests himself of the ownership and possession of the property.
Held further, on facts the above conditions were satisfied in this case.
Mohammad Sadiq Ali Khan vs Fakir Khan (1932) L.R.59 I.A. 1, Nabi Sab vs Papiah and Ors.
A.I.R. 1915 Mad.
972, Nawab fan vs Safiur Rahman, A.I.R. 1918 Cal. 786, Munni Bai vs Abdul Gani, A.I.R. 1959 M.P. 225, Mt. Fatma vs Mt. Autun, A.I.R. 1944 Sind.
195, Mst.
Azizi vs Sona Mir, A.I.R. 1962 J. & K. 4, Mareroad & Ors.
vs Kunhali & Ors., 1962 K.L.J. 351, Md. Abdul Ghani vs Mt. Fakir Khan (1962) 49 I.A. 195, Suna Mia vs S.A.S. Pillai, (1932) 11 Rang.
109 and Musa Miya vs Kadar Bux, I.L.R. , referred to.
