The respondents granted to one Maneklat for five years a lease of the ground and the first floor of a building named Anand Bhawan in the town of Ahmedabad.
After the expiration of the period of the lease, a suit was instituted by the respondents against Maneklal for a decree in ejectment and the realisation of arrears of rent.
The suit was decreed.
However, Maneklal sublet a part of the premises in his occupation to the appellant after the institution of the suit against him but before the promulgation of the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control (Amendment) Ordinance, 1959.
In execution of the decree, the respondents obtained possession of the first floor but were obstructed as to the rest by the appellant and two others who claimed to be sub lessees from Maneklal and thereby to have acquired rights of tenancy of the ground floor upon determination of the tenancy of Maneklal.
The appellant filed a suit for a declaration that it was not bound to deliver possession of the premises in its occupation in execution of the decree passed against Maneklal and for an injunction restraining the respondents form enforcing the decree.
The trial Court refused to grant the interim injunction against the respondents.
The lower appellate court also refused to issue the interim injunction.
The High Court dismissed the appeal of the appellant on the ground that a statutory tenant re 893 maining in possession after determination of its contractual tenancy was in law not competent to sublet the premises in whole or in part and a person claiming to be a sub tenant from a statutory tenant could not effectively plead the protection of section 14 of the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947 as amended by the Ordinance of 1959.
The appellant came to this Court by Special Leave.
Held (per Hidayatullah and Shah, JJ.
Sarkar, J. dissenting) (i) Maneklal was a statutory tenant and as such had no right to sublet the premises and the appellant acquired no right of a tenant on the determination of the right of Maneklal by virtue of section 14 of the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947 as amended in 1959.
(ii)The appellant was bound by the decree obtained by the respondents against Maneklal and it could not take advantage of the Transfer of Property Act and the Indian Registration (Bombay Amendment) Act, 1939.
By section 15(1), all transfers and assignments of interests in the premises and sub letting of premises by tenants are, subject to any contract to the contrary, made unlawful.
This provision applies only to contractual tenants and not to statutory tenants who have no interest in the property.
A statutory tenant cannot sublet the premises because subletting involves a transfer of the right to enjoy property for a certain period in consideration of price paid or promised and a statutory tenant has merely a personal right to resist eviction.
Section 15(2) is in the nature of an exception to section 15(1).
It applies to contractual tenancies.
It protects subtenants of contractual tenants and removes the bar against subletting imposed by section 15(1) as well as by contract, provided the transferee is in possession of the premises at the commencement of the Ordinance.
A statutory tenant is a person who remains in occupation of the premises let to him after the determination of or the expiration of the period of the tenancy.
He has no estate or interest in the premises occupied by him.
He merely enjoys the protection of the law in that he cannot be turned out so long as he pays the standard rent and permitted increases, if any, and performs the other conditions of the tenancy.
His right to remain in possession after the determination of the contractual tenancy is personal.
It is not capable of being transferred or assigned and devolves on his death only in the manner provided in the Act.
On the other hand, the right of a contractual tenant is an estate or interest in the premises and in the absence of a contract to the contrary, is transferable and the premises may be sub let by him.
Roe vs Russel, , Lewis vs Reeves, , Krishna Prasad Bose vs Sm.
Sarajubala Dassi, A.I.R. 1961 cal.
505 and Solomon vs Orwell, [1954] 1 All E. R. 874, referred to.
894 Per Sarkar, J. (1) The word 'tenant ' in section 13(1)(c) of the Bombay, Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Conrtol Act, 1947 includes not only contractual tenants but also statutory tenants and a statutory tenant has the power to sublet.
There is no justification for the view that sub letting by a statutory tenant of a part of the demised premises results in a parting with possession of the premises or that such parting deprives him of the protection of the Act.
Section 13(1)(e) of the Bombay Act implies that a statutory tenant can sublet a part of the premises lawfully.
Section 15 of the Bombay Act deals not only with contractual tenants but also with statutory tenants.
The result is that the sub letting by Maneklal of the premises must be held to have been lawful.
(ii)The appellant was not bound by the decree obtained by the respondent against Maneklal.
It is true that a sub tenant under the general law of landlord and tenant is bound by the decree obtained by the landlord against the tenant for possession, though he was not made a party to the suit, but where a statue like the Bombay Act gives sub tenant a right to continue in possession even after determination of the tenancy of the statutory tenant, the sub tenant is not bound by the decree and his tenancy does not come to an end with the tenancy of the superior tenant.
A decree obtained by a landlord against his tenant does not give him a right to evict a subtenant like the appellant who is entitled to the benefits of section 14 of the Act.
Section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act cannot be resorted to by the respondents in the present case to evict the appellant.
Baker vs Turner, , Keeves vs Dean, , Roe vs Russel, , Campbell vs Lill, , Vevindramuthu Pillai vs Maya Nandan, (1920) 1.
L.R.43 Mad. 696 and Yusuf vs joytish Chandra Banerji, (1932) 1.
L. R. Cal.
739, referred to.
