A dispute arose between the appellant and his employees in the "Motor Garage department" in respect of the claim made by the employees for retrenchment and other compensation and leave facilities.
The Government of the State of Rajasthan, 'on December 18, 1957, referred under section 10 of the , the above mentioned dispute to the Industrial Tribunal, Rajasthan.
Two preliminary objections were raised before the Industrial Tribunal by the appellant against the maintainability of the reference: (1) That without the sanction of the Union Government under section 87B of the Code of Civil Procedure, the reference to the Industrial Tribunal was incompetent.
(2) That on the date when the reference was made no Industrial Tribunal was constituted under section 7A of the as amended by Act 36 of 1956, and on reconstitution of the Tribunal, the reference became incompetent.
The Tribunal rejected both the objections.
The High Court also dismissed the writ petition filed by the appellant challenging the validity of the order of the Tribunal.
Hence this appeal.
Held, (i) Section 86 read with section 87 of the Code of Civil Procedure in terms protects a Ruler from being "sued" and not against the institution of any other proceeding which is not in the nature of a suit.
A proceeding which does not commence with a plaint or petition in the nature of a plaint, or where the claim is not in respect of a dispute ordinarily triable in a civil court, would prima facie not be regarded as falling within section 86 Code of Civil Procedure.
Section 86 of the Code excludes the jurisdiction of the civil courts and must be strictly construed.
It does not debar the commencement of proceedings for adjudication of an 1/SCI New Delhi/64 1 2 industrial dispute for two reasons:neither party to the proceeding is saed by the initiation of the proceeding and the Tribunal is not a court.
(ii) Article 362 of the Constitution declares that in the exercise of legislative and executive power by the Union and the State due regard shall be had to the guarantee or assurance given under any covenant or agreement with respect to the personal rights, privileges and dignities of the Ruler of an Indian State.
These rights, privileges and dignities which are, for historical reasons, recommended to be respected, avail the Rulers of Indian States in their status as Indian citizens and not in recognition of any sovereign authority continuing to remain vested in them.
In the present case, the appellant has also, since the Constitution, been a citizen of India, and his recognition as Ruler under article 366(22) of the Constitution has not altered that status, but as a citizen he is assured a privileged position.
(iii) By sub section
(2) of the Rajasthan Industrial Trjbunal (Constitution and Proceedings) Validating Act, 1959, the Tribunal originally constituted under section 7 of the , before the Act was amended by Act 36 of 1956, is to be deemed to have been duly constituted under section 7A, and the reference made on December 18, 1957 is to be deemed to have been made as if the Tribunal were constituted under section 7A of the amended Act.
The Validating Act is, because of Item 22 List III of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, within the competence of the State Legislature.
As the Act was reserved for the consideration of the President and has received his assent, by virtue of article 254(2) it must prevail in the State of Rajasthan.
Mundra Metal Works Private Ltd. vs State of Rajasthan, W.P.No. 107/58, referred to.
