The respondent company got its supply of electricity from the Calcutta Electric Supply Co., converted the same from alternate current to direct current in its transformer house for running its tram cars.
The appellant Corporation was of opinion that the use of the premises as transformer house was dangerous to life, health and property and was likely to cause a nuisance and asked the respondent to take a licence under section 437(1)(b) of the Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951.
The respondent refused to do so and was therefore prosecuted under section 537 of the Act.
The trial Magistrate held in favour of the appellant and convicted the respondent and sentenced it to pay a fine of Rs. 100 only.
The respondent moved 26 the High Court in revision.
That Court held that the provision in s, 437(1) (b) which made the opinion the Corporation conclusive and non justiciable unreasonably restricted the fundamental right enshrined in article 19(1) (g) of the Constitution and since that provision was inseverable the entire section was unconstitutional.
The corporation appealed to this Court.
Section 437(1)(b) of the Act provided as follows ' "(1) No person shall use or permit or suffer to be used any premises for any of the following purposes without or otherwise than in conformity with the terms of a licence granted by the Commissioner in this behalf, namely, (a) (b) any purpose which is, in the opinion of the Corporation (which opinion shall be conclusive and shall not be challenged in any court) dangerous to life, health or property, or likely to create a nuisance.
" Held: The power conferred on the Corporation by section 437(1)(b) of the Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951, in the parenthetical clause "which opinion shall be conclusive and shall not be challenged in any court" which was in the nature of a procedural provision, was an unreasonable restriction within the meaning of article 19(6) of the Constitution and must be struck down.
The clause makes the opinion of the Corporation, however unreasonable, capricious and arbitrary, conclusive and non justiciable and thereby places trade and business within the municipal limits entirely at the mercy of the Corporation, even though it may not act mala fide.
The decision of this Court in Joseph Kuruvilla Vellukunnel vs Reserve Bank of India, must be confined to the special circumstances of the trade of banking and cannot be extended as a matter of course to other cases involving substantially similar provisions and each case should be judged on its own merits.
Joseph Kuruvilla Vellukunnel vs The Reserve Bank of India, [1962] Supp.
3 S.C.R. 632, held inapplicable.
So judged in the light of the principles laid down by this Court, the parenthetical clause was severable from the rest of the section and, consequently, that clause alone, and not the entire section should be struck down.
The scheme of the section was not so integrated as to indicate that the Legislature wanted it to be operative as a whole.
Dr. N.B. Khare vs State of Delhi, ; and R.M.D. Chamarbaugwalla vs Union of India, [1957] S.C.R. 930, relied on.
