The appellant was in the service of Union of India, his appointment being temporary liable to be terminated on one month 's notice on either side.
He was appointed in June 1949.
On August 1954 he was informed that his services would be terminated from September 1954.
No cause was assigned for the termination of his services and no opportunity was given to him of showing cause against the action taken against him.
Before such termination the appellant was called upon to explain certain irregularities and was also asked to submit his explanation and to state why disciplinary action should not be taken against him.
Certain preliminary enquiries were held against him but he was not heard therein.
No regular departmental enquiry however followed and the proceedings were dropped.
Claiming that he is a quasi permanent servant he brought a suit against the Union of India alleging that the termination of his service was not justified.
He prayed in the suit for a declaration that the termination of his service was illegal.
He also claimed arrears of salary.
The trial Court dismissed the suit and he appealed to the High Court 191 without success.
The present appeal was filed on a certificate granted by the High Court.
The first contention raised by the appellant was that he was a quasi permanent employee and r. 5 of the Central Civil Service (Temporary Service) Rules, 1949 did not apply to him.
Secondly it was contended that r. 5 was invalid as it was hit by article 16 of the Constitution and in any event the action taken against him was discriminatory and therefore hit by article 16.
It was further contended that even if the appellant was a temporary servant he was entitled to the protection of article 311 (2) of the Constitution.
: (i) Sub cls.
(1) and (2) of r. 3 should be read conjunctively and not disjunctively and both the conditions contained therein should be fulfilled before a Government servant can be deemed to be in quasi permanent service.
The Government servant has to show that he has been in continuous Government service for more than three years and that the appointing authority has made a declaration under sub cl.
(2) of r. 3.
This being the position, since no declaration has been made in his case, the appellant cannot claim the benefits of r. 6 which places a quasi permanent servant and a permanent servant on the same footing in the matter of termination of service.
Hence he cannot claim the protection of article 311(2) on the ground that he must be deemed to be in quasi permanent service.
B.M. Pandit vs Union of India, A.I.R. 1962 Bom.
45, Purshottarn Lal Dhingra vs Union of India, ; and K.S. Srinivasan vs Union of India, ; , distinguished.
(ii) R. 5 which provides for termination of the services of a temporary Government servant by giving him one month 's notice is not hit by article 16.
The classification of Government servants into permanent, quasi permanent and temporary is reasonable and differences in the matter of termination of service between these classes cannot be said to be discriminatory.
(iii) Where termination of service of a temporary Government servant takes place as it has taken place in the present ease, on the ground that his conduct is not satisfactory there cannot be any question of any discrimination.
The contention of the appellant that he was denied the protection of article 16 and was treated in a discriminatory manner is rejected.
(iv) Temporary Government servants are also entitled to the protection of article 311(2) in the same manner as a permanent Government servants, if the Government takes action against them by meting out one of the three punishments i.e. dismissal, removal or reduction in rank.
purshottam Lal Dhingra vs Union of India, ; Held, that when a preliminary enquiry is held to determine whether a prima facie case for a formal departmental enquiry is made out in the case of a temporary employee or a Government servant holding a higher rank temporarily there is no question 192 of its being governed by article 311(2).
Such a preliminary enquiry may even be held ex parte.
It is only when the Government decides to hold a regular departmental enquiry for the purpose of inflicting one of the three major punishments that the Government servant gets the protection of article 311.
Shyamlal vs State of U.P. ; and Purshottam Lal Dhingra vs Union of India, ; , explained.
Held, that even if a departmental enquiry against the appellant was contemplated it was not pursued and no punitive action was taken against him on the basis of the memorandum issued to him.
Simply because the Government issued such a memorandum but later decided not to hold a departmental enquiry for taking punitive action, it cannot be said that the Government can never thereafter proceed to take action under the terms of r. 5 even though it is satisfied otherwise that the appellant 's conduct and work are unsatisfactory.
Madan Gopal vs State of Punjab, [1963] 3 S.C.R. 716, State of Bihar vs Gopi Kishore Prasad, A.I.R. 1960 S.C. 689.
State of Orissa vs Ram Narayan Das, ; and, Jagdish Mitter vs Union of India, A.I.R. distinguished.
