The defendant was a tenant of the plaintiffs.
The defendant was in arrears of rent for one year to the extent of Rs. 1,020.
On April 11, 1959 the plaintiffs served a notice on the defendant requiring him to remit to them Rs. 1,020 within one month from the date of service of notice, failing which suit for ejectment would be filed.
This notice was received by the defendant on April 16, 1959.
On June 25, 1959 the defendant sent a reply to the notice enclosing with it a cheque for Rs. 1,320.
This amount consisted of the rental arrears as well as the rent due right up to June 30, 1959.
The plaintiffs accepted the cheque and cashed it and gave a fresh notice on July 9, 1959 requiring the defendant to vacate the premises by the end of the month of July.
The defendant did not vacate the premises.
Then the plaintiffs filed a suit to eject the defendant upon the ground that the latter was in arrears of rent for one year and had failed to pay the arrears within one month of the service of the notice dated April 11, 1959 upon him.
From the undisputed facts it was clear that the defendant was in fact in arrears of rent and had failed to pay it within the time prescribed by cl.
(a) of section 4 of the Madhya Pradesh Accommodation Control Act, 1953.
Held:(i) Though the notice dated April 11, 1959 could be construed to be composite notice under section 4(a) of the accommodation Act and section 106 of the it was ineffective 240 under section 106 of the because it was not a notice of 15 clear days.
In the present case, the defendant had only 14 clear days ' notice.
Subadini vs Durga Charan Lal, I.L.R. and Gobind Chandra Saha vs Dwarka Nath Patita, A.I.R. 1915 Cal. 313, approved.
Harihar Banerji vs Ramsashi Roy, L.R. 45 I.A. 222, dis tinguished.
(ii)The suit was actually based upon the notice dated July 9, 1959 which gave more than 15 days ' clear notice to the defendant to vacate the premises.
This notice was a valid notice under section 106 of the .
(iii)The contention that a suit under cl.
(a) of section 4 of the Act is not maintainable unless a tenant is in arrears on the date of the suit, cannot be sustained.
If this contention had to be accepted it would be virtually rewriting the section by saying "that the tenant was in arrears of rent at the date of suit" in place of that the "tenant has failed to make payment etc.
" It is certainly not open to a court to usurp the functions of a legislature.
Nor again, is there scope for placing an unnatural interpretation on the language used by the legislature and impute to it an intention which cannot be inferred from the language used by it by basing ourselves on ideas derived from other laws intended to give protection to the tenants from eviction by landlords.
(iv)The ground set out in cl.
(a) of section 4 need not be shown by the landlord to exist at the date of institution of the suit.
All that is necessary for him to establish is that the tenant was in fact in arrears, that he was given one month 's notice to pay up the arrears and that in spite of this he failed to pay these arrears within one month of service of notice on him.
(v)The effect of cl.
(a) of section 4 is merely to remove the bar created by the opening words of section 4 on the right which a landlord has under section 106 of the to terminate a tenancy of a tenant from month to month by giving a notice terminating his tenancy.
The character of the tenancy as one from month to month remains; but to it is added a condition that the unfettered right to terminate the tenancy conferred by section 106 will be exercisable only if one of the grounds set out in section 4 of the Accommodation Act is shown to exist.
(vi)By cashing the cheque for Rs. 1,320 the plaintiffs did not waive all rights which accrued to them under the notice dated April 11, 1959.
No right under section 106 of the had accrued to them because of the ineffectiveness of the notice in so far as the termination of tenancy was concerned and, therefore, no question of waiver with respect to that part of the notice arises.
So far as the right accruing under section 4(a) of the Accommodation Act is concerned, the defendant having been under liability to pay rent even after the giving of notice the acceptance of the rent by the plaintiffs would not by itself of operate as waiver.
