In respect of the assessment year 1949 50, the appellant while submitting his return disclosing his turnover of the sale of oil, included therein the value of the hydrogenated oil that he sold and claimed a deduction under r. 18 of the Turnover and Assessment Rules in respect of the value of the groundnuts which had been utilised for conversion into hydrogenated oil on which he had paid tax at the point of their purchase.
The sales tax authorities rejected the claim on the ground that hydrogenated groundnut oil was not groundnut oil within that rule.
This view was upheld by the High Court on February 11, 1955, in the Tax Revision Case No. 120 of 1953 filed by the appellant, but, on application, the High Court granted a certificate of fitness under article 133(1) of the Constitution of India on the ground that substantial questions of law arose for decision in the case.
For the assessment years 1950 51, 1951 52 and 1952 53, the same question as to whether hydrogenated groundnut oil was raised and decided against the appellant by the sales tax authorities and the High Court.
The appellant then applied for a certificate of fitness under article 133(1) of the Constitution, but the High Court dismissed the petition on September 4, 1959, stating: "The judgment sought to 175 be appealed against is one of affirmance.
We do not think that it involves any substantial question of law . . . nor do we regard this as a fit case for appeal to the Supreme Court.
" On November 23, 1959, applications for review were filed under 0.
47, r. 1, of the Code of Civil Procedure but they were dismissed.
The appellant then applied for special leave under article 136 of the Constitution against the orders dismissing the applications for review and leave was granted after notice to the respondent.
When the appeal came on for hearing in the Supreme Court, the respondent raised a preliminary objection that the special leave granted to the appellant should be revoked.
The grounds for revoking the special leave were not urged by the respondent at the time of the hearing of the applications under article 136, nor were they set out in the statement of case filed by the respondent under O.XVIII of the Supreme Court Rules, 1950.
Held (i) that where notice is given to the respondent before the hearing of the application for grant of special leave, no objection to the maintainability of the appeal or to the granting of special leave would be permitted to be urged at any stage after the grant of it, except possibly where the ground urged happens to arise subsequent to the grant of leave or where it could not be ascertained by the respondent at that date notwithstanding the exercise of due care.
(ii) that the statement in the order dated September 4, 1959, that the case did not involve any substantial question of law,was an "error apparent on the face of the record" within the meaning of 0.
47, r. 1, of the Code of Civil Procedure inasmuch as this was a case where without any elaborate argument one could point to the error and say that here was a substantial point of law which stared in the face.
