The respondent, a groundnut oil merchant filed three suits alleging that the property in some goods remained with him till the exept of the goods to an extra provincial point and till the payment of price after export, and sales tax was not demandable on these sales under the Madras General Sales Tax Act, 1933.
The appellant contended that the sales were not inter provincial sales, the suits were not maintainable in a civil court, the respondent had not exhausted his ' alternative remedies and the suits were barred by limitation under section 18 of the Act.
Before the High Court an additional ground based upon the decision in M/s. Ram Narain Sons Ltd. vs Assistant Commissioner of Sales Tax, ; was raised that the whole assessment was invalid because it included an illegal levy which, was not severable from the legal demand.
, Held: (i) SectioN 18 of the Sales Tax Act applies to suits for damages and compensation in respect of acts done under the Act. 'Me period of limitation prescribed in that section does not apply to the kind of suits which were filed by the respondent.
(ii) The jurisdiction of civil courts is not necessarily taken away when the decision of a tribunal is made, final, because the civil court 's jurisdiction to examine the order with reference to fundamental provisions of the statute, non compliance with which would make the proceedings illegal and without jurisdiction, still remains unless the statute goes further and states either expressly or by necessary implications that the civil court 's jurisdiction is completely taken away.
(iii) Applying the above principle the jurisdiction of the civil court was not taken away as the taxing of 'outside ' sales was a matter wholly outside the jurisdiction of the taxing authorities.
Firm of Illuri Subhayya Chetty & Sons vs State of Andhra Pradesh, ; and Secretary of State represented by the Collector of South Arcot vs Mask & Co. 67 I.A. 222.
518 (iv) The entire assessment was void because it was not possible in the present case to separate from the composite turnover transaction which were validly taxed from those which were not, in as much as this pertains to the domain of tax officers and the courts have no powers within that domain.
M/s. Ram Narain Sons Ltd. vs Assistant Commissioner of Sales Tax, ; and Bennett & White, (Calgary) Ltd. vs Municipal District of Sugar City,
