An industrial dispute arose between the appellant the Management of R.S. Madhoram & Sons (Agencies) (P) Ltd., and the respondents its workmen, in regard to the transfer of 57 employees from the Management of R.S. Madhoram & Sons, which was there original employer, to the appellant.
By agreement the transferor firm transferred its retail business to the appellant.
This dispute was referred for adjudication to the Industrial Tribunal.
The case of the respondents was that section 25FF is inapplicable to their case, because the ownership or management of the undertaking has not been transferred by the firm to the company within the meaning of that section.
The case of the appellant was that the said transfer was fully valid and justified under section 25FF of the Act.
In the present case, the muster roll showing the list of employees was common in regard to all the departments of business run by the transferor firm.
The employees could be transferred from one department run by the transferor firm to another department.
In the payment of bonus all the employees were treated as constituting one unit and there was thus both the unity of employment and the identity of the terms and conditions of service.
The respondents succeeded before the Tribunal.
The appellant has come to this Court against the award of the Tribunal.
Held: (i) The first and foremost condition for the appli cation of section 25FF is that the ownership or management of an undertaking is transferred from the employer in relation to that undertaking to a new employer.
Normally this would mean that the ownership or the management of the entire undertaking should be transferred before section 25FF comes into operation.
If an undertaking conducts one business it would normally be difficult to imagine that its ownership or management can be partially transferred to invoke the application of section 25FF.
It may be that one undertaking may run several industries or businesses which are distinct and separate.
In such a case, the transfer of one distinct and separate business may involve the application of section 25FF.
On the facts of this case it was held that the retail business of the transferor firm was not a separate and distinct business and as such, the impugned transfer did not amount to the transfer of 380 the ownership or management of an undertaking so as to attract the provisions of section 25FF of the Act.
In the present case.
the appellant cannot claim to be a successor in interest of the firm so as to attach section 25FF of the Act.
(ii)It would be difficult to lay down any categorical or general proposition as to the application of section 25FF.
Whether or not the transfer in question attracts the provisions of section 25FF must be determined in the light of the circumstances of each case.
The question as to whether a transfer has been effected so as to attract section 25FF must ultimately depend upon the evaluation of all the relevant factors and it cannot be answered by treating anyone of them as of over riding or conclusive significance.
Anakapalle Co operative Agricultural and Industrial Society vs Its Workmen, [1963] Supp.
1.S.C.R. 730, relied on.
