The respondent was found storing over 100 mds.
of paddy in his godown without any licence in violation of cl. 3 of the Manipur Foodgrains Dealers Licensing Order.
He was charged with having committed an offence under section 7 of the Essential Commodities Act.
The respondent 's main defence was that the paddy was meant for the consumption of the members of his family, which was disbelieved by the Trial Magistrate.
The Trial Magistrate held that as a result of the provisions contained in cl.
3(2) of the Order a presumption arose against the respondent, taking his case under cl.
3(1) of the Order, which in turn attracted the provisions of cl. 7 of the Order and made the respondent liable under, section 7 of the Essential Commodities Act.
On these findings the Magistrate convicted the respondent under section 7 of the Act.
An appeal by the respondent to the Sessions Judge was dismissed.
The respondent then filed a Revision Application to the Judicial Commissioner, which succeeded.
The Judicial Commissioner held that the effect of the presumption which can be legitimately raised under cl.
13(2) of the Order is not that the person against whom the said presumption has been drawn is a dealer in respect of the said goods; and so, merely oil the strength of the said presumption, cl.
3(1) of the Order cannot be attracted.
In appeal by special leave, Held: (i) Under cl. 2(a) of the Order before a person can be said to be a dealer, it must be shown that he carries on business of purchase or sale or storage for sale of any of the commodities specified in the Schedule and that sale must be in quantity of 100 minds.
or more at any one time; the concept of business in the context must necessarily postulate continuity of transactions.
A single, casual or solitary transaction of sale.
purchase or storage would not make a person a dealer.
(ii) Cl.
3(2) raises a statutory presumption that the stock of 100 mds.
or more of specified goods found with ail individual, had been stored by him for the purpose of sale.
After the presumption is raised under cl.
3(2), some evidence must be led which would justify the conclusion that the store which was made for the purpose of sale was made by the person for the purpose of carrying on the business.
The element of business which is essential to attract the provisions of el.
3(1) is not covered by the presumption raised under cl.
575 (iii)Cl.
3(2) may have been deliberately worded so as to raise a limited presumption in order to exclude cultivators who may on occasions be in possession of more than 100 mds.
of foodgrains grown in their fields; the Order, apparently did.
not want to make such possession, sale or storage liable to be punished under cl.
3(1) read with section 7 of the Essential Commodities Act.
