Held, by (PATANJALI SASTRI C.J., MUKHERJEA, VIVIAN BOSE and GHULAM HASAN JJ.) (i) Sales and purchases which themselves occasion the export or import of the goods, as the case may be, out of, or into, the territory of India come within article 286 (1) (b) and are exempt from State taxation.
(ii) Purchases in the State by the exporter for the purpose of export as well as sales in the State by the importer after the goods have crossed the customs barrier are not within the exemption.
(iii) Sales in the State by the exporter or importer by transfer of shipping documents while the goods are beyond the customs barrier are within the exemption, assuming that the State power of taxation extends to such transactions.
The word " course " etymologically denotes movement from one point to another and the expression " in the course of " in article 286 (1) (b) not only implies a period of time during which the movement is in progress but postulates also a connected relation.
Consequently, a sale in the course of export out of the country 54 should be understood in the context of article 286 (1) (b) as meaning a sale taking place not only during the activities directed to the end of exportation of the goods out of the country, but also as part of or connected with such activities.
But a purchase of goods for the purpose of export is only an act preparatory to their export and not an act done in the course of the export of the goods, The respondents purchased raw cashew nuts within the State of Travancore Cochin, from the neighbouring states and also imported such nuts from Africa, for the purpose of refining them and exporting them to America.
Imports from Africa were made in the following ways: (a) purchases were made through intermediaries doing business as commission agents at Bombay who acted as agents for the respondents charging commission; (b) the commission agents at Bombay indented the goods on their own account and they sold the goods as principals to the respondents.
In either case the goods were shipped direct from Africa to a port in the Travancore Cochin State.
It was found as a fact that the process of the factory was such that the goods were not the same goods commercially after refinement: Held, (i) as regards purchases made in the local markets of the State they were not exempted under article 286 (1) (b); (ii) as regards purchases made in the neighbouring States, if the purchases were effected and delivery was taken by the respondents ' servants outside the Travancore Cochin State, they would be exempt under article 286, cl.
(i) (a), and if the purchases were effected by employing firms doing commission business outside the State and deliveries were made through normal commercial channels the transactions would be of an inter State character and would fall under cl.
(2) but they would be taxable under the Sales Tax Continuance Order (No. 7 of 1950) issued by the President under cl.
(2) as such tax was being levied before the Constitution.
(iii) As regards imports from Africa, where the Bombay merchants merely acted as agents, the transactions would be purchases which occasioned the import and would be exempt under article 286 (1) (b), but where the Bombay merchants did not act as agents for the respondents, purchases from them would be on the same footing as local purchases and would not be exempt.
Per S.R. DAS J. The Explanation to article 286 (1) (a) is not an exception or a proviso but only explains cl.
(1) (a).
It does not confer taxing power on any State but only takes away the power of taxation of a State in respect of sales and purchases in which delivery does not take place within the State by enacting that such sales shall be deemed to have taken place outside that State within cl.
(1) (a).
Consequently, if a sale or purchase takes place outside a State, either under the general law or by virtue of the fiction created by the Explanation, then that State cannot, under (1) (a), tax such sale or purchase.
If a sale or purchase takes place within a State, either under the general law or by reason of the Explanation, then, if such a sale or purchase takes place 55 " in the course of " inter State trade and commerce, no State, not even the State where the sale or purchase takes place as aforesaid can tax it by reason of (2), unless and until Parliament by law provides otherwise.
A sale or purchase " in the course of " import or export within the meaning of (1) (b) includes (i) a, sale or purchase which itself occasions the import or export as already held by this court, (ii) a sale or purchase which takes place while the goods are on the high seas on their import or export journey.
and (iii) the last purchase by the exporter with a view to export and the first sale by the importer to a dealer after the arrival of the imported goods.
If a sale or purchase takes place within a State, either under the general low or by reason of the Explanation, then, if it takes place in the course of import or export as explained above, no State, not even the State within which such sale or purchase takes place can tax it by reason of (1) (b).
As regards local purchases, as those purchases took place with.
in the State they were not entitled to the protection of article 286 (1) (a), since on the findings of the High Court, the goods purchased were so altered that they cannot be deemed to be the same as the goods which were exported, and the purchases cannot be said to have been made "in the course" of export so as to be entitled to immunity from taxation under article 286 (1) (b).
As regards purchases from the neighbouring States, if the goods were taken delivery of by the agents of the respondents outside the State, such purchases must, under the Explanation, be regarded as having taken place outside the State and accordingly would be exempt from taxation under article 286 (1) (a).
If however, the goods were directly delivered to the respondents in the Travancore Cochin State the Explanation to article 286 (1) (a) will apply in view of the finding of the High Court which implies that the goods are also consumed in the State, and the neighbouring States will not be entitled to tax these sales or purchases, but the purchases are " in the course of " inter State trade and as such will be protected by (2); but as the majority of the Court have taken a different view and as such view must prevail, such purchases will become, as a result of the Explanation to (1) (a), an intra state purchase and will lose the protection of (2).
Even if such purchases fall within (2), they would be liable to be taxed under the President 's Order of 1950.
They are not protected by (1) (b) as the goods exported are different goods.
As regards purchases from Africa (1) where the Bombay merchants act as agents of the respondents and pay the price and take delivery of the shipping documents in Bombay the purchases fall within (1) (a) and also (1) (b) and are not liable to tax as they take place outside the State within (1) (a) and also "in the course of import" within (1) (b); (ii) where the African sellers ship the goods on their own initiation or on that of their agents and while the goods are on the high seas they are 56 purchased by the, respondents ' Bombay agents, the sale or purchase would be exempt under (1) (a) and under (1) (b); (iii) where the respondents place separate orders with the same commission agent at Bombay and the latter places a consolidated order with the African seller on his own responsibility and the Bombay agent after paying for the entire lot, prepares a separate invoice for each of their constituents and the latter receive the delivery orders from a Travancore bank against payment and take delivery from a Travancore warehouse the sale takes place in the Travancore Cochin State and the goods cannot claim exemption under (1) (a), (1) (b) or (2) of article 286.
