Kalayanasundaram and the members of his family were per manent residents of Palghat in the then State of Madras.
and his son, the appellant, formed members of an undivided Hind family.
The family had properties not only in Palghat but also in Cochin.
In 1945, Kalayanasundaram entered into many contracts with the Government of India for the supply of black pepper As he had no ready money to implement those contracts, he app roached the Respondent Bank for funds to finance those contract For that purpose, he executed three promissory notes in favour the bank for a total sum of Rs. 1,10,000.
He also deposited title deeds of his properties with the Bank as security.
As Kalayanasudaram did not pay the borrowed amount, the Bank filed a suit against him on June 17, 1948.
But even before that date, a deed of partition was executed on June 3, 1948 between Kalayanasundaram a the appellant, his son, by which the properties of the family in the Cochin State were divided into two equal parts, the father taking over himself the liability to pay the amount due to the Bank.
It was stated in the deed of partition that the debt due to the bank was a personal debt of the father and hence was not binding on the son.
To the mortgage suit filed by the Bank, several defences we raised.
However, the trial court decreed the suit against the father and there was no appeal against that.
Against the decision of the trial Judge that the Bank had no right to obtain a mortgage decree against the appellant and his half share in the family property an appeal was filed by the Bank which was accepted by the High Court which modified the decree by passing a mortgage decree against the appellant qua his share as well.
The appellant came to this court in appeal after obtaining a certificate of fitness.
The contentions raised by the appellant in this Court were th the finding of the High Court that the partition of the family properties effected between the appellant and his father was not bona fide was not justified on the admitted facts and was based ON 648 erroneous reasoning, that the High Court erred in holding that the Hindu Law as understood and applied by the Courts in the previous Cochin State could determine the liability of the appellant who was a resident of Palghat and that the High Court erred in holding that the mortgage evidenced by exhibit 'E ' was to any extent I for the discharge of antecedent debts.
Dismissing the appeals, Held: (i) The finding of the High Court that the partition of family properties effected between the appellant and his father was not bona fide, was correct.
The partition deed did not set apart sufficient property for the share of the father to enable him to discharge all his debts.
Moreover, onus should have been placed on the ap pellant to establish that the nature of the arrangement under the partition was such as made proper and adequate provision for the discharge of the debt, but actually the onus was wrongly placed on the Bank.
(ii) The view of the High Court that when the transactions took place, British India and Cochin State were independent sovereign states and according to Private International Law, it was the law of the situs of the property that should govern the contracts relating to it, was not correct.
The rule was not any statutory law which was binding on parties who had dealings in regard to land in that State.
Taking the Cochin State itself, the power of a person to dispose of property or to encumber it depends upon whether he is a Hindu, Muslim or Christian and in each case the right of the owner to dispose of the property depends upon his personal law as modified by any statute applicable to that community to which he belongs.
There is no situs which can be applied irrespective of the personal law governing the owner.
In the present case, Kalayanasundaram and his family were permanent residents of Palghat.
The law applicable was the law laid down by the Privy Council and accepted by the Full Bench decisions of the Madras High Court and finally laid down by the Supreme Court.
When the Bank dealt with Kalayanasundaram, it must be taken to have contracted with him on the basis of such a law being applicable to the transaction.
(iii) There was a real and factual antecedency between the loan of Rs. 80,000 for which the draft was given on November 16, 1945, and the previously existing indebtedness of Rs. 1,09,000, and odd in the over drafts account No. 1 and 2 of Kalayanasundaram to the Bank which was discharged thereby.
A father can by incurring a debt, even though the same be not for any purpose necessary or beneficial to the family, so long as it is not for illegal or immoral purposes, lay the entire joint family property including the interests of his sons open to be taken in execution proceedings upon a decree for the payment of debt.
The father can, so long as the family continues undivided, alienate the entirety of the family property for the discharge of his antece 649 dent personal debts subject to their not being illegal or immoral.
In other words, the power of the father to alienate for satisfying his debts is co extensive with the right of the creditors to obtain satisfaction out of family property including the share of the sons in such property.
Where a father purports to burden the estate by a mortgage for purposes not necessary and beneficial to the family, the mortgage qua mortgage would not be binding on the sons unless the same was for the discharge of an antecedent debt.
Where there is no antecedency, a mortgage by the father would stand in the same position as an out and out sale by the father of family property for a purpose not binding on the family under which he receives the sale price which is utilised for his personal needs.
After the joint status of the family is disrupted by a partition, the father has no right to deal with the family property by sale or mortgage even to discharge an antecedent debt, nor is the son under any legal or moral obligation to discharge the post parti tion debt of the father.
Antecedent debt in this context means a debt antecedent in fact as well as in time.
The debt must be truly independent and not part of the mortgage which is impeached.
The prior debt must be independent of the debt for which the mortgage is created and the two transactions must be dissociated in fact so that they cannot be regarded as part of the same transaction.
Brij Narain vs Mangal Prasad, 51 I.A. 129, Panna Lal vs Mst.
Naraini; , , Chidambara Mudaliar vs Rootha Perumal, I.L.R. and Vankataramayya vs Vankataramana, , referred to.
