As a result of the lay off declared by the respondent in the II tea estates, managed by them an industrial dispute arose between the respondent and their workmen, the appellant.
The respondent justified the lay off on the ground that its financial position was very difficult and that the lay off was appropriate in the interests of the employees and their own in order to avoid closure of business.
The appellants urged, inter alia, that the depression in trade or financial difficulties which may be characterised as trade reasons did not justify the lay off under the relevant Standing Order, and so, they justified their claim for full wages during the period of the lay off.
The Tribunal held that the relevant Standing Order No. 8 justified the lay off, and the trade reasons resulting from the depression in trade and financial liabilities arising therefrom fell within the scope of the Standing Order.
Alternatively, the Tribunal thought that even if the lay off was not justified by the relevant clause of the Standing Order, the respondent had a common law right to declare a lay off and this right was recognised by section 25C of the and since it is a statutory provision, it overrides the relevant clause in the Standing Order.
In appeal by special leave: Held: (i) The Tribunal was not right in holding that section 25C of the recognises the inherent right of the employer to declare lay off for reasons which he may regard as sufficient or satisfactory in that behalf.
No such common law right can be spelt out from the provisions of section 25C.
When the laying off of the workmen is referred to in section 25C, it is laying off as defined by section 2 (kkk), and so, workmen who can claim the benefit of section 25C must be workmen who are laid off for the reasons contemplated by section 2(kkk); that is all that section 25C means.
If in any case the lay off is not covered by the Standing Orders, it will necessarily be governed by the provisions of the Act, and lay off would be permissible only where one or the other of the factors mentioned by section 2(kkk) is present, and for such lay off compensation would be awarded under section 25C. 549 (ii) "Stoppage of supply" must, in the context, mean stoppage ' of raw material or other such thing.
In regard to the factory, "stoppage of supply" may mean the stoppage of tea leaves, or in the case of field work, it may mean the stoppage of supply of other articles necessary for field operations.
"Supply" in the context cannot mean money or funds.
(iii) The last clause of r. 8(a) (i) of the Standing Order which refers to "other causes beyond his control" would not take in the financial difficulties of the companies.
Other causes beyond his control for one thing should be similar to the causes that have preceded; even otherwise there is no justification for the argument that the financial difficulty which is alleged to have confronted the respondent was beyond its control.
Rule 8(a) (iii) which refers to temporary curtailment of production must obviously be read in the light of r. 8(a) (i) and if the case of the present lay off does not fall under r. 8(a) (i), r. 8(a)(iii) would not improve the position.
(iv) The present dispute must be governed by r. 8(a)(i) of the respondent 's Standing Orders.
It cannot be accepted that the Standing Orders having been certified before the definition of the lay off was introduced in the Act, the respondent is entitled to rely upon the said definition in support of the plea that the impugned lay off was justified.
Management of Kairbetta Estate, Kotagiri vs Raja manickam & Ors., ; , referred to.
