One of the respondents Mr. S.K. Mukherjee was an employee of the Metropolitan Insurance Co. Ltd., and had been working as an Inspector when the appellant took over the company There after, in February 1958, he was directed to work as a field officer.
By the order dated, October 16, 1958 his services were terminated with immediate effect and he was informed that he would be paid. his emoluments up to the current month and one month 's salary in lieu, of notice.
He was not given.
an opportunity to show cause against this termination.
His petition before the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution challenging the vatidity of this order was allowed by 'the learned single Judge.
After appealing ,,to a Division Bench without success the appellant came in appeal 529 to this Court with a certificate granted by the High Court.
It was urged on behalf of the appellant that by the application of the principle contained in paragraph 4(h) of the Circular issued by the Managing Director under cl.
4(3) of the Life Insurance Corporation Regulation 1958, it was competent to the corporation to terminate the services of the respondents.
It was contended that where cases are dealt with under paragraphs 4(h) and 5 of the Circular, there can be no question of the application of cl. 10 of the Life Insurance Corporation Field Officers Order, 1957, which empowers the appropriate authority to reduce the remuneration of the Development Officer or to terminate his services and in either case, an opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken has to be given to him.
The contention of the respondents was that the termination of their services can be brought about only under cl.
10(a) or 10(b) of the order, and since it has not been so brought about, the impugned orders are invalid.
Held: (i) The power of the corporation to make Regulations is burdened with the condition that these Regulations must not be inconsistent with the Act and the rules framed thereunder , so that if any of the provisions contained in the Regulations made by the corporation under section 49 of the Act are found to be inconsistent either with section 11(2) or with the order made by the Central Government under section 11(2) of the Act, they would be invalid.
(ii) Paragraph 4(h) means that in cases falling under it, the services of the officers concerned would be liable to be terminated, and that means that the termination of the services, of the said officers must be effected in the manner prescribed by cl. 10 of the Order.
That is how paragraph 4(h) of the Circular and cl.
10 of the Order can be reasonably reconciled.
This applies equally to paragraph 5 of the Circular.
(iii) It was competent to the corporation to adopt the Circular, and in consequence, lay down the principles which should be followed in fitting individual officers into the scheme prescribed by cl. 5 of the order.
The total amount of remuneration would undoubtedly be determined in the light of the principles prescribed by the Circular, but under the guise of fitting in a particular officer in the light of the said principles it would not be open to the corporation to demote the officer from the grade of Development Officer to a lower grade; that would be beyond the competence of the Regulations.
(iv) Since the orders terminating the services of the respective respondents have not been passed in accordance either with cl.
10(a) or (b), they must be held to be invalid.
(v) An employee whose performance is poor is liable to be dealt with under cl. 10 of the order.
But it is not open to the corporation to require that person to accept an assignment in a lower or different category.
What the Regulations are authorised to do is merely to determine his salary in the category of develop 1/SCI/64 34 530 ment officers, and so, an order terminating his service on the ground that he refused to take an assignment in a lower category cannot be justified.
