The appellant is the proprietor of a Homoeopathic hospital in New Delhi.
He runs a journal called the "Homoeopathic Doctor".
583 On the request of one Misri Singh the appellant sent copies of the said journal and a list of medicines by V.P.P. Misri Singh was neither a registered medical practitioner nor a wholesale or retail Chemist even though he was working with a registered medical practitioner as his clerk.
The list of medicines sent by the appellant to Misri Singh bore in printed indelible ink the statement that it was meant for the use of medical practitioners alone.
The appellant was prosecuted under section 3 read with section 7 of the Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisement) Act, 1954.
The trial Magistrate found him guilty of the offence charged and sentenced him to a fine of Rs. 1000.
On appeal the Additional Sessions Judge confirmed the conviction but reduced the fine to Rs. 500.
The appellant 's revision petition was dismissed by the High Court The present appeal is on special leave granted by this Court.
On behalf of the appellant it was contended that section 3 is subject to the other provisions of the Act and therefore it is subject to section 14 which provides that any advertisement sent confidentially in the prescribed manner to a registered medical practitioner or wholesale or retail chemist is exempted from the other provisions of the Act.
Relying on this section it was argued that since the appellant requested in writing to send the offending articles the appellant had no duty to enquire whether that person is a registered medical practitioner or chemist.
Further the appellant relied on rule 6 of the Rules framed under the Act and contended that inasmuch as the list sent by him bore the words printed in indelible ink "For the use only of registered medical practitioners" he has complied with the provisions of law.
Held. (i) The definition of "taking any part in the publication of any advertisement" contained in section 2(d) of the Act is wide enough to include the printing of the advertisement and the sending of it in any part of India.
Before a person is penalised it is not necessary to show that the contravention brought home to him is in the nature of habitual contravention.
A single contravention will make a person guilty under section 7.
(ii)Section 3 is subject to the provisions of section 14 and if the appellant 's case falls under section 14, section 3 cannot be invoked against him.
The prosecution has to show that the person to whom the list was sent is not a medical practitioner.
Once this is established it is for the appellant to satisfy the court that his case falls under section 14(1)(c).
The fact that the appellant has complied with one of the conditions prescribed under r. 6 will not bring the case of the appellant under section 14(1)(c).
