Moti Ram Deka was a peon employed by the North East Frontier Railway and Sudhir Kumar Das was a confirmed clerk.
General Manager, North East Frontier Railway, terminated th services under R. 148(3) of Indian Railway Establishment Co Vol.
They challenged the termination of their services but th writ petitions were rejected by the Assam High Court and t came to this court by special leave.
Priya Gupta was an Assistant Electrical Foreman in North Eastern Railway.
His services were terminated under R. 148.
His writ petition and Letters Patent Appeal challenging termination of his services having been rejected by Allahabad High Court, he came to this Court by special leave.
Tirath Ram Lakhanpal was a Guard employed by the Northen Railway.
His services were terminated under R. 148.
His writ petition and Letters Patent Appeal were dismissed by Punjab High Court and he came to this court by special leave.
S.B. Tewari, Parimal Gupta and Prem Chand Thakur employed in the.
North Eastern Frontier Railway.
Their service were terminated under R. 149.
Their writ petitions challenging termination of their services were accepted by the Assam High Court and Union of India came to this Court after getting a certificate of fitness from the Assam High Court.
The only question involved was the constitutional validity or otherwise of Rules 148(3) and 149(3) of the Indian Railway Establishment Code on the ground that they violated articles 14 and 311(2) of Constitution of India.
Held: By majority by Gajendragadkar, Wanchoo, Hidaya tullah, Ayyangar, Subba Rao and Das Gupta JJ.(Shah J. dissenting) 684 that Rules 148(3) and 149(3) of Indian Railway Establishment Code were invalid.
Per Gajendragadkar, Wanchoo, Hidayatullah and Ayyangar, jj.
Rules 148(3) and 149(3) are invalid inasmuch as they are inconsistent with the provisions of articles 311(2).
The termination of the services of a permanent servant which is authorised by those rules, is no more and no less than his removal from service and hence article 311(2) must come into play in respect of such cases.
The rule which does not require compliance with the procedure prescribed under article 311(2) must be struck down as invalid.
A person who substantively holds a permanent post has a right to continue in service, subject to the rules of superannuation and compulsory retirement.
If for any other reason that right is invaded and he is asked to leave his service, the termination of his service must inevitably mean the defeat of his right to continue in service and as such it is in the nature of a penalty and amounts to removal.
In other words, termination of the services of a permanent servant otherwise than on ground of superannuation or compulsory retirement, must per se amount to his removal and if by R. 148(3) or R. 149(3), such a termination is brought about, the rule clearly contravenes article 311(2) and must be held to be invalid.
Rules 148(3) and 149(3) contravene article 14 of the Constitu tion.
It is difficult to understand on what ground employment by the Railways alone can be said to constitute a class by itself for the purposes of framing the impugned rules.
If considerations of administrative efficiency or exigencies of service justify the making of such a rule, such rules should have been framed in other departments also.
The pleasure of the President has lost some of its majesty and power as it is controlled by the provisions of article 311.
Rules of superannuation are based on considerations of life expectation, mental capacity of civil servants having regard to climatic conditions under which they work and the nature of the work they do.
They are not fixed on any ad hoc basis and do not involve the exercise of any discretion.
They apply uniformly to all public servants falling under the category in respect of which they are framed.
There can be no analogy between the rule of superannuation and rules 148(3) and 149(3) of the Code.
If any rule permits the appropriate authority to retire compulsorily a civil servant without imposing a limitation in that behalf that such civil servant should have put in a minimum period of service, that rule would be invalid and the so called retirement ordered under the said rule would amount to removal of the civil servant within the meaning of article 311(2).
685 Where a rule is alleged to violate the constitutional guarantee afforded by article 311(2), the argument of contract between the parties and its binding character is wholly inappropriate.
Per Subba Rao, J. Rules 148(3) and 149(3) which confer a power on the appointing authority to remove a permanent servant on notice, infringe the constitutional protection guaranteed a Government servant under articles 14 and 311 of the Constitution A permanent post and rules such as 148(3) and 149(3) cannot stand together and the latter must inevitably yield to the former.
It is neither the phraseology nor the nomenclature given to the act of termination of service that is material but the legal effect of the action taken that is decisive in considering the question whether a Government servant is dismissed or not.
Whether the services of a permanent Government servant are terminated by giving him 15 day 's notice or whether his services are dispensed with before the age of superannuation by way of compulsory retirement under or outside a rule of compulsory retirement, the termination deprives him of his title to the permanent post.
If in the former case it amounts to dismissal,in the latter case,it must be equally so.
In both cases, article 311(2) is attracted.
Compulsory retirement before age of superannuation is not an incident of tenure.
It does not work automatically.
It is not conceived in the interest of the employee.
It is a mode of terminating his employment at the discretion of the appointing authority.
As a matter of fact, whatever the language used in that connection, it is a punishment imposed on him.
It not only destroys his title but also inevitably carries with it a stigma and hence such a termination is dismissal or removal within the meaning of article 311.
A title to an office must be distinguished from the mode of its termination.
If a person has title to an office, he will continued to have it till he is dismissed or removed from there.
Terms of statutory rules may provide for conferment of a title to an office and also for the mode of protecting it.
If under such rules, a person acquires title to an office, whatever mode of termination is prescribed and whatever phraseology is used to describe it, the termination is neither more nor less than a dismissal or removal from service and that inevitably attracts the provisions of article 311 of the Constitution.
The argument that the mode of termination prescribed derogates from the title that otherwise would have been conferred on the employee mixes up two clear concepts of conferment of title and the mode of its deprivation.
Article 311 is a constitutional protection given to Government servants, who have title to office against their arbitrary and summary dismissal.
Government cannot by rule evade the provisions of article 311.
Parties also cannot contract themselves out of the constitutional provision Per Das Gupta, J. Rule 148(3) does not contravene Art 311(2).
A railway servant to whom R. 148(3) applied has two 686 limitations put on his right to continue in service, viz., termination on attaining a certain age and termination of service on a notice under R. 148(3).
Where service is terminated by order of retirement under R. 2046, the termination is of a service where the servant has no right to continue and it is not removal or dismissal.
Likewise when service is terminated by notice under R. 148(3) that termination is not removal or dismissal.
The words 'removal ' and 'dismissal ' in article 311 mean and include only those terminations of service where a servant has acquired a right to continue in the post on the basis of terms and conditions of service and such other terminations where though there is no such right, the order has resulted in loss of accrued benefits.
Terminations of service which do not satisfy either of these two tests do not come within any of these words.
Both articles 309 and 310 are subject to article 311.
If any rule is made under article 309 as regards conditions of service of a Government servant in the matter of his dismissal or removal or reduction in rank, it has to comply with the requirements of article 31 1.
Before an order dismissing or removing or reducing a Government servant in rank is made by President or Governor in exercise of his pleasure, President or Governor has to comply with the requirements of 311(2).
Under Art 310, all servants of the State hold office during the pleasure of the President or Governor as the case may be.
That means that the officer has no right to be heard before his services are terminated.
Article 311 provides an exception in the case of removal or dismissal.
However, R. 148(3) contravenes article 14 as it does not give any guidance for exercise of discretion by the authority concerned and hence is invalid.
Per Shah, J.Rules 148(3) and 149(3) do not infringe Art.311(2) or article 14of the Constitution.
There is neither logic nor law in support of the contention that r. 148(3) contravenes article 311(2).
The termination of employment under r. 148(3)does not involve the public servant concerned in loss of any right which he has already acquired.
It does not amount to loss of a post to which he is entitled under the terms of his employment because the right to a post is necessarily circumscribed by the conditions of employment which include r. 148(3).
It also does not cast any stigma upon him.
Mere determination of employment, of a public servant, whether he is a temporary employee, a probationer, a contractual appointee or appointed substantively to hold a permanent post, will not attract the provisions of article 311(2) unless the determination is imposed as a matter of punishment.
A railway servant who has accepted employment on the conditions contained in the rules, cannot after having obtained employment, claim that the conditions which were offered to him and which he accepted, are not binding upon him.
The sole exception to that rule is in cases where the 687 condition prescribed by contract or statutory regulations is void as inconsistent with the constitutional safeguard.
This exception is founded not on any right in the public servant to elect, but on t invalidity of the covenant or regulation.
There is no distinction between cases of termination of employment resulting from attaining the age of superannuation or from orders of compulsory retirement terminating temporary employment or employment on probation and orders terminating employment after notice under R. 148(3) An appointment to a public post is always subject to th pleasure of the President, the exercise of such pleasure being restricted in the manner provided by the Constitution.
A person appointed substantively to a post does not acquire a right t hold the post till he dies.
He acquires merely a right t hold the post subject to the rules.
If employment is validly terminated, the right to hold the post is determined even apart from th exercise of the pleasure of the President or the Governor.
public servant cannot claim to remain in office so long as he is of good behavior.
Such a concept of the tenure of a public servant 's post is inconsistent with articles 309 and 310 of the Constitution.
Rules 148(3) and 149(3) do not infringe article 14 of the Constitution.
article 14 forbids class legislation but it does not forbid reasonable classification for the purpose of legislation.
special conditions in which the railways have to operate and t interests of the nation which they serve, justify the classification If for the purpose of ensuring the interests and safety of the public and the State, the President has reserved to the Railway Administration power to terminate employment under the Railways, it cannot be assumed that such vesting of authority singles out the railway servants for a special or discriminatory treatment so as to expose the rule which authorises termination of employment to the liability to be struck off as infringing article 14.
It is true that R. 148(3) does not expressly provide for guidance to the authority exercising the power conferred by it, but on that account, the rule cannot be said to confer an arbitrary power and be unreasonable or be in its operation unequal.
The power exercisable by the appointing authority who normally is if not the General Manager, a Senior Officer of the Railways.
In considering the validity of an order of determination of employment under r. 148, an assumption that the power may be exercised mala fide and on that ground discrimination may be practiced, is wholly out of place.
Because of the absence of specific directions in R. 148, governing the exercise of authority conferred the by the power to terminate employment cannot be regarded as an arbitrary power exercisable at the sweet will of the authority when having regard to the nature of the employment and the service to be rendered, importance of the efficient functioning of the rail transport in the interest of national economy and the 688 status of the authority invested with the exercise of power, it may reasonably be assumed that the exercise of the power would appropriately be exercised for the protection of public interest or on grounds of administrative convenience.
Power to exercise discretion is not necessarily to be assumed to be a power to discriminate unlawfully and possibility of abuse of power will not invalidate the conferment of power.
Case law referred to.
