The appellant in a suit against respondents claimed recovery of possession of the properties in Schedules 1, 2 and 3 as the sole heir of her mother.
She claimed these properties exclusively, under section 12(1) (i) of the Mysore Hindu Law Women 's Rights Act, 1933.
On challenge to her title by respondents she relied on a sale deed created in favour of her mother for a consideration of Rs. 28,000.
Respondents ,set up title in respect of the suit properties in the appellant 's father alleging that her father had executed a will under which respondent I had been appointed an executor and as such, he got possession of the properties and handed them over to Respondent 2, as directed under the will.
Alternatively, they urged that even if the property belonged to the appellant 's mother, she would not be entitled to claim exclusive title to it, because by succession it would devolve upon the appellant and her brothers; and her failure.
to join her brothers made the suit incompetent for non joinder of necessary parties.
The trial court dismissed the suit.
On appeal, the High Court confirmed the decree of the trial court, but held that the main property in Schedule 1 did not belong to the appellant 's mother, but to her father and the sale deed in respect of the property was taken by her father in the name of her mother benami.
On appeal by special leave, the appellant mainly contended that the property in question would fall under section 10(2)(b) :of the Act, and not under section 10(2)(d) as respondents had contended and therefore, she would be exclusively entitled to it and the plea of ,non joinder of her brothers would fail.
Held: (Per, P. B. Gajendragadkar, K. Subba Rao, K. N. Wanchoo and N. Rajagopala Ayyangar JJ.).
It would be straining the language of section 10(2)(b) of the Act to hold that the property purchased in the name of the wife with the money gifted to her by her husband should 'be taken to amount to a property gifted under section 10(2)(b).
The re quirement of section 10(2)(b) is that the property which is the subject matter of devolution must itself be a gift from the husband to the wife.
In deciding under which class of properties specified by cls.
(b) and (d) of section 10(2) the present property falls, it would not be possible to entertain the argument that the gift of the money and the purchase of the property must be treated as one transaction and held on that basis that the property itself has been gifted by the husband to his wife.
134 159 S.C. 1.
2 The gift that is contemplated by section 10(2)(b) must be a gift of the very property in specie made by the husband or other relations therein mentioned.
The trial court therefore, was right in holding that even if the property belonged to the appellant 's mother, her failure to implied her brothers who would inherit the property alongwith her made the suit incompetent.
In the present case, the estate could be represented only when all the three heirs were before the court.
When the appellant persisted in proceeding with the suit on the basis that she was exclusively entitled to the suit property she took the risk and it was now too late to allow her to amend the plaint by adding her brothers at this late stage.
Naba Kumar Hazra vs Radheshyam Mahish, A.I.R. 1931 P.C., 225 followed.
Per Mudholkar J. (dissenting) Upon the pleadings there is no, scope for spliting up the transaction into two parts, ie., a gift of the money by the father to the mother in the first instance and the purchase by the mother of that property subsequently with that money.
It was not even an alternative contention of the respondents that the transaction was in two parts and that what the father gifted was the money and not the property.
It would be indeed an artificial way of looking at the transaction, as was done by the trial court, as being constituted of two parts.
Thus the transaction was one indivisible whole and that is, the father provided the money for acquiring the property in the mother 's name.
Therefore, in effect it was the father who purchased the property with the intention of conferring the beneficial interest solely upon the mother.
Such a transaction must therefore amount to a gift.
In that view the property would not fall under cl.
(d) of section 10 of the Act but under cl.
(b) of that section.
Therefore, the appellant would be the sole heir of her mother and the non joinder of her brothers would not defeat the suit so far as she is concerned.
