An Industrial Dispute arose between the appellant and its workmen in respect of the claim made by the workmen (respondents) for bonus for the year 1959.
The respondents claimed that they were entitled to get bonus equivalent to three months ' salary including dearness allowance, The appellant claimed deductions on the basis of the Full Bench 16 Formula.
The appellant claimed deduction of Rs. 60,000 by way of notional remuneration for Mr. K. R. Podar, one of the Directors of the company.
According to the appellant K. R. Podar devoted the whole of his time to the supervision and management of the appellant concern, and so, he was entitled to charge remuneration at the rate of Rs. 5,000 a month.
The appellant also made a claim for rehabilitation.
On these facts the Tribunal directed the appellant to pay to the respondents bonus at the rate of half month 's basic wages excluding allowances and overtime for the said year.
It is against this award that the appellant has come to this Court.
Held:(i) that in a concern like the appellant 's if one of the Directors spends his time in supervising and managing the affairs of the concern, he would be entitled to charge a reasonable remuneration.
But in the present case Mr. Podar did not actually charge any remuneration.
The working of the Full Bench Formula is no doubt notional in some respects, but it would not be permissible for the employer to make it still more notional by introducing claims for prior charges on purely hypothetical and almost fictional basis.
The Tribunal did not feel justified in allowing the claim for deduction made by the appellant in regard to the notional remuneration of Mr. Podar on the ground that Mr. Podar had not been paid remuneration regularly and it had not been duly shown in the books of account.
Gujarat Engineering Co. vs Ahmedabad Misc.
Industrial Workers ' Union, and Kodaneri Estate vs Its Work men, , relied on.
(ii)It is not the correct legal position that a second hand machinery should be rehabilitated only by second hand machinery.
But in the present case the finding of the Tribunal in respect of the claim for rehabilitation is based on its appreciation of the evidence led by the appellant and that cannot be disturbed having regard to the material which is available on the record.
SouthIndia Millowners"Association vs Coimbatore District Textile Workers 'Union, , relied on.
(iii)It would be erroneous to assume that this Court approved of or affirmedthe ad hoc basis adopted by the Tribunal in the case of South India Millowners ' Association.
(iv)It would be unreasonable to suggest that if the employer does not adduce sufficient evidence to justify his claim for rehabilitation and the Tribunal is inclined to reject the evidence which has been adduced, the Tribunal must nevertheless award some rehabilitation on a purely hypothetical and imaginary ad hoc basis.
In the present case the employer adduced evidence for rehabilitation and that was rejected by the Tribunal.
(v)It has been consistently held by this Court that in bonus calculations the employer is entitled to claim a deduction of the Income tax as well as wealth tax; but in the present case, there is, no material 17 to determine what the amount of wealth tax charged or paid is, and so, no relief can be granted to the appellant on that account.
