The appellant was elected to the House of the People from a constituency in the State of Madhya Pradesh.
The respondents were the ,other contesting candidates.
Respondent No. 1 filed an election petition challenging the election of the appellant.
That election petition was dismissed by the Election Tribunal.
Against the order of the TribunaL the first respondent preferred an appeal to the High Court under section 116 A 134 159 S.C. 9.
130 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
Admittedly, the appeal was filed more than 30 days after the order of the Election Tribunal.
If the time requisite for obtaining a copy of the order of the Tribunal was excluded, the appeal was filed within 30 days.
However, if that was not 'done, the appeal was out of time.
The contention of the appellant before the High Court was that the respondent No. 1 was not entitled in law to exclude the time taken by him in obtaining the copy of the order of the Tribunal.
That contention was rejected by the High Court.
The High Court also found that the appellant was guilty of two, corrupt practices and hence his election was set aside.
The appellant came to this Court by special leave.
The only question raised before this Court was whether for 'the purpose of computing the period of 30 days prescribed under section 116 A(3) of the Act, the provisions of section 12 of the Limitation Act could be invoked or not.
Dismissing the appeal, Held: (per B. P. Sinha, C.J., K. Subba Rao, Raghubar Dayal and N. Rajagopala Ayyangar JJ.) (i) The exclusion of time provided for by section 12 is permissible in computing the period of limitation for filing.the appeal in the High Court.
Per B. P. Sinha, C.J., K. Subba Rao and N. Rajagopala Ayyangar JJ.) (ii) Though the right of appeal is conferred by section 116 A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, and it is by virtue thereof that the appeal was filed by respondent in the High Court, it is still an appeal " under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, to the High Court".
To attract article 156 of the First Schedule to the Limitation Act, it is not necessary for an appeal to be an "appeal under the Code of Civil Procedure" that the right to prefer the appeal should be conferred by the Code of Civil Procedure.
It is sufficient if the procedure for the filing of the appeal and the power of the Court for dealing with the appeal, when filed, are governed by the Code.
Per Raghubar Dayal and Mudholkar JJ.
There is no warrant for holding that an appeal which is not given by the Code of Civil Procedure is still an appeal under the Code merely because its procedural provisions govern its course.
Where a right of appeal is given by some other law, the appeal must be regarded as one udder that law and not under the Code of Civil Procedure.
There is no reason for construing the words "under the Code of Civil Procedure" as meaning "governed in the matter of procedure by the Code of Civil Procedure".
Held:(iii) (per B. P. Sinha, C.J., N. Rajagopala Ayyangar and Raghubar Dayal JJ.) The entire sub section
(2) of section 29 of the Limitation.
Act has to be read as an integrated provision and the conjunction "and" connects the two parts and makes it necessary for attracting cl.
(a) that the conditions laid down by the opening words of sub section
(2) should be satisfied.
131 Per Subba Rao and Mudholkar JJ.
The second limb of sub section
(2) of section 29 is wide enough to include a suit, appeal or an application under a special or local law which is of a type for which no period of limitation is prescribed in the First Schedule.
Per Subba Rao J.
The use of the word "any" clearly shows that the second part of sub section
(2) of section 29 does not depend on the first part or vice versa.
The second part of sub section
(2) is an independent provision providing for that category of proceedings to which the first part does not apply.
Held: (i) that section 116 A does not provide an exhaustive and exclusive code of limitation for the purpose of appeals against orders of Tribunals and also does not exclude the general provisions of the Limitation Act.
Section 29(2)(a) of the Limitation Act speaks of express exclusion and there is no express exclusion in section 116 A(3) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
Moreover, the proviso to section 116 A(3) from which an implied exclusion is sought to be drawn does not lead to any such necessary implication.
The proviso only restores the power denied to the Court under section 29(2)(b) of the Limitation Act.
If this proviso had not been there, section 29(2)(b) would have excluded the operation of section 5 of the Limitation Act with the result that even if a sufficient cause for the delay existed, the High Court would have been helpless to excuse the delay.
(ii)S. 12(2) of the Limitation Act applies to an appeal to the High Court against the order of the Tribunal.
An order made under section 98 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, if it contains also the reasons for it, is a composite document satisfying the definition of a judgment as well as that of an order and thereby attracting the relevant provisions of section 12 of the Limitation Act.
Section 12(2) does not say that the order mentioned therein shall be only such order as is defined in the Civil Procedure Code.
If a statute provides for the making of an order and confers a right of appeal to an aggrieved party against that order within a prescribed time, the time requisite for obtaining a copy of the order can be excluded.
The Act of 1951 empowers the Tribunal to make an order and gives a right of appeal against that order to the High Court and therefore section 12(2) is directly attracted without any recourse to the definition of an order in the Code of Civil Procedure.
Per Mudholkar J.
The first limb of section 29(2) is concerned only with the proceedings under special or local law for which a period of limitation is prescribed in the First Schedule to the Limitation Act.
If for such a proceeding the period to be found in the First Schedule is different from that prescribed under a special or local law, certain consequences will follow under the provision.
No inconvenience is to be caused by giving a literal and natural interpretation to the expression used by the legislature in the first portion of sub section
(2) of section 29 because cases of other kind can easily come under the second portion thereof.
Case Law referred to. 132
