On a dispute with regard to the entitlement to the compensation awarded to the appellants in respect of certain land acquired by the State, the Land Acquisition Officer made a reference to the court for the apportionment of the compensation amount among the various claimants.
Six of the appellants did not accept the award of the Land Acquisition Officer and made applications to him for referring the matter, for determination by the court.
No reference was made by him in pursuance of these applications.
When the matter came up before the Court it proceeded on the footing that the reference made to it was not merely limited to the apportionment of compensation but also with respect to the amount of compensation.
No objection was raised by the State before the Subordinate Judge that in the absence of any reference upon the applications of six of the appellants the Court was incompetent to deal with that matter.
When the matter went up in appeal before the High Court, the Government Pleader raised the question that in the absence of a reference on the question of quantum of compensation, the Court had no jurisdiction to consider that matter at all.
The High Court, allowed this plea to be raised before it but ultimately negatived it.
and it also modified the finding of the Court as to the amount of compensation.
The appellants contended before the High Court that by reason of thefailure of the State to raise the plea before the Subordinate Judge asto the absence of a reference the State must be deemed to have waivedthe point.
The High Court accepted this 'argument upon the view thatthis was not a case of inherent lack of jurisdiction and that the defectin the procedure was such as could be waived.
Held:(i) On consideration of the relevant provisions contained in P 18 of the land Acquisition Act, the jurisdiction of the court arises solely on the basis of a reference made to it.
Wherever jurisdiction is given by a statute and such jurisdiction is only given upon certain specified terms contained therein, it is a universal principle that those terms should be complied with, in order to create and raise the jurisdiction, and if they are not complied with the jurisdiction does not arise.
Therefore, it was a case of lack of inherent jurisdiction and the failure of the State to object to the proceedings before the Court on the ground of an absence of 295 reference in so far as the determination of compensation was concerned cannot amount to waiver or acquiescence.
Indeed, when there is an absence of inherent jurisdiction, the defect cannot be waived nor can be cured by acquisition.
(ii)The court had no jurisdiction to determine the amount of compensation and thus go behind the order of the Land Acquisition Officer.
Nusserwanjee Pestonjee and others vs Meer Mynoodeen Khan Wullud Meer Subroodeen Khan Bahadur, 6 M.L.A. 134, Alderson vs Paliser and another, and Seth Badri Prasad and others vs Seth Nagarmal and others,[1959] Supp.
(1) S.C.R. 769, relied on.
Venkata Krishnayya Garu vs Secretary of State, A.I.R. 1939 (P.C. distinguished.
