The appellant had issued notice to the respondents under section 34(1)( of the Income Tax Act, 1922 in respect of an escaped income of Rs. 47,595 for the assessment year 1944 45.
The case of the respondents was that the impugned notice was bad because the Income Tax Officer proceeded against the respondents without obtaining the necessary sanction of the Central Board of Revenue as required by cl.
(iii) of the proviso to section 34(1) of the Act.
The respondents filed a writ petition in the High Court challenging the notice issued under section 34(1) of the article The respondents succeeded before the High Court.
438 Held: (i) The sanction under cl.
(iii) of the proviso to section 34(1) is, however, necessary only where the notice in question is issued under cl.
(ii) of the proviso.
That is evidently what the legislature meant when it said "in any case failing under cl.
(ii)".
The words "in any case" used in cl.
(iii) only mean a case in which notice can be issued under cl.
Such a notice can be issued only when the escaped income is of one lakh of rupees and over.
Clause (iii) requires such sanction where the notice is issued under cl.
(ii) and when on a construction of cl.
(ii), no notice can be issued with respect to a class of escaped assessments, there can possibly be no requirement of the sanction of the Central Board of Revenue.
If a notice is issued by virtue of some other provision sub as the second proviso to sub section
(3) of section 34, it would be a notice "in any other case" referred to in cl.
(iii) of the proviso to sub section (1) of section 34 and in such a case the sanction which is required is only that of the Commissioner.
Such a sanction was obtained in this case and therefore, the notice cannot be said to be bad because the sanction of the Central Board of Revenue had not been obtained.
In the present case the income which has escaped assessment is below one lakh of rupees and more than eight years have elapsed since the assessment year in respect of which the income is alleged to have escaped assessment.
Clearly, therefore, no notice could issue under cl.
(ii) The High Court erred in holding that the provisions of the second proviso to section 34(3) would not apply to a case where the escaped assessment is of an amount less than a lakh of rupees and more than eight years have elapsed.
Apparently, the High Court has overlooked the fact that the second proviso to sub section
(3) of section 34 was amended first by Act 25 of 1953 and then by Act.
18 of 1956.
The amendment of 1956 would govern the whole of section 34(1) and would consequently include even an escaped assessment with respect to which limitation is provided in cl.
(ii) of the first proviso to section 34(1).
The result would be the same even if the case fell to be governed by the Amending Act of 1953, though not by that of the Amending Act of 1956.
