in disputes regarding extra fees in respect of meet stalls in a private market owned by the appellants, the respondents stall holders filed a suit alleging that the relationship between them and the appellants was that of lessees and lessors; while according to the appellants, the respondents 643 were only their licensees.
The stall holders have been executing agreements, signed by the stall holders alone, in which the payment is styled as rent.
Though the building in which the market is located is owned by the appellants it could not be used as a market for the sale of meat or comestibles without the permission of the municipal council, and a number of duties have been imposed upon the owners including that of closing the market and that market functioned only within 'he stated hours.
The City Civil Court Judge finding that the respondents were bare licensees dismissed their suit.
His decision was affirmed in appeal.
On a further appeal the High Court reversed the findings of the Courts below holding that from the general tenor of the document the terms created only a tenancy in respect of the stalls and not a mere licence or permissive occupation saying that if the occupation of the stall holders was only permissive the condition as to the payment of rent, eviction for default in payment of rent for more than 3 days, the provision for annual repairs being carried out by the landlord, the further provision that repairs that might be occasioned by the carelessness of the respondents should be carried out at their expense and the adequate provision for 30 days notice for vacating the stalls if they were required by the landlord would all seem to be inconsistent and irrelevant.
On appeal by special leave: Held: (i) While it is true that the essence of a licence is that it is revocable at the will of the grantor the provision in the licence that the licensee would be entitled to a notice before being required to vacate is not inconsistent with a licence, and the mere necessity of giving such a notice would not indicate that the transaction was a lease.
Whether an agreement creates between the parties the relationship of landlord and tenant or merely that of licensor and licensee the decisive consideration is the intention of the parties, which has to be ascertained on a consideration of all the relevant provisions in the agreement.
In the absence, however, of a formal document the intention of the parties must be inferred from the circumstances and conduct of the parties.
(ii)The fact that a person has exclusive possession is not conclusive evidenceof his being a lessee.
If, however, exclusive possession to which a personis entitled under an agreement with a landlord is coupled with an interest in the property, the agreement would be construed not as a mere licence but as a lease.
Associated Hotels of India Ltd. vs R. N. Kapur, ; , Errington vs Errington and Woods, [1952] 1 K. B. 290, Cobb.
vs Lane, , Clove vs Theatrical Proprietors Ltd. and Westby & Co. Ltd. Smith & Son vs The Assessment Committee for the Parish of Lambeth, and vutrum Subba Rao vs The Eluru Municipal Council, I.L.R. [1956] A.P. 515, referred to.
(iii) In view of the duties cast upon the landlord and the circumstances of the present case the intention of the parties was to bring into existence merely a licence and not a lease and the word 'rent ' was used loosely for 'fee '.
