The appellant carries on the business of carriage of goods and passengers by sea and owns a fleet of ships for that purpose.
One of its ships named Eastern Saga arrived at Calcutta and was rummaged by the Calcutta Customs Officers.
In the sailors ' accommodation, a hole measuring 2 1/2 x 5 1/2 was found in the wall panelling behind the back batton of a wooden seat which had been screwed to the wall.
The hole was covered with a piece of wood and over painted.
The hole opened into a space and in that space, Customs Officers found 1,458 bars of gold valued at more than Rs. 23 lacs.
Notices were duly served and after hearing the parties, the Additional Collector of Customs came to the conclusion that the vessel had rendered itself liable to confiscation under section 167(12A) because it had infringed the provisions of section 52A.
He ordered the confiscation of the ship but gave the owners thereof an option to pay a fine of Rs. 25 lacs in lieu of confiscation.
The appellant went in appeal to the Central Board of Revenue but that appeal was rejected.
The appellant went in revision to the Central Government but the revision petition was also dismissed. 'Me appellant then came to this Court for special leave and obtained the same.
Dismissing the appeal Held: (i) The Customs authorities.
were right in holding that the facts proved in the case showed that the "Eastern Saga" nor contravened the provisions of section 52A when it entered the port of Calcutta and hence had incurred the liability prescribed by section 167(12.A) of the Sea Customs Act.
(ii) The fine of Rs. 25 lacs was not excessive.
Illegal importation of gold had assumed the proportions of a major problem facing the country and it was open to the Customs authorities to take the view that the best way to check smuggling was to impose deterrent fines whenever those offences were discovered and proved.
(iii) Section 52A was not ultra vires articles 14, 19 and 31(1) and hence was not unconstitutional or invalid.
The appellant was not only 595 a company but also a foreign company and as such was not entitled to claim the benefits of article 19.
The plea under article 31(1) as well as under section 14 could not be sustained for the simple reason that in supporting the said two pleas, the appellant had inevitably to fall back upon the fundamental right guaranteed by article 19(1)(f).
Before an appeal can be entertained under article 136, two conditions have to be satisfied.
The order impugned must be an order of a judicial or quasi judicial character and should not be purely an administrative or executive order.
The said order should have been passed either by a Court or Tribunal in the territory of India.
It is difficult to lay down any definite test to determine whether a body is a court/tribunal or not.
Sometimes, courts enquire whether that body or authority is clothed with the trappings of a court, whether it can compel witnesses to appear before it and administer oath to them, whether it was required to follow certain rules of procedure, whether it was bound to comply with the rules of natural justice whether it was expected to deal the matters before it fairly, justly and on merits and not be subjective considerations and whether it was required to adopt or quasi judicial approach.
If all or some of the important tests are satisfied the proceedings can be characterised as judicial proceedings and the test of "trappings" is satisfied.
Likewise, if it appears that such a body or authority has been constituted by the legislature and on it has been conferred the inherent judicial power of the State, that is significant, if not a decisive indication, that the said body or authority is a Tribunal.
The scheme of the , the nature of the proceeding brought before the appellate and revisional authorities, the extent of the claim involved, the nature of the penalties imposed and the kind of enquiry which the Act contemplates, all indicate that both the Central Board of Revenue and the Central Government, while acting as appellate or revisional authorities, constitute Tribunals under article 136 of the Constitution because they are invested with the judicial power of the State and are required to act judicially.
In order to prove the offence of section 52A against a vessel, what is to be moved is that there has been a construction, adaptation, alteration of fitting and the said construction, adaptation, alteration or fitting had been made for the purpose of concealing goods.
The section prohibits absolutely the entry of vessels which show that there has been construction, adaptation, alteration or fitting made in them for the purpose of concealing goods in them.
It is not necessary for the purpose of section 52A to prove mens rea against the person responsible for the contravention of section 52A.
It is impossible to prove such mens rea or guilty mind.
The knowledge of the owners or even of the masters is entirely irrelevant.
Section 167(12A) and section 183 have to be read together.
Though confiscation is a statutory corollary of the contravention of section 52A, section 183 expressly requires the adjudicating officer to give an option to the owners of the offending vessel to pay fine in lieu of confiscation.
Confiscation is 596 no doubt authorised and required by section 167 (12A) but the statutory obligation makes it necessary for the officer to give an option to the owner.
The result is that the ultimate penalty which can be imposed on the owners falls to be determined by the adjudicating officer in his discretion.
Shewpujanrai Indrasanrai Ltd. vs Collector of Customs ; , F. N. Roy vs Collector of Customs, Calcutta, ; , Leo Roy Frey vs Superintendent, District Jail, mritsar and Anr.
; , , Thomas Dana vs State of Punjab, [1959] Supp.
(4) S.C.R. 274, Maqbool Hussain vs State of Bombay, ; , Harinagar Sugar Mills Ltd. vs Shyam Sundar Jhunjhunwala and Ors., ; , Shivji Nathubhai vs Union of India, ; , Jaswant Sugar Mills Ltd., Meerut vs Lakshmi Chand, [1963] Supp.
1 S.C.R. 242, Engineering Mazdoor Sabha vs Hind Cycles Ltd. [1963] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 625, Ravula Hariprasada Rao vs The State, ; , Brend vs Wood, and Sherras vs De Rutzen, (1895) 9.
referred to.
