The respondent was tried for the commission of an offence under section 7 read with section 16(1)(a)(i) of the for selling adulterated ghee.
The analysis of the ghee had disclosed that it had a Reichert Value of only 22 5 whereas the minimum Reichert value fixed for Uttar Pradesh, where the respondent sold the ghee, was 28.
The defence of the respondent was that he had obtained the ghee which he sold from Jodhpur where the Reichert value fixed was only 22 and that the sample must be held not to be adulterated on the basis of the decision of the Allahabad High Court in State vs Malik Ram, A.1,R. 1962 All.
This decision laid down that a distinction should be made between ghee obtained from cattle in the hill districts and ghee obtained from cattle in the plains and that ghee obtained from the hill districts of U.P. cannot be held to be adulterated if its Reichert value was equal to that prescribed for Himachal Pradesh which is a hilly area.
It was the contention of the respondent that his ghee was admittedly pahadi ghee and therefore this decision would apply.
The First Class Magistrate rejected these contentions and convicted him and sentenced him to six months ' R.I. and a fine of Rs. 500.
On appeal the Sessions Judge concurred in the findings of the trial court but reduced the sentence.
The respondent thereupon filed a Criminal Revision Petition before the High Court.
The High Court agreed with the courts below that the ghee was not Jodhpur ghee but it was produced locally.
But it held that the Reichert values as fixed were not based on any reasonable classification and therefore it was sufficient if a vendor satisfied the minimum standard prescribed for any area in the country and since the minimum prescribed for certain areas is 21 and since the ghee in question had 22 2 the respondent was not guilty of the offence charged.
The State thereupon appealed to this Court by way of a certificate under article 134(1)(e) of the Constitution.
It was urged by the appellant that the High Court was wrong in striking down or re drafting the rules framed by the Central Government in the manner in which the High Court has done purporting to invoke 680 article 14 of the Constitution and virtually setting up what the High Court considered was the reasonable standard.
Held: (i) Where the Government have prescribed certain standards after taking into considerations various factors the court cannot strike down these standards as unreasonable or discriminatory merely on some priori reasoning.
It can do so only by basing its decision on materials placed before it by way of scientific analysis.
The party invoking article 14 must make averments with details to sustain such a plea and lead evidence to establish his allegations.
In the absence of such plea and evidence the court cannot accept the statement of a party as to the unconstitutionality of a rule and refuse to enforce that rule as it stands merely because in its view the standards are too high and for this reason the rule is unreasonable.
(ii) Applying these principles it is found that the case State vs Malik Ram (A.I.R. 1962 All. 156) was wrongly decided by the Allahabad High Court.
In the case under appeal the High Court took the matter a step further and adopted the lowest Reichert value prescribed for any area in the country as what should be adopted for every other area in the country disregarding the rules.
Hence the High Court was wrong in allowing the revisions.
