The appellant, carrying on business as a manufacturer of jute goods with its factory at Guntur, used to send jute bags by railway to the cement factories of the A.C.C. outside the State of Andhra.
For securing a regular supply of jute bags, the A.C.C. entered into a contract with the appellant and under the despatch instructions from that company, the appellant loaded the goods in the railway wagons, obtained railway receipts in the name of the A.C.C. as consignee and against payment of the price, delivered the receipts to the Krishna Cement Works, Tadepalli, which was for the purpose of receiving the railway receipt and making payment, the agent of the A.C.C. From the amounts shown as gross turnover in the return for the assessment year 1954 55, the appellant claimed reduction of certain amounts in respect of the goods supplied by rail to the A.C.C. outside the State of Andhra Pradesh under its despatch instructions.
The Commercial Tax Officer and the Deputy Commissioner of Commercial Taxes disallowed the claim and held that as the railway receipts were delivered to the agent of the buyer within the State of Andhra, and price was also realized from the agent of the buyer within the State, goods must be deemed to have been delivered to the buyer in the State of Andhra Pradesh, and the appellant was liable to pay tax on the sales.
On appeal, this order was reversed by the Appellate Tribunal.
In revision the High Court restored the order of the Deputy Commissioner of Commercial Taxes.
The question for determination in this appeal was whether the sales to the A.C.C. by the appellant may be regarded as "non Explanation sales", i.e. falling outside the Explanation to article 286(1).
Held:(i) If the goods were delivered pursuant to the contracts of sale outside the State of Andhra for the purpose of consumption in the State into which the goods were delivered, the State of Andhra could have no right to tax those sales by virtue of the restriction imposed by article 286(1)(a) read with Explanation.
To attract the Explanation, the goods had to be actually delivered as a direct result of the sale, for the purpose of consumption in the State in which they were delivered.
The expression "actually delivered ' in the context in which it occurs, can only mean physical delivery of 692 the goods, or such action as puts the goods in the possession of the purchaser; it does not contemplate mere symbolical or notional delivery.
C.Govindarajulu Naidu & Co. vs State of Madras, A.I.R. 1953 Mad.
116, M/s. Capco Ltd. vs Sales Tax Officer, A.I.R. 1960 All.
62 and Khaitan Minerals vs Sales Tax Appellate Tribunal for Mysore, A.I.R. followed.
Poppat Lal Shah vs State of Madras, ; , Tata Iron & Steel Co. Ltd. vs State of Bihar, ; , Tobacco Manufacturers(India) Ltd. vs Commissioner of Sales Tax, Bihar, [1961] 2 S.C.R.106, Indian Copper Corporation Ltd. vs State of Bihar, [1961] 2 S.C.R.276 and State of Kerala vs Cochin Coal Co. Ltd., [1961] 2 S.C.R. 219, referred to.
(ii)Section 39 of the Indian will not make mere delivery of the railway receipts representing title to the goods, actual delivery of goods for the purpose of article 286.
The rule contained is section 39(1) has no application in dealing with a constitutional provision which while imposing a restriction upon the legislative power of the States entrusts exclusive power to levy sales tax to the State in which the goods, have been actually delivered for the purpose of consumption.
