The appellant was declared elected to the House of the People from a parliamentary constituency.
The respondent No. 1 challenged the election of the appellant on the ground that the appellant, his election and other agents committed many corrupt practices falling within section 123 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
The main grievance of respondent No. was that the appellant and his agents had made appeals to the electorate to vote for him or to refrain from voting for Daulta (Respondent No. 1) "on the ground of his religion and language", and that the appellant and his agents use a religious symbol a flag called "Om Dhwaj" in all the election meetings.
The case of the appellant was that the flag was not a religious symbol and denied that it was used on any occasion by him or his agents and submitted that it was used only by one person who was always accustomed to carry it on his motor car.
The appellant also pleaded that an appeal to the electorate on the ground of language or religion did not amount to a corrupt practice within the meaning of section 123 of the Act.
The Tribunal dismissed the election petition of respondent No. I but the High Court allowed the appeal and declared the election of the appellant void under section 100(1)(b) of the Act.
Hence the appeal.
Held (i) The use of or appeal to the national or religious symbols to be a corrupt practice must be made by the candidate or his election agent, or by some other person with the consent of the candidate or his election agent, before it can be regarded as a ground for declaring the election void.
(ii) 'Om 'is regarded by Hindus as having high spiritual or mystical efficacy:it is used at the commencement of the recitations of religious prayers.
But the attribute of spiritual significance will not necessarily impart to its use on a flag the character of a religious symbol within the meaning of section 123.
A symbol stands for or represents something material or abstract.
To be a religious symbol, there must be a visible representation of a thing or concept which is religious.
To 'Om ' high spiritual or mystical efficacy is undoubtedly ascribed, but its use on 751 a flag does not symbolise religion or anything religious.
The High 'Court errd in holding that the 'Om ' flag was a religious symbol and its use in an election comes within the purview of cl.
(3) of section 123 of the Act.
(iii)Clause (3) of section 123 of the Act must be read in the light of the fundamental right which is guaranteed by article 29(1) of the Constitution; the clause cannot be read as trespassing upon The fundamental right under article 29(1).
Article 29(1) of the Constitution has conferred the Tight, among others, to conserve their language upon the citizens of India.
Right to conserve the language of the citizens includes the right to agitate for protection of the language.
Political agitation for conservation of the language of a section of the citizens cannot therefore be regarded a a corrupt practice within the meaning of section 123(3) of the Act.
Jamuna Prasad Mukhariya and Ors.
vs Lachhi Ram and Ors., [1955]1 S.C.R. 608, distinguished.
(iv)The corrupt practice defined by cl.
(3) of section 123 is committed when an appeal is made either to vote or refrain from voting on the ground of a candidate 's language.
It is the appeal to the electorate on a ground personal to the candidate relating to his language which attracts the ban of section 100 read with section 123(3).
Therefore it is only when the electors are asked to vote or not to vote because of the particular language of the candidate that a corrupt practice may be ,deemed to be committed.
Where, however, for conservation of language of the electorate appeals are made to the electorate and promises are given that steps would be taken to conserve that language, making of such appeals or promises will not amount to a corrupt practice.
