The respondent was a firm carrying on business in different lines.
It was assessed to income tax under section 23(4) of the Income tax Act, 1922 for the assessment year 1949 50 on the ground that notices issued under section 22(2) and (4) had not been complied with.
Later on, that assessment 412 was cancelled.
However, before the cancellation, it was found that an interest income of Rs. 88,737 in the shape of U.P. Encumbered Estates Act Bonds received by the respondent from third parties had escaped assessment as the assessee failed to disclose the same.
The Income tax Officer issued a notice for the assessment year 1949 50 on the ground that a sum of Rs. 88,737 had escaped assessment in the said assessment year.
After the cancellation of the assessment made under section 23(4), the Income tax officer, ignoring the notice issued by him under section 34(1)(a), included that amount in the fresh assessment made by him for the year 1949 50.The respondent appealed to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner who ordered the deletion of the sum of Rs. 88,737 from the assessment for the year 1949 50 and directed the same to be included in the assesment for the year ending 1948 49.
Pursuant to the direction given, the Income tax Officer served a notice on the respondent under section 34(1).
Against that notice the assessee filed a writ petition in the High Court for quashing the above mentioned proceeding on the ground that these were initiated beyond the time prescribed by a. 34.
The High Court accepted the petition and quashed the notice on the ground that it was issued by the appellant beyond the ordinary period of limitation It also overruled the contention of the appellant that no period of limitation governed the notice in as much as the second proviso to section 34(3) was attracted to the facts of the case.
The only direction which the Appellate Assistant Commissioner could give was one which was covered by section 31 of the Act and as the appeal before him was confined to a particular assessment year, the direction must necessarily be limited to a matter falling within that year.
if the direction be treated as based on a finding recorded by Appellate Assistant Commissioner, that finding would have to be disregarded when applying the proviso.
The appellant came to this Court by special leave.
Held: (per B. P. Sinha, C.J., K. Subba Rao and N. Rajagopala Ayyangar JJ.).
The proviso to sub section
(3) of section 34 of the Indian Incometax Act, 1922 does not save the time limit prescribed under sub section
(1) of section 34 in respect of an escaped assessment of a year other than that which is the subject matter of appeal or revision as the case may be and hence the notice under section 34(1)(a) issued in the present case was clearly barred by time.
The jurisdiction of the High Court or the Supreme Court under section 66 or section 66(b) is a limited one and is confined only to the questions referred to them.
Moreover, the questions referred by Tribunal cannot exceed its jurisdiction.
Therefore the assessment or reassessment made under the said sections or Pursuant to the orders or directions made thereunder must necessarily relate to the assessment of the year under review, revision or appeal as the case may be. 'Me proviso to sub section
(3) of section 34 does not confer any fresh power upon the Income tax Officer to make assessment in respect of the escaped incomes without any time limit.
It only lifts the ban of limitation in respect of certain assessments made under certain provisions of the Act and the lifting of the ban cannot be so construed as to increase the jurisdiction of the tribunal Under the 413 relevant sections.
The lifting of the ban was only to give effect to the orders that may be made by the appellate, revisional or reviewing Tribunal within the scope of its jurisdiction.
If the intention was to remove the period of limitation in respect of any assessment against any person, the proviso would not have been added as proviso to sub section
(3) which deals with completion of an assessment but would have been added to sub section
(1) of section 34.
The word 'finding ' covers only the material questions which arise in a particular case for decision by the authority hearing the. case or the appeal which, being necessary for passing the final order or giving the final decision in the appeal, has been the subject of controversy between the interested parties or on which the parties concerned have been given a hearing.
The expression 'direction ' refers to a direction which the appellate or revisional authority is empowered to give under the law.
The expression "any person" must be confined to a person intimately connected with the assessment of the year under appeal or revision.
Held: per Raghubar Dayal and J. R. Mudholkar JJ.
(dissenting): That the notice was not in contravention of the provisions of section 34 and hence could not be quashed on that ground.
When an appeal is before an appellate authority, the whole matter is at large before it and there fore when a specific case is put before it by an assessee, it has both the power as well as the duty to give its finding thereon.
The ground given by an assessee for claiming a reduction or annulment of assessment may be that the income upon which he had been assessed was not earned in the accounting period of the year to which the assessment pertained but in respect of a specified earlier or later year.
The appellate authority is entitled to go into the whole question and come to a finding one way or the other.
The finding of a tribunal is its conclusion on a point agitated before it and for a conclusion to amount to a finding, it is not necessary that it should be the final and ultimate conclusion.
The contention of respondent that the second proviso to a. 34(3) enabling a notice to issue only to assessee in respect of escaped income without limit of time on the ground that the appellate authority has made a finding or direction in the proceeding before it makes a discrimination against such assessee because it does not lift the bar of limitation with regard to other assessees similarly situated but with regard to whom no finding has been made or direction given by appellate authority, was rejected.
It was held that prima facie, there was a reasonable basis for the classification.
The ground on which classification was made had a rational relationship with the object which was intended to be achieved by law, ie., to detect and bring to assessment the escaped income.
Commissioner of Income tax vs section M. Chitnavis, (1932) L.R. 59 I.A. 290, Sir Kikabhai Premchand vs Commissioner of Income tax (Central), Bombay, pt.
Hazart Lal vs Income tax Officer, Kanpur.
Lakshman Prakash vs Commissioner of Income 414 tax, U.P., , A. section Khader Ismail vs Income tax Officer, Salem, (1963)48 I.T.R. 16, Simrathmul vs Additional Income tax Officer, Ootachamund, (1959)36 I.T.R. 41, Brindaban Chandra Basak vs Incometax Officer, , K. C. Thomas, First Income tax Officer.
Bombay vs Vasant Hira Lal Shah , Prashar & Anr.
V. Sasantsen Dwarkadas 49 I.T.R. (S.C.) 1, Kamlapat Hotilal vs Income tax Officer, , Hiralal Amrit Lal Shah vs K. C. Thomas, Income tax Officer, Bombay, , General Construction and Supply Co. vs Income tax Officer (8th) C Ward, Bombay, , Suraj Mal Mohata & Co. vs A. V. Visvanatha Sastri ; , A. Thangal Kunju Mudaliar vs M. Venkatachalam Potti & Anr. ; and Palaji vs Income tax Officer, Special Investigation Circle ; , referred to.
