The appellant sued the lessee, the predecessor of the respondents, for ejectment on the latter 's failure to deliver possession of a leased land at the expiration of the stipulated period.
Under the covenant the lessee was entitled to build a house for residential purposes.
The trial Court decreed the appellant 's claim whereupon the lessee filed an appeal.
While the appeal was pending the Assam Non Agricultural Urban Areas Tenancy Act was passed, and thereafter the lessee prayed for permission to take an additional ground under section 5 of the Act.
Before that date, the High Court had taken the view that this provision of the Act was applicable to pending proceedings.
The lower appellate court allowed the lessee 's plea and ultimately allowed the appeal and set aside ,he decree passed by the trial Judge in favour of the appellant, concluding that the two houses had been constructed by the lessee within five years after the taking of the lease and that entitled the lessee to claim the benefit of section 5 of the Act.
The High Court on appeal, following its earlier decision about the applicability of the provisions of section 5 to pending proceedings, summarily dismissed the appeal, but granted a certificate for leave to appeal to this Court Held: (i) A statutory provision is retroactive either when it is so declared by express terms.
or the intention to make it retroactive clearly follows from the relevant words and the context in which they occur Re.
Athlumney Ex parte Wilson, , referred to.
(ii) The provisions of the Act clearly indicate that the legislature wanted the beneficient provisions enacted by it to take within their protection not only leases executed after the Act came into force, but also leases executed prior to the operation of the Act.
The plain object of s.5 is to protect the tenants who have built a permanent structure either for business or for residence, provided it has been built within 5 yearsfrom the date of contract of tenancy, even though those constructions had been made before the date of the Act.
(iii) A suit which was pending when the Act came into force would be governed by section 5(1) (a) and an appeal arising from a suit which had been decided before the Act came into force, would likewise be governed by section 5(1) (a), provided it is pending after the date when the Act came into force.
for an appeal pending in a continuation of the suit.
