A terminal tax on goods imported by road or rail was imposed by the Amravati Municipality by virtue of a notification dated August 10, 1916.
This notification exempted silver, bullion and coins from the operation of this tax.
When terminal taxes on goods imported by rail were assigned exclusively to the Federal Centre under the Government of India Act, 1935, the municipality was authorised by section 143 to continue to levy the terminal taxes which were actually levied before the enforcement of the Act.
Likewise, the terminal taxes imposed by the pre Constitution notification were allowed to be levied and collected even after the Constitution came into force by virtue of article 277 of the Constitution.
In 1960, the Municipality levied terminal taxes on three new items, viz., silver and silver jewellery, gold and gold jewellery and precious stones.
In a writ petition filed under article 226 of the Constitution, the validity of the newly imposed terminal tax was challenged by the respondent who was carrying on business, within the limits of the Municipality, in gold, silver and precious stones on the ground of legislative incompetence.
The writ petition was granted by the High Court and the appellant came to this court after obtaining a certificate of fitness from the High Court.
Dismissing the appeal: Held: The newly imposed terminal taxes on silver and silver jewellery, gold and gold jewellery and precious stones had never been imposed by the Municipality and hence it could not be said that those were "being lawfully levied" by the Municipality and "applied to the same purposes" before the commencement of the Constitution as required by article 277 of the Constitution.
article 277 was not intended to confer an unlimited legislative power to impose what in effect were new taxes, though of the same type or nature as existed before the Constitution.
Rama Krishna Ramanath vs The Janpad Sabha, Gondia, [1962] Supp. 3 S.C.R. 70 and Chuttilal vs Bagmal and Balwantrai, I.L.R. [1956] M.B. 339.
referred to.
