In execution of a decree passed in a mortgage suit, the appellant annexed in the execution application a Schedule comprising of 11 properties sought to be sold for the satisfaction of the claim.
The appellant gave valuation of the said properties.
Though the 1st respondent received a notice under O.XXI, r. 66 of the Code of Civil Procedure, he did not file any objection to the valuation.
Though he got the sale adjourned a number of times promising to pay the decretal amount, he failed to do so.
Finally, two of the said properties were sold.
The 1st respondent then filed an application in the executing court for setting aside the said sale under O.XXI, r. 90 of the Code of Civil Procedure, inter alia, on the ground that section 35 of the Bengal Money Lender 's Act was not complied with.
The learned subordinate Judge held that there was no fraud in publishing and conducting the sale, that the price of the lots sold was fair and that the sale was not vitiated by reason of infringement of section 35 of the Act.
On appeal, the High Court held that though there had not been any substantial injury to the 1st respondent, the provisions of section 35 of the Act were mandatory and.
therefore, the infringement of the said provisions would invalidate the sale.
In this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellants that whether section 35 of the Act was mandatory or directory, the sale held in violation of the said provision was only illegal but not a nullity and, therefore, it could be set aside only in the manner and for the reasons prescribed in O.XXI, r. 90 of the Code of Civil Procedure, and further that, as the respon dents did not attend at the drawing up of the proclamation of sale, the sale could not be set aside at their instance.
Held: The non compliance with the provisions of section 35 of the Act is a defect or a irregularity in publishing or conducting the sale.
A party who received the notice of the proclamation but did not attend at the drawing up of the proclamation or did not object to the said defect cannot maintain an application under O.XXI, r. 90 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
Even if he could, the sale cannot be set aside unless by reason of the said defect or irregularity he had sustained substantial injury.
Ashram Thikadar vs Vijay Singh Chopra, I.L.R. (1944) 1 Cal.
166, distinguished.
Manindra Chandra vs Jagdish Chandra, and Maniruddin Ahmed vs Umanprasamma,(1959) , approved.
On a true construction of section 35 of the Act, it must be held that it was intended only for the benefit of the judgment debtor and, therefore, he could waive the right conferred on him under section 35 of the Act.
Case law reviewed.
1003 If that be the legal position, O.XXI.
r. 90 of the Code of Civil Procedure is immediately attracted.
The concurrent finding of the courts is that by reason of the non observance of the provisions of section 35 of the Act no substantial injury was caused to the judgment debtor.
Fur ther, though notice was given to the judgment debtor ' in one case he did not file objection at all and in the other case, though the judgment debtor filed objections, he did not attend at the drawing up of the proclamation.
The sales are, therefore, not liable to be set aside under the terms of the said provision.
