The appellant was tried and convicted by the Special Judge for an offence under section 409 I.P.C. and sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for two years and to pay a fine of ' Rs. 2,000.
On appeal, the High Court altered his conviction from an offence under section 409 to one under section 420 I.P.C. for cheating the employees of the State Bank, by representing a, bill as a genuine bill drawn by the Sub Divisional Health Officer, and thereby dishonestly inducing the Bank 's Staff to make over the sum of Rs. 1,763 6 0 to him and sentenced him to rigorous imprisonment for one year and to a fine of Rs. 2,000.
On appeal by certificate the appellant mainly contended (i) that a case under section 420 I.P.C. could not be allotted for trial to a Special Court by the Government when such an offence was not committed by a public servant while purport ing to act as such public servant: (ii) that the Special Court could not take recourse to the provision of section 237 Code of Criminal Procedure and if it could, the requirements of section 237 Code of Criminal Procedure were not satisfied and consequently the High Court could not have altered the conviction from section 409 I.P.C. to one under section 420 and (iii) that the accused had been prejudiced ' on account of the absence of a charge under section 420 I.P.C. Held (i) that on the facts proved it must be held that the offence under section 420 committed by the appellant would be committed by him as a public servant purporting to act as such, and that a case involving this offence also could have been allotted to the Special Court by the Government for trial.
The Special Court was, therefore, competent to try the accused for this offence if the facts proved established it, Besides, the appellant could be tried by the Special Court for this offence in view of the proviso to section 4 of the West Bengal Criminal Law Amendment Act.
Bhajahari Mondal vs State of West Bengal, [1959] S.C.R. 1276, distinguished.
(ii) that at the trial of the appellant for an offence under section 409 I.P.C., in this case, the appellant could have also been charged for an offence under section 420 I.P.C., in view of section 236 of ' the Code of Criminal Procedure.
71 In view of the proviso to sub section (1) of section 4 of the Act, the Special Court could have tried the appellant for the offence under section 420 I.P.C.
It did not actually try him for that offence.
It was however, open to it and to the appellate court to convict him of the offence under section 420 I.P.C., when trying for an offence under section 409 I.P.C., in view of section 237 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
(iii) that in the present case the appellant could not be said to be prejudiced in his conviction under section 420 I.P.C. on account of the non framing of the charge, and consequent non trial, under section 420 I.P.C.
In fact, no question of irregularity in the trial arises.
The framing of the charge under section 420 I.P.C. was not essential and section 237 Code of Criminal Procedure itself justifies his conviction of the offence under section 420 if that be proved on the findings on the record.
Case Law discussed.
