The respondents brought a suit for a mandatory injunction directing the removal of certain masonry structure on suit site and for a permanent injunction restraining the appellants from encroaching upon the suit property and from causing obstruction to the right of way of the residents of the village.
They claimed that the suit property formed part of a public street and the appellants had no right to encroach upon it.
The appellants claimed the suit property as absolute owners and as such, they were entitled to use it in any manner they pleased.
The trial.
Court decreed the suit.
On appeal, the learned Subordinate Judge set aside the decree.
On challenge of this decree by the respondents in second appeal before the High Court, the learned single Judge passed a decree in their favour.
All that the learned Judge stated in his judgment was that "after a careful consideration of all the issues that arise for decision in this second appeal, I am of the opinion that the best form in which a decree could be given to the plaintiffs is in the following terms" and then he proceeded to set out the terms of his decree.
On appeal by Special Leave the appellants contended that the method adopted by the learned Judge in disposing of the second appeal before him clearly shows that the judgment delivered by him cannot be sustained.
The respondents, raised a preliminary objection that since the appellants did not avail themselves of the remedy available to them under the Letters Patent of the High Court either the special Leave granted by this Court should be revoked, or the appeal should be dismissed.
Held: It would not be possible to lay down an unqualified rule that special leave should not be granted if the party has not moved for leave under the Letters Patent and it cannot be so granted, nor is it possible to lay down an inflexible rule that if in such a case special leave has been granted, it must always and necessarily be revoked.
Having regard to the wide scope of the powers conferred on this Court under article 136, it is not possible and, indeed, it would not be expedient, to lay down any general rule which would govern all cases.
The question as to whether the jurisdiction of this Court under article 136 should be exercised or not, and if yes, on what terms and conditions, is a matter which this Court has to decide on the facts of each case.
50 Raruha Singh vs Achal, A.I.R. 1961, S.C. 1097, referred to.
In the present case, the learned Judge passed an order which reads more like an award made by an arbitrator who, by terms of his reference, is not under an obligation to give reasons for his conclusions embodied in the award.
When such a course is adopted by the High Court in dealing with second appeals, it must obviously be corrected and the High Court must be asked to deal with the matter in a normal way in accordance with law.
Therefore, the decree passed in second appeal, must be set aside on the ground that the judgment delivered by the learned Judge did not satisfy the basic and legitimate requirements of a judgment under the Code of Civil Procedure.
