The Ruler of Dhenkanal State granted a sanad by way of Khorposh allowance to his younger brother, the appellant giving certain lands and a maintenance allowance, under the customary law of the State.
After the merger of that State to the Dominion of India which became effective on January 1, 1948, the Government of Orissa took over the administration of the State and discontinued the cash allowance.
The appellant challenged the validity of the order of discontinuance by a suit in the Court of Subordinate Judge.
The suit was dismissed.
On appeal to this Court it was urged on behalf of the appellant that the sanad issued by an absolute monarch was law, and was continued by articles 366(10), 372(1) of the Constitution and cl.
4(b) of the Order 31 of 1948 issued by the Orissa Government in exercise of the power delegated to it by the Central Government under section 3(2) of the Extra .
Held: (i) It was not correct to say that in dealing with a grant made by an absolute monarch any enquiry as to whether the grant was the result of an executive or legislative act was altogether irrelevant.
This Court did not lay down any inflexible rule that the well recognised jurisprudential distinction between legislative and executive acts was wholly irrelevant or inapplicable to such a case.
Ameer un Nissa Begum vs Mahboob Begum, A.I.R. 1955 S.C. 352, Director of Endowments, Government of Hyderabad vs Akram Ali, A.T.R. , Madhaorao Phalke vs State of Madhya Bharat, ; , Promode Chandra Deb vs State of Orissa, [1962] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 405, Tilkayat Shri Govindlalji Maharaj vs State of Rajasthan, [1964] 1 S.C.R. 561, Maharaja Shree Umaid Mills Ltd. vs Union of India, ; and State of Gujarat vs Vora Fiddali Badruddin Nithibarwala, ; , considered.
In such an enquiry it was necessary to consider such rele vant factors as the nature of the order, its scope and effect, general setting and context and the method adopted by the Ruler in promulgating it.
So judged, the Sanad in question had no legislative element in any of its provisions and was a gift pure and simple made in pursuance of the custom of the family and customary law of the State.
The gift therefore, was an executive act of the Ruler and did not amount to law although the Ruler was discharging by it his obligation under personal or customary law.
113 The gift being an executive act of the Ruler could be modified or cancelled by an executive act of the successor to the Ruler.
The discontinuance of the cash allowance could not affect the continuance of the customary law under cl. 4(b) of the Order of 1948 and article 372 of the Constitution.
Nor could the plea of payment of such allowance even after the merger invalidate the discontinuance.
