The appellants and the five respondents were displaced persons.
The Deputy Custodian of Nizamabad District allotted about 60 acres of land to the five respondents.
The allotment was by way of lease.
There was no condition imposed upon them that they should cultivate the lands personally.
While the lease was continuing in force, the Government of India issued a Press Note on November 13, 1953 by which they announced that they had decided to allot evacuee agricultural land in Hyderabad State to displaced persons whose claims for agricultural land had been verified under the Displaced Persons (Claims) Act, 1950.
The appellants made an application in pursuance of this notifi cation and on May 4, 1954 the land now in dispute, though under a subsisting lease in favour of the respondents, was allotted to them.
In the mean time the , came into force on October 9, 1954.
Under Section 20 of this Act, the Regional Settlement Com missioner issued Sanads in favour of appellants in respect of these lands.
Both the appellants and the respondents claimed these disputed plots.
The matter went up to the Deputy Chief Settlement Commissioner.
He referred the case of both parties to the Government of India for action under section 33 of the Act.
The matter was considered under section 33 of the Act by the Deputy Secretary in the Rehabilitation Ministry who upheld the contentions of these respondents.
The result was that the allotment made in favour of the appellants was set aside.
It is the legality of this order that is challenged in this appeal.
Held (i) The order of the Central Government was covered by section 33 of the Act as one dealing with and rectifying an error committed in relation to a "thing done or action taken" with respect to a rehabilitation grant to a displaced person.
Not merely the order of the Regional Settlement Commission rebut the entire question as to whether the respondents as original allottees by way of lease were entitled to the relief of restoration was referred to the Central Government by reason of the order of the Deputy Chief Settlement Commissioner.
Both the parties were heard on all the points by the Central Government before the orders were passed and it would not therefore be right to consider that the matter in issue before the Central Government was namely the correctness of the order of the Regional Settlement Commissioner, which read in vacuo might not be comprehended within section 39 of the Act.
(ii) It is manifest that a Sanad can be lawfully issued only on the basis of a valid order of allotment.
If an order of allotment which is the basis upon which a grant is made 104 is set aside it would follow, and the conclusion is inescapable that the grant cannot survive, because in order that grant should be valid, it should have been effected by a competent officer under a valid order.
If the validity of that order is effectively put an end to, it would be impossible to maintain unless there were any express provision in the Act or in the rules, that the grant still stands.
On the facts of this case it was held that where an order making any allotment was set aside the title which was obtained on the basis of the continuance of that order also fell with it.
Partumal vs Managing Officer, Jaipur, I.L.R. , distinguished.
Balwant Kaur vs Chief Settlement Commissioner (Lands), I.L.R. [1964] Punjab 36, approved.
