The respondent was assessed to income tax for the years, 1953 54 and 1954 55 on estimated incomes of Rs. 61,000/ and Rs. 1,21,000/ respectively and notices of demand under section 29 of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922, were served on him by the Income tax Officer for the tax due.
On the respondent failing to comply with the notices of demand within the period specified, the Income tax Officer issued certificates under section 46(2) of the Act and sent them to the Collector for recovery of the tax, treating the respondent as in default.
In appeals filed by the respondent against the orders of assessment, the Appellate Assistant Commissioner reduced the income assessed for the year 1953 54 to Rs. 28,000 and for the year 1954 55 to Rs. 46,000.
The Income tax Officer did not issue fresh notices of demand pursuant to the modification in the orders of assessment made by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner, but by a letter informed the respondent that he had to pay tax as reduced by the appellate order, The respondent did not pay the amount of tax demanded, but applied to the High Court of Mysore under article 226 of the Constitution of India for quashing the certificates issued by the Income tax Officer.
The High Court held that the Income tax Officer could not, without issuing fresh notices of demand, after the Appellate Assistant Commissioner of Income tax reduced the taxable income, treat the respondent as a defaulter and that the proceedings of the Collector based on the certificates issued by the Income tax Officer were illegal.
Held:(per Sarkar and Hidayatullah, JJ.).
The decision of the High Court was right.
Per Sarkar, J. On the Income tax Officer 's order being revised in appeal, the default based on it and all consequential proceedings must be taken to have been superseded and fresh proceedings have to be started to realise the dues as found by the revised order.
Per Hidayatullah, J.
In view of the terms of section 29 of the Act, where an order is passed in appeal and the amount of tax reduced, the Income tax Officer must intimate to the assessee the reduced amount of tax and make a demand and give him an opportunity to pay before treating him as a defaulter.
Per Shah, J. (dissenting) In the absence of any provision imposing an obligation upon the Income tax Officer to issue successive notice , of demand from time to time for recovery of the amount due during the process of assessment, it must be held that the notices of demand issued by the Income tax Officer in exercise of the power under section 29 must be enforced in the manner provided by section 46 and within the period of limitation 149 provide in cl.
(7) of section 46, even after the appeal against the order of assessment by the Income tax Officer is disposed of, subject to adjustment of the amount to be recovered in the light of the order of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner.
