The appellant was convicted under section 302 of the Indian Penal Code and sentenced to imprisonment for life by the High Court for the offence of the murder of his wife.
He was granted special leave to appeal by this Court.
During the pendency of the hearing of this appeal the appellant died.
After his death his sons and daughter applied to this Court for permission to continue to prosecute the appeal.
It was pleaded by the legal representatives of the appellant that though that sentence of imprisonment could no longer be executed, it still affected the property of the deceased and the legal representatives were, therefore, interested in the appeal and should be permitted to continue it.
The appellant, who held a high office in the Government of Andhra Pradesh had been suspended during the investigation of the charge against him and he was dismissed from service under certain service rules on his conviction.
During this time the appellant had only been given a small allowance.
On these facts it was pleaded that if the conviction was set aside, the estate of the deceased would be entitled to receive the full salary from the Government.
Held (Per Sarkar, J.): (i) Neither section 431 nor the cases men tioned can be said to apply to the present case proprio vigore, for the present is not an appeal under the code of criminal procedure which is dealt with by section 431 nor is it a revisional application like the one which came up for consideration in Pranab Kumar Mitra 's case, while as for the English case, it is only of persuasive value.
Pranab Kumar Mitra vs The State of West Bengal, [1959] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 63 and Hodgson vs Lakeman, , distinguished.
(ii).The principle on which the hearing of a proceeding may be continued after the death of an accused would appear to be the effect of the sentence on his property in the hands of his legal representatives.
If the sentence affects that property, the legal representatives can be said to be interested in the proceeding and allowed to continue it.
This principle applies in appeals, revisions, and in petitions under article 136 of the Constitution.
A sentence of fine no doubt affects the property.
In the present case, however, the sentence was not of fine but of imprisonment which on the death of the accused has become infructuous.
In the present case the effect of the sentence imposed in this case being set aside would not directly entitle the legal representatives to the salary.
They will have to obtain necessary orders from the Government for the purpose.
252 Held (Per Hidayatullah, J.): (i) This was an appeal against a sentence of imprisonment and an appeal of this character would normally abate on the death of the appellant because a criminal prosecution is concerned primarily with the punish ment of an offender and not with the trial of an abstract issue about the truth or falsity of a prosecution case.
The same principle must apply to appeals after conviction, except in so far as a judgment already rendered touches assets which would come to the legal representative.
In so far as personal punishment (other than a fine) is concerned that stands dissolved by the death of the offender and an appeal to get that punishment set aside becomes infructuous and abates.
Pranab Kumar Mitra vs The State of West Bengal, [1959] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 63, Pritam Singh vs State, ; , distinguished.
Hodgson vs Lakeman, [1943] L.R.K.B. 15, Baghis vs Rowes , referred to.
(ii).The principle laid down in Pranab Kumar Mitra vs The State of.
West Bengal and Another and in Pritam Singh vs The State has.no application to the present matter because there is no analogy between an appeal by special leave and a revision under the code.
The present case is not a case where the legal representatives after the death of the offender have to meet the liability of a fine or are required to protect the assets which they claim should reach them.
In the present case no claim of the petitioners is jeopardized directly, by the judgment.
Their claim is dependent upon the administrative action of Government which may not proceed upon the result of criminal prosecution.
This appeal was only concerned with the correctness or otherwise of the conviction and not with any monetary claims depending upon the result of the appeal.
In such a situation the ordinary rule that a criminal proceeding against a person comes to an end on his demise must apply also to special appeals in this court, such as this, even though the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code may not be directly applicable.
Held (Per Mudholkar, J.): (i) The decision of this court in Pranab Kumar Mitra vs The State of West Bengal has no, bear ing upon an appeal brought to this court by special leave.
It is no doubt true that the power confer red by section 435 of the Code on the High Court and certain other courts and by Article 136 of the Constitution on this Court is discretionary.
Under section 439 of the Code the High Court can exercise any of the powers conferred on a court of appeal by sections 423, 426, 427 and 428 or on a court by section 338 and has also the power to enhance the sentence.
Under Section 435 of the Code, the High Court can suo motu call for the record of any inferior court but this power cannot be exercised by this court under article 136 of the Constitution.
Therefore there is a fundamental difference between the power of the High Court in revision and the power of this Court in article 136 of the Constitution.
Pranab Kumar Mitra vs The State of West Bengal, [1959] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 63, distinguished.
(ii).In a criminal matter the issue is personal between the accused person and the State and the right of appeal is also personal to the appellant.
There is admittedly no express provision permitting the substitution of legal representatives of a decreased appellant in a criminal appeal brought to this Court by 253 special leave.
The policy of the law discernible from section 431 of the Code has to be borne in mind.
The policy under section 431 of the Code is that every criminal appeal under chapter XXXI will abate except an appeal from a sentence of fine.
There is no provision which prescribes the continuation of the appeal on the death of the appellant in cases where the sentence is of imprisonment.
The interest of the legal representatives in the present case is not a direct interest in the sense that it cannot arise out of the decision of this court even if it is in favour of the appellant.
The only interest which the applicants have is a contingent one and is not one which could flow directly out of the ultimate decision of this Court.
Hodgson vs Lakeman, (1943) L.R.K.B. 15, Regina vs Rowe, , Hesketh vs Atherton, Leach vs Wanstead School Board, Siberry vs Connolly, Constantine vs Illingworth, Jones vs Gallowfield, Rivers vs Glasse, (all cited in Short and Mellor, Practice on the Crown Side of the King 's Bench Division 2nd Ed.
at p. 425), United States vs Mook, , The State of Kerala vs Narayani Amma Kamala Devi, [1962] Supp.
3 S.C.R. 943 and Imperatrix vs Dongali Andaji, , referred to and discussed.
(iii). .The
Legislature has by limiting in section 431 of the Code the survival of appeals to appeals against sentences of fine has chosen to recognise only one kind of interest and no other.
This Court in exercise of its inherent powers or discretionary powers would not be acting according to correct legal principles in recognising a kind of interest which the legislature has not chosen to recognise.
In the circumstances the applicants ought not to be granted special leave to prosecute the appeal.
