The appellant, a Pakistani National originally came over to India on a Pakistani Passport and on the strength of visa.
He was found to be overstaying in India and he was deported on April 21, 1957.
Subsequently on finding him again in India he was charged with an offence of having entered India without a passport in contravention of section (2)(a) of the .
His defence was that he had been in India from his birth and that the person who was said to have been deported in 1957 was some other and riot himself.
The trial court accepted this defence and acquitted him.
The State appealed to the High Court and the High Court reversed the finding of the lower court and held him guilty of the offence charged.
The present appeal was filed on a special leave granted by this Court.
The first contention of the appellant was that the High Court was wrong in reversing the finding of the trial court on the issue of the identity of the appellant.
Secondly it was submitted that under section 2(2) of the as it stood before the Amendment which came into force on January 19, 1957 the appellant though a Pakistani citizen was not a "foreigner" and hence his entry into India before that date would not constitute an offence.
It was contended further that the courts had no jurisdiction to determine whether the appellant was or was not a foreigner by reason of the provision of section 9(2) of the Indian Citizen ship act 1955.
Held: The appellant was the person who was deported on April 21, 1957 and the finding of the High Court on the question of his identity was correct.
(ii) If on the date when the offence is committed a person is "a foreigner" as defined by the Act, it would be no excuse for him to say that on an earlier date he was not foreigner.
Since the appellant was deported in April 1957 and he came back to India subsequently without a passport he was a foreigner under the amendment provision which came into force on January 19, 1957 had committed an offence under s, 3 of the .
(iii) Under section 9 of the the onus is upon the person who is accused under the Act to prove that he is not a foreigner.
It is only where there is proof that a person is, to start with a citizen of India and it is alleged that he has lost his Indian Citizenship by reason of acquiring the nationality of the foreign State that any question of invoking the provisions of section 9(2) of the Citizenship Act arises.
In the present case the appellant a Pakistani national came to India originally with a Pakistani Passport and after his deportation in April 1957 came back to India without a passport and hence he cannot invoke section 9(2) of the Citizenship Act and lie had committed an offence under section 3(2)(a) of the . 442
