The appellants are manufacturers of medicine in which they have to use alcohol.
According to r. 36 of the Medical Preparation and Spirituous Rules, 1345 F framed under the Hyderabad Abkari Act, 1316 F the appellant used to pay certain fees to the State Government for the supervision of the use of alcohol by the appellants.
After the coming into force of the Medical and.
Toilet Preparations (Excise Duties) Act, 1955 and the Rules framed thereunder the appellants contended that since R. 36 was repealed by this Act they had not to pay that fee.
On the refusal of the State Government to accept their contention the appellants filed writ petitions before the High Court challenging the power of the Government to levy the fee.
But the High Court held that R. 36 was not repealed and dismissed the writ petitions.
Thereupon the appellant filed the present appeals on certificates granted by the High Court.
Before this Court it was contended on behalf of the appel lant that section 21 of the 1955 Act in terms repealed any corresponding State law and therefore R. 36 stood repealed.
The respondent contended that the proviso to that section saved all previous rules which were not inconsistent with the Act and hence R. 36 should be deemed to be in force.
It was further contended by the respondent State that R. 36 remained in force because it was meant to carry out the general purpose of the Hyderabad Abkari Act which was a general Act relating to alcohol and intoxicating drugs.
Held:(i) By virtue of Entry 84 List I of the VII Schedule to the Constitution no charge could be levied on the manufacture of medicinal preparations except by the Union of India and since the 1955 Act is a law made otherwise by Parliament within the meaning of article 277 the duties and other charges which used to be levied by the State in connection with medicinal preparations could no longer be levied by it.
Further the effect of section 21 of the Act is that so far as the Hyderabad Act applied to the use of alcohol in the manufacture of medicinal and toilet preparations, the Hyderabad Act must be deemed to have been repealed.
(ii)By reasons R. 143 of the 1956 Rules r. 36 must be held to have been repealed after the coming into force of the 1955 Act and the rules framed thereunder.
The purpose of R. 36 is clearly covered by the 1955 Act and the rules framed thereunder and it cannot survive the said Act and Rules in view of section 21 of the Act and r. 143 and the proviso to section 21 cannot be availed of by the State.
377 (iii)The field covered by R. 36 is completely covered by the Rules framed under the Act and therefore R. 36 can no longer be justified as good under the general law relating to alcohol and in ,, toxicating drugs as contended by the State.
