On a complaint by the District Magistrate the respondents were put on trial for an offence under section 15(1) of the Uttar Pradesh Private Forests Act, 1949.
The charge against the first respondent was that he sold one tamarind tree to respondent No. 2 for the purpose of felling and removing it without obtaining permission from the competent authority and that against respondent No. 2 was that he felled the tree and removed it.
The complaint was transferred from one Magistrate to another till it came on the file of Mr. Upadhya, a Magistrate of Second Class.
After he had recorded all the evidence and examined the two respondents, the powers of Magistrate, First Class were conferred on him.
Thereafter, by his judgment the respondents were found guilty and sentenced to pay a fine of Rs. 50/ each or to undergo simple imprisonment for one month.
On appeal, which was later converted into a revision the Additional Sessions Judge made a reference to the High Court recommending that the trial before the Magistrate, First Class be quashed as he had no jurisdiction to try the offence.
The reference was heard by Mulla, J., who was of the opinion that the trial was proper but as the rulings of the same Court stood in his way, he referred the case to a larger Bench.
The case was heard by a Division Bench and the learned Judges differed amongst themselves.
Mr. Justice Nigam was of the view that the trial was valid but Mr. Justice Singh did not agree with him.
The case was then placed before Mr. Justice Verma who agreed with Mr. Justice Singh and the conviction and sentence passed on the respondents were set aside.
According to the opinion of Mr. Justice Nigam which found support from the order of reference made by Mulla, J., there was nothing to prevent the First Class Magistrate from trying an offence under section 15(1) of the Act, because under Schedule III of the Code of Criminal Procedure the ordinary powers of a Magistrate, First Class include the ordinary powers of a Magistrate of the Second Class.
According to the other view, the Forests Act confers jurisdiction on Magistrates of the Second and Third Class and this excludes jurisdiction of any superior Magistrate.
On appeal by certificate: Held: (i) The words of the second sub section of section 15 of the Act or not rendered ineffective by the prescription of the ordinary powers of the Magistrates.
To call in aid Schedule III would render the provisions of section 29 of the Code of Criminal Procedure redundant and useless at least in those cases where the second part of the second schedule applies.
What section 15(2) does is to prescribe a particular court and in view of the words of section 29(1) no other court can try offences under section 15(1) even though the powers of those courts may be superior to those of 436 Magistrates of the Second and Third Class.
In the Second Schedule itself, which prescribes the courts for the trial of offences under law other than the Penal Code, is excluded, the Third Schedule cannot bring about the same result indirectly.
The provisions of the Third Schedule must therefore be taken to define general powers and not to create jurisdiction to try offences which the second schedule does.
(ii) The scheme of the Code read with the provisions of triable by any Magistrate as it would be if the Second Schedule were applicable.
They are therefore triable by such Magistrates as have been named in the second sub section.
There is good reason for holding this, because a conviction by a Magistrate of the second or the third class, as the case may be is open to an appeal whereas a conviction by a Magistrate of the First Class and a sentence of fine of Rs. 50/ or under a fine of Rs. 200/after a summary trial is not appealable.
It is a circumstance which must be taken into account.
It is forcefully illustrated in this case.
An appeal would have laid against the same decision if the Magistrate had not been given the powers of a First Class Magistrate during the trial.
The respondents were robbed of a right of appeal.
In any event, in view of the clear words of section 29(1) the trial of these cases ought to have been before a court designated in section 15(2) and as the trial was before a Magistrate who was not empowered to try the offence the proceedings were rightly declared void under section 530(p) and of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Jaddu vs State, A.I.R., 1952 All.372 and Harbans Singh vs State, A.I.R. 1953 All. 179, referred to.
