The petitioner was selected as a Lower Division Clerk under the Madras Ministerial Service Rules in 1949, and was posted in South Kanara District.
He was promoted as upper division clerk on April 2, 1956 and according to him, he should have teen promoted much earlier.
According to the State, the Petitioner was considered for inclusion in the eligibility list from 1955 onwards, but was not selected as he was not considered fit.
The State admitted that he was promoted as Upper Division clerk with effect from April 2, 1956, but alleged that this was on a temporary basis.
He was later reverted and then again posted as temporary Upper Division clerk.
In August, 1957, the petitioner was considered and included in the eligibility list at serial No. 14.
This list was regularised on December 12, 1957, in accordance with Madras State and Subordinate Service Rules, with effect from October 19, 1957.
According to the petitioner this resulted in the loss of benefit of service and increments.
In the meantime, reorganisati;on of States took place under the and South Kanara District went to the new Mysore and the petitioner was allotted to it.
On May 11, 1957, the Government of India addressed a memorandum to all State Governments and in respect of departmental promotion it said that "the question whether any protection should be given in respect of rules and conditions applicable to Government Servants affected by reorganisation immediately before the date of reorganisation in the matter of travelling allowance, discipline, control, classification, appeal, conduct, probation and departmental promotion was also considered.
The Government of India agree with the view expressed on behalf of the State res presentatives that it would not be appropriate to provide for any protection in the matter of these conditions.
It was urged on behalf of the petitioner (i) that the Mysore General Services Recruitment Rules, 1959, were not made with the previous approval of the Central Government under section 115(7) of the States Re organisation Act, and, therefore, do not govern the petitioner in so far as the conditions of service have teen varied to his disadvantage and (ii) that the Madras Government had, prior to November 1, 1956, by varoius orders, reduced the petitioner in rank in violation of article 311(2) of the Constitution and article 16.
550 Held: (i) In the setting in which the proviso to section 115(7) of the Act is placed, the expression "previous approval" would in clude a general approval to the variation in the conditions of service within certain limits, indicated by the Union Government.
article 309 of the Constitution gives, subject to the provisions of the Constitution, full powers to a State Government to make rules.
The proviso to section 115(7) of the Act limits that power, but that limitation is removable by the Central Government by giving its previous approval.
The broad purpose underlying the Proviso to section 115(7) of the Act was to ensure that the conditions of service should not be changed except with the prior approval of the Central Government.
In the memorandum, the Central Government, after examining various aspects, came to the conclusion that it would not be appropriate to provide for any protection in the matter of travelling allowance, discipline, control, classification, appeal, conduct, probation and departmental promotion.
This amounted to previous approval within the proviso to section 115(7).
By this memorandum the State Governments were required to send copies of all new rules to the Central Government for its information.
Therefore, it must be held that the rules were validly made.
In re Bosworth and Corporation of Gravesend, [1905] 2 K.B. 426 and C. K. Appamna vs State of Mysore, W.P. No. 88 of 1962, held inapplicable.
(ii) The petitioner failed to show, how article 16 was in fringed before he was allotted to the new Mysore State.
The State in its reply had asserted that all the orders complained against were passed by competent authorities, after considering the merits of the petitioner on each occasion.
It was for the competent authorities to judge the merits of the petitioner.
Therefore, it must be held that infringement of article 16 was not established.
