There were three brothers who continued as members of a joint family with the eldest of them, the first respondent as the karta.
Certain properties were acquired thereafter for the joint family.
Certain properties were also acquired in the name of the first respondent 's son his wife and grandson.
The two other brothers of respondent No. 1 acquired properties for themselves out of their own earnings.
Relations became strained between the brothers and the second brother the present appellant filed suit for partition claiming not only the original properties of the joint family and the properties acquired for the joint family by the Karta, the present respondent but also the properties acquired by the respondent No. 1 in the name of his wife, son and grandson as joint family properties.
He also called on the first respondent to account for the past years.
The third brother was impleaded as second defendant.
Respondent No. 1 's contention was that the last mentioned properties were bought by him from his own savings and therefore were not part of the join, family property and consequently not liable to partition.
The learned trial Judge held that those properties were joint family property and were liable to be partitioned.
Respondent No. 1 thereupon appealed to the High Court and the High Court allowed the appeal regarding substantial part of the schedule properties.
Thereupon the appellant filed the present appeal.
Held: (i) Where properties were acquired in the name of a joint family member, if at the date of such acquisition the joint family had sufficient nucleus for acquiring it, the property should be presumed to have been acquired from out of family funds and so to form part of the joint family property, unless the contrary is shown.
In the present case on a consideration of the evidence it is found that the joint family had at the date of the acquisition Of the properties in question sufficient nucleus from which these properties could be acquired.
Amritlal Sen & Ors.
vs Surath Lal Sen, A.I.R. 1942 Cal.
553 and Appalaswami vs Suryanarayanamurthy, I.L.R. [1948] Mad.
(P.C.) 440, referred to.
(ii) In the absence of any evidence of fraud or misrepresentation the Karta of a joint family cannot be called upon to account for the past transactions, but this does net mean that the parties were bound to accept the statement of the Karta as to what the property consisted of and an enquiry should be directed by the court in a manner usually adopted to discover that in fact the property consisted of at the date of the partition.
In what manner this principle can be applied depends on the facts and circumstances of each case.
Where as in the present case the evidence ,on record shows prima facie that the Karta could not reasonably 491 be expected to have in his hands at the date of the suit any accumulaties found on evidence to have been acquired by the family, there can be no justification for calling the Karta to account for his past dealing with the joint family property and its income.
Parameshwar Dube vs Govind Dube, I.L.R., , explained.
