The plaintiff appellant instituted a suit against the defen dants respondents for the recovery of a sum of Rs. 57,000/ .
The appellant was holding permanent lease hold rights over a certain colliery.
On January 31, 1949 the appellant granted a sub lease of the colliery to respondent No. 4 for a term of 5 years.
He joined respondents 1, 2 and 5 as defendants to the suit on the ground that these three persons along with respondent No. 4 formed a partnership firm known as Saurashtra Coal Concern which was joined in the suit as defendant No. 5.
The appellant 's case was that respondent No. 4 was a benamidar for the partnership firm and, therefore, all the respondents were liable for the claim.
Respondents 1 and 2 denied the appellant 's claim totally.
According to them, respondent No. 4 took the sub lease in his personal capacity and not on behalf of the other respondents.
Respondents 4 and 5 who are father and son, admitted the appellant 's case that the lease was obtained by respondent No. 4 on behalf of the partnership firm.
The trial court passed the decree against all the respondents.
On appeal, the High Court set aside the decree as against respondents 1 to 3 but affirmed the same against respondents 4 and 5.
Held: that Section 22 of the , clearly provides that in order to bind a firm by an Act or an ins trument executed by a partner on behalf of the firm, the Act should be done or the instrument should be executed in the name of the firm, or in any other manner expressing or implying an intention to bind the firm.
The sub lease was not executed in the name of the firm.
On the facts of this case it was held that in obtaining the sub lease, the parties to it did not intend to bind the firm by that transaction, and therefore the decree should be limited only against respondents 4 and 5.
Karmali Abdullah Allarakia vs Vora Karimji Jiwanji, I.L.R. , Gouthwaite vs Duckworth, (1810) 12 East 421, Mathura Nath Choudhury vs Sreejukta Bageswari Rani, 46 C.L.J. 362, Pandiri Veeranna vs Grandi Veerabhadi aswami.
T.L.R. , Lakshmishankar Devshankar vs Motiram Vishnuram, 6 B.L.R. 1106 and Gordhandas Chhotalal Seth v, Mahant Shri Raghubirdasi Gangaramji, 34 B.L.R. 1137, distinguished.
