The plaintiff brought a suit for redemption of a large num ber of usufructuary mortgages in favour of the defendants.
The case of the plaintiff was that under the terms of the mortgage bonds the mortgagees were liable to pay rent to the land lord.
The mortgagees, however, defaulted in the payment of rent for some years.
A suit for arrears of rent was brought by the land lord and a decree obtained.
In execution of the decree the lands were sold.
According to the plaintiff, the purchasers of the mortgaged lands were only benamidars of defendants 1 and 2 and other mortgagees.
The plaintiff claimed that the right of redemption was not affected by the Court sale because the purchase was for the benefit of the plaintiff.
The suit was contested by defendants 1 and 2 only.
Their case was that the right of redemption had been extinguished by the court sale; that the purchasers were not the benamidars of the defendants.
The Trial Court dismissed the suit.
On appeal, the Additional District Judge set aside the judgment of the Trial Court and passed a preliminary decree for redemption.
Against this decree the two defendants appealed to the High Court.
The appeal was heard by the Division Bench.
The High Court held that in the present case section 90 of the Trusts Act did not apply because the court sale took place due to the default of the mortgagor as well as the mortgagees.
In this view the High Court set aside the decree of the first Appellate Court and restored the decree of the trial court.
Held: The fact that the mortgagor had made a default, does not alter the position that the mortgagee had also defaulted in paying the rent he was liable to pay.
By his default he has contributed, to the position that a suit had to be brought for arrears of rent and ultimately to the position that the property was put to sale in execution of the decree obtained in the suit.
This contribution to the bringing about of the sale was a direct result of his position as a mortgagee.
When therefore he purchased the property himself at the sale in execution of the rent decree he clearly gained an advantage by availing himself of his position as a mortgagee.
This is the position of law even if the mortgagee 's liability was to pay less than the major portion of the rent of the holdings.
In this view section 90 of the Trusts Act applies to the facts of this case.
