On a reference of industrial disputes between the appel lants, the proprietors of bidi concerns, and their workmen, the appellants contended before the Industrial Tribunal that the workers in question were not their workmen, but were the workmen of independent contractors.
The Tribunal found on the basis of evidence led, that the modus operandi was that contractors took leaves and tobacco from the appellant and ' employed workmen for manufacturing bidis.
After bidis were manufactured, the contractors took them back from the work men and delivered them to the appellants.
The workmen took the leaves home and cut them there; however the process of actual rolling by filling the leaves with tobacco took place in what was called contractors ' factories.
The contractors kept no attendance register for the workmen, there was no condition for their coming and going at fixed: hours, nor were they bound to come for work every day; sometimes they informed the contractors if they wanted to be absent and some times they did not.
The contractors said that they could take no action if the workmen absented themselves even without leave.
The payment was made to the workmen at piece rates after the bidis were delivered to the appellants.
The system was that the appellant paid a certain sum for the manufactured bidis, after deduct ing therefrom the cost of tobacco and the leaves already fixed, to the contractors who in their turn paid to the workmen, who rolled bidis, their wages.
Whatever remained after paying the workmen would be contractors ' commission for the work done, The Tribunal held that there was no sale either of the raw materials or of the finished products, for, according to the agreement, if the bidis were not rolled, raw materials had to, he returned to the appellants and the contractors were forbidden from selling the raw materials to anyone else.
Further the manufactured bidis could only be delivered to the appellants who supplied the raw materials.
Further price of raw materials and finished products fixed by the appellants always remained the same and never fluctuated according to market rate.
The Tribunal concluded that the bidi workers were the employees of the appellants and not of the so called contractors who were themselves nothing more then employees or branch managers of the appellants.
Thereupon, the appellants filed writ petitions in the High Court, which held that neither the bidi roller nor the intermediary was an employee of the appellants and allowed the writ petitions.
On appeal by the workmen the appeal court allowed the appeal and restored the order and conclusion of the Tribunal.
On appeal by certi ficate: Held: On the facts found the appeal court 'was right in holding that the conclusion reached by the Tribunal that the intermediaries were merely branch managers appointed ' by the 647 management and the relationship of employers and employees subsisted between the appellants and the bidi rollers was correct.
Dharangadhara Chemical Works Ltd., vs State of Saurashtra, ; , Shri Chintsman Rao vs State of Madhya Pradesh, ; , Shri Birdhichand Sharma vs First Civil Judge Nagpur; , , Shankar Balaji Waje vs State of Maharashtra, [1962] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 249 and Bikusu Yamasa Kashtriya (P) Ltd. vs Union of India, ; , discussed.
