Respondent No. 2 is the lessee of Respondent No. 1 and the appellant is the sub lessee.
Both the respondents Nos. 1 and 2 had the same directors.
Respondent No. 1 brought a suit against respondent No. 2 for eviction in which the appellant was not impleaded as a party.
By agreement between the present respondent Nos. 1 and 2 that suit was not defended and ex parte decree was obtained in favour of respondent No. 1.
By virtue of this decree the appellant as a sub lessee of respondent No. 2 became a tresspasser and had no right to remain on the land.
To avoid this situation the appellant filed a suit to set aside the decree on the ground that it was obtained by collusion.
The Trial Judge accepted his contention and gave a direction that the appellant still remained a tenant and directing the defendants in that suit from taking any steps in execution of the ex parte decree.
On appeal the trial Court 's decree was set aside on the ground that the present appellant had failed to prove that the ex parte decree was obtained collusively.
Before this Court the same contentions as in the courts below were raised.
Held: (i) The mere fact that the defendant agreed with the plaintiff that if a suit is brought he would not defend it would not necessarily prove collusion.
It is only if this agreement is done improperly in the sense that a dishonest purpose was intended to be achieved that they can be said to have colluded.
Scott vs Scott.
1913 Law Reports (Probate Division) 52 and Nagubai Ammal & Ors.
vs B. Shamma Rao, ; , referred to.
(ii) The law allows a landlord to institute a suit against a lessee for the possession of the land on the basis of a valid notification without impleading the sub lessee and the decree in such suit would bind the sub lessee and hence the suit instituted by respondent No. 1 in the present case cannot be said to have constituted an improper act.
(iii) The omission of the respondent No. 2 to defend the earlier suit was not also an improper act because even if it had a good defence it was not bound to take it.
(iv) Even if the appellant was a Thika tenant within the meaning of the Calcutta Thika Tenants Act, 1949, it would have protected him against eviction by respondent No. 2 but It would not have given protection against the eviction by respondent No. 1 because the Act was designed to protect the Thika Tenant from eviction by the landlord only and not against eviction from any other source.
761 Shamsuddin Ahmad vs Dinanath Mullick, Appeal from original decree No. 123 of 1957, decided on 13 8 59.
(v) The respondents Nos. 1 and 2 are two distinct legal entitles and therefore simply because both had the same directors it cannot be said that the purpose of the suit was dishonest or sinister.
(vi) The appellate Bench of the High Court has correctly decided that the present appellant has failed to establish that the impugned decree was procured collusively.
