For the two accounting periods the assessee, a resident company, incorporated outside India paid estate duty payable on the death of its certain share holders not domiciled in India and debited the said amounts to revenue in its accounts in ascertaining the profits and gains of its business for the said years.
The Income tax Officer included the said amounts so paid towards estate duty in the profits and gains of the company for the said two accounting periods and assessed the company to income tax for 1955 56 and 1956 57 on that basis.
The appeals by the assessee to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner were dismissed but on further appeal, the Appellate Tribunal set aside the said orders and held that the assessee was entitled to deduct the said amount in computing its profits.
On an application by the Commissioner of Income tax, the Tribunal stated a case under section 66(1) of the Act to the High Court and referred the following question of law for its opinion: "Whether on the facts and in the circumstances ,of the case, the estate duty paid by the company under s, 84 ,of the , is a revenue expenditure deductible in computing the assessee 's business income for the ,assessment years in question." The High Court agreed with the view of the Tribunal and answered the question in the affirmative.
On appeal by special leave it was urged on behalf of the appellants, (1) that the sum paid by the assessee under section 84 of the were not expenditure of the assessee company and therefore, they could not be deducted from its profits in computing its assessable income under section 10(2)(xv) of the Act; and (2) that even if it was revenue expenditure, it was not laid out or expended wholly or exclusively for the purpose of the assessee 's business within the meaning of the said sub clause.
Held: (i) There was nothing on the record to show whether in England, where the concerned share holders died, the resident company could recover the amount representing the estate duty paid by it in India from the legal representative of the deceased share holders.
Therefore, the assessee who, as a statutory agent paid to the State the estate duty, could not recover the same from the legal representative of the deceased non resident share holders.
In that situation the company would be out of pocket to the extent it paid the estate duty of the said persons.
Therefore, it cannot be held that the amounts paid by the assessee towards estate duty were not expenditure incurred by it, but only amounts paid by it on account with a right to recover the same from the persons on whose behalf it paid.
(ii)The expression" for the purpose of the business"in s.10(2) (xv) of the Act is wider in scope than the expression "for the purpose of earning profits".
Its range is wide: it may 694 take in not only the day to day running of a business but also the rationalization of its administration and modernization of its machinery; it may include measures for the preservation of the business and for the protection of its assets and property from expropriation, coercive process or assertion of hostile title; it may also comprehend payment of statutory dues and taxes imposed as a pre condition to commence or for carrying on of a business; it may comprehend many other acts incidental to the carrying on of a business.
However wide the meaning of the expression may be, its limits are implicit in it.
The purpose shall be for the purpose of the business, that is to say, the expenditure incurred shall be for carrying on the business and the assessee shall incur it in his capacity as a person carrying on the business.
It cannot include sums spent by the assessee as agent of a third party, whether the origin of the agency is voluntary or statutory; in that event, he pays the amount on behalf of another and for a purpose unconnected with the business.
In the present case, the amounts in question were paid by the assessee as a statutory agent to discharge a statutory duty unconnected with the business, though the occasion for the imposition arose because of the territorial nexus afforded by the accident of its doing business in India.
Therefore, it must be held that the estate duty paid by the respondent was not an allowable deduction under section 10(2)(xv) of the Act.
Case law reviewed.
