The respondents were prosecuted in the court of the special Judge after obtaining the sanction of the Central Government, for an offence under section 6(1)(a) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, They put an objection that the sanctioning authority did not apply his mind properly when sanction was granted.
One of the respondents asked the Court to summon the concerned record of the Home Department for, it would substantiate his assertion that the concerned officer did not apply his mind earlier in according sanction for his prosecution.
The Secretary Ministry of Home Affairs, claimed privilege.
The Special Judge and the High Court in revision rejected the claim of privilege of the Union Government.
The appellant than filed a petition in the High Court for grant of a certificate.
The High Court held that the order sought to be appealed against was an interlocutory one and, therefore, the petition was not maintainable under article 134(1)(c) of the Constitution.
Against the order of the High Court in revision the appellant filed a petition for special leave to appeal stating that he applied for a certificate to the High Court but it was refused.
The appellant did not bring to the notice of this Court that the petition for special leave ",as out of time.
The Registry could not point out the defect as in the petition it was stated that the application under article 134(1)(c) was dismissed by the High Court without indicating on what ground it did and this Court assumed that it was in time and granted special leave.
However after obtaining the permission of this Court the appellant filed a petition for excusing the delay on the ground that the Law Officer, who was at the relevant time in charge of the matter in the High Court, advised the Government that the order under appeal was a final order and that an application should be filed under article 134(1)(c) of the Constitution and that the appellant acted bonafide.
The appellant contended (1) that the order of the High Court in the criminal revision was a final order within the meaning of article 134 (1)(c) of the Constitution and (2) that the rule 1(1) of 0.
XXI of the Supreme Court Rules does not say in express terms that the order of refusal to give a certificate must be on an application which is maintainable and, therefore, if in fact the High Court refused to give a certificate, whether on merit,, or on the ground that it was not maintainable, the party could take advantage of the said rule.
Held (per K. Subba Rao and K. C. Das Gupta, JJ): (i) The order under appeal was not a final order within the, meaning of article 134(1) of the Constitution.
It did not purport to decide 735 the rights of the parties, namely, the State U.P. and the accused.
Assuming that it decided some right of the Union Government, the Union Government was neither a party to the criminal proceedings nor was it a party either before the High Court or before this Court.
The indirect effect of the order of a third party to the proceedings, who did not seek to question that order, did not deprive the order of its interlocutory character.
Seth Premchand Satramdas vs State of Bihar [1950] S.C.R. 799, relied on.
(ii) Rule 1(1) of 0.
XXI presupposes that the application for the certificate is maintainable and the Court refuses to give it on the ground that the condition laid down in article 134(1) of the Constitution have not been complied with.
On a reasonable Interpretation of the rule, it could only mean that the refusal ,of the certificate must be in an application maintainable under the said Article.
(iii)The order ex facie was an interlocutory order and so far as the Government of U.P. was concerned it could not possibly be held that any of its rights had been affected by that order.
In the circumstances, it must be held that a wrong legal advice is not a sufficient ground for excusing the delay, and the appeal therefore must be dismissed as barred by limitation.
Per Raghubar Dayal, J. (dissenting),: The appellant should be given the advantage of the opinion of its legal advisers as the error, if any.
could not be said to be of such a character which a legal adviser could not have possibly given.
The rule does not expressly state that limitation would be counted from the date of refusal of the certificate only when an application for a certificate under article 134 would be maintainable.
It is true that an application under article 134 is contemplated to be an application against the judgment, final order or sentence in a criminal proceeding and that refusal of a certificate under article 134, for purposes of rule 1(1) of 0.
XXI, refers to the refusal of an application for certificate against the judgment, final order or sentence in a criminal proceeding.
But this does not necessarily mean that the rule will not be applicable in cases of refusal of a certificate when one applied for it on the ground that the order sought to be appealed against amounted to a judgment, final order or sentence while the High Court came to a different opnion, The rule does not specifically state that the date of the refusal of the certificate would be taken to be the starting point of limitation only when the High Court refuses certificate on the ground that it was not a fit case for appeal to the Supreme Court.
If it were so, the rule would have been limited to those cases,.
