The appellants were carrying on the business of growing and manufacturing tea in their estates.
The sellers of tea were the appellants; the purchasers were local agents of Foreign buyers.
The sales were by public auction at Fort Cochin.
They were conducted by brokers of tea.
The sales were in conformity with the provisions of Tea Act of 1953.
The Sales tax Officer assessed the appellants to pay sales tax on transactions of sale of tea chests at the auctions held at Fort Cochin in the years 1956 57 to 1958 59.
Against the orders of assessment the appellants filed petitions before the High Court for writs of certiorari and for writs of prohibition re straining the Sales tax Officer from proceeding with the collection of sales tax.
The petitions were dismissed by the High Court.
With special leave the appellants appealed to this Court.
It was the common case of all the appellants that the pur chases by the local agent of foreign buyers were with a view to export the goods to their principals abroad and that the goods were in fact exported out of India.
It was contended on behalf of the appellants that the sales of tea were "in the course of export out of the territory of India", and thus exempt from taxation under article 286(1)(b) ,of the Constitution.
Held: (per Gajendragadkar, C. J., Shah and Sikri, JJ.) (i) A transaction of sale which occasions export, or which is effected by a transfer of documents of title after the goods have crossed the customs frontiers, is exempt under article 286(1)(b) of the Constitution from sales tax levied under any State legislation.
A transaction of sale which is a preliminary to export of the commodity sold may be regarded as a sale for export, but is not necessarily to be regarded as one in the course of export, unless the sale occasions export.
Etymological the expression "in the course of export", contemplates an integral relation or bond between the sale and the export.
In general where a sale is effected by the seller, and the seller is not connected with the export which actually takes place, it is a sale for export.
Where the export is the result of sale, the export being inextricably linked up with sale so that the bond cannot be dissociated without a breach of the obligations arising by statute.
contract of mutual understanding between the parties arising from the nature of the transaction the sale is in the course of export.
707 (ii) A sale in the course of export predicates a connection between the sale and export, the two activities being so in tegrated that the connection between the two cannot be voluntarily interrupted, without a breach of the contract or the compulsion arising from the nature of the transaction.
In the present case there was between the sale and the export no such bond as would justify the inference that the sale and the export formed parts of a single transaction or that the sale and export were integrally connected.
The appellants were not concerned with the actual exportation of the goods, and the sales were intended to be complete without the export, and as such it cannot be said that the said sales occasioned export.
The sales were therefore for export and not in the course of export.
Therefore the sales by the appellant to the agents of foreign buyers do not come with the purview of article 286(1)(b) of the Constitution.
State of Travancore Cochin vs Bombay Company Ltd. ; , distinguished.
State of Travancore Cochin V.Shanmugha Vilas Cashew Nut Factory; , , State of Madras vs Gurviah Naidu and Company Ltd. A.I.R. 1956 S.C. 158, State of Mysore vs Mysore Shipping and Manufacturing Co. Ltd. 13 S.T.C. 529 and B.K. Wadear vs M/s. Daulatram Rameshwarlal , relied on.
M. R. K. Abdul Salem and Company vs Government of Madras, 13 S.T.C. 629, explained.
Per Ayyangar, J.
In the present case the sale and the export being related to each other in the sense of one lead .
in. to the other are therefore within article 286(1)(b) of the Constitution.
There could be no difference in legal effect between a sale to a Foreign buyer present in India to take delivery of the goods for transport to his country and a sale to his resident agent for that purpose.
The buyer was an agent, who was not free to deal with the tea purchased by effecting a local sale, but was under an obligation to his Foreign principal to export the goods purchased to a Foreign destination.
The goods purchased were in fact exported from this country.
It was with such a buyer that the appellants entered into the transaction of sale.
In other words it was a part of understanding between the seller and the buyer, inferrable from all the circumstances attendant on these transactions that the buyer was bound to export.
State of Travancore Cochin vs Shanmugha Vilas Cashew ; , State of Madras vs Gurviah Naidu and Co. Ltd. A.I.R. 1956 S.C. 158, State of Mysore vs Mysore Spinning and Manufacturing Co. Ltd. A.I.R. 1958 S.C. 1002 and East India Tobacco Co. vs The State of Andhra Pradesh, [1963]1 S.C.R. 404, referred to.
(ii) Even though the Tea Act does not in terms prohibit in ternal sale of tea 'Purchased alongwith export quota rights, this could be explained by the circumstance that the rights to export tea is considered a privilege which secures an economic advantage to the exporter and hence there was no need for any statutory compulsion to do so.
L/P(D) ISCI 23(a). .
