The respondent challenged the appellant 's election before the Tribunal alleging that it was void inasmuch as for the purpose of securing votes the appellant had appealed to his religion and had thereby committed a corrupt practice.
He had addressed seven election meetings and in those meetings he and his supporters had asked the voters to vote for him as he was the proper representative of the Sikh Panth, and so, he would be able to protect the Sikh religion and the Sikh language.
It was further alleged that at five of the seven election meetings organised by him, the printed posters (Exts.
p. 1 to p. 10) had been distributed by him and they contained an appeal to the voter , to vote for him on the ground of his religion.
The appellant denied both these allegations.
He disputed the respondent 's case that at these meetings any appeal to religion was made.
In regard to the posters, he denied that he had anything to do with the said posters, except one Ext.
p. 9 and pleaded that the said poster was innocent and its publication and distribution would not attract the provisions of section 123(3) of the Act.
Both these questions were answered by the Tribunal in favour of the respondent.
On appeal, the High Court reversed the conclusion of the Tribunal on the first question.
lit regard to the posters, it held that all the ten posters had been distributed by him, but, in its opinion, except Ext.
p. 10, none of the others offended the provisions of section 123(3) of the Act.
In regard to poster Ext.
p. 10, however, it agreed with the conclusion of the Tribunal and held that the said poster contained an appeal to the votes to vote for the appellant on the ground of his religion, and so, by publishing and distributing it at his election meetings, he had committed a corrupt practice under section 123(3) of the Act.
In this Court the appellant contended that the view taken by the Election Tribunal and the High Court was based on a misconstruction of the impugned pamphlet.
Held:In considering the question as to whether a parti cular appeal made by a candidate falls within the mischief of section 123(3) of the Act, courts should not be astute to read into the words used in the appeal anything more than can be attributed to them on its fair and reasonable construction.
The view taken by the High Court and the Tribunal was inconsistent with a fair and reasonable construction of the impugned poster.
In fact, the High Court did not consider the different places in the poster where the word "Panth" had been used and no attempt was made to co relate these sentences and to enquire whether the meaning attributed by the High Court 791 to the word "Panth" was justified in regard to all the sentences in which that word occurred.
The significance of the reference to the Punjabi Suba in the impugned poster arises from the fact that it gives clue to the meaning which the Poster intended to assign to the word "Panth".
Therefore, the word "Panth" in this poster did not mean Sikh religion and so, it would not be possible to accept the view that by distributing this poster, the appellant had appealed to voters to vote for him because of his religion.
In construing the impugned poster, the High Court did not take into account the oral evidence.
It is true that oral evidence would not be of any material assistance in construing the words in the pamphlet; but, the word "Panth" used in six places in the pamphlet could be properly interpreted only to mean the Akali Dal party and it was in that context that the statements made by the witnesses as to the name by which the Akali Dal Party was known in popular minds, might have some relevance.
Sardul Singh Caveeshar vs Hukam Singh, (1953) VI, E.L.R. 316 and Baba Gurdit Singh vs Sardar Partap Singh Kairon, Indian Election Cases by Doabia, Vol. 1, p. 92, referred to.
Political issues which form the subject matter of contro versies at election meetings may indirectly and incidentally introduce consideration of language or religion, but in deciding the question as to whether corrupt practice had been committed under section 123(3), care must be taken to consider the impugned speech or appeal carefully and always in the light of the relevant political controversy.
Therefore, the High Court was in error in coming to the conclusion that the impugned poster Ext.
P. 10 attracted the provision of section 123(3) of the Act.
Jagdev Singh Sidhanti vs Partap Singh Daulte, ;
