Two of the defendants in the two suits out of which the present appeals arose borrowed a sum of Rs. 80,024 4 9 from the respondent Bank in course of their business by pledging their goods.
The Bank discovered that there was shortage in the goods deposited and through its Secretary lodged a com plaint with the police that the said defendants, their father and brother had in collusion with the local agent of the Bank fraudulently removed part of the goods or, in the alternative, had made a grossly inadequate deposit to cheat the Bank.
The Police registered the case and started investigation.
The parties, thereafter settled their differences by a transaction which consisted, among others, of a hypothecation bond for Rs. 30,000/covering immovable property and a Karar for Rs. 35,000/ , which were executed in favour of the Bank by the parent of the said defendants, by the said defendants themselves and their brother and his wife.
On the Secretary of the Bank stating to the Police that the Bank 's claim had been settled and any further action would be unnecessary the criminal proceeding was dropped.
Thereafter the said relatives of ;the two defendants who had executed the hypothecation bond and the Karar brought a suit for the cancellation of the said documents on the ground that they had been executed to stifle the criminal prosecution and were as such unenforceable under section 23 of the Indian Contract Act.
The Bank sued for recovery of the amount due on the Karar which was resisted on the same ground that the document was unenforceable under section 23 of the Contract Act.
The said defendant debtors did not examine themselves.
They did not raise the plea of unenforceability in respect of a hire purchase agreement which formed a part of the transaction in question and on which the Bank brought a suit against them and got a decree.
After the said settlement these defendants applied for further loan from the Bank.
There was evidence to show that an agreement to furnish additional security had been reached between the said defendants and the Bank even before the complaint was filed.
The trial Court held that both ;the documents fell within the mischief of section 23 of the Contract Act and decreed the first suit and dismissed the second.
The High Court on appeal took the contrary view and reversed the decision of the trial Court accordingly.
The plaintiffs in the first suit appealed to this Court.
Held: It was well settled that agreements made with the sole purpose of stifling prosecution were opposed to public policy since the consideration which supported such agreements was itself against public policy and could not, therefore, be 746 enforced.
In India however this doctrine was not applicable either to compoundable offences or to offences which could be compounded with the leave of the Court.
The onus was strictly on the party that impugned the trans action to prove that it was based on an agreement to stifle the prosecution.
It must be able to show that on a certain consideration proceeding from it the complainant in return promised to discontinue the criminal proceeding and then alone the transaction would be one against public policy.
V. Narasimha Raju vs V. Gurumurthy Raju, [1963] 3 S.C.R. 687, Maharaja Srish Chandra Nandy vs Sapravat Chandra A.I.R. , Sudhindra Kumar Ray Chaudhuri vs Ganesh Chandra Ganguli, 1939 I.L. R. I Cal.
241 and Kamini Kumar Basu vs Birendra Nath Basu, A.I.R. 1930 P.C. 100, referred to.
Bhowanipur Banking Corporation Ltd. vs Duresh Nandini.
Dasi, Cal. 1, considered.
But in judging a particular agreement distinction must be made between the motive for the agreement and the considera tion for it and subsequent events should not be allowed to confuse the issue.
It was clear in the present case that the plaintiffs had failed to discharge the onus that lay on them and the decision of the High Court was, therefore, correct.
