A had insured his car with the appellant under a comprehen sive policy.
A permitted B, (who had insured his own car with another company) to drive his car and while B was driving the car it met with an accident.
As a result of the accident died and D sustained serious injuries.
Both C and D were in the car.
The heirs of C and D filed suits for damages.
Notices under section 96(2) of the were issued to the appellant who thereupon took out a Chamber Summons contending that the notice was bad in law.
Alternatively it was contended that the appellant be permitted to defend the suit in the name of the defendant.
The Court held that the notices were bad.
The plaintiffs filed Letters Patent appeals with success and the Chamber Summons were dismissed and the trial Judge was directed to hear the alternative prayer.
Against this Order the present appeal was filed with special leave.
The contention of the appellant was that in view of para graph 4 of B 's own policy issued by the other company which indemnified B against any liability incurred by him whilst personally driving a private car not belonging to him or hired by him.
under a Hire Purchase agreement, B was not included among persons indemnified in para.
3 of A 's policy which the appellant had issued on account of proviso (a) to the said para.
The respondent contended that this proviso is not a limitation on the class of persons indemnified under para.
3 that class being the drivers driving A 's car insured under the policy but merely amounted to a condition affecting the liability of the company vis a vis the driver who was entitled to be indemnified under any other policy.
Held: (i) From a consideration of sections 93, 94, 95 and 96 of the it follows that if under the terms of the policy B can be said to be the person insured under Para. 3 ,of the policy, the company would be liable to satisfy the decree if any passed against B. (ii)The appellant by agreeing with the person who effects the policy, to insure him against liability to third parties, takes upon itself the entire liability of the person effecting the insurance.
It is open to the insurer not to extend the indemnity to the insured to other persons but if it extends it to other persons, it cannot restrict it vis a, vis the right of the third party ,entitled to damages to recover them from the insured, a right which is not disputed.
A proviso meant to exempt certain persons from the general classification will have to be related to considerations affecting it and is not to be related to such ,classified person 's right to indemnity from any other insurer.
(iii)The cl.
(4) of section II of B 's policy with the other company does not make that policy to be a policy within the meaning of L/P(D))1SCI 28(a) 368 s.94 of the Act in relation to A 's car by whose user B incurred liabilities sought to be established in the two suits.
Such a policy and any indemnity under it cannot be used for sub classifying drivers specified in the policy issued to A by the appellant.
(iv)The High Court was correct in holding that the ap pellant had insured B in view of para.
3 of section II of that policy and that it comes within the expression insurer in section 96 of the Act.
