The Vice Chancellor of the Bihar University by an order dated January 13, 1963 directed the reconstitution of the Governing Body of the Rajendra College, Chapra, which was a public institution founded by public charities and was affi liated to the University under section 2(d) of the Bihar State Universities (Patna, University of Bihar, Bhagalpur and Ranchi) Act, 1960, removed the appellant, who was the Secretary of the College and nominated certain persons as members of the Governing Body.
The Act of 1960 was amended by Act II of 1962 and section 35 of the Amending Act provided for the dissolution of the Senate Syndicate and Academic Council functioning prior to it and for the constitution of new bodies in their place and authorised the Vice Chancellor pending such reconstitution to exercise their powers for a period not exceeding nine months.
In exercise of the power conferred by this section the Vice Chancellor framed new statutes under which he purported to pass the impugned orders.
Clause 2(4) of the new statutes conferred on the Vice Chancellor the power to amend or revise the constitution of the affiliated colleges and cl.
3(l) empowered the syndicate either on its own motion or at the instance of the Vice Chancellor to dissolve and order constitution of Governing Bodies.
It further empowered the cancellation of grants in aid to the colleges concerned.
The proviso to cl. 3(l) required that reasonable opportunity must be given to the Governing Body before any action was taken under the clause.
The appellant moved the Patna High Court for a writ quashing the impugned order and the statutes on which it was made.
His case was that the relevant statutes were ultra vires and as such the order was unsustainable.
The High Court held that the impugned order could not be justified under cl.
3(l) as the proviso had not been complied with but that the order was valid under cl.
It further held that the impugned statutes could be justified by section 60(a)(ii) which was introduced by Act II of 1962, empowering the Vice Chancellor to make adaptations or modification in the pre existing statutes.
Held:The Bihar State University Act of 1960 made a clear ,distinction between two categories of collegiate institutions, (1) those owned and maintained by the university and (2) others admitted or affiliated to the University, as was apparent from sections 4(10) and 30(d) and (e) of the Act.
While the University had undoubtedly the power to disaffiliate an institution belonging to the second category on its failure to conform to reason.able and legitimate conditions under the Act subject to which :the affiliation was granted, it had no power to dissolve and 880 constitute the Governing Body of such an institution itself.
Clause 2(4) of the Statutes was inconsistent with section 30(d) of the Act and must be held to be invalid.
The impugned order passed under it therefore must be invalid and inoperative.
Clause 3(l) of the statute in so far as it proceeded on the basis that the syndicate could itself dissolve the Governing.
Body and order its reconstitution suffered from the same infirmity as cl.
That clause in so far at it gave the syndicatethe power to dissolve and reconstitute the Governing Body and cancel grants in aid to an affiliated college for non compliance with its direction issued in that behalf must, consequently, be held to be invalid.
The power conferred by section 60(ii) of the Act must be read in the light of the provisions of section 30(d) in regard to affiliated colleges and since statute 2(4) was itself invalid, the section could not justify the impugned order.
In resolving disputes between affiliated colleges and the university, attempt should be made to respect the autonomy of the colleges and reconcile the same with the supervisory powers of the University intended to be exercised in the interest of efficiency and progress.
