The assessee (respondent) owner of an estate known as "Tekari Rai" executed an indenture of trust dated January 20, 1941 whereby the "Tekari Rai" and certain Zamindari properties owned by her were conveyed to certain named trustees to be held in trust, subject to conditions specified therein.
This deed was created with a view to liquidate the debts of the Tekari Raj.
The beneficiaries under the deed were the settlor, her husband and her five sons.
This original deed was modified by a deed of rectification dated December 22, 1941.
It was provided in the original cl.
43 of the deed of trust dated January 20, 1941, that the settlor may at any time during her life re voke or vary either wholly or partly the trust or any provi sions of the deed but not before the payment and discharge of certain debts and liabilities.
Clause 43 of the original deed was subsequently modified by the 45th clause which was added by the deed of amendment dated January 12, 1942.
By cl. 45 of the deed of amendment the right of revocation was not exercisable till the Thica leases in favour of the Maharajadhiraj of Darbhanga and Capt.
Maharaj Kumar Gopal Saran Narain Singh remained good and effective.
It was the common ground that the lease in favour of the Maharajadhiraj of Darbhanga was to enure till 1965 and the lease in favour of Capt.
Maharaj Kumar Gopal Saran Narain Singh till 1954.
In assessing the assessee to income tax for the year 1947 48, the Income tax Officer included in her total income the income of the trust.
The matter went up to the High Court and the High Court set aside the assessment order passed by the Income tax Officer.
The High Court held that a,, the trust was not revocable for a period of six years, the income received by the beneficiaries (other than the assessee) was not liable to be taxed as the assessee 's income till the power to revoke arose in her favour.
The appellant obtained special leave against the order passed by the High Court.
Hence the appeal.
The principal question for consideration before this Court was whether the income received by the beneficiaries other than the assessee could be included in the total income of the assessee under section 16(l)(c) of the Act.
Held:(i) In terms the third proviso to section 16 (l)(c) of the Income tax Act excludes from the operation of the principal clause that part of the income alone which arises to any person under a, deed of settlement: it does not remove from its protection the entire deed of trust, if part of the income is not covered by the conditions prescribed or if the settlor has in a part of the income interest direct or indirect.
The third proviso does not operate to exclude the income which the settlor receives as a beneficiary from liability to tax.
921 (ii)The third proviso to section 16 (l)(c) of the Act does ope rate in respect of settlements, dispositions, or transfers which are by the first proviso revocable for the purpose of that clause.
(iii) Two conditions are necessary for the application of the 3rd proviso to section 16 (l)(c) of the Income tax Act: (i) that the trust should not be revocable for a period exceeding 6 years or during the life time of the beneficiary and (ii) the settlor or disponer should have no direct or indirect benefit from the income given to the beneficiary.
The effect of the two conditions is that, that part of the income which arises to any person by virtue of the settlement which is not revocable for a period of six years or which is not revocable during the life time of the beneficiary will not be included in the settlor 's income, provided that from the income of such person the settlor derives no benefit direct or indirect.
On the construction of the deed of trust it was held that the deed was not revocable within six years provided by section 16 (1)(c) of the Act.
Ramji Keshavji vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay, , relied on.
(iv)On the facts of this case it was held that by virtue of the third proviso to section 16 (l) (c) of the Act the income re ceived by the beneficiaries under the deed of trust other than the assessee could not until the power of revocation arose to the assessee, be deemed to be the income of the assessee for the purpose of assessment to income tax.
