A testator was carrying on business in Ayurvedic drugs under the name and style of Arya Vaidya Sala.
Under his will his properties, A including the business, were held under trust and the object of the trust was to utilise 60 per cent of the profits of the business for 20 years and 85 per cent thereafter for religious and charitable purposes.
The assessment years in question fell within 20 years from the death of the testator and the question was whether the 60 per cent of the income from the trust properties was exempt from assessment to income tax under section 4(3)(1) of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922.
The Income tax authorities rejected the claim for exemption and assesses.
the entire income from the said properties, on the ground that the substantive cl.
(i) of section 4(3) was not applicable to the case but only cl.
(b) of the proviso and that the conditions laid down thereunder were not complied with.
HELD: (i) The business run under the name and style of Arya Vaidya Sala was property within the meaning of section 4(3)(i) of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922, and as the entire business was held in trust for utilising a part of its profits for religious or charitable purposes, the said income was exempt from assessment to income tax under that section.
(ii) Cl.
(b) of the proviso to section 4(3)(i) was applicable only to a business not held in trust but carried on on behalf of a religious or charitable institution, (iii) A business held in trust wholly or in part for religious or charitable purposes was not a business carried on on behalf of a religious or charitable institution.
(iv) The dichotomy between the two expressions "wholly" and "in part" in section 4(3)(i) was not based upon the dedication of the whole or a fractional part of the property, but between the dedication of the said property the income from which was to be utilized wholly for religious or charitable purposes or in part for such purposes.
(v) The expression "such income" in the opening words of the proviso to section 4(3)(i) meant "income accruing or arising in favour of the trust".
