By an agreement with the Fort William Jute Company in 1925 the appellant company became its Managing Agent.
The terms, inter alia, were that the appellant or its successors, unless they chose to resign, were to continue as Managing Agent until they ceased to hold certain shares in the capital of the company and were on that account removed by a resolution of the company or their tenure of office was determined by the winding up of the company.
On termination of the agency, the Managing Agent was to get such reasonable compensation as was agreed upon between the Managing Agent and the company.
Besides this managing agency the appellant held five other managing agencies.
In 1952, the appellant by in agreement with M/s. Mugneeram Bangur & Co., agreed to relinquished the managing agency of the Fort William Jute Co., Ltd., in their favour in consideration of M/s. Mugneeram Bangur and Co. taking over the shares held by the appellant, procuring repayment of loans advanced by the appellant to the Fort William Jute Company and further procuring that the Fort William Jute Company.
will pay com pensation to the appellant.
The appellant intimated the members of the latter company that it would be in the best interest of the share holders to terminate the appellant 's agency which would otherwise continue till 1957 and that M/S. Mugneeram Bengur & Co. had agreed to reimburse the Fort William Jute Co. Ltd. for payment of Rs. 3,50,000 as compensation to the appellant.
The arrangement with M/s. Mugneeram Bangur & Co. was accepted by the Fort William Jute Co. and the appellant tendered resignation.
M/s. Mugneeram Bangur and Co. 94 became the Managing agent.
The appellant received the sum of Rs. 3,50,000 and credited the sum in its profit and loss account as having been received from the Fort William Jute Co. Ltd. on account of compensation for loss of office and in calculating the net profit for the purpose of income tax for the year 1953 54 did not include this amount in the return.
The Income tax Officer in assessment included the amount in the appellant 's taxable income.
The Assistant Appellate Commissioner on appeal modified the assessment holding that the sum received by the appellant as compensation for surrendering the managing agency, which was to enure for five years more and might have continued for another twenty years, was a capital receipt.
The Appellate Tribunal confirmed the order of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner.
At the instance of the Commissioner of Income tax the following question was referred to the High Court: Whether on the facts and circumstances of the case the sum of Rs. 3,50,000 received by the assessee to relinquish the managing agency was a revenue receipt assessable under the Indian Income tax Act?.
The High Court answered the question in the affirmative.
HELD: that the answer should be in the negative.
The transaction in question was not a trading transaction, but one in which the assessee parted with an asset of enduring value.
The compensation received was compensation for loss of capital.
It was inconsequential whether the appellant conducted the remaining agencies after the determination of the one in question.
Where payment is made as compensation for cancellation of a contract which does not affect the trading structure of the business, nor causes 'deprivation of what in substance is source of income, and is a normal incident of the business, the compensation is revenue.
But where the cancellation impairs the trading structure or results in loss of the source of income, the compensation paid for the cancellation of the agreement is normally capital receipt.
Commissioner of Income tax Nagpur vs Rai Bahadur Jairam Yalji, , referred to.
Commissioner of Income tax vs Shaw Wallace and Co. L.R. 59 I.A. 206, explained.
Raja Bahadur Kamakshaya Narain Singh of Ramgarh vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bihar and Orissa, L.R. 70 I.A. 180, Commissioner of Income tax and Excess Profits Tax Madras vs South India Pictures, , Peirce Leslie and Co. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, Madras, , Commissioner of Income tax, Hyderabad Deccan vs Vazir Sultan and Sons.
and Godrej & Co. vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay City, , discussed.
