In 1869 the British Government and the State of Tonk entered into a treaty which provided for the extradition of offenders in respect of certain offences specified therein called "heinous offences," which did not include the of fences of cheating and extortion.
In 1903 the Indian Extradition Act was passed which provided for extradition in respect of cheating and extortion also, but section 18 of the Act provided that nothing contained in the Act "shall derogate from the provisions of any treaty for the extradition of offenders.
" Under the Independence of India Act, 1947, the suzerainty of His Majesty over the Indian States lapsed and with it all treaties and agreements in force; but under a "standstill agreement," between the Indian Dominion and the States (including Tonk) all agreements between His Majesty and the States were continued, including agreements in respect of extradition.
Tonk acceded to the Dominion of India in 1947 and became a member State of the United State of Rajasthan.
The appellant was a member of the Uttar Pradesh Civil Service and his services were lent to the State of Tonk in 1948.
After he had reverted to the Uttar Pradesh he was charged with the offences of cheating and extortion alleged to have been committed while he was in Tonk and was arrested under an extradition warrant issued under section 7 of the Extradition Act, 1903.
He applied under es.
4=91 and 561 A of the Code of Criminal Procedure for his release, contending that in view of the provisions of section 18 of the Extradition Act and the Treaty of Extradition of 1869, his arrest was illegal: Held per KANIA O. J. and PATANJALI SASTRI J. (FAZL, ALI.
J. concurring), Even assuming that the Extradition Treaty of 1869 subsisted after the merger of the Tonk State, by providing for extradition for additional offences the Extradition Act of 1903 did not derogate from the provisions of the Treaty of 5869 or the rights of Indian citizens thereunder, and the arrest and surrender of the appellant under section 7 of the Act was not, therefore, rendered unlawful by anything contained in the said Treaty.
574 Per MUKHERJEA J. (FAZL ALI, MAHAJAN and DAS JJ.
concur ring).
The Extradition Treaty of 1869 was not capable of being given effect to in view of the merger of the Tonk State in the United State of Rajasthan, and, as no enforce able treaty right existed, section 18 of the Extradition Act of 1903 had no application; and inasmuch as the conditions of section 7 of the said Act had been complied with, the warrant of arrest issued under section 7 of the Act was not illegal.
