The respondent, who had been carrying on the business of securing refund of octroi duty on behalf of persons who had paid duty and were entitled to refund, claimed the refund of money paid as octroi duty by his principals in respect of the period commencing from February 15, 1950, the date from which the appellant became a Municipal Corporation under the Provincial Municipal Corporation Act, 1949.
After deducting ten percent of the amount in accordance with r. 18(3) of the Octroi Rules, framed by the Municipal Authorities, the ap pellant Corporation paid the balance to the respondent.
The representation of the respondent that from the date from which the Corporation had come into existence, the deduction had become invalid in law.
was turned down by the appellant.
Thereupon the respondent filed a suit for recovery of the balance with interest.
The defence was that the deduction was valid; that in any case, the respondent who was not the person who paid the amount, was not entitled to bring the suit, and that the suit was barred by limitation.
The trial court held the respondent was entitled to bring the suit and also that it was not barred by limitation but the deduction was valid and it dismissed the suit.
On appeal, the District Court disagreeing with the trial court, held that the deduction was not valid in law, but the plaintiff was not entitled to bring such a suit and that the suit was barred by limitation and it dismissed the appeal.
On a further appeal the High Court found in favour of the respondent on all the three points and allowed the appeal.
HELD: (i) A tax on octroi refund is not one of the taxes which the Bombay Municipal Corporation could impose.
Apart from the absence of power to impose such a tax, which is clear from the earlier parts of section 127 of the Bombay Act of 1949 there is the categorical prohibition in sub section
(4) against the imposition of any such tax by the Cor poration.
(ii) Assuming, without deciding, that such a levy can be validly made by way of fees under section 466, since no standing order was made under section 466 prescribing any fee, it is not possible to justify the deductions as _ levy of fee.
(iii)The tax did not become a fee merely because the new Act (Bom.
Act 59 of 1949), prohibited the imposition of such a tax.
(iv)Cl. 5(a) of Appendix IV furnishes no justification for the levy often percent deduction after February 15, 1950 when the Act 59 of 1949with its categorical prohibition in section 127(4) against the imposi tion by the Corporation of a tax which the State Legislature had no power to impose under the Constitution became applicable.
(v)The respondent having made the claim in accordance with the rules was the person entitled to receive what amount was legally refundable, and so he was also entitled to bring the suit.
/ 180 (vi)The suit was not barred by limitation.
The benefit of section 487 of Act 59 of 1949 would be available to the Corporation only if it was held that this deduction was "an act done or purported to be done in pursuance or execution or intended execution of the Act."
