The respondents in these appeals were convicted by Magistrates for offences under section 26(1) of the Indian Forest Act.
Appeals were filed to the Sessions Judge, where the respondents raised the contention that the forest areas in which the alleged offences were committed were not "Reserve forests" within the meaning of the Act.
For establishing that these "reserves" were "reserved forests" within the Indian Act, the appellant relied on two circumstances.
First, there was a Forest Act promulgated by the Ruler of Tripura State (Act 2 of 1257 T.E. 1297 T.E. ?) which contained provisions somewhat analogous to those contained in the Indian Act.
Next, section 5 of the Tripura Act enabled the State Government to declare by notifications published in the State Gazette, the boundaries of the forest areas to be governed by the State Act.
Such notifications were published by which the boundaries of the reserves of the forests in question were defined.
The appellant urged that the Tripura Act was replaced by the Indian Forest Act by reason of legislative provisions upon the merger of the native State of Tripura with the Dominion of India, and that the notifications under the Tripura Act which were continued in force by these same provisions rendered these reserves "Reserved forests" under the Indian Forest Act.
The Sessions Judge held that by reason of these notifications the forest areas became "reserved forests" under the relevant provisions of the Indian Forest Act and dismissed the appeals.
Thereafter, revisions were filed before the Judicial Commissioner, who 'differing from the Sessions Judge held that they were not "reserved forests" and directed the acquittal of the respondents.
On appeal by special leave: HELD:. .(i) From the provisions of the Indian Forest Act, it would be seen that it is the notification under section 20 after complying with the procedure prescribed by the other sections of Chapter 11 commencing with section 4 that constitutes a forest area "a reserved forest" within the Act.
(ii).The fact that under the Tripura Act there were no preliminaries Prescribed before a forest could be notified as a reserved forest does not detract from such a notification being a notification under the Indian Forest Act.
(iii). .In substance the object and purpose of the Tripura Act was the protection of particular trees the seven types of trees specified in section 4.
The notification under section 5 is for the purpose of constituting areas where These types would be protected.
The penal provisions enacted are for insuring the protection of these trees.
(iv) The prime purpose of Chapter II of the Indian Forest Act is the constitution of reserved forests in which (1) all private rights within the reserved area are completely eliminated by their being bought up where these are ascertained to exist by payment of compensation, (2) the entire area being devoted to siviculture, every tree in the forest being protected 160 from injury and within the scope of the penal provision contained in section 26.
In other words, the reservation here is to the "forest area" as such and not the protection of the particular specified trees or species of trees in such a forest.
The object of Ch.
IV of the Indian Forest Act is the protection of particular trees and the setting apart of particular areas as protected forests for the purpose of ensuring the growth and maintenance of such trees.
The object sought to be achieved by the reservation in Ch.
IV is exactly similar to that which is sought to be achieved by the Tripura Act.
Only the Tripura Act makes the cutting of protected trees even outside a forest an offence, whereas there is no such provision under the Indian Forest Act.
(vi).The notification under section 5 of the Tripura Act would constitute the area in question only as a "protected" forest under Ch.
IV of the Indian Forest Act and not as a "reserved" forest under section 20 contained in Ch.
11 of the Act, (vii). .The
Judicial Commissioner was right in considering that the Provision.in the Indian Forest Act "corresponding" to the Tripura Forest Act under.which the notifications fixing the boundaries of these forests in question were issued was that as regards "a protected forest" under Ch.
IV and not "reserved forest" within section 20 contained in Ch.
