Forty persons belonging to a village faction and constituting an unlawful assembly were put up on trial before the Additional Sessions Judge under section 302 read with section 149 of the Indian Penal Code and other sections thereof for murdering 5 persons of the other faction with guns.
The trial Judge found 35 of them guilty and sentenced 10 of them, who carried fire arms, to death and the rest to imprisonment for life.
Three appeals were preferred by the convicted persons to the High Court and the sentences of death came up for confirmation under section 374 of the (1) L.R. 59 I.A. 2o6.
134 Code of Criminal Procedure.
The High Court acquitted 7 of the appellants and, concurring with the findings of the trial court, dismissed the appeals of the rest.
It confirmed the sentences of death passed on the 10 accused persons.
The appeals to this Court were preferred by those 10 and 6 others by special leave.
HELD: (i) In criminal appeals under article 136 of the Constitution involving sentences of death it would be improper to refuse to consider relevant pleas of fact or law on the ground that they had not been taken before the High Court.
when any such point had actually been urged and not considered by the High Court, the party urging it was entitled as a matter of right to obtain a decision from this Court.
Even otherwise no hard and fast rule can be laid down prohibiting such pleas being raised in such appeals.
(ii).It would be unsound to lay down as a general rule that every witness cited by the prosecution must be examined by it even though his evidence was not very material or he was known to have been won over or terrorised.
(iii). .Evidence of a witness could not be discarded only on the ground that he was a partisan or interested witness, particularly in cases of murder committed by a village faction, such mechanical rejection would invariably lead to failure of justice.
(iv).It was not improper for a criminal court having a large number of offenders and victims to deal with to adopt the test that the conviction of any particular accused could be sustained only if a particular number of witnesses gave a consistent account against him.
Such a test, even though mechanical, was not unreasonable.
Punishment prescribed by section 149 of the Indian Penal Code was in a sense vicarious and that section does not necessarily require that the offence must have been actually committed by every member of the unlawful assembly.
The observations of this Court in Baladin vs State of U.P. had to be read in the context of that case and could not be treated as laying down an unqualified proposition of law.
Baladin vs State of Uttar Pradesh, A.I.R. 1958 S.C. 181, explained.
(vi) It was. not correct to say that if a person was found guilty of murder under section 302/149 of the Indian Penal Code and it was not shown that he himself. .had committed the murder, no sentence of death could be inflicted on him.
Dalip Singh vs State of Punjab, [19541 S.C.R. 145, distinguished.
(vii). .There was no error in the exercise of their discretion by the courts below in the present case in making a distinction between the ten persons who carried fire arms and were sentenced to death and the others, who did not carry fire and were sentenced to imprisonment for life, under a common charge under sections 302/149.
I35 (viii).
Regard being had to the circumstances of the present case, the ends of justice would be properly served if the sentences of death passed on the three accused persons aged 18, 23 and 24, who had joined the unlawful assembly under pressure of their elders were modified to life sentences.
