A firm called the Modern Cultivators brought a suit against the State of Punjab to recover damages for loss of crops suffered by flooding of its lands as a result of a break in a canal belonging to the State.
The plaintiff 's case was that there was a breach in the western bank of the canal owing to the negligence of the defendants and canal water escaped to the fields causing them to be flooded.
The case of Government was that breach did take place but it was promptly repaired and the fields were flooded not by the canal water but by heavy rains in the month of September.
The trial Judge passed a decree for Rs. 20,000 against Government, but it was reduced by the High Court to Rs. 14,130.
The High Court held that the inundation of the fields was by water from the canal and not from the nallahas.
Both the plaintiff and the defendant filed cross appeals by special leave of this Court.
Held (per Sarkar, J.): (i) That the rule of res ipsa loquitur was applicable to the facts of this case because there would not have been a breachin the banks of the canal if those in management took proper care andthe breach itself would be prima facie proof of negligence.
Scott vs London Dock Co., applied.
Barkway vs South Wales Transport Co. Ltd., [1950] 1 All.
E.R. 392, distinguished.
(ii)An inference that the defendant was negligent in the management of the canal arises because it is clear from the record that documents called for had not been produced deliberately.
Murugesam Pillai vs Manickavasaka Pandara, L.R. 44 I.A. 98, referred to.
(iii)Article 2 of the Limitation Act does not apply to the facts of the casefor there is nothing in the Canal Act imposing any duty on the defendant to take care of the banks.
Held (per Hidayatullah, J.): (i) The principle of res ispa loquitur cannot always, be safely applied where the facts before the court are not the whole facts.
It should not be applied as legal rule but only 51 S.C. 18. 274 as an aid to an inference when it is reasonable to think that there are lb no further facts to consider.
It is not a principle which dispenses with proof of negligence.
Rather it shifts onus from one party to another.
It is a rule of evidence and not of liability.
A too ready reliance on the maxim reinforces a fault liability and makes it into an absolute liability.
If absolute liability is to give way to fault liabilty, some fault must be established by evidence or must be capable of being reasonably inferred from the circumstances.
It is not sufficient to say res ipsa loquitur because the danger is that facts may not always tell the whole story and if there is something withheld how can the thing be said to speak for itself? The High Court erred in applying the principle of res ipsa loqutur to the facts of this case.
In the present case there was sufficient evidence, in the absence of reasonable explanation (which there was not), to establish negligence.
Donoghue vs Stevenson, 1932 1 A.C. 562, explained.
Sedleigh Denfield vs V. O 'Callaghan and Other section 1940 1 A.C. 890 and Scott vs London and St. Katherine Docks Co., ; , referred to.
Barkway vs South Wales Transport Co. Ltd. [1950] 1 All.
E.R. , relied on.
(ii)The rule in Raylands vs Fletcher is hardly applicable here.
Canal Systems are essential to the life of the Nation and land that is used as canals, is subjected to an ordinary use and not to unnatural use on which the rule in Raylands vs Fletcher rests.
There is difficulty in distinguishing non natural and natural user.
Rylands vs Fletcher, L.R. 3 H.L. 300, inapplicable.
Richards vs Lothian, ; , relied on.
(iii)Article 2 of the Limitation Act cannot apply to cases where the act or omission complained of is not alleged to be in pursuance of statutory authority.
Act or omission which can claim statutory protection or is alleged to be in pursuance of a statutory command may attract article 2 of the Limitation Act but the Act or omission must be one which can be said to be in pursuance of an enactment.
In the present case the breach in the bank was not that kind of act or omission.
It could not claim to be in pursuance of the Canal Act.
Nor could the opening or closing of the channel for operations, though in pursuance of the Canal Act, be the relevant act or omission because they were more than a year before the cause of action and to apply a limitation of 90 days to that cause of action is not only impossible but also absurd.
Article 2, therefore does not apply.
Article 3 of the Limitation Act applies to the present case.
Punjab Cotton Press Co. Ltd. vs Secretary of State, I.L.R. P.C., inapplicable 275 Mohamad Sadaat Ali Khan vs Administrator Corporation of City of Lahore, I.L.R. F.B. and Secretary of State vs Lodna Colliery Co. Ltd., I.L.R. 15 Pat.
510, referred to.
Commissioners for the Port of Calcutta vs Corporation of Calcutta, 64 I.A. 363, distinguished.
Held (per Mudholkar. J.): (i) The rule in Rylands vs Fletcher applies only if the defendant brings or accumulates on his own land something that is likely to escape and do mischief, irrespective of the question whether that was done by the defendant wilfully or negligently.
This rule has been adopted in this country in several cases and so can be regarded as a part of the common law of the land.
In the country of its origin, this rule has been subjected to certain exceptions.
One of the exceptions is this: that where the owner or occupier of land accumulates a deleterious substance thereon by virtue of an obligation imposed upon him by a statute or in exercise of statutory authority he will not be rendered liable for damages resulting therefrom to other persons unless it is established that he was guilty of negligence in allowing the deleterious substance to escape.
The present case falls within this exception.
The State of Punjab would not be liable for damages by the operation of the rule in Rylands vs Fletcher but is liable by reason of its negligence.
The breach was caused by the negligence on the part of the officers of the State in inspecting the banks of the canal and in particular that portion of it where the breach had been caused.
Rylands vs Fletcher, ; explained.
Gooroo Churn V. Ram Dutt, , Dhanusao V. Sitabai, , and Dunne vs North Western Gas Board, referred to.
(ii)The rule of evidence res ipsa loquitur cannot be applied to the facts of this case because all the facts for the decision of the case were not placed before the court.
Immediately after the breach occurred some reports were made by the officers of the State but they were not placed before the Court despite its order requiring their production.
In other words the State had deliberately suppressed evidence in its possession which could have established negligence.
In this view the rule of res ipsa loquitur is not the applicable.
