The appellant, who was a Matadhipati, moved the High Court for a writ quashing the notice served on him in 1952 by the Executive Officer to band ever to the latter the administration and the properties 253 of the Mutt in enforcement of a scheme framed in 1939 under section 63 of the Madras Act 11 of 1927.
The predecessor of the appellant had filed a suit in the District Judge 's Court to set aside that scheme.
The suit failed and the scheme was confirmed subject to minor modifications.
In 1951 the Madras Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Act, 1951, repealed and replaced the Madras Act 11 of 1927.
It was urged on behalf of the appellant in the High Court that the scheme contravened his fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution.
The single Judge who heard the matter found in his favour and held that the scheme contravened article 19(1)(f) of the Constitution.
On appeal by the respondent, the Division Bench reversed the decision of the Single Judge.
The High Court granted certificate to the appellant to appeal to this Court.
It was contended that although the scheme was valid as framed tinder the earlier Act, it incumbent under section 103(d) of the Act of 1951 that the validity of the all the provisions of the scheme must be tested in the light of its provisions.
Held:Section 103(d) of the Madras Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Act, 1951, properly construed, merely meant that earlier schemes framed under Madras Act It of 1927 would be operative as though they were framed under the Act of 1951.
It was not intended by the section that those schemes must be examined and reframed in the light of the relevant provisions of the Act.
Section 62(3)(a) of the Act which provided for the modification of such schemes made this amply clear.
Unless the schemes could be modified under that section they must be deemed to have been validly made under the Act of 1951 and enforced as such.
East End Dwellings Co. Ltd. vs Finsbury Borough Council, , considered.
Although the scheme in question had not been completely implemented before the Constitution, that was no ground for examining its provision in the light of article 19 of the Constitution.
The fundamental rights conferred by the Constitution are not retrospective in operation and the observation made by this Court in Seth Shanti Sarup vs Union of India, are not applicable to the present case.
Seth Shanti Sarup vs Union of India, A.I.R. 1955 S.C. 624, explained and distinguished.
