The respondent No. 1 while he was a minor was admitted to the benefits of a partnership constituted of respondents 2 and 3.
The partnership owed a certain amount to the appellants.
The partnership was dissolved and subsequently respondent No. 1 became a major but he did not exercise the option not to become a partner under section 30(5) of the .
Respondents 2 and 3 committed acts of insolvency and the appellants filed an application for adjudicating the three respondents as insolvents.
The first respondent resisted the application without success but on second appeal the High Court held that he was not a partner of the firm and hence he could not be adjudicated an insolvent for the debts of the firm.
The present appeal was filed on a certificate granted by the High Court.
The appellant contended before this Court that the 1st respondent had become a partner of the firm by reason of the fact that he had not elected to become a partner under a. 30(5) of the Partnership Act and therefore he was liable to be adjudicated an insolvent.
Held:(i) A person under the age of majority cannot become a partner by contract and he cannot be one of that group of persons called a firm.
It therefore follows that if during minority of the 1st respondent the partners of the firm committed an act of insolvency, the minor could not have been adjudicated insolvent on the basis of the said act of insolvency for the simple reason that he was not a partner of the firm.
Sanyasi Charan Mandal vs Krishnadhan Banerji, (1922) I.L.R. , relied on.
(ii)It is implicit in the terms of sub section
(5) of section 30 of the Partnership Act that the partnership is in existence,.
A minor, after attaining majority, cannot elect to become a partner of a firm which ceased to exist.
The entire scheme of section 30 of the Partnership Act posits the existence of a firm and negatives any theory of its application to a stage when the firms ceased to exist.
(iii)Since the 1st respondent became a major after the partnersship was dissolved section 30 of the Partnership Act does not apply to him.
He is not a partner of the firm and therefore he cannot be adjudicated insolvent for the acts of insolvency committed by respondents 2 and 3, the partners of the firm.
