The Administrator of the Union Territory of Tripura passed orders detaining 68 persons, including the appellants and the petitioners, under R. 30(1)(b) of the Defence of India Rules, 1962.
While gradually releasing 45 of them he purported to detain the appellants and the petitioners under R. 30A(8) of the said Rules.
The appellants moved the Judicial Commissioner under article 226 of the Constitution and their case was that the decision to continue them in detention was not recorded in writing nor was it communicated to them and was, therefore, invalid in law.
The Judicial Commissioner dismissed the said applications.
The petitioners moved this Court under article 32 of the Constitution and their case was also the same.
The first review held on February 15, 1963, in respect of all the 68 detenus was recorded as follows, "On review of the detention order in respect of all the detenus CC.
decided to cancel orders in respect of detenus at section Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 12 and 13.
" It was urged on behalf of the respondent that the order by implication continued the detention of the appellants and the petitioners and such detention was confirmed by subsequent orders.
Held: (i) The order did not comply with the provisions of R. 30A(8) of the Defence of India Rules and the detenus before this Court must be set at liberty.
Decision to continue a detenu in detention must not only be recorded in writing but such writing must clearly and unambiguously indicate that decision.
Subsequent reviews under the Rule could not validate the illegal continuance of the detention after the expiry of six months from the date of the original order of detention.
Decision recorded under R. 30A(8) is in the nature of an independent decision and further detention can be justified only if the decision is recorded as required by it.
296 Even assuming that an order passed under R. 30A(8) could in a proper case imply the decision to continue the detention of some of the detenus, the present case could not be said to be one such.
(ii) Assuming, though not deciding, that a decision recorded under R. 30A(8) of the Rules was not in law required to be communicated to the detenue, it was just and proper that the decision should in every case be communicated to the detenu.
