On a petition by the respondent, challenging the election of the appellant to the State Legislative Assembly, the Election Tribunal declared the election void under section 100(1)(b) of the Representation of the People Act.
Against the order of the Tribunal, the appellant appealed to the High Court.
Instead of enclosing with the memorandum of appeal a Government Treasury receipt showing that a deposit of Rs. 500 had been made in favour of the Election Commission, the appellant through his Advocate tendered the amount in the office of the Registrar of the High Court The amount tendered was accepted and was duly credited in the name of the appellant as "security deposit".
At the hearing of the appeal it was contended by the respondent, inter alia, that the appellant had failed to enclose with the memorandum of appeal a Government Treasury Receipt showing that a deposit of five hundred rupees had been made by him in favour of the Election Commission as security of the costs of the appeal, and his appeal was, on that account, not maintainable.
The High Court held that the appellant had failed to comply with the provisions of section 119 A of the Act and on that account the appeal filed by him was incompetent, and dismissed the appeal.
In appeal by special leave : HELD : The failure to comply with the requirements of section 119 A does not necessarily result in the dismissal of the appeal, for the Act imposes no express penalty for non compliance with the requirements of that section.
The Court had therefore jurisdiction having regard to the circum stances, either to permit rectification of the mistake, or to decline to proceed with the appeal which did not comply with the statutory requirements.
In the present case the High Court erred in not taking into consideration the conduct of the office of the Registrar in accepting the deposit of costs and also a defective presentation of the appeal which contributed to the irregularity of the procedure adopted by the appellant.
[122B D].
Jagan Nath vs Jaswant Singh, ; , referred to.
