The respondent sought to redeem a mortgage executed in the State of Alwar in 1919.
By a stipulation in the mortgage deed the mortgagor agreed that if the debt was not paid within 15 years the mortgagee would become the owner of the property.
The respondent 's case was that the transaction was a mortgage and that he could redeem the mortgage even though the stipulated period was over.
The appellant resisted the suit on the ground that the transaction amounted to a sale and not a mortgage.
The trial Judge dismissed the suit holding that the claim for redemption was not maintainable after the expiry of the stipulated period.
The Rajasthan High Court on appeal reversed the decision of the trial Judge holding that the stipulation was a clog on the equity of redemption and remanded the suit.
The stipulation in question I was as follows, "After the expiry of the stipulated period of 15 years this shop would be deemed as an absolute transfer 'Mala Kalam ' for this amount.
Till the mortgage money is paid, I shall have no concern with the shop.
" Held:If the stipulation were to prevail, the use of the words 'mala kalam ', which meant that there would be no scope for the mortgagor to say anything, would indicate that the mortgagee became the absolute owner of the property.
But the stipulation, which was undoubtedly a clog on the equity of redemption, must fail and the suit for redemption must succeed.
240 The equitable principle of justice, equity and good conscience, long and consistently applied by Civil Courts in lndia, could be applied in the State of Alwar even though the Transfer of Property Act had no application there at the time when the mortgage document was executed or its period expired.
The strict provisions of the texts of Hindu Law in this regard would be of no avail.
Namdeo Lokman Lodhi vs Narmadabai, ; , applied.
Pattabhiramier vs Vencatarow Naicken and Narasimha Naicken, (1870) 13 M.I.A. 560 and Thumbusaway Moodelly vs Hossain Rowthen,I.L.R. I Mad. 1, considered.
, Venkata Reddy vs Parvati Ammal, I Mad.
H.C. Rep. 460, Ramji bin Tukaram vs Chinto Sakharam, I Bom.
H.C. Rep. 199 (1864), Bapuji Apaji vs Senavaraji Marvadi, I.L.R. 11 Bom.
231, Ramasami Sastrigal V. Samiyappanayakan, I.L.R. 4 Mad. 179, Amba Lal vs Amba Lal, I.L.R. , Seleh Raj vs Chandan Mal, I.L.R. and Nainu vs Kishan Singh, A.I.R. 1957 H.P. 46, referred to.
