The election of the appellant to a seat in the Legislative Assembly of "the State was challenged by the respondent, an elector, on the ground inter alia, that by publishing a poster which contained a statement of fact about the personal character and conduct of one of the rival candidates, the, appellant was guilty of a corrupt practice under section 123 (4) of the Representation of the People Act (43 of 1951).
The Tribunal dismissed the petition, but the High Court reversed the decision of the Tribunal.
In the appeal to the Supreme Court., it was contended that : (i) the poster, published and circulated by the appellant was not hit by the provisions of section 123(4) the Act and (ii) the election petition should have been dismissed under 85 of the Act on the ground that another candidate against whom allegation of corrupt practices were made was not impleaded.
HELD : (i) Section 123(4) is designed to achieve the dual purpose of protecting freedom of speech and prevention of malicious attack on the personal character and conduct of rivals.
A statement which reflects on the mental or moral character of a person is a reflection on his personal character, whereas any criticism of a person 's political or public activities and policies is outside it.
The sub section also requires that the candidate making the statement believes it to be false or does 'not believe it to be true, and it shall be a statement reasonably calculated to prejudice the prospects of the election of the candidate against whom it is made.
The word "calculated" means designed it denotes more than mere likelihood and imports a design to affect voters.
Applying these tests and on a consideration Of the entire evidence, the appellant by publishing the poster was guilty of a corrupt practice within the meaning of the sub section.
[178A E; 18OC E; 183H].
T. K. Gangi Reddy V. M. C. Anjaneya Reddy, and Inder Lal vs Lal Singh, [1963] Supp. 3 S.C.R. 114, referred to.
(ii)As regards the candidate who was not impleaded the only allegation made in the election petition was that the appellant got the poster published through him and others, but there was no allegation that the candidate believed the statement to be, false or did not believe it to be &W. in the absence of any such averment it cannot be said that there wall anY allegation of any corrupt practice within the meaning of section 82(b) Of Act against such candidate.
Also, under section 123 (4) mens rea is a necessary ingredient of the corrupt practice and the person who publishes a statement, whether he is the author of it or not, does not commit a corrupt practice, unless he has the requisite knowledge.
As there was no allegation of corrupt practice against the candidate who was not impleaded, the penal provision of section 85 are not attracted and the petition was not liable to be dismissed.
[184E H; 185A].
