The appellant collected sales tax from the purchasers of betel leaves in connection with the sales made by it.
But it did not pay the amount collected to the Government.
The Government directed the appellant to pay the amount to the Government and it thereupon filed a writ petition in the High Court questioning the validity of section 11(2) of the Hyderabad General Sales Tax Act 1950.
The main contention of the appellant before the High Court was that section 11(2) of the Act which authorises the Government to recover a tax collected without the authority of law was beyond the competence of the State Legislature because a tax collected without the authority of law would not be a tax levied under the law and it would therefore not be open to the State to collect under the authority of a law enacted under the Entry 54 of List II of the VII Schedule to the Constitution any such amount as it was not a tax on sale or purchase of goods.
The High Court held that a. 11(2) was good as an ancillary provision with regard to the collection of sales or purchase tax and therefore incidental to the power under Entry 54, List II.
The High Court also held that even if section 11(2) cannot be justified under that entry it could be justified under Entry 26, List II and in the result the writ petition was dismissed.
The present appeal is by way of special leave granted by this Court.
Held: (i) It cannot be said that the State Legislature was directly legislating for the imposition of sales or purchase tax under Entry 54, list II when it made the provisions of a. 11(2) for on the face of the provisions the amount, though collected by way of tax was not exigible as tax under the law.
(ii) It is true that the heads of legislation in the various lists in the Seventh Schedule should be interpreted widely so as to take in all matters which are of a character incidental to the topic mentioned therein.
Even so there is a limit to such incidental or ancillary powers These have to be exercised in aid of the than topic of legislation, which in the present case is a tax on sale or purchase of goods.
The ambit of ancillary or incidental powers does not so to the extent of permitting the legislature to provide that though the amount collected, may be wrongly, by way of tax is not exigible under the law as made under the relevant taxing entry, it shall still be paid over to the Govern ment as if it were a tax.
Therefore the provision contained in a. 11(2) cannot be made under Entry 54, List II and cannot be justified as incidental or ancillary provisions permitted under that Entry.
(iii) Section 11(2) cannot be justified as providing for a for the breach of any provision of the Act.
(iv) Entry 26, List II deals with trade and commerce and has nothing to do with taxing or recovering amount realised wrongly as tax.
There is no element of regulation of trade and commerce in a provision like section 11(2) and therefore that section cannot be justified under Entry 26.
List II.
869 (v) The provision in section 20(c) is also invalid as it is merely consequential to section 11(2).
The Orient Papers Mills Ltd. vs State of Orissa, ; , distinguished.
State of Bombay vs United Motors (India) Ltd., [1953] S.C.R. 1069, referred to.
Indian Aluminium Co. vs State of Madras, (1962) XIII Sales Tax Cases 967.
held to be wrongly decided.
