The appellant company which carried on the business of manufacturing textiles was allowed by its Memorandum of Association to borrow money for the purpose of its business and to invest it inter alia in loans to others.
Its Board of Directors passed a resolution to the effect that the company would invest its surplus funds in current account with the Managing Agents on interest.
The Managing Agents borrowed large sums from outsiders, entered the borrowings in the books of the company and invested large sum with themselves in current account.
Before the Annual General Meeting they would bring back the money into the company 's accounts to satisfy the General Body that they had paid off their debts, and afterwards would again withdraw large sums for their own purposes.
In 1933 the Managing Agents ' company went into liquidation and it large debt was due from them to the company.
In 1941 the debt having been found to be irrecoverable, the appellant company claimed it as a bad debt and trading loss for the purpose of computing its income under the Indore Industrial Tax Rules, 1927, the provisions of which, in this regard, were similar to those of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922.
The assessing authority did not allow the claim, nor did the Appellate Authority.
The High Court also held that the losses incurred by the company were really dehors the business of the company.
The company thereupon appealed to the Supreme Court.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant that the employment of the Managing Agents was incidental to the carrying on of the appellant 's business, that,as the Managing Agents had the power to borrow funds for the company and invest the surplus in loans to themselves, the loss such investment was also incidental to the carrying on the appellant 's business, and therefore the said loss was deductible in arriving at the, trading profits of the company.
HELD: The appeal must be allowed.
The Managing Agents had borrowed the money from outsiders and invested it with themselves in accordance with the company 's resolution.
The money borrowed from outsiders became part of the funds of the company, and the creditors could have sued the company for it.
Similarly the company could have sued the Managing Agents for the sums invested with them.
Both the borrowing by the company and the investment with the Managing Agents created legal obligations.
Appropriate entries were made in the company 's accounts in accordance with commercial practice.
The amounts invested with the Managing Agents were entered as debts which became bad debts on becoming irrecoverable.
In the circumstances the loss arising from the bad debts was incidental to the appellant 's business, 560 and deductible in computing the profits of the appellant company for the ,assessment year in question.
[563 F H; 564 B E].
Badridas Daga vs Commissioner of Income tax, [1959] S.C.R. 690 and Commissioner of Income tax, U.P. vs M/s. Nainital Bank Ltd., ;
