Applications were made by four respondent under s.33C(2) of the , contending that besides attending to their routine duty as clerks, they had been operating the adding machine provided for use in the clearing department of the appellant Bank during the period mentioned in the list annexed to the petitions and hence each of them was entitled to the payment of Rs. 10/ p m, as special allowance for operating the adding machine as provided for in para 164(b)(1) of the Sastry Award.
The appellant Bank raised certain objections but these were rejected by the Labour Court which held that the respondents were entitled to the amounts claimed 141 by them, and the same were ordered to be paid.
The appellants came to this Court by special leave.
The contentions raised in this court were that section 33C(2) did not apply in the present case and the Labour Court had exceeded its jurisdiction in entertaining the applications made by respondents as claims made by them were outside the scope of s, 33(3(2) which postulated the existence of an admitted right in a workman and did not cover cases where the said right was disputed.
Moreover, special allowance could be claimed only by comptists and as the respondents had not even claimed that they were comptists, their applications should have been rejected.
Held that section 33C(2) takes within its purview cases of workmen who claim that the benefit to which they are entitled should be computed in term of money, even though the right to the benefit on which their claim is based is disputed by their employers.
For the purpose of making the necessary determination under section 33C(2), it is open to the Labour Court to interpret the award or settlement on which the workman 's right rests.
There is a distinction between section 33C(2) and L 36A. Whereas section 33C(2) 'deals with cases of implementation of individual rights of workmen falling under its provisions, section 36A deals merely with a question of interpretation of the award where a dispute arises in that behalf between the workmen and the employer and the appropriate Government is satisfied that the dispute deserves to be resolved by reference under section 36A.
The scope of section 33G(2) is wider than that of section 33G(1).
Claims made under section 33C(1) can be only those claims which are referrable to settlement, award or the relevant provisions of Chapter V A, but those limitations are not to be found in section 33C(2).
Three categories of claims mentioned in section 33C(1) fall.
under section 33C(2)and in that sense section 33C(2) can itself be deemed to be a kind of execution proceeding, but it is possible that claims not based on settlements, awards or made under the provisions of Chapter V A may also be competent under section 33C (2).
Held that respondents ' claim for special allowance as camptists solely on the ground that they could be described as adding machine operators could not be sustained.
No period of limitation is provided for an application under section 33C(2).
142 Punjab National Bank Ltd. vs
K.L. Kharbanda, (1962) 1 L.L.J. 234, M/s. Kasturi and Sons (P) Led.
vs Shri N. Saliva teeswaranb ; , Shri Ambica Mills Co. Ltd. vs Shri S B. Bhatt; , and M/s. Sawatrum Ramprasad Mills Co. Ltd, Akola vs Baliram, (1962) 65 Born.
L.R. 91, referred to.
