The sales tax officer made a best judgment assessment with respect to the turnover of the appellant under section 21 of the U.P. Sales Tax Act, 1948.
The order was set aside by the appellate authority.
The revisional authority revised the appellate order and remanded the case to the sales tax officer for making a fresh assessment.
When the officer issued a notice for assessment, in pursuance of that order, the assesee contended that as the original assessment had been set aside, no proceeding in connection with it was pending, and that reassessment was barred because, more than three years had elapsed since the end of the year of assessment.
The office,,rejected the contentions.
The assessee filed a writ petition in the High Court and it was allowed by a Single Judge.
The State appealed to the Division Bench.
While the appeal was pending, section 21 was extensively amended in 1956 and the legislature gave retrospective operation to the amended section.
As a result of the amendment, it was provided that when the officer proceeded in pursuance of a direction given by the revisional authority, no period of limitation applied.
The Division Bench, however, relied upon the unamended section and set aside the order of the Single Judge, holding, that even under the unamended section, no period of limitation applied when the assessing officer was directed to proceed by an order of the revisional authority.
The assessee appealed to the Supreme Court.
HELD:The appeal should be dismissed.
Though the High Court was in error in its interpretation of the unamended section on the principle of Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay Presidency and Aden vs Khemchand Ramdas, (L.R. 65 I.A. 236) still the order of the High Court must be confirmed because of the amendment of 1956.
The words used by the legislature in the amended section are precise and admit of only one interpretation, namely, that nothing contained in the section limits the time from the year of assessment within which proceedings should be taken for assessment or reassessment in consequence of or to give effect to an order of the revisional authority.
[783 E G; 784 D E; 785 H; 786 B] Even assuming that the amended section applied only to pending proceedings, when the revisional authority made an order after examining the record directing the assessing officer to make a fresh assessment, there was a proceeding pending before such officer in pursuance of such direction.
[786 E]
