The respondent, a firm manufacturing medicinal products, was the proprietor of two registered trade marks "Navaratna" and "Navaratna pharmaceutical Laboratories " from a, period prior to 25th February 1937.
When the appellant, who was also a manufacturer of medicinal preparations, sought the registration of the words "Navaratna Pharmacy" as his trade mark the respondent objected successfully.
The appellant then moved the Registrar of Trade Marks for removing from the register, the trade mark "Navaratna" and for deleting the word "Navaratna" from the other trade mark of the respondent.
The Registrar directed him to move the High Court for the rectification, as the respondent had by that time filed a suit in the District Court for a permanent injunction restraining the appellant from selling any preparation under a mark containing the word "Navaratna". 'Me appellant accordingly filed an original petition in the High Court.
The suit in the District Court was decreed in favour of the respondent with respect to the trade mark "Navaratna Pharmaceutical Laboratories.
" An appeal against the decree filed by the appellant, and his Original Petition were heard together by the High Court and the decree of the District Court in favour of the respondent was confirmed.
It was held that : (i) having regard to the method of packing adopted by the appellant, he was not guilty of passing off, (ii) the respondent was not entitled to any relief on the ground of the infringement of the mark "Navaratna" as it was a common word in Ayurvedik phraseology and used in connection with several medicinal preparations and (iii) the trade name "Navaratna Pharmaceutical Laboratories" had been use as a trade mark, by the respon dent, for a very long time and had come to denote exclusively his goods; and that the trade mark having been in use from before the specified date February 25, 1937 and having acquired factual distinctiveness, was registerable under the proviso to section 6(3) of the .
In appeal to the Supreme Court it was contended that : (i) the decision of the High Court that the trade mark "Navaratna Pharmaceutical Labradortories ' was validly registerable was inconsistent with the finding that "Navaratna" which was the crucial word in the trade mark was only a descriptive word in regard to which the respondent could obtain no exclusive right, and (ii) the finding that the marks of the appellant and respondent were deceptively similar was inconsistent with the finding that the packing in which the appellant 's goods were marketed was not likely to cause confusion or deceive purchasers.
HELD : (i) A mark which is not "adapted to distinguish" by the application of the tests laid down in section 6(1) of the Act, could still qualify for registration by virtue of the proviso to section 6(3), by proof of acquired distinctiveness.
Under the proviso, with respect to marks in use from a date prior to 25th February 1937, "the Registrar shall not refuse registra 738 tion by reason only of the fact that the trade mark is not adapted to distinguish as aforesaid, and may accept evidence of acquired distinctiveness as entitling the trade mark to registration".
The word "distinctiveness" cannot mean "adapted to distinguish" for then, the proviso would add nothing to the section and would make no variation in the law as between new marks and old marks which had been in use continuously from before the specified date.
A construction which would lead to old marks and new marks being placed on the same footing and being subjected to the same tests for registration cannot be accepted.
However, a mark might have been used prior to the specified date, but it might not qualify for registration under the proviso by not having acquired that degree of factual distinctiveness which the Registrar considers sufficient to enable it to qualify for registration.
Therefore, when the Registrar records a finding that the mark submitted for registration was "not adapted to distinguish as aforesaid", he was authorised to permit evidence being led as to "acquired distinctiveness".
Since both the trial court and the High Court found that through long user from 1926 onwards, the mark of the respondent had become associated exclusively in the market with the pharmaceutical products manufactured by him, it would follow that his mark was rightly registered and that he was entitled to protect an invasion of his rights, by seeking a perpetual injunction against those who invaded them.
[744 G; 750 A C, E F; 751 B, D; 752 A B G H; 753 A] (ii)In an action for infringement of a trade mark the onus would be on the plaintiff to establish that the trade mark used by the defendant is deceptively similar.
This has necessarily to be done by a comparison of the two marks the degree of resemblance necessary being incapable of defi nition by objective standards.
Where the similarity between the plaintiff 's and defendant 's marks is so close either visually, phonetically or otherwise, and the Court reaches the conclusion that there is an invitation, no further evidence is required to establish that the plaintiff 's rights are violated.
The fact that the get us, packing etc., showed marked differences, or indicate clearly a trade origin different from that of the registered proprietor of the mark would be immaterial.
A finding regarding the packing is relevant with respect to the relief on the ground of passing off, but plays a limited role in an action for infringement of a registered trade mark by the registered proprietor who has a statutory right to that mark and a statutory remedy, under section 21, for vindication of his exclusive right to use it.
The question of deceptive similarity is one of fact, unless the test employed suffers from error this court would not interfere.
In the instant case there being no such error, the conclusion reached by both the lower courts that the appellant 's mark was deceptively similar to that of the respondent, cannot be interfered with.
[754 D F; 755 A C, F G; 756 F H]
