The Japanese currency introduced into Malaya during the Japanese occupation began to depreciate after January 1963, so that debts paid off and received in that currency resulted in loss to the creditors.
The Government of India, by a notification issued in 1947, propounded a scheme to give relief to Indian nationals carrying on business in Malaya, and the Central Board of Revenue issued further instructions on the scheme.
One of the instructions was that if any creditors opted to accept the scheme, a recovery subsequently made by them, with respect to the debt due to them was to be taken as their income.
In 1948, the Debtor and Creditor (Occupation Period) Ordinance No. XLII of 1948, of Malaya was passed by the Malaya Legislature.
Under that Ordinance, payments made in Japanese currency were to be valued and scaled down in accordance with its Schedule, so that a payment in Japanese currency would be a valid discharge of a debt only to the extent of such revaluation.
A creditor could enforce his debt to the extent not discharged and the debtor was under an obligation to discharge it to that extent.
On the questions as to (i) whether amounts, recovered by creditors who had accepted the scheme, from their debtors, in terms of the Ordinance, were liable to income tax; and (ii) whether the debtors could claim the payments made by them as deductions, the High Court held, (i) that the assessees who had received payments would not he liable to tax in respect of amounts they had received towards principal, but they would be so liable in respect of moneys which they had received towards interest; and (ii) that those assessees who had made payments towards the debts, would be entitled to deduct from their income, and claim exemption from tax only such amounts as they had paid on account of interest, but they would not be entitled to deduct any payment made on account of principal.
The High Court also gave directions that open payments should be appropriated according to the law of appropriation of payments.
The Commissioner and a debtor assessee appealed to the Supreme Court.
HELD : The appeals should be dismissed.
(i) The creditor assessees were not ' precluded on the principle of "approbate and reprobate" from pleading that the income they derived subsequently, by realisation of the revived debts, was not taxable income.
The doctrine was only a species of estoppel and cannot operate against the statute.
If a particular income is not taxable under the Income tax Act, it cannot be taxed on the basis of estoppel or any other equitable doctrine.
[822 F H] (ii) Under the Ordinance, the discharged debts became enforceable to the extent of the balance of the amount due after the scaling down of the 816 payments, and the contention of the Revenue that the State provided for compensation for the loss incurred by the creditor assessees could not be accepted.
[825 B E] (iii) The Income tax Officer could only impose income tax on the income recovered by the assessees thereafter towards their debts if such income was taxable under the provisions of the Act.
So too in regard to the payments made by the Assessees towards such debts, they could claim relief by way of deduction only if such deductions were permissible under the Act.
[825 F G]
