The respondent was a teacher in a private college affiliated to the Gauhati University in Assam.
The college was receiving grants in aid from the State on certain conditions set out in the form of Rules.
One of the rules, r. 7, provided that if a teacher stood for election to the Legislature, he should be on compulsory leave without pay from the date of filing of nomination till the end of the next academic session or, till the termination of the term of the office to which he may be elected.
The respondent applied for leave for three months and contested for a. seat in Parliament but was defeated.
So, he applied for permission to rejoin, and the Governing Body granted him the permission.
The Director of Public Instruction, however, pointed out that such permission was in contravention of the aforesaid rule, and therefore, the Governing Body informed the respondent that he had been granted compulsory leave without pay till the end of the academic session.
The respondent thereupon filed a petition in the High Court for the issue of a writ of mandamus or other appropriate direction on the grounds that : (i) the rule had no legal force, (ii) the rule did not bind the Governing Body or the respondent and (iii) the order of the Governing Body putting him on compulsory leave was ineffective.
He also prayed that the State should be directed not to withhold the grant inlaid to the college if the Governing Body did not impose compulsory leave on him.
The Governing Body was also made a party to the petition.
The High Court held that the rules had no statutory force, and issued a direction to the Director, as a public authority, to refrain from giving effect to.
such rules.
The High Court also issued a similar direction to the Governing Body, on the ground that it had not applied its independent mind to the question of respondent 's leave.
The State appealed to the Supreme Court, but did not dispute that the Rules were only administrative instructions.
HELD: The order of the High Court issuing a writ to the State through its Director should be set aside.
[899 B] The rules being mere administrative instructions have not the force of law as statutory rules.
They therefore confer no right on the teachers of private colleges which would entitle them to maintain a writ petition under article 226, for the enforcement or non enforcement of any provision of the rules.
They being mere administrative instructions, are matters between private colleges and the Government in the matter of grants in aid to such colleges, and no teacher of any college has any right under the rules to ask either for their enforcement or non enforcement.
It is open to the Governing Body not to carry out any such instructions and it will then be open to the State to consider what grant to make.
But if the Governing Body chooses to carry out the instructions it could not be said that the instruction was carried out under any threat; and, it is not oven to a teacher 891 to insist that the Governing Body should not carry out the instruction.
[897 B H] Messrs Raman and Raman vs The State of Madras, [1959] Supp.2.
S.C.R. 227, referred to,
