The plaintiff (respondent) was employed at Calcutta in the Court of Wards and the service rules did not permit him to start or carry on any trade or business of his own.
It was therefore arranged with the defendant that the defendant should be held out to be the owner of a boarding house the suit property of which the plaintiff was the true owner, and the plaintiff was to be in possession as manager.
Plaintiff had to leave Calcutta on medical advice and he put the defendant in possession on the understanding that on the plaintiff 's return the defendant would hand over possession.
When the defendant refused to so hand over, plaintiff filed the suit, for recovery of possession.
His claim was decreed by the trial Court and in appeal.
, In appeal to the Supreme Court, defendant 's successor in interest contended, that the suit should have been dismissed because the plaintiff admitted in his evidence, that he escaped payment of income tax by submitting a separate return for the salary earned by him in service, and by showing that the business income from the suit property belonged to the defendant; and that therefore, the Court should not countenance his, claim and assist him in obtaining possession of the suit property.
HELD (Per Gajendragadkar, C. J. and Shah J.) : It was not the object of the parties at the time when the transaction was entered into to circumvent or defeat the provisions of the Income tax Act.
It is true that the plaintiff obtained benefit of a lower rate of tax for the business income and his personal income escaped taxation.
But it cannot on that account be held that the transaction on which he founded his claim was unlawful.
In claiming a decree for possession from the defendant, the plaintiff did not plead any invalidity of the transaction under which possession of the business was entrusted to the defendant.
The plaintiff., as the owner of the business, was therefore not prevented from enforcing his title against the defendant there being no taint attached to the entrustment in the circumstances of the case.
[868 D F, G] Per Ayyangar J.
The plaintiff having adopted the device of purchasing the property benami in the name of the defendant, for the purpose, even at the inception, of evading the provisions of the Income tax Act, would not be entitled to recover possession of the property on the basis of his title.
But the plaintiff 's claim on the footing of possession was not open to any objection because the basis of his claim was independent and wholly dissociated from the illegal transaction of the original benami purchase and fell into line with the decision of the Privy Council in Sajan Singh vs Sardara Ali D E]
