The appellant company challenged the imposition of water tax by the Rampur Municipal Board in a petition under article 226 of the Constitution of India on the ground that the tax had not been imposed according to law inasmuch as the proposals and draft rules had been published by the Board in an Urdu paper whereas according to the mandatory provisions of section 131(3) read with section 93(3) of the U.P. Municipalities Act, 1916, they should have been published,in a Hindi paper.
The High Court dismissed the petition but granted a certificate under article 133(1)(c).
The questions for consideration were whether the whole of section 131(3) was mandatory, or the part of it requiring publication in the manner laid down in section 94(3) i.e., in a Hindi newspaper was merely directory; and whether the publication in the Government Gazette of the notification imposing the tax was not conclusive proof, as provided in section 135(3), of the prescribed procedure having been observed.
HELD: (Per GAJENDRAGADKAR" C. J., WANcHoo and RAGHUBAR DAYAL JJ.) (i) Section 131(3) can be divided into two parts the first one providing that the proposal and draft rules for a tax intended to be imposed should be published for the objections of the public, if any, and the second laying down that the publication must be in the manner laid down in section 94(3).
Considering the object of the provisions for publication namely to enable the public to place its viewpoint before the Board it Is necessary to hold that the first part of the section is mandatory, for to hold otherwise would be to render the whole procedure prescribed for the imposition of taxes nugatory.
The second part of the section is, however, merely directory.
What it substantially requires is that the publication should be in Hindi in a local paper, and if that is done that would be compliance with section 94(3).
In the instant case publication was made in Hindi in a local paper which on the evidence seems to have good circulation in Rampur.
There is no regularly published local Hindi newspaper.
There was, in the circumstances, substantial compliance with the provisions of section 94(3) in this case.
[977 E F; 978 D F; 980 C; 981 A B] (ii) Section 135(3) provides that a notification of the imposition of tax in the Government Gazette was conclusive proof that the tax had been imposed in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
Whether such a notification will save a tax which has been imposed without at all complying with one of the mandatory provisions of the relevant law was a question that did not directly arise in the case.
In the instant case there had been compliance with the mandatory part of section 131(3) and substantial compliance with the second part.
Therefore a. 135(3) applied to the case 971 and the objection that the tax was not validly imposed could not succeed.
[983 B D; 983 D E].
K. Kamaraja Nadar vs Kunju Thevar, , relied on.
State of U.P. vs Manbodhan Lai Srivastva, ; and Berar Swadeshi Vanaspati vs Municipal Committee, Shegaon, , distinguished.
Montreal Street Railway Company vs Normandin, ; , Azimulla vs Suraj Kumar Singh, A.I.R. (1957) All.
307 and Municipal Board, Hapur vs Raghuvendra Kripal, 1960 A.L.I. 185, referred to.
Per HIDAYATULLAH J. A Municipal Committee enjoys powers of taxation not as a legislature but as a delegate of the legislature.
Taxes levied by it are in effect levied by the Government.
What the Municipality does in exercise of the delegated power can be effective only if the conditions laid down with the grant of the power are complied with and the Government finally approves the tax.
Once the Government after giving its approval has notified its imposition in the Government Gazette the tax is deemed to be conclusively imposed in accordance with the procedure laid down.
[985 H to 986 D] Some conditions which are laid down are for the protection of taxpayers and some others are for ministerial operations.
The first kind are fundamental and cannot be overlooked.
Conditions which promote dispatch or provide for ministerial operation are directory and substantial compliance is sufficient.
[986 G] The direction to publish the notice in a paper published in Hindi regarded as sufficient compliance in the case.
[987 C D] The Berar Swadeshi Vanaspati vs Municipal Committee, Shegaon, , relied on.
Per MUDHOLKAR J.
Where a verb used in a provision governs two different matters it cannot be given one meaning insofar as it relates to one matter and another meaning insofar as it relates to another matter.[988 F] Since section 94(3) is clearly directory it is immaterial to consider whether section 131(3) is directory or mandatory or to read it as partly one and partly the other and depart from the normal rule of construction which discountenances reading a word in a provision in two different senses.
[988 G H] The essential requirement of section 94(3) is publication in a local newspaper.
Where the requirement is satisfied, the omission to obtain a direction from the State Government permitting publication in a newspaper other then one in Hindi language is not of much consequence.
Upon this view the question whether section 131(3) is mandatory or whether section 135(3) has become void by reason of article 13(1) of the Constitution or whether it ran cure a defect resulting from non compliance with a mandatory provision does not at all arise for consideration.
[989 B C]
