In 1951, several State legislative measures passed for giving effect to a policy of agrarian reform faced a serious challenge in the Courts.
In order to assist the State Legislatures to give effect to the policy, articles 31A and 31B were added to the Constitution by the Constitution (First.
Amendment) Act, 1951.
Article 31B provided that none of the Acts specified in the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution shall be deemed to be void or ever to have become void.
In 1.955, by the Constitution (Fourth Amend ment) Act, article 31A was amended.
Notwithstanding those amendments some legislative measures adopted by different States for giving effect to the policy were effectively challenged.
In order to save the validity of those Acts as well as of other Acts which were likely to be struck down, Parliament enacted the Constitution (Seventeenth Amendment), Act 1964, by which article 31A was again amended and 44 Acts, were added to the Ninth Schedule.
The petitioners in the Writ Petitions in Supreme Court, and interveners, were persons affected by one or other of those Acts.
They contended that none of the Act by which they were affected could be saved because the Constitution (Seventeenth Amendment) Act was constitutionally invalid.
It was urged that : (i) Since the powers prescribed by article 226, which is in Chapter V, Part VI of the Constitution, were likely to be affected by Seventeenth Amendment, the special procedure laid down in the proviso to article 368, namely ' requiring the ratification by not less half the number of States, should be followed; (ii) The decision in Sri Sankari Prasad Singh Deo vs Union of India and State of Bihar, ; , which negatived such a contention when dealing with the First Amendment, should be reconsidered; (iii) The Seventeenth Amendment Act was a legislative measure in respect of land and since Parliament had no right to make a law in respect of land, the Act was invalid and (iv) Since the Act purported to set aside decisions of Court of competent jurisdiction, it was unconstitutional.
HELD (by P. B. Gajendragadkar C. J., Wanchoo, and Raghubar Dayal JJ.) : (i) The main part of article 368 and its proviso must on a reasonable construction be harmonised with each other in the sense that the scope and effect of either of them should not be allowed to be unduly reduced or enlarged.
Such a construction requires that if amendment of the fundamental rights is to make a substantial inroad on the High Court 's powers under article 226, it would become necessary to consider whether the proviso to article 368 would cover such a case.
If the effect is indirect, incidental or otherwise of an insignificant order the proviso may not apply.
In dealing With such a question, the test to be adopted is to find the pith and substance of the impugned Act.
So tested it is clear that the Constitution (Seventeenth Amendment) Act amends the fundamental rights solely with the object of removing obstacles in the fulfilment of a socioeconomic policy.
Its effect 934 on article 226 is incidental and insignificant.
The Act therefore falls under the substantive part of article 368 and does not attract the proviso.
[940 D E; 941 B E; 944 D F] (ii) On the contentions urged there was no justification for reconsidering Shankari Prasad case.
[947 G H] Though the Constitution is an organic document intended to serve as a guide to the solution of changing problems the Court should be reluctant to accede to the suggestion that its earlier decisions should be lightheartedly reviewed and departed from.
In such a case the test is : Is it absolutely and essential that the question already decided should be reopened.
The answer to the question would depend on the nature of the infirmity alleged in the earlier decision, its import on public good and the validity and compelling character of the considerations urged in support of the contrary view.
It is therefore relevant and material to note that if the argument urged by the petitioners were to prevail, it would lead to the inevitable consequence that the amendments of 1951 and 1955 and a large number of decisions dealing with the validity of the Acts in the Ninth Schedule would be exposed to serious jeopardy.
[948 E H; 949 A B] (iii) Parliament in enacting the impugned Act was not making any provision of land Legislation but was merely validating land Legislation already passed by the State Legislatures in that behalf.
[945 C] (iv) The power conferred by article 368 on Parliament can be exercised both prospectively and retrospectively.
It is open to Parliament to validate laws which have been declared invalid by courts.
[945 E F] (v) The power conferred by article 368, includes the power to take away the fundamental rights guaranteed by Part III.
In the context of the constitution it includes the power of modification, or changing the provisions, or even an amendment which makes the said provisions inapplicable in certain cases.
The power to amend is a very wide power and cannot be controlled by the literal dictionary meaning of the word "amend".
The expression "amendment of the Constitution" plainly and unambiguously means amendment of all the provisions of the Constitution.
The words used in the proviso unambiguously indicate that the substantive part of the Article applies to all the provisions of the Constitution.
A B; 951 B] The word "law" in article 13(2) does not include a law passed by Parliament by virtue of its constituent power to amend the Constitution.
if the Constitution makers had intended that any future amendment of the provisions in regard to fundamental rights should be subject to article 13(2), they would have taken the precaution of making a clear provision in that behalf.
It would not be reasonable to proceed on the basis that the fundamental rights in Part III were intended to be finally and immutably settled and determined once for all and were beyond the reach of any future amendment.
The Constitution makers must have anticipated that in dealing With the socioeconomic problems which the legislatures may have to face from time to time, the concepts of public interest and other important considerations may change and expand, and so, it is legitimate to assume that the Constitution makers knew that Parliament should be competent to make amendments in those rights so as to meet the challenge of the problems which may arise.
The fundamental rights guaranteed by Part III could not have been intended to be eternal, inviolate and beyond the reach of article 368 for, even if the powers to amend the fundamental 'rights were not included in the Article, Parliament ran by a suitable amendment of the Article take those powers.
[951 F H; 954 F H; 955 E G] Article 226 which confers on High Court the power to issue writs falls under the proviso to article 368, while article 32 which is itself a guaranteed fundamental right and enables a citizen to move the Supreme Court to 935 issue writs, fall under the main part of the section.
Parliament may consider whether the anamoly which is apparent in the different modes prescribed by article 368 for amending articles 226 and 32 respectively, should not be remedied by including Part III itself in the proviso.
[956 E G] Sri Sankari Prasad Singh Deo vs Union of India and State of Bihar, ; , followed.
A. K. Gopalan vs State of Madras, ; and In re: The Delhi Laws Act; , , referred to.
(vi) It is not reasonable to suggest that, since the impugned Act amends only articles 31A and 31B and adds several Acts to the Ninth Schedule it does not amend the provisions of Part III but makes an independent provision, and so, comes within the scope of the proviso to article 368.
If Parliament thought that instead of adopting the cumbersome process of amending each relevant Article in Part III, it would be more appropriate to add articles 31A and 31B, then what Parliament did in 1951 has afforded a valid basis for further amendments in 1955 and in 1964.
[946 B E] (vii) The fact that the Acts have been included in the Ninth Schedule with a view to making them valid, does not mean that the Legislatures which passed the Acts have lost their competence to repeal or amend them.
Also, if a legislature amends any provision of any such Act, the amended provision would not receive the protection of article 3 1B and its validity will be liable to be examined on the merits.
[956 A C] Per Hidayatullah and Mudholkar JJ.
Quaere (i) Whether the word "law" in article 13(2) of the Constitution excludes an Act of Parliament amending the Constitution.
[959 E F; 968 G] (ii) Whether it is competent to Parliament to make any amendment at all to Part III of the Constitution.
[961 F G; 968 G] Per Mudholkar J. An amendment made by resort to the first part of article 368 could be struck down upon a ground such as taking away the jurisdiction of High Courts under article 226 or of the Supreme Court under article 136 or that the effect of the amendment is to curtail substantially, though indirectly, the jurisdiction of the High Courts under article 226 or the Supreme Court under article 136, and recourse had not been had to the proviso to article 368.
The question whether the amendment was a colorable exercise of power by Parliament may be relevant for consideration in the latter kind of case.
[969 D F] The attack on the Seventeenth Amendment Act was based on grounds most of which were the same as those urged and rejected in the earlier case of Sankari Prasad Singh Deo vs Union of India and State of Bihar, ; , and on some grounds which are unsubstantial.
No case has therefore been made out by the petitioners either for the reconsi deration of that decision or for striking down the Seventeenth Amendment.
[963 FG] The following matters however were not considered in Sankari Prasad 's case and merit consideration : (i) Where Legislation deals with the amendment of a provision of the Constitution, does it cease to be law within the meaning of article 13(2) merely because it has to be passed by a special majority ? [964 B C] (ii) Where a challenge is made before the Court on the ground that no amendment to the Constitution had in fact been made or on the ground that it was not a valid amendment, would it not be the duty of the Court and within its power to examine the question and to pronounce upon it since this is precisely what a Court is competent to do in regard to any other law? (iii) Is the statement in A. K. Gopalan vs State of Madras, ; that the fundamental rights are the minimum rights reserved by the people to themselves, and therefore unalterable, inconsistent with the statement in In re ; , that Parliament has plenary powers of legislation ? [965 D E] (iv) Whether making a change in the basic features of the Constitution can be regarded merely as an amendment or would it be, in effect, rewriting a part of the Constitution, and if it is the latter, would it be within the purview of article 368 ? [966 H, 967 A] (v) Upon the assumption that Parliament can amend Part III of the Constitution and was therefore competent to enact articles 31A and 31B, as also to amend the definition of "estate", can Parliament validate a State law dealing with land ? [968 H, 969 A] (vi) Could Parliament go to the extent it went when it enacted the First Amendment and the Ninth Schedule and now when it added 44 more agrarian laws to it ? Or, was Parliament incompetent to go, beyond enacting article 31A in 1950, and now, beyond amending the definition of "Estate" ? [969 B C]
