The respondent firm, which ran a factory manufacturing brass utensils, filed a Writ Petition for the issue of a mandamus, restraining the appellant from recovering contributions alleged to be due under section 1(3), read with Schedule 1, of the Employees Provident Fund Act, 1952, contending, inter alia, that the manufacture of brass utensils did not fall within the relevant entry in Schedule 1, i.e. it was not an industry engaged in the manufacture of 'electrical, mechanical or general engineering products '.
The learned Single Judge, who heard the petition, rejected the respondent 's contention, holding that brass utensils were, in substance, 'drums and containers ' i.e. they fell within item (24) and cl.
(a) of the Explanation to Schedule 1, and that therefore their manufacture was covered by Schedule 1.
On appeal, however, the Division Bench reversed this finding and issued a writ as prayed for.
it was contended on behalf of the respondent that the products to which the entry referred were products which were useful in, or meant for, electrical engineering, mechanical engineering, or general engineering.
On the other hand, it was the appellant 's contention, that the entry would take in every industry which was engaged in the manufacture of products that were manufactured by an electrical, mechanical or general engineering process.
HELD : In construing the relevant entry in Schedule 1, it was necessary to bear in mind that this entry occurred in an Act which was intended to serve a beneficent purpose.
If the words used in the entry were capable of a narrow or broad construction, each construction being reasonably possible, and if it appeared that the broad construction would help the furtherance of the object, then it would be necessary to prefer that construction.
[78 C F] The nature of the items included in the Explanation to Schedule 1 clearly showed that some of the items could not reasonably be included within the restricted interpretation canvassed by the respondent; on the other hand, the mention of several of items would be redundant if the wide interpretation advocated by the appellant was to be accepted.
[81 B H; 82 A F] The content of the entry 'electrical, mechanical and general engineering products ' was that all products which were generally known as electrical engineering products or mechanical engineering products or general engineering products were intended to be covered by the entry, and the object of Schedule 1 was to include within the scope of the Act every industry which was engaged in the manufacture of electrical engineering products mechanical engineering products or general engineering products.
It was the character of the products that helped to determine the content of the entry.
[82 G H; 83A] 73 Thus considered the manufacture of brass utensils must be regarded as an activity the object of which was the manufacture of general engineering products.
[83 F] Case law reviewed.
