There was divergence between the appellant 's date of birth as given at the time of his appointment as Judge of the Calcutta High Court and as found in the records of the public examinations at which he had appeared.
The Union Home Minister after correspondence with the parties concerned including the Chief Justice of India and the appellant determined the appellants date of birth to be December 27, 1901 as found in the records of the appellant 's Matriculation Examination.
The President, by order passed on May 15, 1961, approved the decision and the consequent order that the appellant be asked to emit his office on December 26, 1961 when be would reach the age of superannuation.
The Punjab High Court dismissed the appellant 's writ petition challenging the order and the Supreme Court dismissed in limine the petition for special leave to appeal.
Pursuant to the orders of the Union Government the Chief Justiceof the Calcutta High Court asked the appellant to demit his office on December 26, 1961, and after that date did not allot him any work.
The appellant thereupon filed a writ petition before the Calcutta High Court under article 226 of the Constitution which was dismissed.
The Supreme Court granted him special leave to appeal.
The appellant in his appeal contended that the age of a Judge given by him at the time of appointment once accepted by Government, could not again be called in question and in any case could not be determined again by the Government by Executive order.
The complexion of the controversy the passing of the Constitution by adding cl.
(3) to article 217 provided that any dispute as to the ago of a Judge of a High Court would be decided exclusively and finally by the president of India in consultation with the chief justice of India.
The Amendment Act also provided that the provision shall be deemed always to have been in the Constitution.
The parties agreed that after the retrospective amendment the main question for consideration was whether the order of the Union Government determining the appellant 's age and date of superannuation was an order which could be deemed to have been passed under article 217(3).
HELD : (i) If a dispute is raised about the age of a sitting Judge then it is desirable that the matter should be decided by the President.
Whether the dispute is genuine or not is to be considered by the President in consultation with the Chief Justice of India.
But it is certainly in the interests of the Judge himself, as much as in the interests of the purity and 54 reputation of the administration of justice that the dispute should be settled.
it could not be held that the age of a Judge given by him at the time of ,,appointment could never again be called in question.
(65 E F] (ii)The Chief Justice of the Calcutta High Court was justified in not allotting any work to the appellant after December 26, 1961, as any judgments delivered by him after the date would have been open to question as to their validity.
[66 B C] (iii)The judgment of the Punjab High Court dismissing appellant 's ,writ petition did not operate as res judicata as it was not on merits.
[71 A] (iv)Article 217(3) gave to the President exclusive power to determine ,the age of a sitting Judge and divested the courts of jurisdiction in this regard.
The procedure to be adopted was in the discretion of the President ,but the provision to formally consult the Chief Justice of India was man Also implicit in the Article, was the requirement that the Judge concerned should have a reasonable opportunity to give his version and 'Produce his evidence.
[64 B D] (v)The provision having been expressly made retrospective the appeal had to be decided on the basis that the order passed by the President in the appellant 's case could be treated as a decision under article 217(3), if, on merits, such a conclusion was justified.
[65 A] (vi)The order of the Union Government passed on May 15, 1961 did not satisfy the requirements of article 217 (3) and could not be held to be ,an order passed under the provisions of that Article.
The decision had been taken by the Home Minister and that plainly was not a decision of the President.
The offer to allow the matter to be decided by arbitration, and reopening of the matter after the decision had been taken, cannot be ,easily assimilated to the requirements of the Article.
The informality of the consultation with the Chief Justice of India also did not squarely fit, in ,with the formal consultation which is mandatory.
[67 B C, G H; 68 A] Srinivas Mail Bairoltva vs King Emperor, I.L.R. 26 Pat. 460 and Alexander Brogden and others vs The Directors of the Metropolitan Rail.way Company , referred to.
(vii)The order was also not a proper order under article 217(3) because the requirements of natural justice had not been satisfied inasmuch as the President did not have before him when he made the decision the evidence of the appellant.
It is true that the appellant had refused to produce the evidence on the ground that the Executive had no jurisdiction to call into question and determine his age.
This contention of the appellant when raised was fully justified as such a dispute in the legal situation which them existed had normally to be determined by judicial proceeding before the High Courts of competent jurisdiction, and therefore his failure or refusal to produce his evidence could not be fairly pressed into.
service against 'him.
[69 D F; 70 B] The Court held that the appellant was entitled to a decision by the President of India as to his age under article 217(3) and passed orders in terms agreed to by both parties.
[71 B F]
