Upon the death of the last Mahant of a Dera of Sanyasi Sadhus in Punjab, the respondent, claiming to be the Chela of the deceased and therefore having a preferential title, entered into possession of certain properties basing his title thereto on an appointment made to the office by the Bhekh and the people of the village.
The appellant also claimed the same properties as the successor of the deceased Mahant and brought a suit for a decree for possession of the properties belonging to the Dera, he claimed title on the basis that as Gurbhal of the last Mahant, he was entitled to the Gadi and that he, and not the respondent, had been appointed to it by the people of the village and the Bhekh; he further claimed in the alternative, that even if it was found that he was not so appointed, according to the custom regarding succession of the Dera and Rewaj i am of Deras, he was in any event entitled to become Mahant as he was the Gurbhai of the deceased Mahant.
The trial court found that the respondent was not the Chela of the deceased Mahant and that there was no evidence that be was appointed Mahant, on the other hand the appellant was also held not to have been appointed.
However, without recording a finding on the custom set up by the appellant, the trial court held that under the law in Punjab, in the absence of a Chela, a Gurbhai was entitled to succeed to the Gadi apart from any question of appointment by the Bhekh, and on this reasoning, decreed the appellant 's suit.
The respondent 's first appeal to the Additional Sessions Judge was allowed but a Single Bench of the High Court reversed that decision.
Thereafter, in the respondent 's Letters Patent Appeal, although the Division Bench concurred with the single Bench on the other issues, the appeal was allowed on the ground that the custom set up in the plaint that a Gurbhai could succeed without an appointment of the Bhekh had not been made out.
HELD : (i) There is no general law applicable to religious institutions in the Punjab and each institution must be deemed to be regulated by its own custom and practice.
Therefore, the appellant could not succeed as Mahant without reference to an appointment by the Bhekh or the fraternity unless he could establish a custom which entitled him to succeed by virtue of being a Gurbhai.
[238 D E; 239 C] Rattigans ' Digest of Customary law: Jiwan Das vs Hira Das, A.I.R. 1937 Lah.
311 and Sital Das vs Sant Ram, A.I.R. 1954 S.C. 606, referred to.
On the basis of the evidence before the trial court the appellant had not established the custom put forward by him.
[240 G] Sup./65 16 234 (ii)The appellant 's suit being one of ejectment he had to succeed or fail on the title that he established; if he could not succeed on the strength of his title, his suit must fail notwithstanding that the defendant in possession had no title to the property.
[236 HI Mukherjea 's Hindu Law of Religious and Charitable Trust, 2nd Edition,p.
317, referred.
