The appellants manufacture a medicated syrup "Sharbat Rooh Afza" according to a formula and containing some fruit juices.
Acting under section 3 of the , the Central Government made the Fruit Products order in 1955; as a result of an amendment in September 1956 of the relevant provisions of this Order, the requirement of the minimum percentage of fruit juices in a fruit syrup covered in of the Second Schedule of the Fruit Order was raised from 10% to 25%.
This requirement was duly notified to the Appellants.
Thereafter as a result of an inspection of their factory by the Marketing development Officer, the appellants received an order from him requiring them to stop further manufacture and sale of 'Sharbat Rooh Afza ' forthwith on the ground that it did not contain the minimum percentage of fruit juices prescribed by the relevant provisions of the Fruit Order.
The appellants challenged this order in a Writ Petition on the ground, inter alia, that the Fruit Order did not apply to 'Sharbat Rooh Afza ' and also that the impugned order and the Fruit Order were invalid.
The High Court, however, rejected these grounds, upheld the validity of the Fruit Order and dis missed the petition.
It was contended on behalf of the appellants that the 'Sharbat ' was a medicinal product and not a 'fruit product ' as defined by cl. 2(d) of the Fruit Order; that the Fruit Order was invalid because it could have appropriately been issued only under the , and not the ; and that the impugned order was invalid because it affected the appellant 's Trade mark rigts.
HELD : (i) The Sharbat was a fruit product within the meaning of cl. 2(d) (v) of the Fruit order as the residuary part of that clause took in any beverages containing fruit juices or fruit pulp; as such, its production could be controlled by the relevant provisions of the order.
The High Court was right in rejecting the appellant 's contention that the Sharbat was a medicinal product in view of the fact that the appellants had not claimed exemption from the application of the Fruit Order by complying with Cl. 16(1)(c) thereof.
[200 E G; 201 H; 203 A] (ii)As section 3(1) of the authorised the Central Government to regulate the qualitative and quantitative production of essential commodities, and as the pith and substance of the relevant provisions of the Fruit Order was clearly to regulate the qualitative production of the Fruit Products covered by it, the contention that the regulations imposed by the order were outside the purview of section 3(1), could 193 not be accepted.
The order was not therefore invalid on the ground that it purported to tackle the problem of adulteration and should therefore have been issued under the .
[201 D 202 C] (iii)The Fruit Order and the Act under which it was issued were constitutionally valid as the restrictions imposed by them were reasonable and in the interest of the general public.
What the impugned order purported to do was to require the appellants to comply with reasonable restric tions imposed by the Fruit Order and the fact that, incidentally, compliance with the Fruit Order might tend to affect the trade mark rights, could not render the impugned order invalid.
[203 D E] (iv)The definition of 'synthetic beverage ' in cl. 2(k) of the Fruit Order which indicates that it is a beverage which contains no fruit juice cannot be said to conflict with the requirements of cl.
11(2) that beverages containing less than 25% fruit juices should be sold as 'synthetic ' pro ducts.
Furthermore, cl. 11 contains a positive provision and the validity of the mandatory requirements of cl. 11 could not be impaired by the alleged inconsistency between that provision and the definition of 'synthetic ' beverage prescribed by cl. 2(k).
[203 A B] Amrit Banaspati Co. Ltd. vs The Stale of U.P. Cr.
A. No. 141 of 1959 dated 30 11 60, referred to.
