The respondents instituted a passing off action in the High Court of Mysore for a declaration that they were exclusive owners of a certain trade mark and for a permanent injunction restraining the appellants from passing off their goods as that of respondents.
By section 105 of the Trade and Merchandise Mark Act such an action may be instituted in any court not inferior to a District Court having jurisdiction to try the suit.
It appears that on the day the suit was instituted the District Court was closed and there was no Judge functioning in the District Court who was on duty and competent to exercise the powers of the District Court.
The High Court entertained the plaint and granted temporary injunction.
In appeal by special leave : HELD:(i) The High Court of Mysore is by its constitution primarily a court exercising appellate jurisdiction; it is competent to exercise original jurisdiction only in those matters in respect of which by special Acts it has been specifically invested with jurisdiction.
It would be competent to exercise original jurisdiction under section 105 of the Act if it was invested with ordinary original jurisdiction of a District Court and not otherwise.
[802 D F] As a Court of appeal it undoubtedly stands at the apex within the State, but on that account it does not stand invested with original jurisdiction in matters not expressly declared within its cognizance.
[802 H] (ii) Power under section 24 of the Code of Civil Procedure to try and dispose of a proceeding after transfer from a court lawfully seized of it does not involve a power to entertain a proceeding which is not otherwise within the cognizance of the High Court.
[803 C D] (iii) Section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure preserves the inherent powers of the Court, but it does not authorise the High Court to invest itself with jurisdiction where the jurisdiction is not conferred by law.
[803 D E] (iv) By "jurisdiction" is meant the extent of the power which is conferred upon the court by its constitution to try a proceeding : its exercise cannot be enlarged because an extraordinary situation "requires" the court to exercise it.
[803 H 804 A]
