The appellant, a resident of Palwal in Gurgaon District, committed house trespass and tried to outrage the modesty of a girl aged 7 years.
By an order dated May 31, 1962, he was convicted by magistrate and sentenced to rigorous imprisonment.
He was also ordered to pay fine.
At the time of his conviction, he was 16 years old.
The was extended to Gurgaon on September 1, 1962 and hence at the time of his conviction the magistrate had no power or duty to make any order under the Act.
The appeal of the appellant was dismissed by the Additional Sessions Judge, Gurgaon by his order dated Sep tember 22, 1962.
His revision petition was also dismissed by the High Court on September 27, 1962.
No ground was taken either before the Additional Sessions Judge or High Court that the provisions of the should be applied in the case.
After the dismissal of the revision petition, appellant filed a criminal miscellaneous petition requesting the High Court to exercise its powers under section 11 of the Act and pass orders under sections 3, 4 or 6 of the Act.
The application was also dismissed by High Court.
The appellant filed a petition in the High Court for the grant of a certificate of fitness to appeal to this Court and one of the grounds taken was that High Court should have acted under section 11 of the Act and passed orders under sections 3, 4 or 6 of the Act.
The certificate having been refused by High Court, the appellant came to this Court by special leave.
Accepting the appeal, Held (Per Subba Rao and Das Gupta, JJ.): The order of the High Court be set aside and High Court be directed to make an order under section 6 or if it so desires, remand the case to the Sessions Court for doing so.
It is true that ordinarily, this court is reluctant to allow a party to raise a point for the first time before it, but in this case, both the Additional Sessions Judge and the High Court ignored the mandatory provisions of the Act.
It is true that the appellant did not bring the provisions of the Act to the notice of the Court till after the disposal of the revision petition, but that does not absolve the court from discharging its duty under the Act.
The appellate court in appeal or the High Court on revision can, in exercise of the powers conferred under section 11 of the Act, make an order under section 6(1).
The Act is a milestone in the progress of the modern liberal trend of reform in the field of penology.
It is the result of the recognition of the doctrine that the object of criminal law is more to reform the individual offender than to punish him.
The Act distinguishes offenders below 21 years of age and those 677 above that age and offenders who are guilty of committing an offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life and those who are guilty of a lesser offence.
While in the case of offenders who are above the age of 21 years, absolute discretion is given to the court to release them after admonition or on probation of good conduct, in the case of offenders below the age of 21 years an injunction is issued to the court not to sentence them to imprisonment unless it is satisfied that having regard to the circumstances of the case, including the nature of the offence and the character of the offenders, it is not desirable to deal with them under sections 3 and 4 of the Act.
An order under section 1 1 (1) of the Act can be made by any court empowered to try and sentence the offender to imprisonment and also by High Court or any other court when case comes before it on appeal or in revision.
The sub section ex facie does not circumscribe the jurisdiction of an appellate court to make an order under the Act only in a case where the trial court could have made that order.
The phraseology used therein is wide enough to enable the appellate court or High Court, when the case come before, it, to make such an order.
It was purposely made comprehensive as the Act was made to implement a social reform.
As the Act does not change the quantum of the sentence, but only introduces a provision to reform the offender, there is no reason why the legislature should have prohibited the exercise of such a power even if the case was pending against the accused at one stage or other in the hierarchy of tribunals.
The term "court" in section 6(1) includes an appellate court as well as revisional court.
Per Raghubar Dayal, J. (dissenting) When a person has been found guilty for the first time of an offence to which the provisions of sections 3 and 4 of the could apply, and such finding, be it of the trial court or of the appellate court, is arrived at before the application of the Act, the court of appeal or revision cannot take action under section 11(1) of the Act when the case comes before it in appeal or revision.
It is true that appellate courts have allowed parties to take advantage of a law enacted during the pendency of the case, but this is done when parties can litigate further in view of the changed law and is done to save multiplicity of proceedings.
Such a ground is not available in the present case.
Ramji Missar vs State of Bihar, [1963] Supp.
2 S.C.R. 745, referred to.
