By virtue of a scheme framed by the Madras High Court in 1919, the administration of a temple was placed in the hands of the Kattali Thambiran to be appointed by the appellant in his capacity as the trustee.
In June 1951, the Commissioner, Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments, Madras, filed a petition under section 62(3)(a) of the Madras Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Act, 1951, (Act No. XIX of 1951( in the court of the Sub Judge, for the modification of the 1919 scheme.
The petition contained various allegations of mismanagement and of the full income of the temple not having been secured and safeguarded; this was stated to be attributable mainly to defective machinery set up under the 1919 scheme and it was suggested that an executive officer should be appointed to undertake the administration of the temple.
The Subordinate Judge found that the petitioner had not substantiated any of the allegations made against the trustees and no case had been made out for amending the 1919 scheme so as to provide for the appointment of an Executive Officer.
In appeal, although the respondent State did not question the finding of the lower court that there was no proof of mismanagement, the High Court modified the scheme by introducing the suggested provision for the appointment of an Executive Officer and by providing for the appointment of additional trustees, if necessary.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant that the High Court, having agreed with the Subordinate Judge that the Commissioner had failed to establish any of the charges levelled by him against the Trustee, erred in modifying the 1919 scheme as above.
On the other hand, it was urged by the State that under the Act a scheme for administration of a temple could be framed or an earlier scheme amended not only when there was mismanagement by the Trustee, but also so as to provide for a better administration of the temple.
Furthermore the Commissioner was empowered to frame a scheme if he considered this desirable for the proper administration of a religious institution and his opinion in this regard must be given decisive weight by the court when amending a scheme.
In the present case, in view of the fact that the temple owned extensive immovable properties, some of which were required to be sold, and there were many other complicated problems connected with the administration of the temple requiring attention, it was necessary to appoint a trained Executive Officer in the best interest of the temple 935 HELD: (i) A consideration of the scheme of the Act showed there was no justification for the contention that a court should accept without scrutiny the view of the Deputy Commissioner that the scheme required modification in the manner suggested by him and that the formal imprimaturs of the court was all that was contemplated by the Act.
While a court should have due regard to the views of the Commissioner who is in close touch with the administration of temples, it could not be held that the court was relieved of its duty of ascertaining the necessity for framing a scheme or to consider the propriety or advisability of the various clauses of a scheme.
In framing a scheme the Deputy Commissioner and in a suit or application for amendment of a scheme the Court, will mould the relief under section 58(2) having regard to the circumstances of each case.
[939 H 940 A C] (ii) The Deputy Commissioner, the Commissioner, or the Court, as the case may be, is not bound, in framing a scheme, to appoint an executive officer in every case; a case must be made out for such appointment.
[940 G] (iii) In the present case the proposed executive officer would have the entire administration of the temple with hardly any power left to the trustee.
Such a drastic provision might be necessary where the temple was mismanaged or there were other compelling circumstances requiring such an appointment.
But in view of the concurrent finding of fact that the Commissioner had failed to establish and of the charges against the trustee, it could not be held that a case had been made out for the appointment of an Executive Officer to practically displace the trustee.
Furthermore, there was no material before the court to ascertain the complicated nature of the problems of administration requiring the attention of an executive officer, and in any event the Commissioner bad ample powers under the Act to issue orders or give appropriate advice to the trustee.
[944 E G; 945 A B] (iv) The proposed provision in the scheme only conferred a power to appoint additional trustees and did not direct their appointment in present or even in future; such a power was also available to the Commissioner under section 39 and the appellant was not therefore in any way prejudiced by this provision.
[945 E F] (v) Although the Commissioner was given wider powers in respect of the appointment of an Executive Officer under the Madras Act XXII of 1959, as the suit in the present case was filed in 1951 i.e. before the coming into force of that Act, the appeal had to be decided on the basis of circumstances prevailing in 1951.
[945 H]
