By a notification issued in 1937 the respondent State of Madras had made Ch.
VI A of the Hindu Religious Endowments Act, 1926, applicable to the Thiyagarajaswami temple at Tiruvarur.
In 1956 the aforesaid notification was extended for a period of five years beginning on September 30, 1956.
This was done in exercise of powers under section 64(4) of the Madras Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Act, 1951.
The appellant challenged the issue of the notification under section 64(4) in a writ petition before the High Court.
At the hearing it was urged that the impugned notification was invalid as it had been passed without giving a reasonable opportunity to the appellant to show cause against it.
The High Court while accepting this contention, nevertheless refused to issue.
the writ prayed for because: (1) the said plea had not been taken in the writ petition and (2) the period for which the notification had been extended was shortly due to expire.
The appellant came to the Supreme Court with certificate of fitness.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant that the two reasons given by the High Court for not issuing a writ were wrong.
The respondent State on the other hand contended that no quasi judicial enquiry was necessary for extending an existing notification under section 64(4) although such an enquiry was necessary before issuing a notification for the first time under section 64(3).
HELD: (i) ' Whether f,or issuing a notification under 64(3) or for extending an existing notification under section 64(4) the process of dec.ision is the same.
In either case the Government had to satisfy itself whether supervision by the Executive Officer under the notification is required for public good.
The Government cannot legitimately and satisfactorily consider the question as to whether the notification should be cancelled without hearing the party asking for cancellation; nor can it legitimately and reasonably decide to extend the notification without hearing the trustee.
Circumstances could arise after the issue of the first notification which would help the Trustee to claim that the notification should either be cancelled or should not be extended.
The nature of the order which can be passed under section 64(4) and its effect on the rights of the Trustee are exactly similar to the order which can be passed under section 64(3).
[25 A E] The High Court was therefore right in holding that it was obligatory on the respondent State as a matter of natural justice to give, notice to the appellant before the impugned notication was passed by it.
[25E] Shri Radeshyam Khare & Ant.
vs State of Madhya Pradesh and Ors.
, distinguished.
18 (ii) Although the plea of denial of natural justice had not been taken by the appellant in his writ petition, it had been taken in the rejoinder, and the respondent thereafter had full notice of the said plea.
Therefore the first reason given by the High Court for refusing the writ was wrong.
[25G H] (ii) The High Court ignored the fact that before it delivered its judgment a new Act had come into force, namely, Madras Act XXII of 1959, whereby the life of the impugned notification had been extended.
Therefore the second reason which weighed with the High Court in not issuing a writ in favour of the appellant, that the impugned notification would remain in operation for a very short period after it delivered its judgment, was also wrong.
[26C E]
