The appellant had a combined overdraft and deposit account, also described as a mutual open and current account, with the respondent bank.
In December 1946, the respondent credited two cheques to the appellant 's account one for Rs. 8,200 and the other for Rs. 600 and sent them for collection to the Shillong branch of the Bharati Central Bank, on which they were drawn.
Instead of obtaining cash from that Bank, the respondent accepted a cheque on the Nath Bank.
This the respondent did without consulting the appellant and on its own responsibility.
When the respondent presented the cheque to the Nath Bank, it was returned with a note "full cover not received".
The respondent thereupon debited the appellant with the sum of Rs. 8,800 in the accounts without informing him.
On the instructions of the appellant, who was informed about the dishonouring of the cheque, the respondent accepted a demand draft from the Bharati Central Bank drawn on its Calcutta branch for the amount.
The Calcutta branch of the Bharati Central Bank however requested the respondent to present it to the Shillong branch.
The respondent presented the draft to the Shillong branch of the Bharati Central Bank, but the Bank applied for moratorium and closed its business, in January 1947 and the draft was not cashed.
In the proceedings for the reconstruction of the Bharati Central Bank, the respondent asked to be treated as a preferential creditor in respect of the amount of the draft, and was so treated.
The dealings between the appellant and respondent continued till December 1950.
In May 1953, the respondent Bank was ordered to be wound up and the liquidator presented an application to the High Court under section 45D of the Banking Companies Act, 1949, for settlement of the list of debtors, claiming a decree for about Rs. 6,000 and interest, against the appellant.
The appellant resisted the claim but the High Court decreed it.
In the appeal to the Supreme Court, it was contended that (i) the respondent acted negligently and in breach of its duty as collecting agent of the appellant and was bound to give credit for the sum of Rs. 8,800 and (ii) the claim was barred by limitation.
HELD: (per Raghubar Dayal, Bachawat and Ramaswami.
JJ.) (i) It was not shown that the respondent acted negligently or in breach of its duties or contrary to any instructions given by the appellant or any lawful usages prevailing amongst bankers and therefore was not bound to give credit to the appellant for the sum of Rs. 8,800.
[114 H] A banker entrusted by its customer with the collection of a cheque is bound to act according to the directions given by a customer, and in the absence of such directions, according to the usages prevailing at the place where the banker conducts his business 111 and applicable to the matter in hand.
The banker is also bound to use reasonable skill and diligence in presenting and securing payment of cheques and placing the proceeds to his customers ' accounts and in taking such other steps as may be proper to secure the customer 's interests.
The respondent in the instant case received the two cheques for collection in the usual way as agent of the appellant and not with the intention of acquiring title to them.
The appellant, instead of disowning the various acts of the respondent in respect of the collection of the cheques, had ratified them.
By preferring a claim as creditor in respect of the draft, in the liquidation proceedings of the Bharati Central Bank, the respondent was not accepting the draft in satisfaction of its dues from the appellant.
It was only preserving all the rights in respect of the draft and was acting in his best interests.
[114 A, F H; 115 A B] (ii) The respondent gave loans on overdrafts and the appellant made deposits.
The loans and deposits created mutual obligations.
Since the account was mutual and continued to be so until December 1950, the claim against the appellant was not barred by limitation having regard to section 45 (0) of the Banking Companies Act.
[116 B, E] Per Mudholkar, J. (Dissenting), the appellant 's name could not be included in the list of the respondent 's debtors.
[121 A] Where a customer hands in a cheque to his banker for collection, the banker accepting the performance of that duty becomes the agent of the customer for the purpose of collection.
But if a banker credits a cheque in the customer 's account with the bank, the banker would not necessarily be deemed to be the customer 's agent, when he takes steps for collecting the amount payable under the cheque.
The facts, that the cheques when paid in, were credited in the appellant s account with the respondent and that when the cheques were returned unpaid, the respondent made a debit entry against the appellant 's account without informing the appellant show mat the respondent accepted the position that it was acting in the matter not as the appellant 's agent but as a payee.
Since the appellant had a mutual open and current account with the respondent, the respondent would, with respect to the amounts for which the cheques were drawn, have become upon realisation of the cheques drawn by the appellant an actual recipient of the money from the appellant.
Therefore, though it is true that the amount was not received by the respondent in cash it must be deemed to nave received the sum either by reason of the fact that it obtained from the Bharati Central Bank a cheque for the amount on the Nath Bank, or by the acceptance of the demand draft.
Having claimed as against the Bharati Central Bank to be treated as a preferential creditor for the sum of Rs. 8,800 whatever rights the respondent would be against that Bank and not against the appellant.
[118 H; 120 A, C, F H]
