The first respondent S, a Brahmin woman married to R, during the lifetime of her husband became the permanently kept concubine of L, a sudra by caste.
The other three respondents were the sons of S & L.
After L 's death, in a suit filed by the respondent against L 's brother and their sons (the appellants here), the sub judge, by a decree dated September 20, 1954, awarded maintenance to the respondents during their life time out of the estate of L and this award was upheld on appeal by the High Court.
During the pendency of the appeal before the High Court, the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act of 1956 came into force and upon a contention being raised before it, the High Court held that the relevant provisions of the new Act did not have retrospective effect so as to adversely affect the rights of maintenance available to the respondents under the Hindu Law before the Act came into force.
In appeal before the Supreme Court, it was contended on behalf the appellants (1), that the respondents were not entitled to claim any maintenance from the estate of L under the Hindu Law in force before the 1956 Act because (a) the first respondent was not a Dasi and the other three respondents were not Dasiputras of L; (b) the husband of the first respondent having been alive, her connection with L was adulterous and she could not therefore be entitled to maintenance as an Avaruddha Stree and (c) the first responden being a Brahmin adulteress and L being a Sudra.
the connection was Pratiloma and illegal.
(2) That in any event, by virtue of section 4 of the 1956 Act, the Hindu Law prior to that Act ceased.
to have effect with respect to matters for which provision was made in the Act and that provision for maintenance, etc.
had in fact been made in sections 21 and 22 of the Act.
HELD ': (1) The respondents were entitled to maintenance during their lives out of the estate of L under the Hindu Law as it stood before the 1956 Act came into force.
[127 D] (a) It was well recognised that independently of the express texts of the Mitakshara, whereby, in the case of Sudras the Dasiputra was entitled to a share of the inheritance, the illegitimate son of a Sudra was entitled to maintenance out of his father 's estate though his mother was not a Dasi in the strict sense and though he was the result of a casual or adulterous relationship.
[125 C] Mitakshara Ch.
I, section 12 V. 1, 2 and 3 referred to; Case law reviewed.
(b) Under Mitakshara law.
a married woman who left her husband and lived with her paramour as his permanently kept mistress could claim the status of an Avaruddha Stree by remaining faithful 123 to her paramour, even though the connection was adulterous, and she was entitled to maintenance from the estate of the paramour so long as she preserved sexual fidelity to him.
[125 H, 126 B] Akku Prahlad vs Ganesh Prahlad I.L.R. affirmed Case law reviewed.
(c) A Brahmin concubine in the exclusive and continuous keeping of a Sudra until his death was entitled to claim maintenance.[127 B] Case law referred to.
Sections 21 and 22 are in terms prospective and these sections read with section 4 did not destroy or affect the right of maintenance of the respondents which vested in them on the death of L and before the commencement of the 1956 Act.
A] section Kameshwaramma vs Subramanyam A.I.R. 1959 Andhra Pradesh 269; distinguished.
