The respondents who were interested in a public temple filed a suit against the appellant who was looking after the affairs of the temple.
They prayed for his removal from possession of the trust properties, for the rendering by him of true and faithful accounts and for the framing of a scheme.
The trial court held that the appellant was liable to render accounts.
Having ascertained the amount of principal, it determined the interest payable at an amount equal to that of the principal on the basis of the rule of damdupat.
The respondents appealed to the High Court and urged that the rule of damdupat should not have been applied and that compound interest should have been charged against the appellant.
The High Court held that the appellant had used the trust moneys in his business and therefore agreed with the contention of the respondents and remanded the case to the trial court for ascertaining the amount due to the temple.
In the appeal to the Supreme Court, it was contended that, (i) there were no grounds for making the appellant liable to pay compound interest, and (ii) even if there was liability to pay any interest, it was only for paying simple interest and that the rule of damdupat should be applied.
HELD: (i) It had not been proved that the trust funds had been used in the appellant 's business and therefore the appellant was not liable to pay compound interest on the balance of the trust funds with him.
[96 G] (ii) In the absence of statutes during the period of suit dealing with public charitable trusts making a trustee liable to pay interest, interest could be charged only on equitable grounds.
One such circumstance is, when the Court considers that the trustee ought to have received interest, as when he retains trust money in his hands uninvested.
Since the accounts, in the instant case, show that the appellant had retained the principal amount uninvested for over twenty years he would be liable to pay simple interest at the rate of 4 per cent per annum.
Even though the interest calculated at that rate exceeded the principal, that entire interest would have to be paid, because, the rule of damdupat would not apply.
The principle of damdupat was evolved both as an inducement to the debtors to pay the entire principal and interest at one and the same time in order to save interest in excess of the principal, and as a warning to the creditor to take effective steps for realising the debt from the borrower within a reasonable time, so that, there may not be accumulation of interest in excess of the principal amount.
But that rule applies only to cases where a loan is advanced.
Though a trustee who had custody of trust funds, has a pecuniary liability to make good those funds if he has used them and may, on the basis of such a liability, be said to be a debtor of the trust, yet he, as an individual, is not a borrower of the funds from the trust and cannot be said to have taken a loan from himself as a trustee in charge of the trust funds.
[96 H; 97 E H; 99 D; E; 101 E F, H] 92 Sharp vs Jackson, (1899) A.C.419 and Lake, in re Dyer Ex Parte, (1901)1 K.B. 710, referred to.
