The appellant who was in the service of a State Government asked for long leave which was refused.
Subsequently he asked for ten days ' leave which was granted.
On the expiry of the leave period he did not join duty on the ground that he was seriously ill.
The Government refused to accept the plea and instituted a departmental inquiry against him.
The respondent wanted to produce oral evidence in support of his plea including the evidence of doctors who treated him, but the enquiry officer refused to record oral evidence on the ground that the case against the appellant rested on documents alone and therefore no oral evidence was necessary.
On the report of the enquiry ' officer the State Government ordered the compulsory retirement of the respondent.
The latter filed a suit in which he claimed inter alia that the constitutional provision in article 311 had been contravened.
The trial judge held against him but the High Court decided in his favour.
The State Government appealed to the Supreme Court with certificate.
The narrow question to which the COurt had to address itself was whether it was obligatory on the enquiry officer to give a reasonable opportunity to the respondent to lead oral evidence and examine his doctors.
HELD: (i) The Civil Services (ClassifiCation, Control and Appeal) Rules provide in r. 55 that if the charge sheeted Officer so desires or if the authority concerned so directs an oral enquiry shall be held.
This provision is mandatory and is based on considerations of natural justice and fair play.
Therefore when the respondent expressed his desire to the enquiry officer that he wanted to lead evidence in support of his plea, it was obligatory on the enquiry officer to have fixed a date for recording such oral evidence and give due intimation to the respondent in that behalf.
[143 D F] (ii) Though an enquiry officer would be justified in conducting the enquiry in such a way that its proceedings are not allowed to be unduly or deliberately prolonged, it would be impossible to accept the argument that if the charge sheeted officer wants to lead oral evidence the enquiry officer can say that having regard to the charges against the officer he would not hold any oral enquiry [143 H] (iii) In the present case the witnesses whom the respondent wanted to examine would undoubtedly have given relevant evidence.
He wanted to examine his doctors but the enquiry officer failed to give him an opportunity to do so.
That introduced a fatal infirmity in the whole enquiry as the respondent had not been given a reasonable opportunity to de.fend himself within the meeting of article 311 (2).
The appeal of the State Government had therefore to be dismissed.
[144 A, C] 136
