The respondent entered into a partnership agreement with the appellant.
But this was not registered.
There was an arbitration clause sti 51 pulating that in case of dispute the matter will be referred for arbitration in accordance with .
Dispute having arisen between the respondent and the appellant the former wrote to the latter stating that the dispute be referred for arbitration and that the respondent has appointed one K as the sole arbitrator.
On the failure of the appellant to agree to this the respondent filed an application under section 8(2) of the Indian for the appointment of arbitrator.
The application was heard by a Division Bench of the High Court before which the appellant contended that section 69(3) of the afforded a bar to the petition because the partnership was not registered.
One of the Judges upheld the contention while the other rejected it and the matter was referred to another Judge who held that the application was competent.
The present appeal was filed by special leave granted by this Court.
HELD: (i) Thai since the arbitration clause formed a part of the agreement constituting the partnership it is obvious that the proceeding which is before the Court is to enforce a right which arises from a contract.
Whether one views the contract between the parties as a whole or one views only the arbitration clause it is impossible to think that the right to proceed to arbitration is not one of the rights which are founded on the agreement of the parties.
The words of section 69(3) "a right arising from a contract" are in either sense sufficient to cover the present matters.
(ii) Interpretation ejusdem genuris or noscitur a sociis need not always be made when showing particular classes are followed try general words.
Before the general words can be so interpreted there must be a genus constituted or a category disclosed with reference to which the general words can and are intended to be restricted.
The expression "claim of set off" does not disclose a category or a genus.
Set offs are of two kinds legal and equitable and both are already comprehended and it is difficult to think of any right "arising from a contract ' which is of the same nature as a claim of set off and can be raised by a dependent in suit.
Allen vs Emerson, , referred to.
Hafiz Qamar Din vs Nur Din, A.I.R. 1936 Lah.
136, Babulal Dhan Dhania vs M/s. Gautam & Co. A.I.R. 1950 Cal.
341, Kottamasu sreemannarayanmurthy vs Chokka Arjanadtu, A.I.R. , Jamal vs Firm Umar Haji Karim, I.L.R. , and Ram Lal Harnam Das Y. Bal Kishan, A.I.R. 1957 Punj. 159, distinguished.
(iii) The words "other proceeding" in sub section (3) must receive their full meaning untramelled by the words "a claim of set off.
The latter words neither intend nor can be construed to cut down the generality of the words "other proceeding".
The sub section provides for the application of the provisions of sub sections (1) and (2) to claims of set off and also to other proceedings of any kind which can properly be said to be for enforcement of any right arising from contract except those expressly mentioned as exceptions in subsections (3) and (4).
