The appellant offered the highest bid at the auction for the grant of royalty collection contract on January 21, 1964.
Respondent No.2 a cooperative society of workers was also one of the bidders.
Resportdent No. 2 made an application on March 5, 1964 to the Government stating therein that the appellant had not deposited 25 Dee cent of the bid amount as security within the time prescribed by Rule 36(7) of the Rajasthan Minor Mineral Concession Rules, 1959, and that it was prepared to take the royalty collection contract on the highest bid as made by appellant.
On the above application the State Government made an order in favour of Respondent No. 2.
The appellant thereupon filed a writ petition in the High Court which was dismissed.
He was however granted a certificate of fitness.
In appeal it was contended that the Government had merely to confirm the highest bid at the auction by way of formality and was not competent to sanction the contract in favour of someone who had not offered the highest bid at the auction.
HELD: (i) The appellant had admittedly failed to deposit 25 per cent of the bid as security in compliance with the provisions of Rule 36(7).
The rules did not contemplate adjustment of security deposited for an earlier period as the appellant claimed.
He therefore lost whatever claim he could have had for the final acceptance of his bid by Government and therefore could not question the grant of the contract to any other person by the.
Government.
[175 B C] (ii) Nothing in Rule 36 requires the Government to accept the highest bid by formally confirming it.
The Government has discretion to confirm the bid or not to confirm it.
Further Rule 59 provides for the relaxation of any provision of the rules in the interest of mineral development or better working of the mines.
[176 A B] (iii) The view taken by the Government in preferring Respondent No. 2 to the appellant cannot be said to be arbitrary or without any justification.
The cooperative society is of the laborers who work in the mines and the benefit of the contract would go to the labourers.
In view of the spirit underlying Rule 59, Government could therefore relax any such rule which could in any way come in the way of" its granting the contract to Respondent No. 2.
[176 D F] (iv) The time for which the contract was granted was shortly to come to an end, and it would not be desirable even if the appellant was right to interfere with the contract.
[176 G] K.N. Guruswamy vs State of Mysore, ; , relied on.
