The Government of Punjab issued a press note stating that certain dailies in the States were publishing false reports alleging the complicity of a Minister 's son in smuggling, that the allegations were made with a view to malign the Government, and, that the name the son should be openly mentioned.
In response to that challenge the appellant, who was a public worker, published a statement in the press, naming the Chief Minister 's son as the leader of the smugglers, and as also responsible for a large number of crimes.
He also requested that the Government should appoint a committee of independent Judges to inquire into the matter.
The Chief Minister 's son then filed a complaint of defamation against the appellant.
After the complainant and his witnesses were examined, the appellant filed a detailed written statement in answer to the questions under section 342, Criminal Procedure Code, ten months after he was questioned under that section.
He claimed therein the protection of both the First and Ninth Exceptions to section 449 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
At the very commencement of the proceedings, he gave a list of 328 witnesses.
to be examined on his behalf.
He was allowed to summon only 35 and eventually he examined 20 defence witnesses.
He also produced several documents.
After considering the oral and documentary evidence, the trial Court convicted the appellant.
In his appeal to the High Court, he claimed only the protection of the Ninth Exception that is, that he published the statement in good faith and for public good.
The High Court dismissed the appeal, with a modification in the sentence.
In his appeal to this Court, the appellant contended that, in appreciating his evidence in respect of good faith, the High Court had misdirected itself.
HELD: A broad survey of the evidence led by the appellant and the background in which the impugned statement was made, show that the High Court was in error in holding that the appellant had failed to show that he acted in good faith when he published the statement.
[253 B C] (ii) The High Court had misdirected itself in dealing with the question about the nature and scope of the onus of proof which the appellant had to discharge in seeking the protection of the Ninth Exception, because, it held that in discharging the onus, the plea should be proved by the appellant as strictly as if the complaints was being prosecuted for the offence.
Where the burden of an issue lies upon the accused under section 105 of the Evidence Act, he is not required to discharge the burden by leading evidence to prove his case beyond a reasonable doubt.
It is sufficient if he succeeds in proving a preponderance of probability, for then, the burden is shifted ' to the prosecution which has still to discharge its original onus that never shifts, that is, to establish on the whole case the guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
[240 H; 241 C G; 243A B] R.V.
Carr Braint,, , referred (ii) While dealing with the appellant 's claim for protection under the Ninth Exception, the High Court had confused the requirements 236 of the First Exception with those of the Ninth.
It was not necessary to consider whether the appellant had strictly proved the truth of the allegation made by him, because, proof of truth of the impugned statement is not an element of the Ninth Exception as it is of the First.
What the Ninth Exception requires an accused person to prove is that he made the statement in good faith.
The question as to whether the accused acted in good faith would depend on the facts and circumstances of each case, What is the nature of the imputation made; under what circumstances did it co.me to be made; what is the status of the person who makes the imputation; was there any malice in his mind when he made the imputation; did he make any ,enquiry before he made it; are there reasons to accept his: story that he acted with due care and attention and was satisfied that the imputation was true; these, and other considerations would be relevant in deciding the question.
[243 B E; 244 G H] (iii) The High Court also erred in holding that the appellant 's written statement should not be seriously considered, as he did not make out his case of good faith at the early stage of the trial, and that the written statement was likely to have been influenced by legal advice.
If the written statement filed after a long delay contained pleas which could otherwise be legitimately regarded as matters of after thought, that no doubt, would affect the value of the pleas taken in the written statement.
But, the fact that at the very commencement of the proceedings, the appellant called for a large number of witnesses and documents, and the evidence led by him as well as the nature of the cross examination to which he subjected the complainant and his witnesses, make it difficult to reject his plea of good faith, on the ground that the written statement was filed very late and the pleas taken in it might be an after thought.
[245 H. B C: 246 E F] Tilkeshwar Singh and others vs State of Bhar, A.I.R. 1956.
section C.239 explaired
