Where a Hindu widow surrenders her widow 's estate to the reversioners, after a third person has acquired title to the properties by adverse possession against her, the reversioners are entitled to recover possession of the properties from that person immediately as heir 's of the last male holder.
The person in adverse possession is not entitled to remain in possession till the death of the widow.
So far as the legal consequences are concerned there is no material difference in this respect between an adoption and an act of surrender by the widow.
As a surrender by a Hindu widow does not convey any title to the reversioners, but is only a voluntary act of self effacement by the widow, she can make a valid surrender under Hindu law even after another person has acquired title by adverse possession against her.
The reversioners do not take the property subject to the rights created by the widow.
Surrender by the widow and acceptance by the reversioner are not matters of contract.
The estate vests in the reversioner by operation of law without any act of acceptance on the part of the reversioner.
L/B(D)2SCI 8(a) 340 The view that, as the widow herself is incapable of disput ing the title of alienee, or of the person who has obtained title by adverse possession, a like disability attaches to the reversioner, is also unsound as the reversioner does not derive title from the widow even in the case of a surrender.
Assuming that the court has power to impose conditions on the reversioners ' right to recover possession during the lifetime of the widow on considerations of equity, justice and good conscience and to prevent the widow, by her own act, from prejudicing the interests she has created, no such equitable considerations arise in favour of persons who have come upon the land, as trespassers and claim title by adverse possession.
Subbamma vs Subrahmanyam (I.L.R. 39 Mad.
1035), Sundrasiva vs Viyyamma (I.L.R. , Arunachala vs Arumuga (I.L.R. , Lachmi vs Lachho (I.L.R. 49 All. 334) and Basudeo vs Baidyanath (A.I.R. 1935 Pat.
175) disapproved.
Ram Krishna vs Kausalya , Raghuraj Singh vs Babu Singh (A.I.R. 1952 All. 875) approved.
Vaidyanatha vs Savitri (I.L.R. commented upon.
