Out of a consignment of 60 bales of piece goods despatched by the Railway, under risk note Form Z, only 29 bales were delivered to the respondent who was the consignee.
By sending the consignment thus, the consignor got a specially reduced rate but the burden was thrown on him, of proving misconduct on the part of the railway or its servants, if there was a loss of goods.
The risknote also imposed an obligation on the Railway, to disclose how the consignment was dealt with by it, during the time the consignment was in its possession or control.
The respondent wrote a letter to the Chief Commercial Manager of the Railway stating that 60 bales were booked but only 29 bales had been delivered, and that a suit for damages would be filed.
The letter was sent within 6 months of the booking of the consignment ,and contained the details as to how the amount of damage was arrived at.
Later on, a notice was given under section 80 of the Civil Procedure Code, 1908, and a suit was filed for damages.
But, before the filing of the suit, there was no demand by the consignor for a disclosure as to how the consignment was dealt with by the Railway throughout the period it was in its possession or control.
The Railway however, made a disclosure in its written statement as.
to how the consignment was, dealt with throughout that period.
Its defence was that, there was a theft in the running train and that was how part of the consignment was lost and not due to any misconduct on the part of the Railway or its servants.
Even after the suit was filed and evidence let in at the trial, by the railway there was no statement by the respondent at any stage that the disclosure made by the Railway in the written statement or in the evidence, was in any way inadequate.
The resplendent never told the court after the evidence of the Railway w.as over, that he was net satisfied with the disclosure and that the Railway should be asked to make a further disclosure.
The suit was dismissed by the trial court but decreed on appeal, by the High Court.
In the appeal to the Supreme Court it was contended that, (i) the, suit was barred by section 77 of the Indian Railways Act, 1890, inasmuch as notice required therein was not given by the respondent, and (ii) under the terms of the risk note the Railway was absolved from all responsibility for the less of the goods consigned thereunder, from any cause whatsoever.
except upon proof of misconduct of the Railway or its servants, that the burden of proving such misconduct was on the respondent and that the respondent had failed to discharge the burden.
HELD: (i) A notice under section 77 of the Act is necessary in the case of non delivery which arises from the loss of goods.
Though the letter, written by the respondent to the Chief Commercial Manager, was not specifically stated to be a notice under the section it gave all 'the 'particulars necessary for such a notice and it was also given within time prescribed.
Therefore, the letter was sufficient notice for the purpose of the Act, [149 D F] 146 Governor General in Council vs Musaddilal [1961]3 S.C.R. 647 and Jatmull Bhojraj vs The Darjeeling Himalayan Railway Co.Ltd. ; , followed.
(ii) The view of the High Court, that there was a breach of the condition relating to complete disclosure, and that on such breach the risk note could be completely ignored and the responsibility of the Railway judged purely on the basis of section 72(1) of the Act, as if the goods were consigned at the ordinary rates on the Railway 'srisk, was not correct.
[154 H] The responsibility of the railway administration to disclose to the consignor as to how the consignment was dealt with throughout the time it was in its possession or control arises at once, under the risk note, in either of the cases referred to therein, and is not confined to the stage of litigation.
But such disclosure is necessary only where a consignor specifically asks the railway to make the disclosure.
If no such disclosure is asked for, the administration need not make it before the litigation.
Therefore, if the Railway did not make the disclosure, before the suit was filed, it could not be said to have committed a breach of the term of the contract [153 A D] The disclosure envisages a precise statement of how the consignment was dealt with by the railway or its servants.
If the disclosure is asked for before litigation commences and is not given, or the disclosure is given but it is not considered to be sufficient by the consignor, the dispute has to be judicially decided and it is for the court to say, if a suit is filed, whether there .has been a breach ,of the term.
At that stage, evidence has to be led by the railway in the first instance to substantiate the disclosure which might have been made before the litigation, to, the consignor, or which might have been made in the written statement.
When the administration has given its evidence in proof of the disclosure, if the plaintiff is not satisfied with the disclosure made in evidence, he is entitled to ask the court to call upon the railway to fulfill its obligation under the contract, and the railway should then have the opportunity of meeting the demands of the plaintiff.
It is then for the court to decide whether the further disclosure desired by.
the plaintiff should be made by the railway, and if the court decides that it should be made, the railway has to make such further disclosure as the court orders.
If the railway fails to take that opportunity to satisfy the demands of the plaintiff endorsed by the court, the railway, at that stage, would be in breach of its contractual obligation of disclosure.
[153 E 154 B] The effect of the breach however is not to bring the contract to an end and throw the responsibility on the railway, as if the case was a simple case of responsibility under s.72(1).
The risk note would continue to apply and the court would have to decide whether the misconduct can be fairly inferred from the evidence of the railway, with the difference that, where the railway has been in breach of its obligation to make full disclosure, misconduct may be more readily inferred and section 114 of the Evidence Act more readily applied.
But the conditions of the risk note cannot be completely ignored, simply because there has been a breach of the condition of complete disclosure.[154 D G] Surat Cotton Spinning & Weaving Mills vs Secretary of State for India in Council [1937] 64 I.A. 176, applied.
