The respondents filed a suit against the petitioner in 1954 for the possession of certain property and for mesne profits and obtained decree in their favour.
The petitioner 's appeal to the High Court was dismissed in April 1959 and a petition for special leave to appeal to this Court was granted in June, 1959.
Thereafter, the 7th respondent died in November 1959.
The petitioner filed the present applications in October 1964 for bringing on record the legal representatives of the 7th respondent and for condonation of delay on various grounds.
It was also contended on behalf of the petitioner that in view of the fact that after the preliminary decree for mesne profits had been passed, the respondents/plaintiffs brought the heirs and legal representatives of the deceased 7th respondent on record in the final decree proceedings within the time prescribed, and as the legal representatives were brought on record at one stage of the suit on the basis of the rule laid down by the Privy Council in Brij Inder Singh vs Kanshi Ram, 44 I.A. 218, no question of abatement would arise in respect of the appeal; that the final decree proceedings are a stage in the suit and the appeal is another stage in the suit and, therefore, the bringing on record of the legal representatives in one stage of the suit will enure for all stages of the suit.
HELD: (i) On the facts of the case there were no sufficient grounds for condoning the delay in bringing the legal representatives of the 7th respondent on the record.
(ii) The order bringing the legal representatives of the respondent on record in the final decree proceedings cannot enure for the benefit of the appeal filed against the preliminary decree.
The appeal therefore abated so far as the 7th respondent was concerned.
[217D] An order bringing the legal representatives of a deceased party on the record passed at the stage of an interlocutory application in a suit, or passed while an appeal is pending where the suit is subsequently remanded to the trial court or if passed while an appeal is pending against an interlocutory order in passed while an appeal the subsequent stages of the suit ' in all that suit, would enure for made at one stage of the suit be it the suit these.
cases the order is final appeal against the interlocutory order or final order in the suit, for here the appeal is only a continuation of the suit.
But the same legal position cannot be invoked where an order is made in a suit subsequent to the filing of an appeal at an earlier stage.
Such an order cannot be Projected,backwards into the appeal that has already been filed so as to become an order in that appeal [216F 217D] Brij Inder Singh vs Kanshi Ram, 44 I.A. 218 distinguished.
Shankarnaraina Saralaya vs Laxmi Hengsu, A.I.R. 1931 referred to.
N)3S.C.I. 1 212
