The appellant, drove a jeep at an excessive speed and dashed against a wall.
In the jeep was also a bottle with a label on it as "Tincture Zingeberis".
On medical examination the appellant was found to be intoxicated.
He was prosecuted under sections 66(1)(b) and, 85(1)(1), (2) and (3) of the Bombay Prohibition Act, 1949; the Magistrate convicted him under the aforesaid sections and sentenced him under sections 66(1)(b) and 85(1) of the Act.
On appeal the Sessions Judge acquitted the appellant under section 66(1)(b) but confirmed the sentence under section 85(1)(1).
The respondent filed an appeal against the acquittal and the appellant filed a revision against the conviction, which the High Court heard together and allowed the respondent 's appeal and dismissed the revision of the appellant.
In appeal by certificate; HELD Whatever meaning may be given to the expression "drunk", in this case there was clear evidence that the appellant had taken the drink for the purpose of intoxication and not for indication and that under the influence of drink he had rashly driven his Jeep.
He was drunk and was, therefore, incapable of taking care of him self.
[363 G] If a person consumes liquor, i.e. any liquid consisting of or containing alcohol, he commits an offence under section 66(1) of the Act and, therefore, is liable to be convicted thereunder.
But by reason of section, 24A(2) of the Act, if it is established that the liquor consumed is contained in any medicinal preparation which is unfit for use as intoxicating liquor, the consumption of such liquor is not an offence under the Act, for the Act itself does not apply to such medicinal preparation.
[360 B, C] In terms of section 66(2) of the Act, the burden of proving that the, liquor consumed was a medicinal preparation containing alcohol, the consumption of which was not in contravention of the Act etc., or the rules made thereunder, shifted to the accused.
[361 E] In this case not only the accused failed to discharge the burden so shifted to him by the statute; but the prosecution had also established that the said medicinal preparation was fit for use as an intoxicating liquor.
[361 G] State of Borabay (Now Gujarat) vs Naraindas Mangilal Agarwal, (1962] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 15, held inapplicable.
