In 1954, the words "rent on land or buildings" were added to section 250 of the .
After the amendment, the appellant (Cantonment Board), applied under the section to the concerned Magistrate, for realisation of arrears of rent from the respondent, on the basis of a lease in his favour.
The Magistrate issued warrants for attachment of the movable property of the respondent.
The respondent went in revision to the Sessions Judge.
He made a reference to the High Court and the High Court set aside the Magistrate 's order.
In its appeal to the Supreme Court, the appellant contended that, upon a correct interpretation of the section, the Magistrate had the power to order the recovery of rent due to the appellant.
HELD: (Per Wanchoo and Sikri JJ.) ' The rent was not claimable by the appellant under the Act or the Rules but only under the lease in favour of the respondent.
Therefore, section 259(1), in so far as It refers to recovery of such rent by application to Magistrate, would not apply.
In view of the provisions of the Act, Cantonment Property Rules, 1925, and the Cantonment Land Administration Rules, 1937, a Cantonment Board has power, to manage the lands or buildings vested in it or entrusted to its management, to lease them out and to fix rents therefor.
But section 259 can be utilised for realisation of arrears of rent on land and buildings, only if such rent is recoverable by a Board or a Military Estates Officer under the Act or the Rules made thereunder.
The word "recoverable" means "claimable".
Section 257 read with section 2.56 is an example of the Board 's power to claim rent from the tenant of an owner.
There may be other such cases, and it is only in those cases, where the Act or the Rules, in terms, make the rent on land and buildings claimable by the Board, that the section will apply.
But where the liability arises purely on the basis of a lease between the Board and the tenant, nothing in the Act or the Rules, particularly after r. 42 which provided for such recovery had been repealed, makes such rent claimable by the Board under the Act or the Rules.
Since.
the repeal was in 1940 before the section was amended, it cannot be argued that the rule was repealed because of the amendment of the section.
[344 F H; 346 F H] The view taken, however, would not affect the right of the Board to recover by suit, under the general law, rent of its land and buildings given by it on lease.
[347 B] Per Mudholkar, J. (dissenting): The High Court was in error in setting aside the order of the Magistrate.
What the expression "recoverable by a Board or a Military Estates Officer under the Act or the Rules made thereunder," in section 259 means is, what the Act or the Rules permit the Board to recover, or what the Act or the Rules permit the Military Estates Officer to recover.
The words "recoverable by" and "under this Act of the Rules made thereunder." are meant to govern "a Board" or "a Military Estates Officer." Thus under the section the power to recover money is exercisable by such of these two authorities as performs the duty or exercises the power by reason of which the liability of another 342 to pay the tax, rent or any other money arises.
Powers are conferred upon a Board under the Act read with the Cantonment Land Ad ministration Rules, 1937.
to let out property vested in it or which is under its management.
Where, in exercise of those powers the Board has let out any land or buildings, it has the right as well as the duty to collect the rent from the tenant.
Therefore, where the liability to pay money arises against a person, by reason of something done by the Board or the Military Estates Officer, in exercise of a power or the performance of a duty under the Act, that liability can be enforced by the authority concerned, either by instituting a suit or by making an application to a Magistrate.
But if the word "rent" is confined to money due under some express provision of the Act or Rules, it will lead to the curious result, that, in respect of land or buildings under the management of the Board, neither remedy would be available though the claim for rent is ultimately traceable to those provisions of the Act and the Rules which empower the Board to let out the land or buildings upon the ground that it cannot be said to be claimable or recoverable under any express provision of the Act.
[350 C E; 351F; 351 G H] Further, if the meaning of the word "rent" is so restricted, that word itself would be rendered otiose, because, there is no provision whatsoever in the Act which expressly makes rent claimable or recoverable by either of the two authorities specified therein.
What the Board recovers under sections 256 and 257 cannot be regarded as rent, giving the word its dictionary meaning, for, the Board is not the landlord of the occupier, and what it recovers from him, is not something which was due to the Board as rent from him.
[352 E G].
