Out of 45 employees of the respondent, 18 had become members of a Trade Union.
Later, these 18 employees were dismissed by an order passed on the same day.
The Union took up the cause and ultimately the dispute was referred to the Tribunal, where the respondent raised the preliminary objection that the reference was invalid inasmuch is the dispute referred to the Tribunal was not an industrial dispute but was merely an individual dispute, and besides these dismissed employees no other employees of the respon dent was a member of the Union, and so the Union could not raise the dispute.
This was upheld by the Tribunal.
In appeal by special leave; HELD:The appeal must be allowed.
The definition of "industrial dispute" in section 2(k) shows that before any dispute raised by any person can be said to be an industrial dispute, it must be shown that it is connected with the employment or non employment of that person.
This condition is satisfied in the present case.
[396 D] Having regard to the broad policy underlying the Act, this Court and indeed a majority of Industrial Tribunals are inclined to take the view that notwithstanding the width of the words used by the Act in defining an "industrial dispute" it would be expedient to require that a dispute raised by a dismissed employee cannot become an industrial dispute, unless it is supported either by his Union or, in the absence of a Union by a number of workmen.
[397 B C] Considerations which would be relevant in dealing with a dispute relating to an individual employee 's dismissal, would not be Material in dealing with a case where a large number of employees have been dismissed on the same day.
[399 G H] A Union of workmen may validly raise a dispute as to dismissal even though it may be a union of minority of the workmen employed in any establishment.
Similarly if there is no union of workmen in any establishment, a group of employees can raise the dispute and the dispute then becomes an industrial dispute, though it may relate to the dismissal of an individual employee.
[399 H] In a given case it is conceivable that the workmen of an establishment have no union of their own and some or all of them join the union of another establishment belonging to the same industry.
In such a case if the said union take up the cause of the workmen working in an establishment which has no union of its own, it would be unreasonable to hold that the dispute does not become an industrial dispute because the Union which has sponsored it is not the union exclusively of the workmen working in the establishment concerned.
In every case where industrial adjudication has to decide 395 whether a reference in regard to the dismissal of an industrial employee is validly made or not it would be necessary to inquire whether the Union which has sponsored the case can fairly claim a representative character, in such a way that its support to the case would make the dispute an industrial dispute.
[400 F H] Besides, 18 workmen, dismissed by an order passed on the same day, themselves form a group of workmen which would be justified in supporting the cause of one another.
[401 C] Central Provinces Transport Service vs Raghunath Gopal Patwardhan, ; and The Newspapers Ltd. vs The State Industrial Tribunal, U.P., ; , relied on.
Bombay Union of Journalists vs The Hindu, Bombay, , explained and distinguished.
