The plaintiff instituted the suit for possession of her half share in the suit properties and for mesne profits.
The first defendant, who was the plaintiff 's sister, admitted the plaintiff 's claim and herself claimed a decree against the other defendants in respect of her half share in the suit properties.
The second defendant was their father and the suit properties were in his possession.
He and the other defendants, who were his second wife and children by her, contested the suit.
The trial court decreed the plaintiff 's claim, but held that the first defendant was estopped from claiming possession of her share.
On appeal by the first defendant, the High Court passed a decree in her favour also for possession of her half share in the suit properties, and for past and future mesne profits.
On appeal to this Court against the decree in favour of the first defendant, it was contended on behalf of the other defendants: (i) that the first defendant was estopped by her conduct from claiming possession of her half share of the properties because (a) she had not replied to a notice from the plaintiff to join with her in the suit for obtaining possession and division of the suit properties; (b) 'she had written a letter to her step mother stating that she wished to have no interest in the suit properties then in her father 's possession; (c) she and her husband had attested a will executed by the father 25 1 1941 which covered the disposition of the suit properties; and (d) ' that the first defendant 's conduct was either covered by section 115 Evidence Act or fell within the principle of "equitable estoppel" ' (ii)even if the first defendant 's claim to the half share in the suit properties could not be denied, she must be made to pay for half the cost of various improvements of those properties effected by the second.
defendant in the bona fide belief that the properties belonged to him as she had acquiesced in the expenditure being incurred; (iii) that no, decree can be passed in favour of a defendant who has not asked for transposition as plaintiff in the suit; and (iv) that it is not open to a court to award future mesne profits to a party who did not claim them in the suit.
HELD: (i) The first defendant was neither estopped from claiming possession of her half share of the properties nor could she be made liable to pay half the costs of improvements alleged to have been made by the second defendant; (a) It cannot be implied from the conduct of the first defendant in not replying to the notice given b the plaintiff that she had admitted that she had no interest in the properties; (b) The second defendant 's case that the properties belonged to him having been negatived, there was no possibility of an erroneous belief being created in the mind of the second defendant that he had title to the property because of what the first defendant, had said in her letter to her step mother; (c) The attestation of the will by the first defendant and her husband, by which the second defendant purported to make a disposition of the suit properties in favour of the other defendants could not operate as an estoppel, as 284 no interest had accrued in favour of those defendants on the date of the suit.
As far as the second defendant was concerned, he knew, the true legal position and could not say that an erroneous belief was created in his mind by reason of the first defendant and her husband attesting the will.
[286 G H; 287 C; 287 F] Quaere: Whether the Court, while determining whether the conduct of a particular party amounts to an "equitable estoppel" could travel beyond the provisions of section 115 of the Evidence Act.
[288 B] Case law reviewed.
(ii) No man who knowing fully well.
that he has no title to property, spends money on improving it, can be permitted to claim payment for improvements which were not effected with the consent of the true owner.
[290C] Ramsden vs Dyson, L R.I.H.L.App.
129, 140 distinguished.
(iii) Both the plaintiff and the first defendant claimed under the same title and though the other defendants had urged special defences against the first defendant, they had been fully considered and adjudicated upon by the High Court while allowing her appeal.
The High Court could, while upholding her claim, have transposed her as a plaintiff.
It either over looked the technical defect or felt that under Order XLI rule 33, it had ample power to decree her claim.
However that may be, the provisions of section 99 C.P.C., would be a bar to interference by the Supreme Court with the High Court 's decree upon such a ground.
[290 G H] Bhupendra vs Rajeshwar, 58 I.A. 228, referred to.
(iv) Though mesne profits prior to the suit cannot be awarded to a successful party unless a claim is made in respect of them, the position regarding future mesne profits is governed by O. XX, r. 2, C.P.C. The decree awarding mesne profits to the first defendant must be upheld because the first defendant admitted the plaintiff 's claim and in substance prayed for a similar decree in her favour.
[291 B; 292 G H] Mohd. Amin and Ors.
vs Vakil Ahmed and Ors.
; , distinguished.
