Respondent No. 2 was a monthly tenant of 'the appellant on a condition that he would not sublet the premises of any portion thereof Under the West Bengal Premises Rent Control (Temporary Provisions) Act, 1948 the appellant filed a suit against respondent No. 2 for his eviction on the ground that the tenancy had been determined on account of default in payment of rent.
While the suit was pending, the West Bengal Premises Rent Control (Temporary Provisions) Act, 1950 came into force.
The suit was decreed and the appellant took out execution proceedings.
The suit was resisted by respondent No. 1 who alleged that he had taken subtenancy from respondent No. 2.
Respondent No. 1 also filed a suit impleading the appellant and respondent No. 2 and prayed for a declaration that on the termination of the tenancy of respondent No. 2, respondent No. 1 became a direct tenant of the appellant under section 13(2) of the 1950 Act and he was not liable to be evicted in the execution case.
The suit was decreed bY the trial court, which was affirmed by the appellate courts.
In appeal by special leave: HELD: The appeal must be dismissed.
[334F] In the case of sub letting by a tenant of the first degree no consent of the landlord to sub letting is required as a condition precedent for acquisition by the sub lessee of the tenant 's rights, but in the case of sub letting by a tenant inferior to the tenant of the first degree the ,consent of the landlord and also of the tenant of the superior degree above him to the sub letting is necessary if the sub lessee is to acquire the rights of the tenant contemplated by section 13(2).
[332 H] The clause "and the sub lease is binding on the landlord of such last mentioned tenant" in section 13(2) does not govern both classes of tenancies, namelY, sub tenancies created by "tenant of first degree" and also by "a tenant inferior to the tenant of the first degree" as defined in section 13(1).
[333 B] Is not correct to say that the rights mentioned in s, 13(2) are conferred u.on the sub lessee only in a case where sub letting is not in violation of the agreement of lease.
The right of sub tenant even in a case in which the landlord has brought a suit for eviction against the tenant under section 12(1)(c) are saved and the rights and obligations of sub tenants, would be governed by the provisions of.s.
[334A] In enacting section 13 of the Act the legislature has deliberately enlarged the class of sub tenants to be protected from eviction by the landlords and the language of the section dealing with the sublessees has been deliberately changed and proper effect and interpretation must be given to the language of the new section.
[334 E] 330
