Under Order 30 of the Code of Civil Procedure the respondent No. 1 a firm sued another firm of which the appellants and a Ruler of a former Indian State were partners.
The consent of the Central Government to the institution of the suit under section 87 B of the Code of Civil Procedure was not obtained.
The firm admitted the liability and the Court passed a decree and directed that the decretal amount would be payable in certain instalments.
On the firm 's default in paying the instalments an application was filed under Order 21 Rule 50(2) of the Code of Civil Procedure for leave to execute the decree against the appellants, excepting the Ruler as partners of the firm.
The Court allowed the application.
The appellants ' appeal was dismissed by the High Court.
On appeal by certificate; HELD: (i) The suit so far as it was one against the Ruler was incompetent and the decree against the firm so far as it was a decree against him personally was a nullity.
In the absence of the requisite consent of the Central Government a suit against the Ruler was barred by section 87 read with section 87 B. [425 F, G].
(ii) The application of respondent No. 1 under Order 21 Rule 50(2) for leave to execute the decree against the other partners was maintainable.
[427 G].
A suit may be brought under the provisions of 0. 30 of the Code against a firm of which a partner is not capable of being sued or being adjudged a debtor, and in such a suit a decree enforceable against the other partner and the partnership assets may be passed.
[427 B].
Case law referred to.
(iii) In an application under 0.
21 Rule 50(2) the judgmentdebtor could question the decree on the ground of collusion, fraud or the like but so as not to have the suit tried over again or to raise issues between himself and his other partners.
[428 A].
The Judgment debtor was also entitled to raise a plea of special protection under the law; and might also defend the application on the ground that the decree sought to be executed against him is a nullity.
But in the instant case none of the appellants was entitled to any special protection; nor was it alleged that respondent No. 1 was a party to any fraud or collusion or that it obtained the decree by fraud or collusion.
[428 B, C].
Gambhir Mal Pandiya vs J. K, Jute Mills Co. Ltd., Kanpur relied upon. 422
