The appellant was paying a tax at the rate of one anna per unit weight of cotton, under section 66(1)(b) of the Central Provinces Municipalities Act.
1922, from 1936.
In all 1941 the rate of tax was increased to 4 as.
In 1952, the appellant filed a suit for recovery of the excess,tax paid within 3 years of the date of suit.
It was contended that after the coming into force of section 142A of the Government of India Act, 1935, on 1st April 1939, till 25th January 1950, a tax in excess of Rs. 50 per annum could not be imposed by the respondent, and, after the coming into force of the Constitution the upper limit of the tax was raised to Rs. 250 per annum under article 276 of the Constitution; and that as the appellant was already paying more than this amount per year even at the rate of one anna, the enhanced rate of 4 annas was illegal.
The trial court decreed the suit for recovery from the Municipal Committee of excess tax paid by the appellant within 3 years of the date of suit but on appeal, the High Court held that the suit was bad for non compliance with the requirements of section 48 of the Act, according to which a suit for anything done or purported to be done under the Act shill be instituted only after the expiration of 2 months after serving a written notice and within six months from the date of the accrual of the alleged cause of action.
In its appeal to this Court, the appellant contended that it was a case of recovery of an illegal tax and therefore, a, claim for its refund fell outside the provisions of section 48.
The respondent contended that (i) since the ban was not upon the rate of tax but upon the excess collection thereof, the collection of a tax above the constitutional limit was not without jurisdiction but only illegal or irregular and therefore, the suit would be in respect of a matter "Purported to be done under the Act" and the provision of section 48 would apply, and (ii) on the basis of Raleigh Investment Company Ltd. vs Governor.
General in Council, (74 I.A. 50) the suit was barred by section 84(3) of the Act, which enacts that no objection shall be taken to any assessment in any other manner than is provided in the Act.
HELD (Per K. Subba Rao, J. R. Mudholkar and V. Ramaswami JJ.): (i) Since the respondent had no authority to levy a tax beyond what section 142A of the Government of India Act, 1935, or what article 276 permitted, the assessment proceedings were void in so far as they purported to levy a tax in excess of the permissible limit and authorise.
Its collection, and the assessment order would be no answer to the suit for the recovery of the excess amount, and therefore, the suit was maintainable.
[522G H] The Constitution is the fundamental law of the land and it is unnecessary to provide in any law that anything done in disregard of the Constitution is prohibited, Such a prohibition has to be read into 500 every enactment, and where such prohibition exists or can be implied, anything done or purported to be done by an authority must be regarded as wholly without jurisdiction, and is not entitled to a protection of the law under colour of which that act was done.
[512A B; 516B C] Poona City Municipal Corporation vs Dattatraya Nagesh Deodhar.[1964] 8 S.C.R. 178, followed.
(ii)A tax can be recovered only if it is "payable" and it would be payable only after it is assessed.
It is therefore futile to contend that the ban placed by section 142A of the Government of India Act and article 276 of the Constitution, extends only to recoveries and not to an earlier stage.
[513G] It is true that the respondent had jurisdiction to recover an amount up to the constitutional limit.
But it cannot be contended that merely because of this, the recovery by the respondent of an amount in excess of the constitutional limit was only irregular or at the worst illegal.
Where power exists to assess and recover a tax up to a particular limit and the assessment or recovery of anything above that amount is prohibited, the assessment or recovery of an amount in excess is wholly without jurisdiction.
To such a case, the statute under which action was purported to be taken can afford no protection.
Indeed, to the extent that it affords protection it would be bad.
But it is the duty of the court to so construe it as to avoid rendering the provision unconstitutional, that is, to construe section 48 as affording protection only if what was done was something which could legally have been done by the respondent but was wrongly done by it, and reject a construction which will invalidate the provision.
[515B; 516B H] (iii)The appellant 's suit could not be barred even if section 84(3) of the Act is interpreted in the same way as the Privy Council interpreted section 67 of the Income tax Act, in the Raleigh Investment Co. 's case.
Unlike the Income tax Act the Act does not provide a machinery for making a claim for refund or repayment on the ground of the un constitutionality of the levy, and the jurisdiction of the civil court in cases of refund is not taken away.
Even in the class of cases to which the provisions of sections 83 and 85 of the Act, which are the only provisions providing a machinery under the Act for challenging an assessment, apply, they cannot be said to provide a sufficiently effective remedy to an assessee.
A reference to the High Court is only at the discretion of the appellate or revisional authority and the person aggrieved has no right to move the High Court.
Besides, in the Raleigh Investment Co. 's case, the expression "assessment made under this Act was given too wide a construction, because, it is difficult to appreciate how taking into account an ultra vires provi sion, which in law must be regarded as not being a part of the Act at all, will make the assessment as one under the Act.
[517G; 518B, F, H; 519A B; 520D F; 521H] The exclusion of the jurisdiction of the civil court is not to be readily inferred but such exclusion must either be explicitly expressed or clearly implied.
One of the corollaries flowing from the principle that the Constitution is the fundamental law is that the normal remedy of a suit will be available for obtaining redress against the violation of a constitutional provision.
Moreover the provisions of article 265 of the Constitution preclude the levy or collection of a tax except by authority of law, which means only a valid law.
There was no corresponding provision in the various Acts for the governance of India which preceded the Constitution and the decision in the Raleigh Investment Co. 's case was given in that context.
Further under article 501 226, the Constitution has provided a remedy to a citizen to obtain redress in respect of a tax levied or collected under an invalid law, and this remedy will not be affected by any provision like section 67 of the Income tax Act, or section 84(3) of the Act.
[520G H; 521C E] Thus, when the question merely is whether the assessment had been made according to law, the respondent having jurisdiction over the subject matter and the assessee, the provisions of section 84(3) may be a bar to a suit.
But, where the question raised is as to the jurisdiction of the respondent to proceed against the assessee, and levy on or collect from him an amount in excess of that permitted by the Constitution, the matter would be entirely out of the bar of that provision.
[522E G] Per Raghubar Dayal and Bachawat, JJ.
(dissenting): The appellant 's suit for the recovery of the tax realized in excess of Rs. 250 a year was rightly dismissed, as the correctness of the assessment of the tax could not be challenged by a suit in a civil court in view of section 84(3) and as the provisions of section 48, requiring the giving of notice to the respondent and the institution of the suit within a certain period, had not been complied with.
[534H; 535A B] The suit was in essence a suit for, first, modifying the amount assessed and then to decree the payment of the amount held to have been paid in excess of the tax as modified by the court.
But the act of assessing the tax or the consequential act of collecting the amount cannot be broken up into two acts, one, upto the legal limit and the other in excess of it.
The act of assessment or of collection therefore was an act done by the respondent under the provisions of the Act, though it acted wrongly in assessing the tax at an excessive figure, and consequently in collecting an amount in excess of that which could have been legally collected.
The suit was therefore fully covered by section 48 and had to be dismissed.
[526E H] In view of section 84(3), exclusive jurisdiction to determine the correctness of the amount assessed is given to the authorities mentioned in section 83.
The result is that no other authority can enter into the question of the correctness of the assessment on grounds of law or fact, and therefore the appellant 's suit was barred from the cognizance of the civil court.
[527G] Raleigh Investment Co. Ltd. vs Governor General in Council, L.R. 74 I.A. 50 and Firm of Illuri Subbayya Chetty & Sons vs State of Andhra Pradesh; , , followed.
Poona City MuniciPal Corporation vs Dattatraya Nagesh Deodhar, ; , distinguished.
