On partition being effected through a suit, a Hindu joint family who has only an interest in the entire joint family property acfamily.
The preliminary decree passed by the Court determined 10/16 as the share of the appellant family and 6/16 as that of the other branch.
Those assets of the erstwhile larger joint family which could not be physically divided were auctioned between the two branches and in this manner a sugar mill was purchased for 34 lacs by the appellant family.
In Income tax proceedings depreciation under section 10(2) (vi) of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922 was claimed on the above valuation of 34 lacs.
The claim was rejected by the Income tax Officer as well as the Appellate Assistant Commissioner, on the ground that the value for the purpose of depreciation was not the price determined at the family auction, but the original cost to erstwhile larger joint family.
The Tribunal held that the 6/16 share of the other branch was purchased at the auction and its value had to be taken as the basis of the price determined at the auction, but the appellant family 's own share of 10/16 was not purchased at the auction and therefore had to be valued at the original cost to the larger joint family.
In reference, the High Court held that the distinction made by the Tribunal was wrong and that the shares of both branches had to be valued on the basis of the original cost to the larger family.
Appeal was filed before this Court with certificate.
HELD: Per Subba Rao and Sikri, JJ.
It may be that in strict legal theory partition may not involve a transfer, but the substance of the transaction is that an erstwhile member of a joint Hindu family who has only an interest in the entire joint family property acquires an absolute title to a specific property.
The cost of the property to the member at the date of partition would be the value given to it for the purpose of allotment.
provided it was real, or the price at which he purchased it in auction, or the value of it ascertained otherwise.
[647A C] In the case of assessees acquiring a property by purchase, gift, bequest, or succession, courts have held that the cost of the property to the assessee was not the original cost of it to his predecessor but its actual cost to him at the time of the purchase, gift, bequest or succession.
In substance there is no difference in the matter of ascertaining the cost of an asset to an assessee whether he is a donee, purchaser, legatee, successor, or a divided member e.f a joint Hindu family.
[646D; 647A] 642 Commissioner of Income tax, Madras vs The Buckingham & Carnatic Company, Ltd., Madras (1935)3 I.T.R. 384(P.C.), Jagata Coal Co. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, West Bengal , Indian Iron & Steel Co. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bengal, (1943) 11 I.T.R. 328 (P.C.), Francis Vallabaravar vs Commissioner of Income tax, Madras and Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay vs Solomon & Sons , referred to.
Commissioner of Income tax, U.P. & C.P.v.
Seth Mathuradas Mohta, (1939)7 I.T.R. 160, disapproved.
In the present case the valuation given to the property was not notional but a real one; indeed the property was sold in the open auction between the members of the larger joint family and the value fetched thereunder entered into the scheme of partition.
[647 C D] Therefore, even in respect of the appellant 's own share of 10/16, the valuation for the purposes of section 10(2)(vi) had to be on the basis the price which the appellant bid at the auction.
Per Shah, J. (dissenting).
By the preliminary decree the appellant family became entitled to a 10/16th share in every item of the property of the larger joint family; the other branch became entitle to the remaining i.e. 6/16th share in each item.
The appellant being already owner of 10/16th share could not purchase the same at the auction.
In substance the appellant purchased, by being declared the highest bidder, the remaining 6/16th share belonging to the other branch.
[650 C E] The asset in question, viz, the sugar factory, at all material times remained a business asset.
Acquisition of the interest of the other branch by the appellant did not alter the character or use of the asset; nor did it make any fundamental alteration in its value to the appellant so as wholly to displace its original value even in respect of its share which it continued to own.
[654 B D] The Tribunal therefore, had rightly held that in respect of the 6/16th share of the other branch, depreciation had to be allowed to the appellant on the basis of the auction price.
The High Court wrongly interfered with this finding the Revenue not having appealed against it.
On the appellant 's 10/16th share, which the appellant could not be said to have purchased, depreciation had to be calculated on the basis of original cost to the larger family.
[654 E G] Case law discussed.
