Indian section 10 Transfer of Funds from Life Insurance Fund to General Department of composite insurer Permissibility.
The appellants were directors of an insurance company which was a composite insurer i.e. one carrying on other classes of life insurance business besides life insurance.
Under section 10(1) of the Indian Life , a composite insurer had to keep separate accounts in respect of the different classes of business, and its receipts in respect of life insurance business had to go into a fund called the Life Insurance Fund which could be applied only for the put the Life Insurance business and had always to be sufficient to meet the net liabilities of the Life Insurance business.
By resolution dated December 18, 1948, a sum of Rs. 1,10,000 was transferred from the General Department of the company to the Life Department to be added to the Life Fund; if this had not been done the said fund would have shown a deficit in the actuarial valuation report dated July 18, 1949.
In the profit appropriation account of the company for the latter year a sum of Rs. 60,000 out of the above sum was written off so that the sum advanced was reduced to Rs. 50,000.
A further sum of Rs. 32,000 was again similarly transferred from the General to the Life Department by resolution passed in August 1953.
with retrospective effect from December 31, 1952, in order to strengthen the position of the Life Fund which again would have shown a deficit if this had not been done.
The advances thus made on both occasions were according to the relevant resolutions repayable only out of the 'valuation surplus ', if any, ' in the life department.
On January 8, 1956, the Board of Directors of the company transferred a sum of Rs. 82,000 from the Life Department to the General Department.
by way of repayment of the above loans.
On January 19, 1956, by Ordinance No. 1 of 1956 the management of the life insurance business of all insurers in the country passed to the Central Government.
On September 1.
1956, the Life Insurance Corporation of India came into being under the , and the assets and liabilities of the life insurance business carried on by all insurers became vested in it.
The corporation filed an application under section 15 of the said Act before the Tribunal constituted under the Act alleging that transfer of Rs. 82,000 from the Life Department to the General Department of the aforesaid company was without consideration and not for any 665 666 necessity of the life insurance business and prayed for a decree against appellants and the company jointly and severally for the said amount.
The Tribunal overruled the defendants ' objections as to its jurisdiction and granted a decree to the Corporation as prayed.
The company did not appeal but the appellants came to this Court by special leave.
The following contentions were raised on behalf of the appellants; (1) The tribunal had no jurisdiction to proceed with the proceedings on the petition presented by the Corporation without the leave of the High Court in view of section 446 of the , the Company having been ordered to be wound up the High Court on November 9, 1959; (2) In view of section 44(a) of the L.I.C. Act none of the provisions of the Act applied to the company and therefore the Tribunal could not proceed on the application of the Corporation subsequent to the company being wound up; (3) The transfer of Rs. 82,000 from the Life Fund to the General Department of the company was for consideration and was necessary for the life insurance business.
HELD: (i) The provisions of section 446 of the did not affect the proceedings before the Tribunal.
It is in view of the exclusive jurisdiction conferred upon the company court in sub section
(2) of section 446 of the to entertain and dispose of any suit or proceeding by or against a company which is being wound up that provision has been made in subs.
(1) of that section that no suit or proceeding shall be filed, or if pending, proceeded with against such a company without permission having been taken from the Court.
In view of the provision in section 41 of the L.I.C. Act the company court has no jurisdiction to try matters which a Tribunal under the is empowered to entertain and decide.
It could not be disputed that the Tribunal was empowered to try the Corporation 's application under section 15 and the Company Court therefore had no jurisdiction to entertain or decide it.
It must follow that the consequential provision of sub section
(1) of section 446 would not operate on the proceedings before the Tribunal.
[673E G] Further, the provisions of the Special Act i.e. the L.I.C. Act will over ride the provisions of the general Act viz. the which is an Act relating to companies in general.
[673H] (ii) The company could not take advantage of the provisions of section 44(a) of the L.I.C. Act.
[674D E] Section 44(a) provides that the provisions of the Act will not apply to an insurer whose business is being wound up under orders of court.
But the question of the applicability of the Act to a particular insurer is to be considered in relation to facts existing at the time when the Act came into force i.e. July 1, 1956 or on the appointed day, i.e. September 1, 1956, when the assets and liabilities of the controlled insurer of the company stood transferred and vested in the Corporation.
The company was not being wound up under orders of Court on the above dates.
The L.I.C. Act and therefore section 41 thereof did apply to the company.
It could not cease to apply merely because subsequently the company was ordered to be wound up.
[673H 674B] Section 44(a) was not applicable to the company for the further reason that when it was ordered to be wound up in 1959 it was not an 'insurer ' within the meaning of that word in section 2(6) since it was not carrying on life insurance business on that date.
the said busi 667 ness having been taken over by the Corporation on the 'appointed day ' [674C D] (iii) The Tribunal rightly passed a decree in favour of the Corporation.
No question of lending money by one department of the company to the other can ordinarily be contemplated.
The assets of the company really constitute one entity even though the company maintains separate accounts with respect to its various insurance businesses.
From the facts it was clear that the amounts of Rs. 1,10,000 and Rs. 32,000 had been transferred from the General Department to the Life Fund to meet the deficit in the Life Fund which was likely to occur on both occasions.
The circumstances showed that the sum of Its. 82,000 was transferred back to the General Department in a hurry in anticipation of some law depriving the company of its life insurance business.
It was moreover a condition of the alleged 'loans ' that they would be repaid only when there.
was a 'valuation surplus ' in the Life Fund.
There was no such surplus in the Life Fund at the time when the sum was transferred from it the General Department.
[674G]
