A scheme was settled in 1955 by the Madras High Court for the management of the income and properties of the Durgah consecrated to a saint in Tanjore District.
Under the scheme the management of the properties of the Durgah was to be in the hands of eight trustees called Nattamaigars one of whom was to be elected by them as Managing Trustee.
The net income of the trust was to be distributed among descendants of the foster son of the saint, called Kasupangudars, whose definite shares were to be determined each year by a list prepared by the Managing Trustee.
For the assessment years 1953 54 and 1954 55, the Income tax Officer assessed the surplus income of the wakf in the hands of the Managing Trustee as an association of persons.
The trustees unsuccessfully appealed to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and the Appellate Tribunal.
The controversy centred round the question whether s.41 of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922 applied to the case.
In a reference made by the Tribunal at the instance of the assessee the High Court held that that section 41 applied to the case and that the income was received by the trustees on behalf of the beneficiaries.
Aggrieved, the Commissioner of income Tax appealed, by certificate, to this Court.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant that as the properties vested in the managing trustee and he received the income in his own right and not on behalf of the beneficiaries, though for their benefit, the said income in the hands of the managing trustee fell outside the scope of s.41 of the Act.
HELD: The High Court had rightly answered the question in favour of the assessee.
(i) The technical doctrine of vesting is not imported into section 41.
This is apparent from the fact that a trustee appointed under a trust deed is brought under the section though legally the property vests in him.
In the case of a Muslim Wakf the property vests in the Almighty; even so the mutawallis are brought under the section.
Thus in some of the persons enumerated in the section property vests and in others it does not.
A reasonable interpretation of the section is that all categories of persons mentioned therein are deemed to receive them on behalf of another person or persons or manage the same for his or their benefit.
None of them has any beneficial interest in the income; he collects the income for the benefit of others.
In this view even if the Nattarnaigars were trustees in whom the 65 660 properties of the Durgah vested, they should be deemed to have received the income only on behalf of the Kasupangudars in definite shares.
[662G 663B] (ii) The mutawalli of a Muslim Wakf is merely a manager and not a "trustee" as understood in the English system.
[663E] Vidya Varuthi Thirtha vs Balusami Ayyar, (1921) 48 I.A. 32 and Allah Rakhi vs Mohammad Abdur Rahim, (1933) 61 I.A. 50, relied on.
Therefore in terms of s.41 of the Act the Nattamaigars were the manager of the properties on behalf of other and were entitled to receive the income therefrom on behalf of them.
[663G H] (iii) Under c1.3 of the scheme it was the "management and administration" of the Durgah and its properties which was vested in the Nattamaigars and not the properties themselves.
In the absence of clear words it could not be held that the High Court in framing a scheme for the endowments of the Durgah had introduced a foreign concept of "trust" in derogation of Mohammadan Law.
The scheme therefore did not vest the properties of the Durgah in the Nattamaigars and the contention on behalf of the Revenue could not succeed.
[664D, E]
