The appellant company was a commercial undertaking, doing the business of supply of electricity subject to the provisions of .
For the purpose of rationalization of rates and keeping them under control, the licensee was directed by the Act to adjust the rates in such a way that the clear profit in any year did not exceed the amount of reasonable return as defined in the Act; but that if an excess was collected, the licensee should distribute half of that excess by way of rebate to the consumers, or carry the amount forward in the accounts for distribution to the consumers.
For the purposes of the Act, during the accounting years, the assessee credited certain amounts which formed part of the excess collected to the "Consumers Benefit Reserve Account", and claimed deduction of those amounts from the taxable income.
The Income Tax Officer and the Appellate Assistant Commissioner disallowed the claim, but the Tribunal allowed the deductions.
The High Court, on a reference, held against the assessee.
In it appeal to this Court the appellant contended that there was a distinction between commercial accurancy,.
As a ' profit" under the and that the real or commercial profit under section 10(1) of the Income Tax Act, 1922, could be determined only after excluding the amounts statutorily transferred to the "Consumers Benefit Reserve Account", for, that amount represented a rebate to the consumers, of the excess amount: collected from them.
HELD: As a business concern the real profit of the appellant had to be ascertained on the principles of commercial accountancy.
As a licensee governed by the statute its "clear profit" was ascertained in terms of the statute and the schedule annexed thereto.
The two profits are for different purposes one for commercial and tax purposes and the other for statutory purposes in order to maintain a reasonable level of rates.
The amounts for which deduction was claimed were a part of the excess amount paid to the assessee and reserved to be returned to the consumers.
They did not form part of the assessee 's real profits, and therefore, to arrive at the taxable income of the assessee from the business, under section 10(1) of the Income tax Act the said amounts had to be deducted from its total income.
[827G 828A] The income tax is a tax on the real income, that is the real profits arrived at on commercial principles subject to the provisions of the Income tax Act.
The real profit can be ascertained only by making the permissible deductions.
There is a clear cut distinction between deductions made for ascertaining the profits and distributions made out of profits.
It is a question of fact to be found on the relevant circumstances, having regard to business principles.
Another 819 distinction that should be borne in mind is that between the real and the statutory profits, that is between the commercial profits and statutory profits.
The latter are statutorily fixed for a specified purpose.
The real profit of a businessman under section 10(1) of the Incometax Act, cannot ,obviously include the amounts returned by him by way of rebate to the consumers, under statutory compulsion, from the statutory profits.
[822C, 827E, F] Case law referred to.
