Respondent No. 1 who was the landlord of the accommodation in dispute obtained a decree of ejectment against respondent No. 2, his tenant.
The appellants who were sub tenants under respondent No. 2 gave a notice to the landlord under section 15(2) of the Madhya Pradesh Accommodation Control Order, 1961, and thereafter filed a suit against him claiming a declaration that being lawful sub tenants they had become direct tenants of the landlord under s, 16(2) of the Act.
The High Court held that the suit was barred by section 45(1) of the Act according to which no civil court could enter Lain any suit or proceeding in so far as it related to any matter which the Rent Controlling Authority under the Act was empowered to decide.
In appeal to the Supreme Court.
HELD : (1) For section 16(2) to come into operation the sub tenancy has to be lawful.
The question of lawfulness of a sub tenancy was one which under section 15(3), the Rent Controlling Authority was empowered to decide.
Under section 45(1) of the Act no civil court could entertain a suit or proceeding which the Rent Controlling Authority was empowered to decide. 'Me High Court was therefore right in holding that the suit had been filed in a court incompetent to try it and in dismissing it.
[13OH 131B] (ii)There is nothing in section 15(3) of the Act to indicate that it does not apply to a case where a, landlord has already obtained a decree against a tenant.
If in spite of the decree the appellants had a right under the Act to a direct tenancy under the landlord, they had a right to move the Rent Controlling Authority within the prescribed period for a decision of the question that the subletting to them was lawful.
If the Rent Controlling Authority had the power to decide that question, a civil court would not be competent to decide the dispute in a suit brought within that period.
The suit by the appellants had been filed within that period.
[131G 132B] (iii)The fact that the landlord had not applied under section 15(3) did not affect the issue as it was for the appellants as sub tenants to prove that the sub letting to them was lawful.
, [132C] (iv)Section 45(2) also did not help the appellants.
That provision was clearly intended only to protect a right to resort to a civil court for the decision of a question as to an interest in property existing apart from the Act concerning which an adjudication may have been incidentally made by a Rent Controlling Authority in deciding a question which it had been empowered by the Act to decide.
It does not authorise a civil court to decide a dispute as to the lawfulness of sub letting for the purpose of section 16(2).
[133 C E] 129
