The appellants were tried on a complaint by the respondent before an Honorary Magistrate for offences under sections 420, 468, 406 and 465/471 Indian Penal Code and acquitted.
The Magistrate rejected the complainant 's request to frame a charge under section 467 Indian Penal Code, and commmit the accused to the Court of Sessions.
The complainant appealed to the High Court against the acquittal.
The High Court held that the evidence prima facie disclosed an offence under section 467 and even though the complaint did not mention that section it was the duty of the Magistrate to commit the case to sessions.
It accordingly set aside the acquittal, and ordered a retrial.
The appellants came to this Court by special leave.
It was contended on behalf of the appellants that the trial before the Magistrate, in so far as it went, was with jurisdiction and it could not be set aside merely because the High Court thought that a charge under section 467 might be framed, and that such a proceeding is not contemplated.
by section 423(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
HELD: (i) If the Magistrate had applied his mind to the relevant evidence he would have seen that the main offence was under section 467 read with section 471and the other offences were subsidiary.
It was thus not proper for him tochoose for trial only such offences over which he had jurisdiction andto ignore the other offence over which he had none.
His duty clearly wasto frame a charge under section 467 and to commit the appellants to stand their trial before the Court of Sessions.
[259 G] (ii)It is wrong to contend that the High Court had no jurisdiction in the matter because the trial before the Honorary Magistrate (in so far as it went) was with jurisdiction.
If it were so there would be no remedy whenever a Magistrate dropped serious charges ousting him of his jurisdiction and tried only those within his jurisdiction.
[260 B C] Dr. Sanmukh Singh Teja Singh Yogi vs Emperor, , approved.
However hesitant the High Court may be to set aside an order of acquittal and to order retrial, it has jurisdiction under the code to do so if the justice of the case clearly demands it and a case of omission from the charge of a serious offence prima facie disclosed by the evidence, is one of those circumstances in which the power can properly be exercised particularly when the charge for the offence it framed would have ousted the jurisdiction of the trial court.
[260 D E] Abinash Chandra Bose vs Bimal Krishna Sen, A.I.R. 1963 S.C. 316, Ukha Kolhe vs State of Maharashtra, A.I.R. 1963 S.C. 1531, Barhamdeo 256 Rai and others vs King Emperor, A.I.R. 1926 Pat.
36 Balgobind Thakur and others vs King Emperor, A.I.R. 1926 Pat 393 and K.E.V. Razya Bhagwanta, , referred to.
