The land in dispute as in the Vidarbha region originally forming part of the State of Madhya Pradesh, to which the Berar Regulation of Agricultural Leases Act, 1951 (Berar Act) applied.
Under the Act, a landlord requiring land for personal cultivation, could terminate a lease by issuing a notice to the lessee under section 9, and obtaining an order in that behalf from the Revenue Officer under section 8(1)(g) and then, applying to the Revenue Officer for ejectment of the lessee.
On the landlord 's application, the Officer, after making such summary enquiry as he deems fit, may pass an order restoring possession to the landlord.
After the merger of the Vidarbha region with the State of Bombay, the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands (Vidarbha region and Kutch Area) Act (Tenancy Act) was passed on December 30, 1958 repealing, the Berar Act.
Section 36 of the Tenancy Act set up a procedure for obtaining possession from a tenant and provided that the landlord may apply to the Tahsildar who, after holding an enquiry, may pass such order as he deems fit.
Section 38(1) authorised the landlord to obtain possession of land from a tenant, if the landlord, bona fide required the land for personal cultivation and in order to efecetuate that right, the landlord must give a notice of one year 's duration in writing and make an application for possession under section 36, within the prescribed period.
By section 38(3) it was provided that the right of a landlord to terminate a tenancy under section 38(1) shall be subject to the conditions contained in cls.
(a) to (e) of sub section
(3) and sub ,section (4) imposed certain restrictions on the right of the landlord to terminate a tenancy.
By section 132(2) any right already acquired before 30th December 1958 remained enforceable.
and any legal proceeding in respect of such right, could be instituted, continued and disposed of as if the Tenancy Act had not been passed.
But to this reservation an exception was made by section 132(3) that a proceeding pending on 30th December 1958, was to be deemed to have been instituted and pending before the corresponding authority tinder the Tenancy Act, and was to be disposed of in accordance with its provisions.
The appellant had obtained from the Revenue Officer concerned an order, determining the tenancy of the respondent under section 8(1)(g) of the Berar Act.
effective from 1st April 1958.
On 15th May 1959 after the Tenancy Act had come into force the appellant applied to the Tahsildar under section 36 for an order for restoration of possession.
The Tahsildar ordered restoration of possession.
but on appeal the Sub Divisional Officer set aside the order on the ground that the appellant failed to comply with the requirements of section 38 of the Tenancy Act.
and the Revenue Tribunal confirmed the order of the Sub Divisional Officer.
In a petition for the issue of a writ, the High Court set aside all the orders of the subordinate tribunals and remanded the case to the Tahsildar for dealing with the application in the light of directions given in its judgment.
The High Court 595 held that though section 36(1) of the Tenancy Act did not apply to the appellant 's application, by vitrue of section 132(3) the provision of section 38(3) and (4) were applicable to it.
In his appeal to the Supreme Court, the appellant contended that the High Court had not correctly interpreted section 132(3) and that it should have restored the order passed by the Tahsildar Direct should not have reopened the enquiry.
HELD : The Tahsildar was competent to entertain the appellant 's application for recovery of possession.
Once an order was passed under section 8(1)(g) of the Berar Act by the Revenue Officer, the only enquiry contemplated to be made on an application under section 19 of the Act, was a summary enquiry before an order for possession was made in favour of the landlord.
At that stage there was no scope for the application of the conditions and restrictions prescribed by section 38(3) and (4), for those provisions do not apply to proceedings to enforce rights acquired when the Berar Act was in operation.
Therefore the Tahsildar should deal with the application on the footing that it was an application to enforce right conferred by sections 8 and of the Berar Act and that the provisions of section 38 of the Tenancy Act have no application thereto.
[604 F H; 605 A B] The appellant had acquired a right to obtain possession of the land on the determination made by the Revenue Officer under section 8(1)(g) of the Berar Act.
An order made under section 8 or section 9 of the Berar Act relating to termination of a lease does not terminate the proceeding it comes to an end only when an order under section 19 of the Act is made.
Therefore, the application filed by the appellant purporting to be under section 36(2) of the Tenancy Act must be regarded its an application under section 19 of the Berar Act, and deemed to be a Continuation of the application under sections 8 and 9 of the Berar Act and pending at the date when the Tenancy Act was brought into force.
Since the repeal of the Berar Act the proceeding would stand transferred to the Tahsildar, who was bound to give effect to the rights already acquired before the Tenancy Act was enacted under section 132(2), and in doing so, under section 132(3) he bad to follow the procedure prescribed by the Tenancy Act, But the exception made in section 132(3) is limited in its content.
By the use of the expression 'shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this Act '.
the legislature intended to attract the procedural provisions of the Tenancy Act and not the conditions precedent to the institution of fresh proceedings.
Therefore, a pending proceeding in respect of a right acquired before the Act, had to be continued and disposed of as if the Tenancy Act had not been passed, subject to the reservation in respect of two matters relating to the competence of the officers to try the proceedings and to the procedure in respect of the trial.
Between section 19(3) of the Berar Act and section 36(3) of the Tenancy Act in the matter of procedure there is no substantial difference.
But to the trial of the application for enforcement of the right acquired trader the Berar Act, section 38 of the Tenancy Act could not be attracted.
Section 38(1) is in terms prospective and does not purport to affect rights acquired before the Tenancy Act was brought into force.
Section 38(3) and (4) do not apply to an application filed or deemed to be filed under section 19 of the Berar Act.
Section 38(3) in term makes the right of the landlord to terminate a tenancy under sub section
subject to conditions mentioned therein.
The words of section 38(4).
are undoubtedly general, but the setting in which the sub section occurs indicating that it is also intended to apply to tenancies determined under section 38(1).
Therefore where the determination of the tenancy is not under 38(1), sub sections
(3) and (4) have no application.
D, E, 60 A, B. F. G H, 603 B, E, F H] 596 Jayantraj Kanakanial Zambad vs Hari Dagdu, I.L.R. , approved.
