There was a fire at a railway station in which certain goods& were destroyed.
Two suits were filed claiming damage for loss of goods by 'the said fire.
The first suit was filed by a factory which claimed to be owner of the goods as consignor.
The other suit was filed by a consignee in whose favour the relevant documents were endorsed.
The Union of India resisted both the suits.
The trial court and the High Court concurrently held that the loss was due to the negligence of the Railways.
The1 Union of India appealed to this Court.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant : (1) The suits, as filed, were not maintainable.
(2) In the first suit delivery of the goods had been made to the consignee and the High Court 's finding to the contrary was wrong.
(3) Damages should have been awarded at the contract rat .
and not the market rate (4) Interest could not be awarded for the period before the suit on the amount of damages decreed.
(5) In the second suit notice had been given to the consignee that the consignment had arrived on February 23, 1943.
The consignee did not come to remove the goods till March 8, 1943 when the fire broke out, and the liability of the railway administration ceased after the lapse of reasonable time after arrival of the consignment at the railway administration.
HELD: (i) A railway receipt is a document of title to goods covered by it, but from that alone it does not follow, where the consignor and consignee are different, that the consignee is necessarily the owner of the goods and the consignor in such circumstances can never he the owner of the goods.
It is quite possible for the consignor to retain title in the goods himself while the consignment is booked in the name of another person.
In the first of the present suits the risk remained with the consignor according to the agreement of the parties, and it had not been proved that the consignor had parted with the property in the goods.
Therefore the suit by he consignor was maintainable.
[586 D H] In the second suit the railway receipt was endorsed in the consignees favour and the courts below had concurrently found that the consignee was the owner of the goods.
There could therefore be no dispute about the maintainability of the second suit also.
[588 D] (ii) Though there was a token delivery to the consignee in the first suit as appeared from the fact that the railway receipt had been sur 581 rendered and the delivery book had been signed, there was no redelivery by the railway to the consignee.
The goods had not been unloaded and were still under the control and custody of the railway and the evidence of the Assistant Goods Clerk was that his permission had still to be taken before the goods could be actually removed by the consignee.
The contention in the first suit that the delivery had been made to the consignee before March 8, 1943 therefore, in the peculiar circumstances of the case had to fail.
[590 C D] (iii) The High Court rightly calculated the damages on the basis of the on March 8 as it is well settled that it is the market price at lest be damage occurred which is the measure of the damages to be awarded.
[590 E F] (iv) In the absence of any usage or contract, express or implied, or of any provision of law to justify the award of interest it is not possible to award interest by way of damages and therefore no interest should have been awarded in the present two suits up to the date of filing of either suit.
[591 A] Bengal Nagpur Railway Co. Ltd. vs Ruttanji Rant, & Ors. 65 I.A. 66, Seth Thawardas Pherumal vs Union of India , Union of India v, A. L. Rallia Ram; , and Union of India V. Watkins Mayer & Co. C. As.
Nos. 43 and 44 of 1963 dt.
10 3 65, relied on.
(v) Under section 72 of the Indian Railways Act, the responsibility of the railway administration for the loss, destruction or deterioration of animals or goods delivered to the administration to be carried by railway is, subject to the other provisions of the Act, that of a bailee under sections 151, 152 and 161 of the Indian Contract Act.
The responsibility continues until terminated in accordance with sq. 55 and 56 of the Railways Act.
[591 E] It may be that under the Rules framed by the Railways goods are kept at the railway station of destination only for one month, and that demurrage has to be paid after three days of reaching the destination.
But the responsibility of the railway is under section 72 of the Indian Railways Act and it cannot be cut down by any rule.
Even if owing to the said Rules the responsibility of the railway as a carrier ends within a reasonable time after the goods have reached their destination station, its responsibility as a warehouseman continues and that responsibility L. the same at that of a bailee.
[592 E H] Chapman vs The Great Western Railway Company, (1880)5 Q.B.D. 278, distinguished.
In the present case the consignee (in the second suit) claimed the goods well within the period of one month mentioned in the rules.
The fact that he was liable to pay demurrage because he did not take delivery of the goods within three days did not relieve the railway of its respon sibility as warehouseman.
As it had been concurrently found by the courts below that there had been negligence by the railway within the meaning of sections 151 and 152 of the Indian Contract Act, the railway war, liable to make good the loss caused by the fire.
[593 A B]
