The first respondent was detained by the Government of Maharashtra under r. 30(1) (b) of the Defence of India Rules, 1962.
The conditions of detention under sub rule 4 of r. 30 of the said rules were prescribed to be the same as those under the Bombay Conditions of Detention Order, 1951.
While so detained the first respondent wrote a book of scientific interest and sought permission from The State Government to send it out of jail for publication.
The request having been rejected he filed a writ petition under article 226 of the Constitution praying for a direction to the State Government to permit him to send out the manuscript for Publication.
The High Court held that The book was in no way prejudicial to the defence of India etc., and allowed the petition.
The State Government by special leave appealed to this Court.
It was contended on behalf of the, appellant that the first respondent not being a free person could exercise only such privileges a, , were conferred on him by the order of detention, and the Bombay Conditions of Detention Order, 1951 which regulated the terms of the respondent 's detention did not confer on him any privilege or right to write a book and send it out of the prison for publication.
HELD : (i) It cannot be said that the Bombay Conditions of Detention Order, 1951 which lays down the conditions regulating the restrictions on the liberty of a detenu, conferred only certain privileges on the detenu.
If this argument were to be accepted it would mean that the detenu could be starved to death, if there was no condition providing for giving food to the detenu.
In the matter of liberty of a subject such a construction shall not be given to the said rules and regulations unless for compelling reasons.
[7O8 C D] (ii) The said conditions regulating the restriction on the personal liberty of a detenu are not privileges conferred on him, but are the conditions subject to which his liberty can be restricted.
As there is no condition in the Bombay Conditions of Detention Order, 1951, prohibiting a detenu from writing a book or sending it for publication, the State of Maharashtra in refusing to allow the same infringed the personal liberty of the first Respondent in derogation of the law whereunder he was detained.
[708 E] (iii) The effect of the President 's order under article 359 of the Constitution was that the right to move the High Court or the Supreme Court remained suspended during the period of emergency if a person was deprived of his personal liberty under the Defence of India Act, 1962, or any rule or order made thereunder.
If a person was deprived of his personal liberty not under the Act or rule or order made thereunder but in contravention thereof his right to move the said courts in that regard would not be suspended.
[705 C D] 703 Since the State Government 's refusal to allow publication of the first respondent 's book was in contravention and derogation of the 'law under which he was detained he had the right to move the High Court under article 226 and the said High Court was empowered to issue an appropriate writ or direction to the said Government to act in accordance with law.
