A decree was passed in a money suit against N and his four sons who were members of a Mitakshara Hindu joint family.
In execution of that decree the shares of the four sons in the joint family properties, described altogether as 4/5 th share, were put up for auction in December, 1936 and purchased by section N 's interest was not put up for sale as it was the subject matter of insolvency proceedings.
The sale to S was duty confirmed.
S sold the properties to P.
On November 6, 1939 an order was made under 0.
21 rr.
33(2) and 96 of the Code of Civil Procedure for delivery of joint possession of the properties purchase to P along with the members of the joint family already in possession.
This order was carried out and possession was delivered to P by publishing that fact by beat of drum as prescribed in the rules.
Subsequently P retransferred the properties to section On October 16, 1951 S filed a suit against the then members of the joint family and various alienees asking for a partition of the joint family properties into five equal shares and thereafter for possession of four of such shares by removing the defendants from possession.
The trial court decreed the suit but held that S was not entitled to a 4/5th share but only to a 2/3rd share because before the decree a 5th son had been born to N who had not been made a party to the suit or the execution proceedings and whose share had consequently not passed under the auction sale.
Some of the defendants filed an appeal to the High Court which allowed the appeal holding that the suit was barred by limitation under article 144 of Schedule 1 to the Limitation Act.
S had field a coss objection in the High.
Court on the ground that he should have been held entitled to a 4/5th share of the properties which was dismissed by the High Court without discussion of the merits in view of its decision on the question of limitation.
S having died the appellants as his successors in interest appealed to this Court under article 133 of the Constitution.
The two questions that arose for decision were (1) whether the suit was barred by limitation under article 144 or article 120 and (2) whether S was entitled to a 4/5th share.
HELD : (Per Sarkar and Raghubar Dayal, JJ.) (i) (a) 'Me view that the suit was barred under article 144 of the suit presented great difficulties.
The article obviously contemplates a suit for possession of property where the defendant might be in possession of it as against the plaintiff.
However, the purchaser of a copartner 's undivided interest in joint family property is not entitled to possession of what he has purchased.
His only right is to sue for partition of the property and ask for allotment to him of that which an partition might be found to fall to the share of the copartner whose share he has purchased.
His right to possession would date from the period when a specific allotment is made in his favour.[632 H] 629 S was therefore not entitled to possession till a partition had been made.
As possession of the defendants could tie adverse to him only if he was entitled to possession the difficulty in applying article 144 arose.
[633 B] Sidheshwar Mukherjee vs Bhubneshwar Prasad Narain, ; , relied on.
Vyapuri vs Sonamma Boi Ammani, Mad. 81, referred to.
Mahant Sudarsan Das vs Mahan Ram Kirpal Das, (1949) L.R. 77 I.A 42, distinguished.
(b) Even on the assumption that article 144 applied the suit was not barred.
In the present case the defendants were not in uninterrupted possession for twelve years as required by the Article.
By the delivery of symbolical possession under the order of November 6, 1939, the adverse possession of the defendants was interrupted.
Time had therefore to commence to run from that date, and the suit having been brought within twelve years of that date, it was not bared under that article.
[633 F G] Sri Radha Krishna Chanderji vs Ram Bahadur, A.I.R. (1917) P.C. 197, relied on.
It could not be said that the order of delivery of possession was a nullity though S and his transferee who had purchased an undivided share in copartners property were not entitled in law to any possession at all.
In making the order the learned Judge had gone wrong in law but he had acted within his jurisdiction.
Such an order has full effect if it is not set aside.
[634 A B] Yelumalai Chetti vs Srinivasa Chetti, Mad. 294, distinguished.
Mahadev Sakharam Parkar vs janu Namji Hatle, (1912) I.L.R. and fang Bahadur Singh vs Hanwant Singh All.
520, held inapplicable.
(ii) Article 120 applies to suits for which no period of limitation is provided elsewhere and prescribes a period of six years commencing from the date when the right to sue accrues.
[636 D] The right to sue accrues for the purpose of article 120 when there is an accrual of the right asserted in the suit and an unequivocal threat by the respondent to infringe it.
In the present case there was nothing to show that the right was ever challenged in any way by the respondents.
It was impossible therefore to hold that the suit was barred under article 120.
[636 F] Mst.
Rukhmabai vs Lala Laxminarayan, ; and C. Mohammad Yunus vs Syed Unnissa, ; , relied on.
Bai Shevantibai vs Janardan R. Warick, A.I.R. 1939 Bom.
322 disapproved in so far as it held that the right to sue accrued from the date of sale.
(iii) The cross objection had no merit.
What S purchased at the auction sale was the share of the sons of S then bom, in the joint family Properties.
At the date of the auction sale that share which was originally 4/5th had been reduced to 2/3rd by the birth of another son to N who had not been made a party either to the suit or the execution proceedings.
What was purchased at the execution sale was only the shares of the four elder sons of N and their share at the date of sale was 2/3rd.
That 630 being so S was not entitled to get the 1/6th share of the fifth son also allotted to him in the partition suit.
[637 B C] Per Ramaswami, J. : (i) The purchaser of a share of joint Hindu family property doe , not acquire any interest in the property he cannot claim to be put.
in possession of any definite place of Property.
A suit for partition filed by the alienee from a is not, in a technical sense, a suit for partition and such a suit have the necessary effect of breaking up the joint ownership of the members of the family in the joint family in the joint property nor the corporate character of the family.
Such being the rights of the alienee his right to sue for partition cannot be said to be a continuing right subject to no period of limitation for enforcing it.
[638 F H] Aiyyagari Venkataramayya vs Aivyagari Ramayya, I.L.R. 25 referred to.
(ii) Though the alienee of an undivided interest of a Hindu is not entitled to joint possession with other copartners or to separate possession of any part of the family property he is entitled to obtain possession of that part of the family property which might full to the share of his alienor at a partition.
[640 B] In the present case the alienee instituted a suit for general the prayer that he may be put in possession of that part of the family property which may be allotted to his share.
It is not right to such a suit as a suit for mere partition.
The main relief sought by the plaintiff is the relief of possession of that part of the property which may be allotted to the alienor 's share and a relief for partition is only a machinery for working out his right and ancillary to the main relief for possession of the property allotted to the alienor 's share.
what the plaintiff seeks is actual delivery of possession.
Such a suit falls within the of article 144 of the Limitation Act.
[640 B D] Thani vs Dakshinamurthy.
I.L.R. , appoved (iii) the possession of the non alieniting members of the family cannot be said to be possession on behalf of the alienee also because the purchaser alienee does not acquire in interest in the property sold and does not become tenant in common with the members of the family tier is he entitled to joint possession with them.
In the absence of clear acknowledgement of the right of the alienee or participation in the enjoyment of the family property by the alienee the possession of his alienors share.
The fact that the alienee has purchased an undivided interest is not inconsistent with the conception of adverse possession, of that interest.
[640 E H] Sudarsan Das vs Ram Kirpat Das, A.I.R. 1950 P.C. 44, reliel on.
According to the third column of article 144, time begins to run from the date when the possession of the defendant becomes adverse to the plaintiff.
In the present case, therefore, adverb possession bengon to run from the date of purchase of the undivided share i.e. front December 21.
[640 E; 641 FF] (iv) However the grant of symbolic possession bv the court in favour of P after notice to defendants 2 to 5 was tantamount in law to delivery of actual possession and therefore efficient to break up the continuity of adverse "scion in favour of the defendants.
Even assuming that the grant of symbolic possible ought not to have been made and that, 631 the executing court acted illegally in making such an order, it could not be argued that the executing court had no jurisdiction to make the order or that the act of symbolic possession was a nullity in the eye of law.
[642 B] Yelumalai Chetti vs Srinivasa Chetti,I.L.R. , referred Sri Radha Krishna ' Chanderii vs Ram Bahadur, A.I.R. 1917 P.C. 197, relied on.
According the suit of the plaintiff was no.t barred by limitation under ' article 144 of the Limitation Act and the view taken by the High Court on this part of the case was not correct.
[642 D]
