The respondent was appointed a Munsif on November 10, 1927.
After promotion he became an Additional District and Sessions Judge and officiated at several stations as District and Sessions Judge but was never confirmed as such.
In the ordinary course he was due to superannuate and retire on July 31, 1953.
By an order dated July 14, 1953 the Government of West Bengal ordered that the respondent be retained in service for a period of two months commencing from August 1, 1953.
The order purported to be under Rule 75(a) of the West Bengal Service Rules, Part 1.
By another order dated July 20, 1953, the respondent was placed under suspension and on the following day he wag served with charges and asked to file a written reply within 15 days.
An enquiry into the charges was made by an officer appointed for the purpose.
During the period of the enquiry the respondent was retained in service, though kept in suspen sion, by repeated orders under rule 75(a).
The enquiry officer reported that some of the charges were proved.
On March 18, 1954 the respondent was asked to show cause why he should not be dismissed from service and after be had shown cause he was dismissed on May 27, 1954.
The Public Service Commission was consulted but not the High Court.
The respondent appealed to the Governor unsuccessfully.
Thereafter he applied to the High Court at Calcutta under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution against his dismissal.
The High Court quashed the order of dismissal as well as the enquiry.
The Government of West Bengal appealed to this Court on a certificate granted by the High Court.
The questions that fell for consideration were : (1) Whether the enquiry ordered by the Government and conducted by an Executive Officer of the Government against a District and Sessions Judge contravened the provisions of article 235 of the Constitution which vests in the High Court the control over the District Court and the courts subordinate thereto; and (2) whether the provisions of rule 75(a) West Bengal Service Rules could be utilised to extend the service of the respondent beyond the normal age of retirement.
HELD : (i) Rule 75(a) which was modelled on Rule 56(a) of the Fundamental Rules was not designed to be used for the purpose of retaining a person in service for enquiry against him but to keep in employment persons with a meritorious record of service who although superannuated can render some more service and whose retention in service is considered necessary on public grounds.
If retention in service for the first reason was considered necessary a rule like Rule 56(d) of the Fundamental Rules was required.
[777 E C] 7 72 (ii) There is special provision for District Judges in the Constitution in articles 233 to 237.
These articles deal with the appointment of persons to be, and postings and promotions of, District Judges and appointment, postings and promotions of Judges subordinate to the District Court and the courts subordinate thereto.
They also provide for special rules to be made by the Governor of the State after consultation with the State Public Service Commission and the High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to each State.
These articles were not placed in the Chapter on services but immediately after the provisions in regard to the High Courts.
The articles went a little further than the corresponding sections of the Government of India Act, 1935.
They vested the 'control ' of the district courts and the courts subordinate thereto in the High Courts.
[779 B E; 785 B] (iii) The word 'control ' as used in article 235 includes disciplinary control or jurisdiction over District Judges.
The history which lies behind the enactment of these articles indicates that 'control ' was vested in the High Court to effectuate a purpose, namely, the securing of the independence of the subordinate judiciary and unless it included disciplinary control as well the very object would be frustrated.
[786 B] The word 'control ', moreover, is accompanied by the word 'vest ' which is a strong word.
It shows that the High Court is made the sole custodian ,of the control over the judiciary.
Control therefore is not merely the power to arrange the day to day working of the court but contemplates disciplinary jurisdiction on the presiding Judge.
[786 C D] Article 227 gives to the High Court superintendence over these Courts and enables the High Court to call for returns etc.
The word 'control ' in article 235 must have a different content.
It includes something in addition to mere superintendence.
It is control over the conduct and discipline of Judges.
The inclusion of a right of appeal against the orders of the High Court in the conditions of service necessarily indicates an order passed in disciplinary jurisdiction, and the word 'deal ' also points to disciplinary and not mere administrative jurisdiction.
[786 D F] (iv) Although the term used is "district court" the word 'court ' is used compendiously to denote not only the court proper but also the presiding Judge.
[786 G H] (v) That the Legislature has under article 309 the power to make laws relating to the services does not show that the Executive under article 162 enjoys corresponding executive power, when the Constitution indicates otherwise.
[787 F G] (vi) There is nothing in article 311 which compels the conclusion that the High Court is ousted of the jurisdiction to hold the inquiry if article 235 vested some power in it.
The control which is vested in the High Court is a complete control subject only to the power of the Governor in the matter of appointment (including dismissal and removal) and posting and promotion of District Judges.
Within the exercise of the control vested in the High Court, the High Court can bold enquiries, impose punishments other than dismissal or removal subject however to the conditions of service, to a right of appeal if granted by the conditions of service, and to the ,giving of an opportunity of showing cause as required by cl.
(2) of article 31 1.
unless such an opportunity is dispensed with by the Governor acting under the provisos (b) and (c) to that clause.
[790 A C] The High Court alone could have held inquiry in this case.
To hold otherwise would be to reverse the trend which has moved determinedly in this direction.
[790 C D] 773
