M, K and L mortgaged certain immovable properties in favour of R in 1933.
M died in 1937 and in 1940, R commenced an action for enforcement of the mortgage against K, L and three widows and a daughter of M.
In execution of the decree passed in the action, the properties were bold at a court auction in 1942 and purchased by R, who thereafter trans ferred them to others.
The appellant plaintiff, claiming that he was the son of M, instituted a suit in 1950 for a decree for partition of the mortgaged properties "by metes and bounds" and in the alternative for a declaration that he was entitled to redeem the mortgage or a portion thereof equal to his share in the mortgaged properties.
The plaintiff 's suit was resisted by R and the other alienees of the properties, mainly on the ground that the decree of 1940 was binding on the appellant for the estate of M was fully represented in the suit by those who were in possession at the time; and that R had made full and boan fide inquiry and had learnt that the three widows and the daughter of M were the only surviving members of the latter 's family.
The trial court dismissed the appellants 's suit and this decision was confirmed in appeal by the High Court.
In appeal to this Court, the only contention pressed on behalf of the appellant was ',hat when in a suit to enforce a mortgage instituted after the death of a muslim debtor, one or more out of the heirs of the deceased is or are not impleaded in the suit and a decree is obtained, what passes to the auction purchaser at the court sale is only the interest of the heirs who were impleaded; that this was so because each heir is under Mohamedan law liable to satisfy the debts of the deceased only to the extent of 'the share of the debt proportionate to his share in the estate.
HELD : (i) The appellant was sufficiently represented in the suit filed in 1940 and was bound by the decree passed in that suit, (ii) Whether a decree obtained by a creditor against the heirs of a deceased muslim is binding upon the entire estate or only on those who were impleaded eo nomine is not a question to be determined on the personal law either of the deceased or of the defendant in the suit.
It is a part of the law of procedure which regulates all matters going to the remedy, and when the matter passes into the domain of procedure, it must be regulated by the law governing the action of the court; [944 D] 938 (iii) Where certain persons are impleaded after diligent and bona fide enquiry in the genuine belief ',hat they are the only persons interested in the estate, the whole estate of the deceased will be duly represented by the persons who are brought on the record or impleaded, and the decree will be binding on the entire estate.
[948 G] Daya Rain and others vs Shyam Sundari & others ; followed.
If the creditor has proceeded after such bona fide enquiry, it would make no difference in principle between a case in which a debtor is sued for recovery of a debt and upon his death pendente lite there is an order of the court recognising the persons brought on the record as representing the estate, and a case in which in a suit against the heirs of a deceased debtor, the creditor has taken upon himself the responsibility to bring certain persons on the record as representing the estate.
[948 E] This rule will not apply to cases where there has been fraud or collusion between the creditor and the heir impleaded or where there are other circumstances which indicate that there has not been a fair or real trial, or that the absent heir had a special defence which was not and could not be tried in the earlier proceeding.
[948 H] Case law reviewed.
