The mortgagee of the property in dispute bad obtained a mortgage decree and in execution purchased it.
in 1942, he sold the property to the appellant.
After the introduction of section 37 A into the Bengal Agricultural Debtors Act, 1936, by the Amendment Act of 1942, the respondents who were the owners of the property, applied under the section, to the debt Settlement Board, for getting back possession of the property.
They succeeded in their application and obtained possession, but their possession was disturbed by the appellant.
Therefore, 'the respondents field ,he suit to remove the cloud on their title and to obtain possession in case it was found that they were not in possession.
The suit was decreed by the trial court, but the appellate court allowed he appeal.
The High Court on further appeal, restored the decree of the trial court.
In his appeal to this Court, the appellant contended that, (1) the Board had no jurisdiction in the matter as the decree, in the mortgage suit was for more than Rs. 5,000, and (ii) Section 37 A did not apply to a bona fide purchaser for value from the auction purchaser.
HELD : (i) The contention ,is to jurisdiction on the ground of value should be rejected as the point was not taken in the trial court, for, if it had been raised, the respondents would have been able to show that, even if the deal was over Rs. 5,000, the previous sanction of the Collector had been taken by the Board before it dealt with the matter as permitted by the proviso to r. 144 framed under the Act.
[932 F] (ii) Reading the wide language used in section 37A.(8) with section 37A,(1)(c), it is clear that once the sale is set aside, even alienees from 'he decreeholder would be liable to be ejected and would be covered by the words "any person" used in the latter part of section 37A(8), unless they were alience, of the four kinds mentioned in section 37A(1) (c).
[936 E] When an award in favour of the debtor was made under section 3SA(5) and where a copy of the award was presented to the Civil Court or Certificate officer at those order the property was sold, section 37 A(8) imperatively enjoins on the Civil Court or the Certificate Officer to ,set aside the sale.
it follows that where a sale is set aside, whoever may have purchased the property in the sale whether the decree holder him self or somebody else will have to give up possession.
for the right of the person who hid purchased the property.
to remain In possession, would only exist so long as the sale subsists.
On the same reasoning if the auction purchaser, whether he be the decree holder or somebody else, his parted with the property subsequently in favour of any person that person would be equally liable to ejectment, for his right to remain in possession only flows from the sale which is ordered to be set aside.
Further, The word 'decree holder" has been given an inclusive definition and so, it cannot be said Sup.
C.1.165 16 930 that it is confined only to the decree holder auction purchaser.
Also, under section 37 A(1)(c) only four kinds of transfers, including bona fide transfers for valuable consideration (excepting a mortgage) before 20th December 1939, are excepted, and so an application could be made under the section even where there was an alienation of any kind by the decre holder, so long as the alienation was after 20th December 1939.
Therefore, there is no doubt that section 37A(8) intends that the sale should be set aside whoever may be auction purchaser, and it also intends that after setting aside the sale the property should be delivered back to the debtor, whoever may be in possession thereof at the time of the delivery back, except in the case of an under riyat under certain conditions.
[934 D H; 935 A B, D; 936 A C]
