In 1954 some foreign currency and Travelers Cheques were recovered from the respondent 's premises.
By Act 39 of 1957 the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act was amended, section 23(1} was substituted and section 23D was added.
After the amendment either adjudication proceedings or criminal proceedings could be taken up in respect of a contravention mentioned in section 23(1), while, before the amendment only criminal proceedings before a court could be instituted to punish the offender.
The Director of Enforcement in 1958 issued a show cause notice to the respondent why adjudication proceedings be not held against him for contravention of section 23(1) of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act.
The respondent showed cause, on consideration of which the Director of Enforcement concluded that adjudication proceedings should be held, and therefore, required the respondent to appear before him.
Thereupon, the respondent filed a petition under article 226 of the Constitution challenging the adjudication proceedings on.
the grounds : (i) section 23( 1 )(a) as well as section 23D contravened article 14 of the Constitution; (ii) the amendment in 1957 did not apply to contravention which took place before it came into force; and (iii) s 23(1)(a) of the Act was ultra vires of article 20(1) of the Constitution.
The High Court upheld the objections and quashed the adjudication proceedings, In appeal to this Court; HELD: The appeal must be accepted.
(i) Section 23(1) and section 23D of the Act did not violate article 14 of the Constitution.
[36 F] Shanti Prasad fain vs Director of Enforcement, , followed.
(ii) A person accused of the commission of an offence had no vested right to be, tried by a particular court or a particular procedure except in so far as there is any constitutional objection by way of discrimination or the violation of any other fundamental right is involved.
There is no principle underlying Art 20 of the Constitution which makes a right to any course of procedure a vested right.
[38 F H] Rao Shiva Bahadur Singh vs State of Vindhya Pradesh, ; followed.
it is not necessary that there should be a special provision to indicate that the new procedural law is retrospective.
No right of appeal under the Criminal Procedure Code is affected because no proceedings had even been started under the Criminal Procedure Code.
[39 A] 35 (iii) The new section does not prescribe any minimum.
What it prescribes is a maximum.
No greater penalty than might have been levied under the old section has been prescribed by the new section 23(1)(a), and consequently there is no breach of article 20(1) of the Constitution. [39 C D] The words "not exceeding" in section 23 (1) (a) of the Act cover not only the expression "three times the value of the foreign exchange" but also the words "five thousand rupees." [39 C]
