On 7th March 1948, the Ruler of a former Indian State, out of his bounty and in discharge of his moral obligation, passed an order providing for an allowance to his brother respondent herein.
He directed the Chief Minister of the State to do, certain things, and the various parts of the order were sent to the different departments of the State Administration for carrying them out.
The order also granted to the respondent a house, conveyance etc.
On 18th March 1948, the State along with other States formed the United State of Vindhya Pradesh, the component States losing their sovereign status.
Later, the United State merged in India, and on the promulgation of the Constitution, the State became a Part of the Indian Union.
On 24th September, 1951, the President of India, in his executive capacity reduced the amount of allowance.
The respondent thereupon filed a suit for a declaration, against 'the State and Central Governments, that the allowance could not be reduced Because it was granted to him by a law passed by the former Ruler, which law was continued in force by the covenant constituting the United State, by certain statutory orders made from time to time and lastly by article 372 of the Constitution.
The trial court dismissed the suit, but the High Court, on appeal, decreed it.
In the appeal to this Court by the State and Central Governments, the question was whether the order of the former Ruler was a law.
HELD : It wag not a law and was not continued in force after the State lost its sovereignty.
The order was an executive act of the Ruler and it was competent to the President, in his executive capacity., to reduce the amount.
[66 H] The nature of the order shows it cannot be a law according to notions of modern jurisprudence.
It was a mere directive or grant, and even if the money was paid out of the State Exchequer, that fact would not turn the order into a law.
[60 C; F] Narsing Pratap Deo vs
State of Orissa; , , referred to.
Promod Chandra Dev vs State of Orissa, [1962] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 405, explained.
