One Mst.
Raj Kaur was holding certain lands on different tenures under the Raja of Faridkot.
She had two daughters.
She adopted the son of one of them and put him in possession of all the lands.
He transferred a part of the lands to the second respondent who was son of the other daughter of Raj Kaur.
After Raj Kaur 's dearth the Raja filed suits for possession of the land, and in execution of the decree he obtained in those suits, took possession of the entire land, in October, 1938.
He then transferred the land, but the transferee was dispossessed by the appellants in June 1950, in execution of a decree they obtained, in a suit for preemption filed by them against the transferee.
The second respondent 's mother had died in 1938 and her sons the first and second respondents, filed a suit for possession of the entire land in February 1950, as heirs of Raj Kaur, but it was decreed only to the extent of their half share, and the decree was affirmed by the High Court.
In the appeal to this Court it was contended that the suit was governed either by article 142 or article 144 of the Indian Limitation Act, 1908, and on either basis, was barred by time.
HELD: (i) Article 142 would not be attracted to the suit.
In order that the article may be attracted the plaintiff must initially have been in possession of the property and should have been dispossessed by the defendant or some one through whom the defendant claims or alternatively, the plaintiff should have discontinued possession.
It was no one 's case that the first respondent was ever in possession of the property.
As regards the second respondent 's possession at one time of a part of the property, it was by reason of a transfer by the adopted son.
The claim in the instant case, however, was by succession, under a different title altogether, and so it must be held that the plaintiffs respondents, as heirs of Raj Kaur, were never in possession of the land.
[65H] (ii) Article 144 was applicable to the suit, but the suit was not barred by time.
Adverse possession against the respondents started in October.
1938, when the Raja took possession of the land.
To that adverse possession could be added that of his transferee and that of the appellants who had preempted the lands under the decree obtained by them against the transferee.
But, the sum total of the adverse possession of all those persons at the date of the respondent 's suit would be less than 12 years.
The adverse possession of the adopted son could not be tacked on to the adverse possession of the Raja and those who claim through him, because, in a suit to which Art 144 is attracted, the burden is on the defendant to establish that he was in adverse possession for 12 years before the date of suit, and for computation of that period, he can avail himself of the adverse possession of any person or persons through whom he claims but not the adverse possession of independent tres 64 passers.
The starting point of limitation in article 144 is the date when the possession of the defendant becomes adverse to the plaintiff.
The gist of the definition of the word "defendant" in section 2(4) of the Act is the existence of a jural relationship between the different persons referred to in the definition, and there can be no jural relationship between two independent trespassers.
[66 F H; 68C; 70B].
Ramayya vs Kotamma, Mad. 370, explained.
