A trust was created for four religious and charitable objects, two of the objects were within taxable territories and the other two were outside the taxable territories.
The income derived from the trust property was not allocated or set apart for the said purposes.
The Trustees were assessed to Income tax on income derived on the Trust property.
The Trustees ' claim for exemption under s ' 4(3) (ii) of the Income tax Act was not accepted by the Revenue and the High Court.
In appeal to this Court the, Trustees contended that proviso (a) to s ' 4(3) (i) of the Act would be attracted only when the Trustees exctcised their option to apply the income to religious or charitable purposes outside the taxable territories, that in the present case the Trustees had not exercised the said option, and that therefore their case was directly governed by the substantive part of cl.
(i) of section 4(3) of the Act.
HELD : Under cl.
(i) of section 5(3) of the Act only income from the property wholly or in part held in trust actually applied or set apart for application for future spending on religious or charitable purposes within the taxable territories is exempted from inclusion in the: total income [390 G H] The substantive part of cl.
(i) of section 4(3) is in two parts : the first part relates to the income derived from property held under trust whooly for religious or charitable purposes and the second part to income derived from property held in part only for such purpose.
The words "applied 'Or finally set apart for application" in the second part indicate that unless the income from the, said property is applied or finally set apart for the purposes within the taxable territories, the said income does not earn the exemption.
There cannot be any reason why a different meaning should be given to the expression "applied or accumulated for application" in the first part of the clause, for, on principle, there cannot be any possible distinction between such income from the property wholly held under the trust or a part of the property held in trust.
The words "applied" and "accumulated" , therefore, must mean "applied or finally set apart".
"Applied" means that the income is actually applied for the said purposes in the taxable territories; and "accumulated" means that the income is set apart during the year for future spending on the said purposes.
The expression "accumulated for a purpose" involves a conscious act in presenti and posits a clear indication on the part of the trustee to set apart the income for that purpose [390 B G] 'Till the Trustee set apart the accumulation for the purposes within the taxable territories, it cannot be said that Me, purposes are within the taxable territories.
Mohammad Ibrahim Riza V. Income tax Commissioner, Nagpur, (1930) L.R. 57 I.A. 260, referred to.
