The appellants sued the respondents their tenants for ejectment from their shop.
They had applied to the District Magistrate for the requisite permission to institute the suit under section 3(1) of the U.P. (Temporary) Control of Rent and Eviction Act.
When the permission was refused they moved the Commissioner in his revisional jurisdiction under section 3(2) of the Act and the Commissioner gave the permission.
The Munsif decreed the suit.
This was confirmed in appeal by the District Judge.
The High Court, on appeals, upheld the respondents contention that the permission granted by the Commissioner under section 3 (3) of the Act, was invalid in law, and so concluded that the appellants ' suit was incompetent.
In this Court the appellants contended (i) sections 3(4) and 16 of the Act totally excludes the jurisdiction of civil courts in relation to the question as to whether permission has been properly or validly granted or refused by the appropriate authority exercising their powers under the relevant provisions of the Act, and (ii) the decision of the High Court that the permission granted by the Commissioner was invalid in law was inconsistent with the true scope and effect of the provisions prescribed by section 3(3) of the Act.
HELD:(i) Section 3 (4) and 16 of the Act create a bar against pleas which challenge the correctness or propriety of the orders in question.
[558 G] The two tests, which are often considered relevant in dealing with the question about the exclusion of civil courts ' jurisdiction are (a) whether the special statute which excludes such jurisdiction has used clear and unambi guous words indicating that intention; and (b) does that statute provide for an adequate and satisfactory alternative remedy to a party that may be aggrieved by the relevant order under its material provisions.
Applying these tests the inference is inescapable that the jurisdiction of the civil courts is intended to be excluded.
[558 D G] This conclusion, however, does not necessarily mean that the plea against the validity of order passed by.
the District Magistrate, or the Commissioner, or the State can never be raised in a civil court.
The bar excluding the jurisdiction of civil courts cannot operate in cases where the plea raised before the civil court goes to the root of the matter and would, if upheld, lead to the conclusion that the impugned order is a nullity.
[558 G H] (ii)The High Court was not justified, in introducing a limitation pertaining to questions of jurisdiction in determining the scopeof the width of the revisional power conferred on the Commissionerby section 3 (3).
There are three categories of cases in which the commissioner 'can interfere with the order passed by the District Magistrate :(a) if the District Magistrate has acted illegally; (b) if he has acted with material irregularity and(c) if he has wrongly refused to act.
This last ground is wide enough 5 54 to empower the Commissioner to correct the error committed by District Magistrate in making an order brought before it; clearly if the District Magistrate refused to grant permission and the Commissioner thinks that in doing so, he has committed an error, that would be a case where the District Magistrate "has wrongly refused to act" and that would give the Commissioner jurisdiction to exercise his revisional powers.
[562 C E, H]
