By the Taxation Laws (Extension to Merged States and Amendment) Act of 1949 the Income tax Act.
1922 was applied to the territories of the former Indian States which were merged with the former British Indian Provinces under the States Merger (Governors ' Provinces) Order.
By such application, the income received, accrued or arisen or deemed to be received, accrued or arisen to any person resident within the territory of the merged State became chargeable to income tax.
With a view to avoid hardship to residents of former Indian States, caused by the sudden application of the high rates of taxation, the Central Government issued the Merged States (Taxation Concessions) Order of 1949 under a. 60A of the Income tax Act.
Under Paragraphs 6 and 6A of Us Order income of residents of the merged States became charageable to tax under the Indian Income tax Act, but the income of any previous year ending after 31st March 1948 was to continue to get for a limited Period the benefit of lower rates of tax operative under the law in force in the States before merger.
This concession was to apply, under paragraph 4 of the Order, only to so much of the income, profits and gains included in the total income of an assessee as would, had he been resident in the taxable territories, have been exempt under section 14(2)(c) of the Income tax Act if the Taxation Laws Extension Act had not bee passed, that is, in respect of income arising or accuring to him :within territory of the merged State.
In the Calendar years 1948 and 1949, the assessee, who was resident and ordinarily resident within British India in 1948, received certaining as dividend in the State of Baroda which was one of the merged States.
The Income tax Officer upheld its claim that the dividend income had accrued or arisen in the Baroda State and as the income was not brought into British India, it was exempt from liablility to tax under section 14(2)(c) of the Income tax Act.
The Appellate Tribunal held that the dividend income arose in Baroda State, but by reason of the definition of "taxable territories" in section 2(14A) of the Income tax Act, the income attracted liability to tax and did not qualify for the rebate equal to the difference between the British Indian rate and the Baroda State rate in respect of the dividend income, under paragraph 6 of the Taxation Concessions Order.
The High Court also, on a reference, held that the assessee was not entitled to the rebate.
In appeal to this Court, the assessee contended that by the application of the Taxation Laws Extension Act, all residents in the taxable territory become liable to pay tax at the Indian rates, but with a view to maintain the status quo ante, it was intended by the Taxation Concessions Order, to restore the State rates of taxation to residents in the former Indian States, and also to continue the exemption in respect of the income of the former British India residents, arising or accruing 5 80 in the territory of the merged States within the limits prescribed by section 14(2) (c).
HELD : in terms the concession is not given to residents of the territories of British India, and the context does not warrant an implication to the contrary.
[587 C D] There is nothing in paragraph 4 of the Concessions Order which seeks to grant exemption from liability to tax in respect of income which prior to merger of the States was not liable to tax by virtue of section 14(2) (c), but has, since the application of the Income tax Act, become so liable.
The paragraph applies to income.
which would, if the Taxation Laws Extension Act had not been passed, have been regarded as accuring or arising in an Indian State, and the assessee would in respect of that income, had he been a resident of the taxable territory before merger, have been exempt under section 14(2)(c).
It is true that by this interpretation of paragraph 4 British Indian residents are denied the benefit of the exemption under section 14(2)(c) in respect of income arising or accruing in the territories of the merged State.
But the use of the expression "had he been resident in the taxable territories" implies that the benefit is not to tenure to persons who were before the merger entitled to the exemption under section 14(2)(c).
[587 A B, D]
