The appellant was a mining company with its head office at Nagpur.
The business of the head office was to look after the sale of coal extracted from the collieries.
An employee of the company working in the head office made applications under section 16 of the Central Provinces and Berar Industrial Disputes Settlement Act, 1947, to the Assistant Commissioner of Labour, Nagpur.
The company objected that by virtue of the notification under section 1(3) of the Act the mining industry had been exempted from the operation of the Act including section 16 and therefore the Assistant Labour Commissioner had no jurisdiction.
The authorities under the Act as well as the High Court under articles 226 and 227, re jected the company 's contention.
The High Court took the view that what was exempted by the third item in the notification was not the head office of a mine but the mine itself and consequently the employees of the head office were governed by the Act.
The company appealed to the Supreme Court by special leave.
HELD : The notification in question said that the Act would come into force on 21st November, 1947 "in all the industries except the following" and then went on to name four industries the third one being 'Mines '.
After the word 'following ' the, word industries must be read and thus read the notification in effect said the Act would come into effect on the given date in all industries except the industries mentioned.
Therefore it was not only mines but the mining industry itself that was exempted from the operation of the Act.
[593 A B, D E] If the notification exempted the industry of mines or the mining industry it could not be said that it merely exempted that part of the said industry of mines or mining industry which consisted of raising coat at the colliery and did not include the head office thereof.
As the High Court said, the head office was part of the integrated activity of the company.
Therefore when the mining industry was exempted from the operation of the Act the exemption applied not only to that part of the industry which consisted of raising coal at the colliery but also to that part of it which consisted in the sale of coal and its supply to the customers and would thus include the head office also.
[593 E G] M/s.
Godavari Sugar Mills Ltd. vs D. K. Worlikar, A.I.R. and M/s. Serajuddin and Co. vs Their Workmen, [1962] 3.
S.C.R. 934, distinguished.
On the above view the Assistant Labour Commissioner had no jurisdiction under the Act to deal with the matter in question.
[595 E]
