The accused were charged under section 392, Indian Penal Code in the Court of a Magistrate.
The prosecution failed in its attempt to have the procedure under Ch.
XVIII, Code of Criminal Procedure adopted.
After 15 months, the prosecution made an application to the Magistrate to frame a charge under section 386 or section 387 Indian Penal Code (which are exclusively triable by a Court of Sessions) and to commit the accused to the Court of Sessions, which was refused.
Thereafter a second application was made for committing the case to the Court of Sessions.
This, too, was rejected by the Magistrate.
Immediately thereafter, one of the informants, filed a revision which the Sessions Judge allowed being of the view that the framing of charges under section 386 or 387, I.P.C. could not be ruled out altogether and directed the Magistrate to commit the accused to the Court of Sessions.
The appellants preferred revision to the High Court, contending that the Sessions Judge had no jurisdiction to pass an order for commitment as there was no order of discharge by the Magistrate.
The High Court rejected the revision application.
In appeal to this Court HELD : There is nothing in the language of section 437 of the Code of Criminal Procedure from which it could be said that this power is not exercisable during the pendency of a trial before a Magistrate or that this power can be exercised only where Magistrate had made an express order of discharge.
The provisions of the Code indicate that an express order of discharge is contemplated only in a case where a Magistrate comes to the conclusion that the act alleged against the accused does not amount to any offence at all and, therefore, no question of trying him either himself or by another court arises.
Where on a certain set of facts the accused is alleged by the prosecution to have committed an offence exclusively triable by a Court of Sessions but the Magistrate is of the opinion that the offence disclosed is only an offence which he is himself competent to try and either acquits or convicts him there is an end of the matter in so far as the very set of acts are concerned.
The facts may disclose really a very grave offence such as, say, one under section 302 I.P.C. but the Magistrate thinks that the offence falls under section 304A which he can try and after trying the accused either convicts or acquits him.
In either case the result would be that the appropriate court will be prevented from trying the accused for the grave: offence which those very facts disclose.
It is to obviate such a consequence and to prevent inferior courts from clutching at jurisdiction that the provisions of section 437, Criminal Procedure Code have been enacted.
G] Nahar Singh vs State, I.L.R. (1952) 2 All.
152, Sri Dulap Singh Ors.
vs State through Sri Harnandan Singh A.I.R. 1954 All. 163 and Sambhu Charan Mandal vs the State , disapproved.
741 In re : Nalla Baligadu, A.T.R. , Rambalam Pd.
Singh vs State of Bihar, A.I.R. 1960 Patna 507, Krishnareddi vs Subbamma,I.L.R. Shambhooram vs Emperor, A.I.R. 1935 Sind 221,Sultan Al; vs Emperor, A.I.R. 1934 Lahore 164 and In re Valturu Narayan Reddy & Ors.
A.I.R. 1955 Andhra 48.
, approved.
Yunus Shaikh vs
The State, A.I.R. 1953 Cal.567 distinguished.
The provisions of section 437, however, do not make it obligatory upon a Sessions Judge or a District Magistrate to order commitment in every case where an offence is exclusively triable by a Court of Sessions.
The law gives a discretion to the revising authority and that discretion has to be exercised judicially.
[750 B] Considering the delay in moving the Sessions Judge, the terrible harassment that the accused would be called upon to face if the Magistrate were to commit them for trial by a Court of Sessions now, and further that it was a private party who had no locus standi that went up in revision before the Sessions judge after the last attempt by the prosecution had failed, it was injudicious for the Sessions Judge to order the commitment of the accused, [150 F H; 751 B C]
