Samples of a certain brand of tinned condensed milk were taken from the appellants ' shop by the Food Inspector.
The Public Analyst found the fat content of the condensed milk below standard.
When prosecuted under section 16(1) (a) (i) of the the appellants took a plea based on section 19(2) of the Act and claimed that the label on the tins was a warranty within the meaning of that section as well as of the proviso to Rule 12 A.
The label on the tins described the milk as "Full cream sweetened condensed milk made on formula of Holland product ' and inter alia said : "The contents of the tin are scientifically preserved, pure and produced from healthy cow 's milk." The trial Magistrate accepted the appellants ' plea and acquitted them but on appeal by the State the High Court convicted them.
They appealed to this Court with certificate.
HELD : (i) Defence under section 19(2) of the Act was available to the appellants provided they showed in the first place, that what was stored by them for sale to the purchasers demanding condensed milk was in fact milk which had been concentrated from full cream milk so as to conform to the standard of quality given in A 11.07 of Appendix B. For, it would be milk which satisfies the standard prescribed therein which can be regarded as 'condensed milk ' under the Act.
Since however the milk stored by the appellants was found to be below standard it could not be regarded as 'the same in nature, substance and quality as that demanded by the purchaser '.
Nor again had the appellants obtained a warranty in the prescribed form.
Thus the requirements of s.19 (2) (i) were not satisfied.
[819 B C] (ii) No doubt, under the proviso to Rule 12 A no warranty in the prescribed farm is necessary if the label on the article of food or cash memo delivered by the trader to the vendor in respect of that article contains a warranty certifying that the food contained in the container or mentioned in the cash memo is the same in nature, substance and quality as demanded by the vendor.
But the labels on the tins stared by the appellants contained no warranty of the kind referred to in the proviso.
The labels were not in the form prescribed under r. 42B(b) and it was not possible from the matter printed thereon to ascertain by reference to standard tables the quantity of milk solids and fat from the quantity of milk condensed and from the quantity of condensed milk contained in the tin.
[819 D 820 D] (iii)The words "Full cream" on the tin did not satisfy the requirements of the law either. 'Full cream ' has nowhere been defined in the Act or the rules.
Without knowing the quantity of 'full cream ' which 816 was condensed in the milk contained in each tin it was impossible even to calculate the quantity of milk solids and fat in each tin.
The label therefore was of little assistance to the appellants.
[820 D E] Similarly the cash memos carried no warranty whatsoever.
(iv) When a vendor accepts from the trader tins purported to be of condensed milk hearing a label of the above kind he cannot be said to have "had no reason to believe" that it was not condensed milk of the prescribed nature, substance and quality.
It may be that the appellants sold the tins in the same state as they purchased them.
But this fact was by itself not sufficient to absolve them.
[820 F] Per Bachawat, J The defence under section 19(2) of the Act could not succeed as the appellants failed to prove that they purchased the articles of food with a written warranty in the prescribed form.
The label on the tin container gave a description of the article of food but it did not give a warranty certifying that the food was the same in nature, substance and quality as demanded by the vendor.
In the absence of such a warranty.
the appellants had failed to establish the defence under section 19(2) read with r. 12 A and Form VI A. [821 A B.]
