On 26th January 1950, the United Khasi Jaintia Hills District was formed as one of the Tribal Areas of Assam.
The area along with other Tribal Areas mentioned in Parts A and B of the Table appended to paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution, are governed by the provisions prescribed by that Schedule.
Under Paragraph 2(4) of the Schedule, the administration of the United Khasi Jaintia Hills District vested in the District Council inaugurated on 27th June 1952.
The appellant was elected as Chief Executive Member of the District Council in March 1963, and by various notifications the term of the District Council has been extended up to 2nd May 1965.
On 26th August 1963, the Governor of Assam appointed a Commission under paragraph 14(1) to examine and report on the creation of a new autono mous district for the people of Jowai sub division and for excluding it from the United Khasi Jaintia Hills District.
The Commission made its report for such creation and exclusion on 20th January 1964.
The Council of Ministers considered the 'report, decided to accept the recommendation, drew up an explanatory memorandum as required by paragraph 14(2) of the Schedule and sent the entire file to the Governor who noted on it "seen thanks".
The Minister in charge, then laid the report of the Commission and the explanatory memorandum, stating that the Government had decided to accept the recommendation of the Governor on the report, before the Assembly, and the Assembly passed a resolution approving the action proposed.
On 23rd November 1964, the Governor issued a Notification by which the new autonomous district was created and was "eluded from the United Khasi Jaintia Hills District with effect from 1st December 1964.
The appellant challenged the Notification by a petition for the issue of a writ in the High Court., which was dismissed.
In appeal to this Court, it was contended that : (i) Paragraph 1(3) of the Schedule does not confer upon the Governor power to constitute a new autonomous district and that it could be done only by Parliamentary legislation under Paragraph 21 of the Schedule under which powers are granted to Parliament to amend the Schedule and even if be had the Dower, the Governor 's decision must be confirmed by Parliamentary legislation; and (ii) the Notification was invalid because the mandatory provisions of paragraph 14 bad not been complied with.
HELD (Per Chief Justice, Wanchoo, Ramaswami and Satyanarayana Raju, JJ.):(i) When paragraph 1(3)(c) provides that the Governor may, by public notification, create a new autonomous districts; it does not contemplate, that the Constitution requires something more to be done by Parliament, in order to make the notification effective.
[782 A] 771 Paragraph 1(3) confers on the Governor power to issue a notification for the purposes of bringing about any of the results enumerated by cls.
(a) to (g) of the paragraph.
Clause (c) refers to the power of Governor to create a new autonomous district; cl.
(e) refers to the power to diminish the area of any autonomous district, and cl.
(g) refers to the power to define the boundaries of any autonomous district.
The proviso to the paragraph imposes a condition on the exercise of the powers conferred by cls.
(c) to (f) by requiring the Governor before exercising the powers to appoint a Commission under Paragraph 14(1) to report on those matters and then to consider its report Paragraph 1(3) indicates that the Constitution has delegated to the Governor a part of the power conferred on Parliament itself by paragraph 21.
If the Governor has been clothed with the relevant power, the exercise of the power must by itself, be effective to bring about the results intended by cis.
(c) to (i) of paragraph 1(3).
The power must be exercised subject to The condition prescribed by the proviso, but once it is properly exercised it becomes effective and there is no need for parliamentary legislation in that behalf.
[780 H; 781 A B, C D; 782 B, C D] The two Acts, namely Act 18 of 1954 and Act 42 of 1957, one for renaming a District and the other for excluding an item from Part A and including it in Part B, do not show any legislative practice requiring parliamentary legislation with respect to the matters covered by the Notification.
[782 G; 783 D] It is not necessary that for an effective exercise of his power by the Governor there should be confirmation by Parliamentary legislation, because, the power of Parliament under paragraph 21 is very wide and includes the power to take away the Governor 's power, and in the very unlikely event of the Governor attempting to challenge the decision of Parliament in respect of any of the matters mentioned in Paragraph 1(3), Parliament can take away his power altogether by suitable legislation.[783 F] The modification made by the impugned Notification does not affect the contents of paragraph 20(1), because, even after the Notification the paragraph truly and correctly provides that the areas specified in Parts A and B of the table shall be tribal areas within the State.
What the Notification purports to do is to change one item into two.
Since the power to bring about the change is expressly conferred on the Governor by paragraph 1(3)(c) to (g), the exercise of that power, which leads to a consequential change in paragraph 20(2) which just gives a description of the areas, does not require Parliamentary legislation to make the change effective.
Therefore, it would not be reasonable to hold that without Parliamentary legislation the impugned Notification cannot validly effect any change in item 1 of Part A of the table appended to paragraph 20.
[784 C E, H; 786 B, C] (ii) The power conferred on the Governor by paragraph 1(3) had been validly and properly exercised by him.
One of the conditions prescribed by paragraph 14 is that the Governor should consider the report submitted by the Commission and make his recommendations.
Even if the Governor was expected to apply his mind and make a recommendation.
, he is not precluded from receiving the assistance of the Council of Ministers before he makes up his mind, and on the record it must be held that the Commission recommended that a new autonomous district should be created and that the Governor agreed with the recommendation.
B] Though the Commission appointed under paragraph 14 used the words "District Council" on considering its recommendations as a whole 772 there is no doubt that what it recommended was the creation of a new autonomous district.
[787 F G] Per Hidayatullah, J. (dissenting) : No action could be effective without Parliamentary legislation under Paragraph 21 to amend the operative portion of paragraph 20 which Parliament alone can amend, Further, the Governor, far from playing the key role which the policy underlying the Schedule envisages, left the entire matter to the Government.
(i) When the final step is taken to divide a tribal area it amends the Sixth Schedule.
Paragraph 1(3) says nothing about the amendment of paragraph 20, and the Governor has no power under cls.
(c), (d) and (e) to amend the paragraph or the Table appended to it.
A power to amend paragraph 20 and an amendment of the.
paragraph and the table cannot be implied, in view of paragraph 21, under which powers are granted to Parliament to amend the Schedule.
Even if it is not an amendment for purposes of article 368, the amendment cannot be such a simple affair that a Notification of the Governor amends the provisions by implication.
If the Notification alone did that there would be antinomy between the Notification and the Schedule.
Paragraph 20 and the Table will remain unaltered and the Notification will render them obsolete.
Therefore, to complete the chain of steps the power under paragraph 21 must be exercised to alter the autonomous districts. the names and areas of which are laid down by Parliament.
The Governor 's Notification is one of the means of achieving the change but effectiveness can only be given by Parliament as it was done on previous occasions when Act 18 of 1954 and Act 42 of 1957 were passed.
There is no material as to what the practice or procedure was that was followed when changes were made in the tribal areas, except that on previous occasions Parliamentary legislation was undertaken, and while it is not conclusive, it is a circumstance which also points in the direction that Parliamentary legislation must cap all other steps if the Schedule is to read true to the new situation.
[803 C,F H; 804 F H; 813 FIH] (ii) The history of these backward tracts and the scheme of 'he Sixth Schedule show that the Governor is intended to discharge special functions in the administration of the tribal areas in Assam in which a start in democratic institution is being made.
In the present case the Governor was very much in the background and the information and formation of opinion was by the State Government.
He was only informed after everything was over.
E] The functions of the Governor are not made subject to the scrutiny of the Government of Assam, and the Union also has not been given the power to give directions as to the administration of these autonomous districts.
The Governor is expected to act independently and not with the advice of Ministers.
Should difference arise between them the legis lature would decide.
Under paragraph 14(2) there is provision for the appointment of Commissions for various purposes mentioned in that paragraph and paragraph 16.
As regards the changes in autonomous districts contemplated by paragraph 1(3)(c) to (f), if the State Government agreed with the Governor there would be no need to explain what action the Government was going to take; it has only to implement the decision administratively and the Governor would notify the changer.
The need for an explanatory memorandum arises if the Governor 's recommendations are not accepted by the State Government.
Apart from this control by the Legislature in specified matters, there is nothing to ,show that in addition the District and Regional Councils, which are autonomous in almost every way, are to be controlled by the Council of 773 Ministers through the Governor.
The Governor 's note hardly squared with the special responsibilities contemplated by the Schedule.
[805 D E; 810 G; 811 B, D G; 812 A, F] Even in the Commission 's recommendation there was some confusion, though it may be conceded that when reference was made to a council, an autonomous district was meant.
[813 D]
