In 1941 the appellant Municipal Board issued a notification under section 128 (1) (xiv) of the U.P. Municipalities Act,, 1916, by which it imposed a toll on motor vehicles and tongas entering or leaving the municipal limits with passengers, at the rate of 2 as per passenger.
In 1955, a second notification was issued under section 128(1)(vii) by which the toll was increased from 2 as.
to 4 as.
The respondents, who were owners of motor vehicles, filed petitions under ArT 226 challenging the toll.
Thereafter, a third notification was issued under section 128(1)(xiv) by which the description of the toll was amended.
A single judge of the High Court held that the toll could not be levied on vehicles leaving the municipal limits and issued a writ prohibiting the collecting of toll on such Vehicles.
On appeal, a Divisional Bench of the High Court held that toll could also be levied on vehicles leaving the municipality, but it could not be levied on the same vehicle if the toll had been levied on its entry into the municipality.
In this Court, it was contended by the appellant that, cl.
(xiv) being residuary and enabling, brought the full amplitude of the power of the State Legislature or levy toll to the aid of el.
(vii), and therefore, according to the concept of a toll it could be levied on vehicles both on entering into and departing from the municipality.
HELD:Section 128(1) (vii) which enabled the levy of toll on a vehicle entering the municipality, exhausted all the power delegated by the Legislature to the appellant and that power could not be extended either by the considerations derived from the nature of tolls or from the residuary el.
(xiv).
Therefore, the toll could be collected only from vehicles entering the municipality.
The distinction made by the Divisional Bench between vehicles which pay toll on entering and which do not pay any toll till leaving was irrelevant, because the question of vehicles leaving the municipality could not enter the discussion.
[897 B F] Since the tolls were first imposed in 1941, el.
(xiv) must be viewed in the light of the Constitution Act of 1935.
The scheme of section 128 of the U.P. Act is that it enumerates certain taxes and confers powers on municipalities to levy them and then it enacts el.
(xiv) which is intended to cover the taxes not enumerated which the Provincial Legislature had authority to impose.
The relevant powers of theprovincial Legislature were found in Entries 52 and 53 of the Provincial Legislative List of the Constitution Act of 1935.
Entry 52 could not be relied did not enable the Provincial Legislature to impose taxes carried over inland routes.
The power which flowed from made over to the appellant to be exercised in the particular in el.
(vii), that is, on vehicles entering the municipality, the tolls to be levied on vehicles leaving the municipality el.
(vii) ineffective.
[895 A C, E G, H] on because it on passengers Entry 53 was manner stated and to permit would render 892 The power of the State Legislature derivable from Entries 56 and 59 of the State List of the Constitution was not available for the second notification because, while Entry 56 permitted tax on passengers, the toll was not a tax on passengers but on vehicles; and the power to levy tons under Entry 59 continued to be restricted to vehicles entering the municipality.
Besides, cl.
(vii) under which it was issued limited the power to vehicles entering the municipality.
The third notification was irrelevant, as was issued after the petitions were filed.
[896 A C]
