The respondent company obtained under an agreement with the Ruler of the erstwhile State of Dharampur an exemption from levy of income tax and super tax for the first seven years of its working.
it commenced business in June 1949.
In August 1949 the State of Dharampur merged with the Province of Bombay.
The company then applied for and obtained under para 15 of the Merged States (Taxation Concession) Order, 1949, an exemption from income tax and supper tax for five years commencing from April, 1950.
In the assessment year 1956 57 when the company was to be assessed under the Indian Incometax Act, 1922, for the first time, it claimed that as no depreciation had actually been allowed to it earlier the original cost of its machinery etc. should be taken as the written down value for the purpose of calculating the allowable depreciation.
The assessing and appellate authorities held against the company but the High Court held in its favour.
In appeal to this Court by the Revenue it was contended that (1) on a proper interpretation of section 10(5)(b) of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922 the depreciation must be deemed to, have been allowed to the assessee in the years in which its income was exempted and (2) the concession given by the Commissioner must be deemed to be a continuation of the agreement with the Ruler and therefore the Taxation Laws (Merged States) (Removal of difficulties) Order 1949 as amended by the Taxation Laws (Merged States) (Removal of Difficulties) (Amendment Order,), 1962 applied to the facts of the case.
HELD: (i) The words 'actually allowed ' in section 10(5)(b) did not include any notional allowance and the High Court had rightly decided that the original cost was the written down value.
[862 C] Commissioner of Income tax, Madhya Pradesh vs M/s. Straw Products Limited, Bhopal, [1966] S.C.R. applied.
(ii) The exemption granted to the company under para.
15 of the Merged States (Taxation Concession) Order, 1949 was an exemption under section 60A of the Income tax Act and not under any agreement.
The case of the assessee had therefore to be determined with reference to section 10(5)(b) of the Act unaffected by the amendment made by the 1962 Order.
[862 G]
