M executed a document exhibit B 1 on May 28, 1946, in respect of his half share in certain lands in favour of the defendant for a consideration of Rs. 4,000/ .
The document was in the form of a sale deed but it contained a stipulation that the defendant should reconvey the property to M on his repaying the amount of Rs. 4,000/ after five years and before the end of the seventh year.
After M 's death his sons executed an assignment deed in favour of the plaintiff in August 1950 for a sum of Rs. 1,600/ and on the basis of this deed, the plaintiff filed a suit for re demption of the disputed property.
He claimed, inter alia, that exhibit B 1 must be deemed in law to be a mortgage by conditional sale and that he was entitled to redeem as the assignee of the equity of redemption; or alternatively, that exhibit B 1 was a sale with a condition to repurchase and the defendant was bound to reconvey the property to him on payment of Rs. 4,000/ and that although this amount had been tendered several times, the defendant had refused to accept it.
On the other hand the defendant denied that exhibit B 1 was a mortgage by conditional sale and contended that it was an outright sale with a covenant for repurchase and as the plaintiff did not tender the amount within the time stipulated in the document, the suit was barred by time.
The trial court held that exhibit B 1 was a mortgage by conditional sale and granted a preliminary decree; but the High Court, in appeal, reversed this decision.
On appeal to this Court, HELD : exhibit B 1 was a transaction of mortgage by conditional sale and not a sale with a condition for retransfer.
The question whether by the incorporation of a condition a transaction ostensibly of sale may be regarded as a mortgage is one of intention of the parties to be gathered from the language of the deed interpreted in the light of the surrounding circumstances.
The definition of a mortgage by conditional sale postulates the creation by the transfer of a relation of mortgagor and mortgagee, the price being charged on the property conveyed.
In a sale coupled with an agreement to reconvey there is no relation of debtor and creditor nor is the price charged upon the property conveyed, but the sale is subject to an obligation to retransfer the property within the period specified.
The distinction between the two transactions is the relationship of debtor and creditor and the transfer being a security for the debt.
[921 C F] In the present case the following circumstances indicated that the transaction was a mortgage by conditional sale : (i) As required by the proviso to section 58(c).
the condition for repurchase was embodied in the same document; (ii) the consideration for exhibit B 1 was Rs. 4,000/. while the real value of the property was Rs. 8,000/ ; 919 (iii)the patta was not transferred to the defendant after the execution of exhibit B 1 by M; (iv) M, and after his death, his sons, continued to pay kist for the land; and (v) the consideration for reconveyance was the same amount as the consideration for exhibit B 1, i.e. Rs. 4,000/ .
[923 B G]
