In February, 1963, the first respondent, Regional Transport Authority, granted a permit to the third respondent for running a town bus service in Raipur, but as the latter was unable to.
put the service into operation, the permit was revoked in September, 1964.
Thereafter, the first respondent granted a temporary permit to the appellant for a period of two months and in November, 1964 pending the grant of a permit for permanent regular operations, granted a second temporary permit to the appellant for four months.
The third respondent thereupon filed a petition in the High Court for a writ of certiorari to quash the order of the first respondent granting a temporary permit to the appellant on the ground, inter alia, that such grant was in violation of section 62 of the Motor Vehicles Act.
The High Court allowed the petition, being of the view that a temporary permit could not be granted for any route when there was a permanent need for providing transport facilities on that route and it had been decided to invite applications for that purpose.
In the appeal before this Court, it was also contended that the provision in section 62 that a temporary permit could be granted for a period not "in any case" to exceed four months meant that under no circumstances could a temporary permit be granted on any route for more than a total period of four months.
On the other hand, it was the appellant 's contention that in the circumstances of the case, there was a "particular temporary need" within the meaning of section 62(c) and the High Court was in error in taking the view that whenever there was a permanent need, there could be no temporary need.
HELD: (i) The Regional Transport Authority was right as a matter of law in granting a temporary permit to the appellant under section 62(c) of the Act in the circumstances of the case.
[790 C] After the regular permit granted to the third respondent was ,cancelled, in view of a shortage of transport vehicles on the route the Regional Transport Authority thought it fit to provide for this temporary need until permanent regular operations could be introduced in accordance with the procedure prescribed in section 57.
There was no reason why the clause "to meet a particular temporary need" should be given any special or restricted meaning.
There is no antithesis between a particular temporary need and a permanent need and it is manifest that these two kinds of need may co exist on a particular route.
[789 G H] 786 787 (ii) The words "in any case" in section 62 do not mean "in any circumstance".
The section means that at any one time the Transport Authority is not permitted to issue to any person a temporary permit for a period exceeding 4 months; but if the temporary need persists then, except where an abuse of the power is shown, it would be permissible to grant a second temporary permit to meet the temporary need.
[790 D F] Jairam Dass vs Regional Transport Authority, I.L.R. ; Chandi Prasad Mahajan vs The Regional Transport Authority, Gauhati, I.L.R., , approved.
Sri Rama Vilas Service Ltd. vs The Road Traffic Board, Madras, A.I.R., 1948 Madras 400, Balagangadharan vs Regional Transport Board, Quilon, A.I.R., 1958, Kerala 144, Shah Transport Co., Chhindwara vs The State of Madhya Pradesh, A.I.R., 1952 Nagpur 363, Mallasattappa vs The Chairman, Regional Transport Authority, Bangalore, A.I.R., , disapproved.
