The appellant, who was a permanent employee of the respondent State Transport Corporation, proceeded on 15 days ' leave on January 15, 1962 and thereafter applied for an extension of his leave on medical grounds.
This extension was refused and although the appellant was directed to report for duty immediately, he continued to be absent and wrote to the respondent on March 3, 1963, intimating him of his inability to join duty as he was still not well.
By an order of the respondent dated March 9, 1962, the appellant 's services were terminated with effect from January 16, 1962 on the ground of long absence.
After his representations and an appeal to higher authorities in the ;Corporation had been rejected, the appellant filed a petition for a writ of Certiorari to quash the dismissal order, but this petition was dismissed in limine.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant that in accordance with Clauses 4(b), 38 and 40 of Schedule A to the Regulations governing his service conditions, a charge should have been framed against him and that be was entitled to an opportunity to show cause against the proposed 'punishment.
On the other hand it was the respondents ' contention that though the order of dismissal referred to long absence as the cause of termination, the termination itself was not by way of punishment and the only right of the appellant under Regulation 61 was to two months ' notice in lieu of pay; and that an examination of the correspondence and the circumstances of the case showed that the appellant had been given to opportunity to show cause and that there was in fact and in substance compliance with the rules of natural justice.
HELD : The order of termination passed against the appellant must be quashed as it was bad in law since it contravened the provisions of cl. 4(b) of the Regulations and also the principles of natural justice.
[44 B] Clauses 38 and 40 provided that absence without leave and without reasonable cause, and failure, without sufficient cause. to report for duty when directed amount to acts of misconduct.
Under clause 4(b) it was therefore obligatory on the part of the respondent to give the appellant a reasonable opportunity to show cause, by providing him with a copy of the charge or charges as well as the statement of the allegations that had been made against him.
