The respondent was employed in the Southern Railway as Train Examiner in the scale of Rs. 100 5 125 6 185.
He was promoted to officiate in the next higher scale of Rs. 150 225.
Subsequently he was reverted to the lower scale, and his departmental representations and appeals having failed, he filed a writ petition under article 226 of the Constitution.
The High Court held that the reversion of the respondent amounted to a reduction in rank because he was reverted from the higher post to the lower post notwithstanding the fact that his juniors were still retained in the higher posts.
As this reduction of rank was in violation of article 311(2) the High Court granted the writ prayed for.
The Divisional Personnel Officer, Southern Railway appealed to this Court by special leave.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant that the High Court had misunderstood the ratio of the judgment of this Court in Vaikunthe 's case and that the respondent had not suffered any reduction in rank within the meaning of article 311(2).
HELD : (i) The reversion of a Government servant from an officiating post to his substantive post, while his junior is officiating in higher post, does not, by itself, constitute a reduction in rank within the meaning of article 311(2) of the Constitution.
[110 D] (ii) An important aspect of the decision in Vaikunthe 's case was lost sight of by the High Court.
The real ground on which Vaikunthe 's reversion to his original post of mamlatdar was held to be a violation of his constitutional guarantee was that his chances of promotion were irrevocably barred for a period of three years.
There was no such bar on promotion in the present case.
[114 E] Madhav Laxman Vaikunthe vs State of Mysore, [1962] 1 S.C.R. 886, distinguished.
(iii) The respondent 's complaint was that he had lost his seniority by reason of the retention of his juniors in the officiating higher post.
But his rank in the substantive post i.e. in the lower grade, was in no way affected by this.
In the substantive grade the respondent retained his rank and was not visited with any penal consequences.
The respondent had no right to the post to which he was provisionally promoted.
His reversion in these circumstances did not amount to reduction in rank.
[118 G 119 A] 107 Parshotam Lal Dhingra vs Union of India, ; , State of Bombay vs F. A. Abraham, [1962] Supp. 2 S.C.R. 92 and The High Court, Calcutta vs Amal Kumar Roy, ; , 'relied on.
P. C. Wadhwa vs Union of India, , distinguished.
M. A. Waheed vs State of Madhya Pradesh, [1954] Nag.
L. J. 305, referred to.
