The appellants, who are the followers of the Swaminarayan sect and known at Satsangis, filed a representative suit: (i) for a declaration that the relevant provisions of the Bombay Harijan Temple Entry Act, 1947, as amended by Act 77 of 1948, did not apply to their temples, because, the religion of the Swaminarayan sect was distinct and different from Hindu religion and because, the relevant provisions of the Act, were ultra vires, and (ii) for an injunction restraining the 1st respondent and other non Satsangi Harijans from entering the Swaminarayan temple.
The Trial Court decreed the suit.
Pending the 1st respondent 's appeal in the High Court, the Bombay Hindu Places of Public Worship (Entry Authorisation) Act, 1956, was passed, and since the 1947 Act gave place to the 1956 Act, it became necessary to consider whether the 1956 Act was intra vires.
The High Court allowed the appeal and dismissed the suit holding that the followers of the Swaminarayan sect professed Hindu religion and that the Act of 1956 was constitutionally valid.
In appeal to this Court it was contended that : (i) the High Court erred in treating the 1st respondent 's appeal as competent when the vakalatnama filed on his behalf was invalid (ii) section 3 of the 1956 Act was ultra vires as it contravened article 26(b) of the Constitution; and (iii) the religion of the Swaminarayan sect was distinct and separate from Hindu religion and that therefore the temples belonging to that sect did not fall within the ambit of the 1956 Act.
HELD: (i) The appeal to the High Court was properly presented.
Technically the memorandum of appeal presented by the Assistant Government Pleader on behalf of the 1st respondent suffered from an infirmity, because, the 1st respondent signed the vakalatnama in favour of the Government Pleader.
But, since the Registry had not returned the appeal for correcting the irregularity, and since r. 95 of the Appellate Side Rules of the High Court authorises an advocate to appear even without initially filing a vakalatnama, the High Court was right in allowing the Government Pleader to sign the memorandum of appeal and the vakalatnarna, in order to remove the irregularity.
[251 E G; 252 A C] (ii) There is no substance in the contention that section 3 contravenes article 26(b) of the Constitution and is therefore ultra vires.
243 The right to enter temples which has been vouchsafed to the Harijans by the impugned Act substance symbolises the right of Harijans to enjoys all social amenities and rights, for, social justice is the main foundation of the democratic way of life enshrined in the provisions of the Indian Constitution.
After the Constitution came into force, the whole social and religious outlook of the Hindu community has undergone a fundamental change as a result of the message of social equality and justice proclaimed by the Constitution; and the solemn promise in article 17, abolishing untouchability has been gradually, but irresistibly enforced by the process of law assisted by enlightened public conscience.
All that section 3 of the 1956 Act purports to do is to give the Harijans the same right to enter the temple for darshan of the deity as can be claimed by the other Hindus.
The act of actual worship of the diety is allowed to be performed only by the authorised poojaris of the temple and by no other devotee entering the temple for darshan.
Therefore, it was nont intended to invade the tradition and conventional manner of performing the actual worship of the idol.
(iii) The High Court was right in coming to the conclusion that the religion of the Swaminarayan sect is not, distinct and separate from Hindu religion, and consequently, the temples belonging to the sect did fall within the ambit of section 2 of the Act.
The Indian mind has consistently through the ages, been exercised, over the problem of the nature of godhead, the problem that faces the spirit at the end of life, and the interrelation between the individual and the universal soul.
According to Hindu religion the ultimate goal of humanity is release and freedom from the unceasing cycle of births and rebirths and a state of absorption and assimilation of the individual soul with the infinite.
On the means to attain this and there is a great divergence of views; some emphasise the importance of Gyana, while others extol the virtue of Bhakti or devotion, and yet others insist upon the paramount importance of the performance of duties with a heart full of devotion and in mind inspired by knowledge.
Naturally it was realised by Hindu religion from the very beginning of its career that truth was many sided and different views contained different aspects of truth which no one could fully express.
This knowledge inevitably bred a spirit of tolerance and willingness to understand and appreciate the opponent 's point of view.
Because of this broad sweep of Hindu philosophic concept under Hindu philosophy, there is no scope for excommunicating any notion or principle as heretical and rejecting it as such.
The development of Hindu religion and philosophy shows that from time to time saints and religious reformers attempted to remove from Hindu thought and practices, elements of corruption and superstition, and revolted against the dominance of rituals and the power of the priestly class with which it came to be associated; and that led to the formation of different sects.
in the teaching of these saintns and religious reformers is noticeable a certain amount of divergence in their respective views; but underneath that divergence lie certain broad concepts which can be treated as basic, and there is a kind of subtle indescribable unity which keeps them within the sweep of broad and progressive Hindu religion.
The first among these basic concepts is the acceptance of the Vedas as the highest authority in religious and philosophic matters.
This concept necessarily implies that all the systems claim to have drawn their principles from a common, reservoir of thought enshrined in the Vedas.
Unlike other religions in the world, the Hindu religion does not claim any one prophet; it does no( worship any one God; it does not subscribe to any one dogma;it does 244 not believe in any one philosophic concept; it does not follow any one set of religious rites or performances; in fact, it does not satisfy the traditional features of a religion or creed.
It is a way of life and nothing more.
The Constitution makers were fully conscious, of the broad and comprehensive character of Hindu religion; and while guaranteeing the fundamental right to freedom of religion made it clear that reference to Hindus shall be construed as including a reference to persons professing the Sikh, Jaina or Buddhist religion.
Philosophically, Swaminarayan was a follower of Ramanuja and the essence of his teachings is acceptance of the Vedas with reverence, recognition of the fact that the path of Bhakti or devotion leads to Maksha, insistence or devotion to Loard Krishna and a determination to remove corrupt practices and restore Hindu Religion to its original glory and purity.
This shows unambiguously and unequivocally that Swaminarayan was a Hindu saint.
Further, the facts that initiation is necessary to become a Satsangi, that persons of other religions could join the sect by initiation without any process of proselytising on such occasions, and that Swaminarayan himself is treated as a God, are not inconsistent with the basic Hindu religious and philosophic theory.
