As a result of the 'Indo Pakistan Agreements ' entered into in 1956 between the Prime Ministers of India and Pakistan half of the area known as Barubari Union No. 12, and a portion of Chilahati village admeasuring 512 acres were agreed to be transferred by India to Pakistan.
Certain questions arising out of the implementation of the sand Agreements were referred by the President under article 143 (1) of the Constitution, to this Court, and were answered by this Court in Special Reference No. 1 of 1959.
In accordance with the answers therein given, Parliament passed the Constitution (Ninth Amendment) Act, 1960.
There was provision in the Act for a date, to be appointed by notification in the Official Gazette, for the transfer of the areas in question of Pakistan.
In regard to Berubari Union No. 12 the Second Schedule to the Amending Act, inter alia, This will be so divided as to give half the area to Pakistan, the half adjacent to India being retained by India.
The division of Berubari Union No. 12 will be horizontal, starting from the north east comer of Debiganj Thana.
" The appellants filed a writ petition in the High Court of Calcutta challenging the legality of the proposed transfer of the said areas of Berbubari Union No. 12 and Chilahati village to Pakistan.
The language of the Amending Act in regard to Berubari Union No., 12 was, they urged, so confused that it was incapable to implementation.
In regard to Chilahati village they urged that it was outside the Radcliffe Award.
Reliance was placed by them on an unofficial map, Ext.
The High Court found that Ext.
A 1 was inadmissible and unreliable.
Relying on the maps produced by the respondents it dismissed the writ petition filed by the appellants who, with certificate, appealed to this Court.
It was urged on behalf of the appellants : (1) If the division of Barubari Union No. 12 was made as directed by the said amendment no portion of Berubari Union No. 12 would fall to the south of the horizontal line starting from the north cast corner of Debiganj Thana, so that no part of the said Union could be transferred to Pakistan.
(2) The High Court erred in holding that map Ext.
A 1 was neither relevant nor accurate.
(3) The location of different villages in the various Thanas was a matter within the special knowledge of the respondents and under section 106 of the Evidence Act the onus of proving the relevant facts was on the respondents.
(4) The portion of Chilabati village in question was different from the village of Chilabati which bad gone to Pakistan under the Radcliffe Award, as was shown not only by maps but by certain private documents which described Chilabati as part of Jalpaiguri Thana.
(5) Entry 13 in the First Schedule to the Constitution provides, inter alia, that West Bengal means the territories which immediately before the commencement of the Constitution were either comprised in the Province of West Bengal or were being administered 'as if ' they formed part of that Province. 'Me portion of Chilahati in question was being administered 'as if ' it was a part of the Province of West Bengal and must be deemed to have been included 431 in the territory of West Bengal within the meaning of the First Schedule,, and if that was so, it was a part of the territory of India under article 1 of the Constitution.
It could not therefore be ceded to Pakistan without following the, procedure laid down by this Court in Special Reference No. 1 of 1959.
(6) In any case Pakistan 's title to Chilahati had been lost by adverse possession.
HELD : (i) It had not been proved that Ext.
A 1, relied on by the appellants, was generally offered for public sale.
The requirements of section 36 of the Evidence Act were thus not satisfied and Ext.
A 1 was irrelevant.
Even if the said map was treated as relevant its accuracy had not been established and no presumption as to its accuracy could be made under section 83 of the Evidence Act, since the requirements laid down in the first part of the section were not satisfied, [440 E H] (ii) Me location of ' villages of different Thanas could not be regarded as a matter within the exclusive knowledge of the respondents so as to attract the provisions of section 106 of the Evidence Act.
Both parties had; produced maps, the High Court refused to accept the maps produced by the appellants and treated the maps produced by the respondents as worthy of credence.
Under the circumstances no question of onus really arose.
[441 G H] (iii) The map produced by them having been rejected by the High Court, the appellants were hardly in a position to contend that they had established their plea that the relevant portion of the Constitution Amendment Act was incapable of implementation.
[442 D E] (iv) When it was said that the division of Berubari Union No. 12. would be 'horizontal ' starting from the north east corner of Debiganj Thana it was not intended that it was to be made by a mathematical line in the manner suggested by the appellants.
The provision did not refer to any line as such, it only indicated broadly the point from which the division was to begin east to west , and it emphasised that in making the said division what had to be borne in mind was the fact that the Union in question was to be divided half and half.
The contentions of the appellants in regard to Berubari Union No. 12 were therefore rightly rejected by the High Court.
[442 H 443 D] (v) The materials on record showed that the contention of the appellants that Chilahati village formed part of Thana Jalpaiguri was incorrect : it clearly lay within Debiganj Thana and under the Radcliffe Award had been allotted to Pakistan.
The private documents produced by the appellants for the purpose of showing that a part of Chilahati village lay in jalpaiguri Thana were rightly rejected by the High Court, as in view of the maps produced by !he respondents it was difficult to attach any importance to the recitals by individuals in their respective documents.
It was plain that through inadvertence a part of village Chilahati was not delivered to Pakistan on the occasion of the partition which followed the Radcliffe Award.
What the respondents proposed to do wag to transfer to Pakistan the area in question which really belonged to her.
This conduct of the respondents spoke of their fair and straightforward approach to this matter.
[444 E 45 D] (vi) The clause 'as if ' in Entry 13 of the First Schedule to the Constitution was not intended to take in cases of territories which were administered with the full knowledge that they did not belong to West Bengal ' and had to be transferred in due course to Pakistan. 'Me said clause was clearly and specifically intended to refer to territories which merged with the adjoining States at the crucial time and so it could not include the part of Chilahati administered by West Bengal.
It would be idle to contend 432 that by virtue of the accidental fact that this area had not been transferred to Pakistan, though it should have been, it had constitutionally and validly become a part of West Bengal itself.
That being so, there could be no question about the constitutional validity of the proposed transfer of this area to Pakistan.
What the respondents were seeking to do was to give to Pakistan what belonged to Pakistan under the Radcliffe Award.
[448 A E] (vii) The Plea of adverse possession was not raised by the appellants in their writ petition.
Besides it was plain that neither the Union of India nor the State of West Bengal, which were impleaded to the present proceedings, made such a claim.
It would indeed be surprising that even though the Union of India and the State of West Bengal expressly said that this area belonged to Pakistan under the Radcliffe Award and had to be delivered to Pakistan, the petitioners should intervene and contend that Pakistan 's title to this property had been lost because West Bengal had been adversely in possession of it.
[448 G H] (viii) In Special Reference No. 1 of 1959 it had been inadvertently assumed while discussing the several clauses of article 3 that the word 'State ' used therein did not include Union Territories.
In view of section 3 (58) (b) of the General Clauses Act (10 of 1897) this assumption was not correct.
However the opinion of the Court in that Reference was not based mainly on the above assumption, but on the view that the power to cede a part of national territory and the power to acquire additional territory were the inherent attributes of sovereignty.
[438 H]
