The appellant 's election to Parliament was challenged by the first respondent on the ground that the nomination papers of the third candidate, W, had been wrongly rejected by the returning officer and this had materially affected the result of the election.
We had filed three nomination papers with one only of which he had filed a copy of the electoral roll of the assembly constituency in purported compliance with section 33(5) of the Representation of the People Act, 1950.
The nomination paper with which W had filed the said copy was rejected on account of technical defects; the other two were rejected because no such copy was filed with them.
The Election Tribunal dismissed the first respondent 's petition holding that the returning officer had rightly rejected the nomination papers of W.
The High Court took the opposite view and set aside the election.
The appellant came to this Court by certificate and contended that W had not complied with section 33(5) because (i) under that section a copy of the electoral roll must be produced with every nomination paper, (ii) W had filed a copy of the electoral roll of the assembly constituency and not of the Parliamentary constituency, (iii) the copy produced was not a complete copy of the relevant 'part ' of the electoral roll.
HELD : (i) The returning officer was wrong in not looking at the copy of the electoral roll filed with one of the nomination papers filed by W when dealing with the other nomination papers filed by him.
Section 33(5) does not require that a copy must be filed with each nomination paper or that any copy should be filed at all, for the candidate is given the alternative to produce before the returning officer such copy at the time of scrutiny.
The purpose of filing the copy is to ensure that the returning officer is able to check whether the candidate concerned is qualified or not and that purpose would be effectively served even if only one copy is filed with one nomination paper and no copies are filed with the other nomination papers by the said candidate.
[547 F 548 D] (ii) The electoral roll for a parliamentary constituency is made up by stitching together the electoral rolls of the assembly constituencies comprised therein.
Therefore if a candidate files a copy of the electoral roll of an assembly constituency that copy is sufficient to show that he is an elector in the parliamentary constituency in which that assembly constituency is included.
W had filed copy of the assembly constituency in which he was recorded as an elector and the High Court was right in rejecting the contention based on the fact that the copy of the roll of the parliamentary constituency was not filed.
[548 G, H] 544 (iii) Under r. 5 of the Registration of Electors Rules, 1960 it is provided that "the roll shall be divided into convenient parts which shall be numbered consecutively".
When a. 33(5) refers to a copy of the relevant parts of the electoral roll it means a part as defined in r. 5.
In producing not the full part but only a portion of the electoral roll in which he was recorded as an elector W did fail to comply with the requirements of section 33(5).
A complete copy would carry the various amendments made in the roll and enable the returning officer to see whether the name of the candidate continued in the roll for the whole of the relevant period.
The High Court was not right in its view that the production of an incomplete copy was not a defect of substantial character which would make the nomination paper liable to be rejected.
The nomination papers of W were rightly rejected by the returning officer though for different reasons.
[549 D; 551 E F]
