The second defendant sold property belonging to himself and his minor son the third defendant.
and also executed an indemnity bond in favour of the vendee agreeing to indemnify him for any loss that might be caused to him in case the sale of the third defendant 's half share should later on be set aside.
vendee sold the property to the plaintiffs and assigned the indemnity bond in their favour and the plaintiffs took possession of the property.
The third defendant, after attaining majority, sued for ,setting aside the sale in respect of his half share and for partition.
The plaintiffs contested the suit but the third defendant 's suit was decreed.
He, however, did not dispossess the plaintiffs.
Meanwhile, a creditor of .the third defendant obtained a money decree against him and in execution ,thereof attached and brought to sale the third defendant 's half share, and, ,the brother in Law of the plaintiffs purchased the property, but ,the plaintiffs continued in possession of the property.
The plaintiffs, thereafter, filed the suit for recovery of half the consideration paid by them, on the allegation that they sustained damage by the loss of one half of the property bought by them, and that they were entitled to recover damages from the second defendant.
The suit was contested on the ground that the court sale in favour of the brothers in law of the plaintiffs was benami for the plaintiffs, and that as the plaintiffs never lost ownership or possession of the halfshare, they did not sustain any loss.
.The trial court decreed the suit.
The High Court, on appeal, confined the decree to the actual loss sustained, namely, the amount for the court sale and the amount spent for the defence of the third defendant 's suit.
In appeal to the Court, on the question of the quantum of damages to which the plaintiffs were entitled, HELD : High Court was right in granting a decree to, the plaintiffs only for the sum which was the actual loss sustained by them.
The sale of the half share of the third defendant was not void ab initio but was only voidable.
In such a case the indemnity bond becomes enforceable only if the vendee is dispossesed from the properties, because, a breach of the covenant can only occur on the disturbance of the vendees possession.
SD long as the vendee remains in possession, he suffers no loss and no suit can be brought for damages either on the basis of the indemnity bond or for the breach of a convenant of the warranty of title.
[610 H 611 B] Subbaroya Reddiar vs Rajagopala Reddiar, Mad. 887 Muhammad Siddiq vs Muhammad Nuh, I.L.R. 52 All. 604 and Gulabchand Daulatram vs Suryaji Rao Ganpatrao, A.I.R. 1950 Bom.
401, approved.
