G was one of a number of partners in a firm which carried on the business of acting as Managing Agents and Selling Agents of a company owning a textile mill in Indore.
Serious disputes arose between the partners and soon thereafter the Directors of the managed company appointed a committee in November 1940, of which the appellant was a member, to inquire into certain allegations made against G and two other partbers of the managing agency firm.
In February 1941, G entered into an agreement with the appellant to sell to him a share in the partnership which was to be transferred to G by virtue of an arbitration award on the disputes between the partners.
In April 1941, the committee gave its final report which was favourable to G although the interim report of December 1940 had not been So favourable.
Upon G failing to transfer the share in the partnership as provided in the agreement of February 1941, the appellant filed a suit against the heirs and legal representatives of G for specific performance of the agreement.
The High Court decreed the appellant 's suit, but on appeal to the Division Bench of the High Court, the decree was set aside.
A further appeal to the Full Bench of the High Court was dismissed.
Both the Division Bench and the Full Bench held that the agreement to sell a share in the partnership was a bribe offered by G to the appellant to write a report favourable to him.
In the appeal to this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellant, inter alia, that there was no evidence in support of the finding relating to bribery arrived at by the Full Bench and that the said finding was based on mere surmises; that the Full Bench had misdirected itself in not adopting a strict standard of proof and that where bribery is alleged in a civil case, the same standard of proof should be required as in a criminal case , that in case of circumstantial evidence, the circumstances must be such so as to exclude any other reasonable possibility and that if this principle was applied to the present case, the finding of bribery must be reversed as the facts were equally consistent with the appellant having acted honestly; and that immorality within Section 23 of the Indian contract Act is confined to sexual immorality.
HELD : On the facts, the Full Bench did not rely on any surmises and its findings were not vitiated.
It is clear from Section 3 of the that the same standard of proof applies in all civil cases.
It makes no difference between cases in which charges of a fraudulent or criminal character are made 624 and cases in which such charges are not made.
But this is not to say that the Court will not, while striking the balance of probability, keep in mind the presumption of honesty or innocence or the nature of crime or fraud charged.
[629 G H] Weston vs Peary Mahan Dass Cal.
898 at 916: disapproved.
Jarat Kumari Dassi vs Bissesur: I.L.R. and Prasannamayt Debya vs Baikuntha Nath Chattoraj: I.L.R. ; referred to.
It cannot be said that rules applicable to circumstantial evidence in criminal cases would apply where a party, in a civil case, is alleged to have accepted a bribe.
The ordinary rules governing civil cases will continue to apply.
[630 E] Raja Singh vs Chachoo Singh : A.I.R. 1940 Patna 210; referred to.
It was unnecessary to consider whether the consideration for the agree.
ment of February 1941 was unmoral or not.
The caw of bribery is covered otherwise by Section 23 of the Contract Act.
[630 G]
