By notifications issued in October 1958, May 1959 and April 1960, the Mysore Public Service Commission invited applications for the recruitment of 80 probationary Assistant Engineers .
The qualifications, pay, age limit and other conditions for eligibility were prescribed by these notifications.
On March 1, 1960, it was notified by the Governor, that for direct recruitment to appointments and posts in the services of the State, reservations for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes would be 15% and 3%; and the reservation for other backward classes would be 25%.
Thereafter, in October and November 1960, the Mysore Public Service Commission interviewed the candidates and sent a list to the Government of 80 candidates selected by them.
On December 3, 1960, the Government of Mysore sanctioned the establishment of the State Service Cadre in respect of the Mysore Public Works Engineering Department Service.
On the same date, in exercise of the powers conferred by the proviso to article 309 the Governor made the rules called the Mysore Public Service Engineering Department Service (Recruitment) Rules 1960.
These Rules prescribed in respect of each category of specified posts the methods of recruitment, whereby only 40% of the appointment could be made after an interview and an oral test and also prescribed the minimum qualifications, age limits, etc.
for Assistant Engineers which were somewhat different from those prescribed in the earlier Notifications of the Mysore Public Service Commission relating to the recruitment of 80 Assistant Engineers.
On October 23, 1961 the Governor made certain amendments to the 1960 Rules the effect of which was to make those rules retrospective with effect from March 1, 1958 and also, to waive the requirements of the rules relating to the percentages for direct recruitment, educational qualifications, and age requirements, etc.
in respect of direct recruitment of Assistant Engineers for the first time.
Thereafter, on October 31, 1961, the Governor appointed 88 candidates as probationary Assistant Engineers.
These appointments were challenged in 16 Writ Petitions filed in the High Court on the grounds inter alia, that (1) in view of Rule 3 of the Mysore State Civil Services 683 (General Recruitment) Rules, 1957, which provided that the method of recruitment and qualifications for each State Civil Service shall be set forth in the rules of recruitment of such service specially made in that behalf, the Government could not recruit the Assistant Engineers without framing the necessary rules; (ii) the State Government could not make rules retrospectively unless it had express powers to do so under the relevant statute; (iii) the appointments which were made on October 31, 1951 had to be made in accordance with the 1960 Rules but in fact were not so made; (iv) some of the appointments were made mala fide.
These writ petitions were allowed by the High Court.
On appeal to this Court, HELD : The appointments of the 88 Assistant Engineers were validly made in the exercise of the executive power of the State under article 162 of the Constitution.
It is not obligatory under the proviso to article 309 to make rules of recruitment etc.
before a service can be constituted or a post created or filled.
The State Government has executive power in relation to all matters with respect to which the Legislature of the State hag power to make laws.
It follows from this that the State Government will have executive power in respect of List 11 Entry 41 "State Public Services".
[686 C E] In this background, Rule 3 of the General Recruitment Rules of 1957 cannot be interpreted as suspending the executive power of the State till rules of recruitment of a service are specially made in that behalf.
[686 G] Ram Jawaya Kapur vs State of Punjab, and T. Cajee vs K. Jormanic Siem, ; , referred to.
Even if it were to be assumed that the rules purported to be made by the State Government had no retrospective validity the position would be that there were no statutory rules governing the appointment of the 88 Assistant Engineers; but that could not prevent the State Government from making valid appointments in the exercise of its executive powers.
[694 P] It cannot be said that the appointments made in October 1960 had to be under statutory rules made on December 3, 1960.
It took about two years for the Public Service Commission to publish notifications, interview candidates and recommend names for appoinment.
The whole procedure having been followed, it could not have been the intention of the Government, while framing the rules, to cover appointments made in pursuance of the recommendations of the Public Service Commission made in November 1960 after interviewing the candidates in October 1960.
[694 G 695 B] On the facts, no mala fide or collateral object had been proved.
The Mysore Public Service Commission (Function) Rules, 1957 are not statutory rules made under article 309.
First.
the rules do not expressly say so; and secondly, they deal with the functions of the Commission rather than with the rules regarding recruitment to services or posts.
[685 E]
