The respondent was the director of a company and also a partner in the firm managing it.
On behalf of the company he made an application for an import licence under the Imports and Exports (Control) Act 1947, and in May 1955 the licence was granted.
At that time the grant of licence was governed by an Order issued in 1948 issued under section 32 of the Act, and under that Order the Controller of Imports and Exports could attach conditions to licences issued by him.
According to the terms of the licence granted to the aforesaid company the goods imported under the licence were to be employed for the company 's own use.
In December 1955 the Imports (Control) Order No. 17 of 1955 was passed.
Under cl.
5(3) of the Order certain conditions were deemed to be part of every licence and under cl.
5(4) every licencee was enjoined to observe the condition of the licence.
In 1956 the respondent secured a revalidation of the licence issued to the company.
Thereafter when the goods arrived they were sold by the respondent to another party.
A complaint was filed against the respondent and the company for an offence under section 5 of the Imports and Exports (Control) Act 1947 read with cl.
(5) of the Imports (Control) Order 1955.
The respondent faced the trial as an accused and participated in the proceedings without any objection.
He was convicted by the trial Magistrate but the High Court acquitted him on the ground that at the time when the transaction of sale was entered into i.e. in December 1956, breach of a condition of licence did not constitute an offence under section 5 of the Act of 1947.
The State appealed to this Court.
The questions that fell for determination were : (i) whether by disposing of the imported goods without permission any offence was committed; and (ii) if so whether the respondent was personally liable.
HELD: (i) Although section 5 of the Imports and Exports (Control) Act, 1947 did not, before its amendment in 1960, specially provide that breach of a condition of licence would be deemed to be a breach of the Imports (Control) Order, yet by virtue of cls.
5(3) and (4) read with cl. 12 of the Imports (Control) Order 1955 the transfer of a licence was a breach of the said order and constituted an offence.
No distinction could validly be made in the circumstances of this case between transfer of a licence and transfer of goods imported under it.
[945 E G; 946 B C] C.T.S. Pillai vs H. P. Lohia & Anr.
A.I.R. 1957 Cal. 83, referred to.
East India Commercial Co. Ltd. Calcutta vs Collector of Customs, Calcutta, ; , distinguished.
934 Stare vs Abdul Aziz ; , applied.
(ii) The fact that the licence was obtained by 'the respondent while the 1948 Order was in operation did not help the respondent as under cl. 12 of the 1955 Order any licence issued under any of the earlier Orders was deemed to have been issued under the corresponding provisions of the 1955 Order.
The goods under the licence were, moreover, imported and sold after 1955.
The licence itself was revalidated in 1956 and that could only have been done by power derived under cl. 7 of the 1955 Order.
[945 B, D] (iii) The respondent was responsible for the issuance of the licence and for the transfer of the goods imported under it.
He was therefore responsible principally along with the company.
The complaint no doubt was not clear as to whom was really meant to be prosecuted but it described the respondent as an accused to which he did not object at his trial.
The error, omission or irregularity, if any, in the complaint was curable under section 537 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and in the present case could not be said to have led to a failure of justice.
[946 E H]
