The respondent was a trader in hider.
and skins and the appellant was an exporter.
During the period January to August 1949, there were several contracts between them.
The contracts mentioned that the appellant was buying the goods for resale in U.K.
The price quoted was C.I.F. less 2 1/2 %.
The contracts also provided that time should be the essence of the contract, that the sales tax was on respondent 's ac count, that the respondent was answerable for weight as well as quality, that there should be a lien on the goods for moneys advanced by the appellant, and that any dispute regarding quality should be settled by arbitration according to the custom of the trade in the U.K.
The course of dealing between them showed that before the goods were shipped they were subjected to a process of trimming and reassortment in the godowns of the appellant with a view to make them conform to London standards, that the goods were marked with the respondent 's mark and that premiums were paid to the respondent in case the goods supplied were of special quality.
The respondent filed a suit on the original side of the High Court praying that an account should be taken of the dealings between himself and the appellant on the ground that the appellant was his agent.
The appellant 's case was, that there was an outright purchase of the respondent 's goods and that the appellant was not an agent of the respon dent.
The trial Judge dismissed the suit.
On appeal the High Court held that the appellant acted as a del credere agent of the respondent and directed the taking of accounts.
In appeal to this Court, it was contended by the appellant that: (i) the terms of the contracts and the course, of dealing between the parties showed that the appellant was not the agent of the respondent but was an outright purchaser of the goods, and (ii) that there was a settled account between the parties which the respondent could not reopen.
HELD:(i) The appellant was the purchaser of the respondent 's goods under the several contracts and not his agent for sale, and therefore, the view taken by the High Court was not correct.
The essence of sale is the transfer of title to the goods for price paid, or to be paid, whereas the essence of the agency to sell is the delivery of the goods to a person who is to sell them, not as his own property but as the property of the principal who continues to be the owner of the goods, and the agent is liable to account for the proceeds.
On the terms of the contract and the course of dealing between the parties, the contract was not one of agency for sale but was an agreement of sale.
The appellant purchased the goods from the respondent 2 1/2% less and sold them to the London purchasers at the full price so that the 2 1/2 % was its margin of profit and not its agency commission.
The fact that the goods were sent with the respondents 2 mark, that the premium was paid outside the terms of the contract, that the appellant considered it fair and just to pay the whole of the premium to the respondent or to share it with him, and that additional burden with respect to weight and quality was thrown on the respondent, have no significance, in deciding the nature of the contract.
The clause with regard to lien is consistent with the transac tion being an outright sale, because the appellant was acting as creditor of the respondent and charged interest on advances only till the date of shipment of the goods when it became the purchaser of the goods from the respondent.
An agent can become a purchaser when the agent pays the price to the principal on his own responsibility.
The clause regarding arbitration in the U.K., though unusual, is not also inconsistent with there being a sale of goods between the parties in India.
[3H 4B; 5G H.] (ii) The accounts were settled between the parties and the respondent could not be allowed to reopen the settled account as there was no proof of fraud, mistake or any other sufficient ground.
Accounts are "settled or started" if they are submitted and accepted as correct by the other side to whom they have been rendered.
For almost every shipment the appellant prepared a full and detailed statement of account and sent it to the respondent.
The account contained items both of credit and debit and the figures on both sides were adjusted between the parties and a balance struck and the respondent accepted their accuracy and never raised any objection to them.
[11H; 14 E F].
Bishnu Chand vs Girdhari Lal, (1934) L. R. 61 I.A. 273 and Laycock vs Pickles, 4 B and S 497, applied.
