Rule 30(1)(b) of the Defence of India Rules, 1962, provided that a State Government might, if it was satisfied with respect to a person that with a view to preventing him from acting in a manner prejudicial, inter alia to "public safety and maintenance of public order" it is necessary to do so, order him to be detained.
A Disrict Magistrate to whom the power of the Government of the State of Bihar had been delegated under section 40(2) of the Defence of India Act, 1962, ordered the detention of the petitioner under the rule.
The order stated that the District Magistrate was satisfied, that with a view to prevent the petitioner from acting in any manner prejudicial to the "public safety and the maintenance of law and order," it was necessary to detain him.
Prior to the making of the order the District Magis trate had, however, recorded a note stating that having read the report of the Police Superintendent that the petitioner 's being at large was prejudicial to "public safety and maintenance of public order", he was satisfied that the petitioner should be detained under the rule.
The petitioner moved this Court under article 32 of the Constitution for a writ of habeas corpus directing his release from detention, contending that : (i) though an order of detention to prevent acts prejudicial to public order may be justifiable an order to prevent acts prejudicial to law and order would not be justified by the rule; (ii) the order mentioned a notification which did not contain the necessary delegation; (iii) the District Magis trate acted beyond his jurisdiction by considering the danger not only in his district but in the entire State; and (iv) all the conditions mentioned in the rule must be cumulatively applied before the order of detention could be made.
The respondent State raised a preliminary objection,that the President of India had made an Order under article 359(1) that the right of a person to move any court for the enforcement of the rights conferred by articles 21 and 22 shall remain suspended for the period during which the proclamation of emergency under article 352 was in force, if such person had been deprived of any such rights under the Defence of India Act or any rule made thereunder, and that therefore, this Court was prevented from entertaining the petition.
HELD : (Per Full Court) : (i) The petition was maintainable.
Per Sarkar, J. : The order of the President does not form a bar to all applications for release from detention under the Act or the Rules.
Where a person was detained in violation of the mandatory provisions of the Defence of India Act his right to move the Court was not suspended.
Since the petitioner contended that the order of detention was not justified by the Act or Rules and was therefore against the provisions of the Act, the petitioner was entitled to be heard.
[716 G; 717 A B] 710 Per Hidayatullah and Bachawat, JJ. : The net result of the President 's Order is to stop all claims to enforce rights arising from laws other than the Defence of India Act and the Rules, and the provisions of article 22 at variance with the Defence of India Act and the Rules are of no avail.
But the deprivation must be in good faith under the Defence of India Act or any rule or order made thereunder.
The President 's Order does not say that even if a person is proceeded against in breach of the Defence of India Act or the Rules or mala fide he cannot move the Court to complain that the Act and the Rules under colour of which some action was taken, do not warrant it.
It follows, therefore.
that this Court acting under article 32 on a petition for the issue of a writ of habeas corpus must not allow breaches of the Defence of India Act or the Rules to go unquestioned, as article 359 and the President 's Order were not intended to condone an illegitimate enforcement of the Defence of India Act.
[731 B, E, F; 733 B C] Per Raghubar Dayal, J. : This Court can investigate whether the District Mazistrate exercised the power under r. 30 honestly and bona fide, or not, that is, whether he ordered detention on being satisfied as required by r. 30.
[748 H] Per Mudholkar, J. : Before an entry into the portals of this Court could be denied to a detenu, he must be shown an order under r. 30(1) of the Defence of India Rules made by a competent authority stating that it was satisfied that the detenu was likely to indulge in activities which would be prejudicial to one or more of the matters referred to in the rule.
If the detenu contends that the order, though it purports to be under r. 30(1), was not competently made, this Court has the duty to enquire into the matter.
Upon an examination of the order, if the Court finds that it was not competently made or was ambiguous, it must exercise its power under article 32, entertain the petition thereunder and make an appropriate order.
[755 H; 756 A B] Makhan Singh vs State of Punjab, [1964] 4 S.C.R. 797 followed.
(ii) Per Sarkar, Mdayatullah, Mudholkar and Bachawat JJ.
: The petitioner should be set at liberty.
Per Sarkar J. : The order detaining the petitioner would not be in.
terms of the rule unless it could be said that the expression "law and order" means the same thing as "Public order".
What was meant by maintenance of public order was the prevention of disorder of a grave nature, a disorder which the authorities thought was necessary to prevent in view of the emergent situation created by external aggression; whereas, the expression "maintenance of law and order" may mean prevention of disorder of comparatively lesser gravity and of local significance only.
[718 B, D, E] Courts are only entitled to look at the face of the order, because the satisfaction which justifies the order under the rule is the subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority.
If on its face an order of detention is in terms of the rule, ordinarily, a court is bound to stay its hands and uphold the order.
When an order is on the face of it not in terms of the rule, a court cannot enter into an investigation whether the order of detention was :In fact in terms of the rule.
So the State cannot be heard to say of prove that an order was in fact made to prevent acts prejudicial to public order though the order does not say so.
It is not a case where the order is only evidence of the detention having been made under the rule.
The order is conclusive as to the state of the mind of the person who made it and no evidence is admissible to prove that state of mind.
Extraneous evidence such as the note made by the District Magistrate was not admissible lo prove that the rule had been complied with.
[718 G H; 718 B D 720 G; 722 B C] 711 is not taking too technical a view, but is a matter of substance.
If a man can be deprived of his liberty under a rule by the simple process of the making of an order, he can only be so deprived if the order is in terms of the rule.
If for the purpose of justifying the detention such com pliance by itself is enough, a non compliance must have a contrary effect A more reference in the detention order to the rule is not sufficient to show that by "law and order" what was meant was public order".
[719 F G: 720 A C] The order no doubt mentions another ground of detention, namely, prevention of acts prejudicial to public safety, and in so far as it did so, it was clearly within the rule.
But the order has notwithstanding this to be held illegal, though it mentioned a ground on which a legal order of detention could have been based, because, it could not be said in what manner and to what extent the valid and invalid grounds operated an the mind of the authority concerned and contributed to the creation of subjective satisfaction.
[722 E; G 11] ShShibban Lal Saksena vs State of U.P. ; , followed.
Per Hidayatullah and Bachawat, JJ.
: The satisfaction of the detaining authority cannot be subjected to objective tests and courts are not to exercise appellate powers over such authorities and an order proper on its face, passed by a competent authority in good faith, would be a complete answer to a petition for a writ of habeas corpus.
But when from the order itself circumstances appear which raise a doubt whether the officer concerned had not misconceived his own powers, there is need to pause and enquire.
The enquiry then 'Is, not with a view to investigate the sufficiency of the materials but into the officer 's notions of his power.
If the order passed by him showed that he thought his powers were more extensive than they actually were, the order might fail to be a good order.
No doubt.
what matters is the substance; but the form discloses the approach of the detaining authority to the serious question and the error in the form raises the enquiry about the substance.
When the liberty of the citizen is put within the reach of authority and the scrutiny by courts is barred, the action must comply not only with the substantive requirements of law but also with those forms which alone can indicate that the substance has been committed with.
[739 H; 740 B C, E; 741 C; F] The District Magistrate acted to "maintain law and order" and his order could not be read differently even if there was an affidavit the other way.
If he thought in terms of "public order" he should have said so in his order, or explained how the error arose.
A mere reference to his earlier note was not sufficient and the two expressions cannot be reconciled by raising an air of similitude between them.
The contravention of law always affects order but before it can be said to affect public order, it must affect the community or the public at large.
One has to imagine three concentric circles, the largest representing "law and order", the next representing "public order" and the smallest representing "security of State".
An act may affect "law and order " but not "public order," just as an act may affect "public order" but not "security of the State".
Therefore, by using the expression "maintenance of law and order" the District Magesstrate was widening his own field of action and was adding a clause to the Defence of India Rules.
[740 E F, H; 746 B E; 747 D, E] The order on its face shows two reasons, but it was not certain that the District Magistrate was influenced by one consideration and not both, because, it was not oven to the Court to enquire into the material on which the District Magistrate acted, or to examine the reason ,; to see whether his action fell within the other topic.
namely.
public safety.
[746 F G] 712 Per Mudholkar J. : The use of the expression "maintenance of law and order" in the impugned order makes it ambiguous on its face and therefore the order must be held to be had.
No doubt the order also refers to public safety.
But then the questions arise : What is it that weighed with the District Magistrate, the apprehension regarding public safety or an apprehension regarding maintenance of law and order? Was the apprehension entertained by the District Magistrate that the petitioner, if left at large, was likely to do something which will imperil the maintenance of public order generally, or was it that he apprehended that the petitioner 's activities may cause disturbances in a particular locality ? His order, which was the only material which could be considered, gave no indication on those questions.
The expression "law and order" does not find any place in the rule and is not synonymous with "public order".
"Law and order" is a comprehensive expression in which would be included not merely public order but matters such as public peace, tranquility, orderliness in a locality or a local area and perhaps other matters.
[756 H; 757 A, C, D, F] Per Raghubar Dayal J. (dissenting) : The District Magistrate made the impugned order on his being satisfied that it was necessary to do so with a view to prevent the petitioner from acting in a manner prejudicial to public safety and maintenance of public order.
The impugned order was therefore valid and consequently, the petitioner could not move this Court for the enforcement of his rights under articles 21 and 22 in view of the President 's Order under article 359(1).
[755 B C] The detaining authority s free to establish that any defect in the detention order is of form only and not of substance it being satisfied of the necessity to detain the person for a purpose mentioned in r. 30, though the purpose has been inaccurately stated in the detention order.
The existence of satisfaction does not depend on what is stated in the order and can be established by the District Magistrate by his affidavit.
His omission to refer to "maintenance of public order" does not mean that he was not so satisfied, especially when his note refers to the petitioner being at large to be prejudicial to public safety and the maintenance of public order.
The petitioner 's affidavit and rejoinder show that the District Magistrate was satisfied of the necessity of detaining the petitioner to prevent him from acting in a manner prejudicial to the public order, because of the setting of events that happened on that date.
"Maintenance of law and order" may be an expression of wider import than "public order", but in the context in which it was used in the detention order and in view of its use generally, it should be construed to mean maintenance of law and order in regard to maintenance of public tranquility.
[749 C D; 750 C D; 751 C, F G] Sodhi Shamsher Singh vs State of Pepsu, A.I.R. 1954 S.C. 276, referred to.
Even if the expression "maintenance of law and order" in the impugned order be not construed as referring to "maintenance of public order" the impugned order cannot be said to be invalid in view of its being made with a double objective, that is, with the object of preventing the petitioner from acting prejudicially to the public safety and the maintenance of law and order.
His satisfaction with respect to any of the purposes mentioned in r. 30(1) which would justify his ordering the detention of a person is sufficient for the validity of the order.
There is no room for considering that be might not have passed the order merely with one object in view, the object being to prevent him from acting prejudicially to public safety.
It is not a case where his satisfaction was based on two grounds one of which is irrelevant or non existent.
There does not appear to be any reason why the District Magistrate would not have passed the order of 713 detention against the petitioner on the satisfaction that it was necessary to prevent him from acting prejudicially to public safety.
[752 H; 753 B D; 754 A Di (iii) Per Sarkar, Hidayatullah, Raghubar Dayal and Bachawat, JJ.
The delegation was valid.
Per Sarkar J. : In spite of the mistake in the order as to the Notification delegating the power, evidence could be given to show that the delegation had in fact been made, because, the mistake did not vitiate the order.
To admit such evidence would not be going behind the face of the order, because, what is necessary to appear on the face of the order is the satisfaction of the Authority of the necessity for detention for any of the reasons mentioned in r. 30(1) (b), and not his authority to make the order.
[721 D, F G] Per Hidayatullah, Raghubar Dayal and Bachawat JJ. : There was only a clerical error in mentioning the wrong notification and being a venial fault did not vitiate the order of detention.
Also, section 40(2) does not require the imposition of any conditions but only permits it.
[737 F; 738 A; 741 G; 748 D] (iv) Per Hidayatullah, Raghubar Dayal and Bachawat, JJ.
: There was nothing wrong in the District Magistrate taking a broad view of the petitioner 's activities so as to weigh the possible harm if he was not detained.
Such a viewing of the activities of a person before passing the order against him does not necessarily spell out extra territoriality, but is really designed to assess properly the potentiality of danger which is the main object of the rule lo prevent.
[737 G H; 748 D] (v) Per Hidayatullah, Raghubar Dayal, Mudhilkar and Bachawat, JJ.
It is not necessary that the appropriate authority should entertain an apprehension that the person to be detained is likely to participate in every one of the activities referred to in the rule.
D; 756 F]
