The respondent entered into two contracts with the B Company (sellers) of New York to purchase certain chemicals and in pursuance of the contracts placed three indents for the material in December 1950 and January 1951.
The indents specified that the materials were to be packed in new fibre drums.
The respondent thereafter opened and confirmed irrevocable letters of credit to be negotiated by his bankers ' agents in New York.
These agents were authorised to make payment to the sellers against "clean on board" bills of lading.
When the sellers shipped the, goods by one of the appellant 's vessels, the Mate 's receipt given to the sellers on the arrival of the goods at the wharf described them as being packed in refused drums.
The sellers then approached the appellant with a request to grant them a clean bill of lading as against the reference in the Mate 's receipt to refused drums.
Upon the sellers furnishing the appellant with an indemnity bond against any claims etc., the appellant issued them a clean bill of lading which described the drums simply as drums.
The sellers then negotiated the bills of lading against the letters of credit and obtained payment of the contract price.
When the shipment arrived in India it was discovered that the drums contained only coal dust and not the chemicals ordered.
The respondent took appropriate proceedings against the sellers in the American Courts and recovered part of his loss.
He then instituted the present suit against the bank and the appellant.
The Trial Court dismissed the claim against the appellant but decreed the suit in part against the bank.
However, the High Court, on appeal, held that the appellant, with the knowledge that the bills of lading would be negotiated, gave at the request of the seller, clean bills of lading though only unclean bills of lading should have been given.
It therefore held the shipowners responsible for the loss caused to the respondents and allowed a separate appeal filed by the bank.
On appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellants that while respondent had based his cause of action on a breach of contract, the High Court had given relief founded on deceit.
that under common law or contract the appellant had no duty or obligation to make a statement in the bills of lading that the drums were old ones; and that the bills of lading were clean ones, for the oldness or newness of drums had no real impact on the contents thereof, as both were equally suitable containers for the materials to be supplied.
93 HELD:(i) There was no merit in the contention that the High Court gave relief founded on deceit whereas the respondents cause of action was based on a breach of contract.
It was clear from the pleadings that a claim on the basis of misrepresentation was made in the plaint, denied by the appellant in the written statement and argued in the Courts below.
[96 G H] (ii)The High Court was right in holding that the appellant was liable in damages for the loss incurred by the respondent.
It was one of the terms of the contract between the seller and the buyer that the goods should be placed in new fibre drums.
The standard of good order and condition of the packages was agreed upon by the parties to the contract.
The shipowners knew that condition as disclosed by the Mate 's receipt.
If the drums had been mentioned as old in the bill of lading, that bill would not have been a clean bill.
Though the apparent condition of the drums was old, the shipowners made an assertion that they were not old drums, i.e., they gave a clean bill.
This representation was obviously intended, in collusion with the sellers, to enable them to operate upon the credit with the Bank.
This collusion was also apparent from the indemnity bond they took from the sellers to guard themselves against the consequences of the said representation.
All the elements of deceit were therefore present.
[102 D F] Case law reviewed.
