A preliminary decree was passed in the appellant 's suit for redemption of a mortgage.
The decree specified the amounts due as principal and interest, provided for payment of future interest at 3 % from the date of decree till date of realisation, and payment of the amount due by a certain date.
It also provided that, if payment was made by that date, a final decree would be passed in favour of the appellant, but that, if the payment was not so made, the respondent would be entitled to apply for a final decree for foreclosure.
The appellant appealed against the preliminary decree to the High Court and applied for stay of the order requiring him to deposit the decretal amount within the date fixed by the trial court, and the High Court granted stay on his undertaking to pay 9 % interest instead of 3 %, during the period of stay.
Subsequently, the High Court dismissled the appeal and confirmed the preliminary decree, but, the additional amount due for the period of stay on account of the undertaking, was not included by the High Court in the preliminary decree.
The appellant then applied for a final decree in his favour, after depositing a sum which was more than the amount to be deposited when calculated according to the preliminary decree, but was less than the amount when circulated according to the condition imposed by the High Court in its stay order.
The trial Court however directed that a final decree for foreclosure in favour of the respondent be drawn up.
On appeal, the lower appellate court ordered that a final decree be drawn up in favour of the appellant.
In second appeal, the High Court took the view that the appellant had to deposit the entire amount due on the date of the deposit, as per its direction in the stay order, and as there, was a shortage on the date of deposit though the shortage was made up after the judgment of the lower appellate court only a final decree for foreclosure could be passed in the respondent 's favour.
In appeal to this Court, HELD:The appellant was entitled to a final decree.
In order that a final decree may be passed in favour of the appellant, he had to carry out before a final decree is passed, the terms of the preliminary decree and to pay "the amount adjudged due in respect of the subsequent costs, charges, expenses and interests" under O.XXXIV, r. 7(1) (e) (i) and (ii) of the Civil Procedure Code.
The appellant had carried out the terms of that decree by the deposit made by him and he had nothing to pay on account of Subsequent charges, costs, expenses and interest, because, the extra interest of 6% was not made a part of the decree, and it could not come within the words "in respect of subsequent costs, charges, expenses and interests.
" as it arose out of an independent order of the High Court 110 and was only payable on account of the undertaking for purposes of stay.
Further, such subsequent costs.
charges, expenses and interest have to be adjudged before the mortgagor is asked to deposit the amount.
As regards the appellant 's undertaking in the stay matter the court could insist on his honouring it before the final decree is passed.
[112 F 113 C].
