By a deed styled `otti Kuzhikanam deed ', the predecessor of the respondent sold a building standing on a property to the predecessor of the appellant and also transferred to him the right to possess and enjoy the property for 12 years in Kuzhikanam right with liberty to plant coconut trees thereon.
The deed expressly reserved the right for the respondent to enjoy the fruit bearing trees then standing on the properties.
and provided that after expiry of 12 years the appellant would on demand demolish and take away the building and surrender possession of the land on receipt of a certain amount and he agreed compensation for the coconut trees planted by him.
The respondent instituted a suit for redemption of the property, which was decreed.
On appeals, the decree was affirmed by the District Court and High Court.
In appeal to this Court the appellant claimed fixity of tenure and protection from eviction on the ground that he was (i) a Kuzhikanamdar under section 2(57)(d) and section 2(28), or alternatively.(ii) the holder of a kudiyiruppu under section 2(57) (h) and section 2(26) of the Kerala Land Reforms Act.
HELD: (i) The deed did not grant Kuzhikanam rights to the appellant.
"Kuzhikanam" as defined in section 2(28) means a transfer (1) of garden lands or of other lands or of both, (2) with the fruit bearing trees, if any standing thereon at the time of the ' transfer, (3) for the enjoyment of those trees and (4) for the purpose of planting such fruit bearing trees thereon.
It does not include a usufructuary mortgage as de fined in the but it was not the case of the respondent that the deed created such a usufructuary mortgage.
[137 E F] A transfer of land without the fruit bearing trees then standing on it and not carrying with it the right to enjoy those trees was not a kuzhikanam as defined in section 2(28).
The force of the words "if any" in the definition of "kuzhikanam" in section 2(28) is that if there are any fruit bearing trees on the land at the time of the transfer, the trees also must be transferred for their enjoyment by the transferee.
[137 H 138 B] (ii)The appellant was not the holder of Kudiyiruppu within the meaning of section 2(26) of the Act.
There was no material on the record to show that the building on the land was a residential building.
Moreover, it did not appear that the land was necessary for the convenient enjoyment of the building.
[138 D]
