The appellants had applied for compensation to the Jagir Abolition Officer under section 13 of the Bombay Merged Territories and Areas (Jagir Abolition) Act, 1953 in respect of their proprietary jagirs.
Against the orders of the said officer they preferred appeals to the Revenue Tribunal which were dismissed for non prosecution.
The appellants thereupon filed applications for restoration of the appeals within 30 days of the receipt of the orders of dismissal of the appeals.
These applications were dismissed as time barred, the Tribunal taking the view that time was to be calculated from the date of the order.
The appellants ' applications under article 227 of the Constitution to the High Court failed and they came by way of special leave, to this Court.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant that (i)the Tribunal even while deciding ex parte had to decide on merits and that (ii) the applications for restoration were filed within the time prescribed in Regulation 21 made under the Bombay Revenue Tribunal Act, 1958 which applied to the case.
HELD:(i) In the context of section 20 and ;in view of the express language of section 17(1) of the Jagirs Abolition Act the Tribunal had no power to dismiss the appeals in question for non prosecution, but it was obligatory on its part of decide the appeals on merits and to record is decision even though there was default on the part of the appellant to appear in the appeal.
[142 E F] (ii) The Tribunal also committed an error of law in dismissing as time barred the applications for restoration of the appeals made by the appellants.
In Regulation 21 made under Bombay Revenue Tribunal Act, 1958 the time prescribed for such applications is thirty days from the date of receipt of the Tribunal 's order dismissing the appeal, and the appellants had filed their applications within the said period.
[145 A, B] Regulation 21 lays down the procedure for dealing with applications for restoration made under Regulation 20 and the latter Regulation includes within its scope all appeals 'decided ex parte ' whether on merits or otherwise.
It could not therefore be said that Regulation 21 did not apply to the case.
[144 H]
