The three appellants were a wholesale dealer in spices, a dealer in groceries, and his servant respectively.
The second appellant purchased a bag of turmeric powder from the first and the third appellant took delivery of it on behalf of the second appellant, his master.
Immediately after it was taken delivery of, the food inspector purchased from the third appellant some turmeric powder contained in that bag for the purpose of analysis, and after issuing notice to the third appellant as required by section 1 1 of the , sent a portion of the powder purchased to the public analyst, who gave a report that it was adulterated food.
The three appellants were then prosecuted under sections 6(1) (a) read with section 7(v) of the Act and convicted by the Magistrate.
The conviction was confirmed by the High Court.
In the appeal to this Court it was contended that, (i) the report of the public analyst, by itself was not sufficient to sustain the conviction, and the public analyst should have been called as a witness, (ii) the report of the public analyst could not be used as evidence against a person who was not given notice under section 11 of the Act, (iii) the first appellant could not be convicted without establishing that he had the mens rea, and (iv) the taking of the sample under section 10 by a food inspector, was not a "sale" within the meaning of section 2(xiii) and therefore section 7(v) of the Act was not infringed.
HELD : (i) Section 13(5) of the Act, makes the report of the public analyst admissible in evidence and a Court of fact is free to act on it or not, as it thinks fit.
The Court could therefore legally act solely on the basis of the report and the prosecution Could not fail on the ground that the public analyst was not called as a witness.
If the appellant wanted the analyst to be examined, it was for the appellant to take appropriate steps.
C D] (ii)The law requires notice under section 11 to be given only to the person from whom the sample was taken and none else.
If that formality had been complied with and the report of the analyst is placed on record at the trial, it would be admissible against all the accused persons.
[902 H ; 903 C] (iii)The word "vendor" in section 19(1) means the person who had add the article of food which was alleged to be adulterated.
At one stage, the first appellant was the vendor of the turmeric powder.
Since the section deprives the vendor of adulterated food of the defence of merely alleging that he was ignorant of the nature, substance or quality of the article of food sold by him the burden of showing that he had no mens rea to commit the offence would be upon the first appellant.
[904 B D] State of Maharashtra vs Mayer Hans George, ; followed.
895 (iv)The definition of "sale" in section 2(xiii) of the Act, specificallY includes within its ambit a &,de for analysis.
The transaction in the instant can would amount to sale inspite of the fact that where a person is required by the food inspector to sell him a sample of a commodity, there is an element of compulsion under section 10 of the Act.
L906 H] Sarjo Prasad vs State of U.P., ; , M. Y. Joshi vs M. U. Shimpi, ; and State of Uttar Pradesh vs Kartar Singh, ; , referred to.
Food Inspector vs Parameswaran, [1962] 1 Cr. L.J. 652, overruled.
