The appellants were convicted of murder under section 302 read with section 34 I.P.C. on the allegation that they had laid their victim in a drain after closing his mouth with adhesive tape and plugging his nose with cotton wool soaked in chloroform, as a result of which death was caused.
They appealed to this Court by special leave.
It was contended on their behalf: (i) that their offence did not amount to murder but only to culpable homicide under the second part of section 304, (ii) that it could not be inferred from the mere fact of death that the injury caused by the appellants was sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death; this had to be proved by further evidence and (iii) that the ingredients of section 34 I.P.C. were not satisfied.
HELD : (i) What distinguishes the offences of murder and culpable homicide is the presence of a special, mens rea which consists of four mental attitudes in the presence of any of which the lesser offence becomes the greater.
These four mental attitudes are stated in the four clauses of section 300 I.P.C. [235 B] (ii)The first clause of section 300 says that culpable homicide is murder if the act by which death is caused is done with the intention of causing death.
An intention to kill a person brings the matter so clearly within the general principle of mens rea as to cause no difficulty.
Once the intention to kill is proved, the offence is murder unless one of the exceptions applies, in which case the offence is reduced to culpable hominid not amounting to murder.
On the facts of the present case an intention to cause death was not proved against the appellants and the clause therefore did not apply.
[235 C] (iii)The second clause of the section deals with acts done with the intention of causing such bodily injury as the offender knows to be likely to cause the death of the person to whom harm is caused.
The mental attitude here is two fold.
There is first the intention to cause bodily harm and next there is the subjective knowledge that death will be the likely consequence.
English Common Law made no clear distinction between intention and recklessness but in our law the foresight of the death must be Present.
The mental attitude is thus made of two elements (a) causing an intentional injury and (b) which injury the offender has the foresight to know would cause death.
The Present case could not fall under this clause either.
because, it could not be said that the appellants who only wanted to make their victim unconscious had the Subjective knowledge of the fatal consequences of the boil harm they were causing.
(iv) The appellants were however guilty of murder under the third clause of section 300.
[237 G H) The third clause discards the test of subjective knowledge.
It deals with acts done with the intention of causing bodily injury to a person and the bodily injury intended to be inflicted is sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death.
In this clause the result of the intentionally caused injury must be viewed objectively.
If the injury that the offender intends causing and does cause is sufficient to cause death in the ordinary way of nature the offence is murder whether the offender intended causing death or not and whether the offender had a subjective knowledge of the consequences or not.
[236 B] For the application of this clause it must be first established that an injury is caused, next it must be established objectively what the nature of that injury in the ordinary course of nature is.
If the injury is found to be sufficient to cause death one test is satisfied.
Then it must be proved that there was an intention to inflict that very injury and not some other injury and that it was not accidental or unintentional.
[236 C D] Virsa Singh vs State of Punjab ; , referred to.
The bodily injury caused by the appellants was deliberate and preplanned and the subjective test involved in the clause was therefore satisfied.
The other test namely whether the injury was sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death was also satisfied in the case as in the circumstances it would have been a miracle if the victim had escaped.
Death of the victim took place as a direct result of the acts of his assailants.
[236 E F] (v)The fourth clause of section 300 comprehends generally, the commission of imminently dangerous acts which must in all probability cause death.
What the appellants did may well be said to satisfy the requirements of this clause also, although it is ordinarily applicable to cases in which there is no intention to kill anybody in particular.
(Obiter).
[238 A] (vi)The sufficiency of an injury to cause death in the ordinary course of nature in the terms of el. 3 need not in every case be required to be proved by separate evidence in that regard.
Where the victim is either helpless or rendered helpless and the offender does some act which leads to death in the ordinary course and death takes place from the act of the offender and nothing else it is hardly necessary to prove more than the acts themselves and the causal connection between the acts and the end result.
The sufficiency of the injury in the present case was objectively established by the nature and quality of the acts taken with the consequence which was intimately related to the acts.
There was no need to establish more than this in the case.
[237 B G] Anda vs 9tate of Rajasthan, A.I.R. 1965 S.C. 148 referred to.
(vii)All the acts were done after deliberation by the appellants.
They were of a type which required more than one person to perpetrate.
That there was a common intention admits of no doubt and as clause 3 of section 300 views the consequence of the act objectively all those who shared the common intention of causing the bodily injury which was sufficient to cause death in the ordinary course of nature must be held responsible for the resulting offence.
[238 C] 232
