Two Hindu undivided families one of them being represented by the appellants and the other by the respondents were co owners of a house which was Purchased by them jointly.
The appellants occupied a major portion of the house on an agreed compensation being payable by them to the respondents in respect of the latter 's share occupied by them.
On the compensation not being paid as agreed, the respondents filed a suit for its recovery, as well as for partition.
In the plaint one S was mentioned as having been adopted out of the plaintiff family and for that reason he was not impleaded.
The appellants resisted the suit on the grounds that: (i) S had not been impleaded although a co owner, (ii) the suit was barred by the Bihar Building (Lease, Rent and Eviction) Control Act, 1947 (Bihar Act 3 of 1947), and (iii) the contract for payment of compensation was not enforceable as there was no ouster of the plaintiffs by the respondents.
The trial court decided in favour of the appellants but the High Court held against them.
They came to this Court by special leave.
HELD: (i) The suit was not incompetent because S was not made a party thereto.
The fact of adoption was stated in the plaint and had not been specifically denied by the appellants in their written statements.
No specific issue on the question of adoption was raised and it could not be therefore argued that S 's adoption had not been established.
[284 A B, F] Oral evidence of the fact of adoption did not become inadmissible merely because the existence of a deed of adoption was admitted.
A deed of adoption merely records the fact that an adoption had taken place and nothing more.
Such a deed cannot be likened to a document which by its sheer force brings a transaction into existence.
[284 D E] (ii) The mere fact that the defendants agreed to pay compensation to the Plaintiffs for their occupation of the plaintiff 's share would not bring into existence a relationship of landlord and tenant.
By this agreement the parties never intended to Constitute a relationship of landlord and tenant between the defendants and their co owners.
Bihar Act 3 of 1947 was therefore inapplicable and the suit could not be said to be barred under its provisions, [285 C] 281 (iii) Co owners are legally competent to come to any kind of agreement for the enjoyment of their undivided property and are free to lay down any terms covering the enjoyment of the property.
Ouster of a co owner is not a sine qua non for enabling him to claim compensation from the co owner who is in occupation and enjoyment of common property.
[285 E F]
