The appellants filed an original petition in the District Court under section 84(2) of the Madras Hindu Religious Endowments Act, 1927 for setting aside an order of the Endowments Board that a temple was a public temple and for a declaration that it was a private temPle.
The Commissioner of the Endowments 'Board and: a worshippewere the contesting respondents to the petition.
Pending its dispo sat the 1927 Act was repealed by the Hindu Religious and Charles ble Endowments Act of 1951.
After the passing of the new Act the petition was amended by the addition of a prayer for a further dec laration that the properties in dispute were the personal property of the appellants ' family.
Thereafter, a compromise decree between the appellants and the Commissioner wag passed.
by which it was declared that the temple was a public temple, that the properties were the personal properties of the appellants but that the appeal ants were liable to make annual payments in cash and kind to the temple for its maintenance. 'The worshipper, who was not a part, to the compromise decree, filed the present suit for a declaration that the Compromise decree was not binding on the temple.
On the questions whether: (i) the suit was not barred by the provisions of section 42 of the , and (ii) the compromise decree was invalid.
HELD: (i) Section 42 of the is not exhaustive of the cases in which a declaratory decree may be made an courts have power to grant such a decree independently of the requirements of the section.
The relief sought for in the present case ,was for a declaration that the compromise decree was null and voice Such a declaration is in itself a substantial relief and has imme diate coercive effect and the deity would be restored to its right in the trust properties.
The suit fell outside the purview of section 4 and would be governed by the general provisions of the Civil Procedure Code and was therefore maintainable even though the worshiper was not suing as a person entitled to any legal character or the any, right as to any property as required by section 42 of the .
[276 E; 277 F G] Case law referred to.
(ii) The compromise decree was not valid and binding on the, temple, because, the deity was not a party to it through any representative.
271 Though under section 20 of the 1927 Act the Commissioner was ves ted with the power of superintendence and control over the temple, it does not mean that he has authority to represent the deity in proceedings before the District Judge under section 84(2) of the Act.
Further, the compromise decree was beyond the scope of the proceedings, because, a declaration that the properties in dispute were the 'Personal. properties of the appellants ' family and not of the temple, was outside the purview of section 84(2).
[278 A B, F, H]
