The respondent owned a coke plant which originally belonged to a group of collieries but was later transferred to him.
It was situated adjacent to a coal mine on the surface land which formed part of the coal fields beneath which the coal mine was worked.
The respondent did not mine or excavate coal himself nor carry on any operation for the purpose of obtaining coal.
His coke plant was a bye product Plant in which hard coke as well as some other byeproducts were manufactured.
The respondent was prosecuted under para 70 of the Coal Mines Provident Fund Scheme issued under the Coal Mines Provident Fund and Bonus Schemes Act, 1948 (Act 46 of 1948) on a complaint that as an owner of a coal mine and an employer within the meaning of the Scheme, he had failed to pay certain contributions to the Provident Fund.
Although he was convicted by the trying Magistrate and his appeal to the Sessions Judge dismissed, the High Court allowed a Revision Application and set aside the conviction.
The question for consideration in the appeal to this Court was whether the respondent was an owner of a coal mine within the meaning of section 2 of the and therefore an employer as defined by Section 2(e) of Act 46 of 1948.
The expression "coal mine" in Section 2(b) of the means "any excavation where any operation for the purpose of obtaining coal has been carried on and includes all works, machinery, tramways and sidings, whether above or below ground, in or adjacent to or belonging to a coal mine HELD: The respondent was not the owner of a coal mine within the meaning of Section 2(b) of the and the High Court had rightly acquitted him.
[264 C].
The expression "belonging to a coal mine" is the controlling expression governing all aspects of the activities of the coal mine within the definition of section 2(b) and all subsidiary things such as works, machinery, tramways, and sidings are brought within the definition of the "coal mine" only if they appertain to the coal mine, that is to.
say, if they are under the. same ownership.
In order to carry out the legislative intention it is therefore necessary to substitute the conjunction "and" for the Conjunction "or" in the definition of a "coal mine" in section 2(b) of the Act.
[262 D E].
Section 2(b) of the Coal Mines Provident Fund and Bonus Schemes (Amendment) Act, 1965 and Ormond Investment Co. Li mited vs Betts: , 156; referred to. 260
