The appellant an advocate who maintained his accounts on the cash system gave up practice when he was elevated to the Bench in 1957.
Certain outstanding professional dues were however received by him in the accounting years 1958 and 1959.
These receipts were shown by him as income in his return for the assessment years 1959 60 and 1960 61 and were assessed by the Income tax Officer.
The appellant then went in revision to the Commissioner of Income tax contending that the said receipts were not income and had been wrongly taxed.
The Commissioner having decided against him the appellant came to this Court under article 136 of the Constitution.
HELD: (i) The receipts in the present case were clearly the fruits of the assessee 's professional activity and fell under the fourth head of section 6 of the Indian Income tax Act 1922.
They were however not chargeable to tax under that head because under the corresponding computing section that is.
section 10.
an income received by the assessee who kept his accounts on the cash basis in an accounting year in which the profession had not been carried on at all is not chargeable.
[297 D F] Commissioner of Income Tax vs Express Newspapers Ltd., , relied on.
(ii) The income could not be taxed under section 12 either.
Section 12 deals with income which is not included under any other preceding heads covered by sections 7 to 10.
If the income is so included, it falls outside section 12.
It follows that if, as in the present case, the income is profits and gains of profession it cannot come under section 12.
[301 E] The heads of income in section 6 are mutually exclusive and it would be incorrect to say that as the receipts could not be brought to tax under the fourth head they could not fall under that head and must therefore fall under the residuary head 'other sources '.
There is no justification for the assumption that an income falling under one head has to be put under another head if it escapes taxation under the computing section corresponding to the former head.
[298 A; 300 E F] The character of the income cannot change merely because the assessee received it at a certain time or adopted a certain sYstem of accounting.
[301 B] Section 4 does not say that whatever is included in total income must be brought to tax.
The income has to be brought under one of the heads mentioned is section 6 and can be charged to tax only if it is so chargeable under the computing section corresponding to L/S5SCI 296 that head.
Income which falls under the fourth head can be brought to tax only if it can be so done under the rules of computation laid down in section 10.
[298 G 299 B] In re: B, M. Kamdar, , not approved.
The United Commercial Bank vs The Commissioner of Income Tax, ; , Salisbury House Estate Ltd., vs Fry.
15 Tax Cases 266 and Commissioner of In tax vs Cocanada Padhaswami Bank Ltd., , relied on.
Probh At Chandra Barua vs King Emperor, 57 I.A. 228, distinguished, Per Bachawat J. (dissenting) The receipts in question were chargeable under section 12.
Any income Chargeable under a specific head can be charged only under that head, and no part of that income can be charged again under section 12.
But any part of a total income of the assessee not me*sable under a specific head is assessable under the residuary head covered by section 12, [305 C] The income in question was not exempt under section 4(3).
The receipts were liable to be included in total income under section 4.
This income could not be included under section 10 owing to the method of accounting adopted by the assessee.
Nor did it fall under any other head.
It followed that the income must fall under the residuary head specified in section 12, This was not a case where the Revenue had taxed or could tax the income under s, 10 and again sought to tax the income under a. 12.
[306 C. G H]
