As a result of constitutional changes following the Indian Independence Act, 1947, the ownership of the public properties of the Maharaja of the Mayurbhanj including certain shares in the appellant company passed to the State of Orissa.
Although the State had acquired title to these shares by operation of law, it also obtained from the Maharaja by way of abundant caution, a deed transferring these shares to it.
In 1950, the State Government lodged the share scrip and transfer deed with the company and requested it to make the necessary changes in the share register.
Despite repeated requests.
however, the directors of the company refused to do so.
In 1955 the State filed an application under section 38 of the Indian Companies Act, 1913 in the High Court of Orissa, asking for rectification of the share register by inserting its name as the holder of the share in place of the Maharaja.
The High Court allowed the application and passed a supplemental order directing the filing of the notice of rectification with the Registrar within a fortnight.
The company 's appeal before the Division Bench failed, whereupon it appealed to this Court by special leave.
It was urged on behalf of the appellant company, inter alia, that under article 11 of its Articles of Association as well as under cl. 22 of Table A read with article 1 A the directors has power to refuse registration of the transfer.
HELD: (i) In Table A which was attracted by article 1 A of the company 's Articles of Association, the word transmission is put in contradistinction to the word 'transfer '.
One means a transfer by the act of the parties, the other a transmission by devolution of law.
article If refers to transfers.
A devolution of title by operation of law is not within its purview.
Being a restrictive provision the article must be strictly construed.
In the instant case, the title to the shares vested in the State of Orissa by operation of law and the State did not require an instrument of transfer from the Maharaja to complete its title.
Article 11 does not confer upon the Board of directors a power to refuse recognition of such a devolution of title.
r383G 384C].
In re Bentham Mills Spinning Company, , referred to.
(ii)Clause 22 of the regulations in Table A read with article 1 A confers power on the Board of directors to decline registration of transmission of title in consequence of the death or insolvency of a 381 member.
In the instant case, there was no transmission of title in consequence of death or insolvency and clause 22 had, therefore no application, [384 D] (iii)In so far as the claim of the State was based on the transfer deed it fell within the purview of article 11.
But the refusal of the board of directors to register the transfer under that article was mala fide.
The power under that article was a discretionary power.
The directors must exercise that power reasonably and in good faith.
The Court can control this discretion if they act capriciously or in bad faith.
[384 E F; 385 C D] (iv)The name of the State of Orissa had without sufficient reason, been omitted from the register, and there was default in not entering on the register the fact of the Maharaja having ceased to be a member.
The Court 's jurisdiction under section 38 was, there fore, attracted.
The High Court rightly ordered the rectification in the exercise of its summary powers under section 38.
The jurisdiction created by section 38 is very beneficial and should be liberally exercised.
[385G]
