In August 1957 the appellant created two Trusts by two sepa rate deeds, one of which was a charitable trust and the other a family trust.
He then transferred certain shares to the family trust the scheme of which was that during the minority of each of three children of the appellant the property in Schedules A, B and C to the deed qua each beneficiary was to remain vested in the trustees for the benefit of the charitable trust, and after the expiry of the period specified in each case, the corpus and income was to be herd for the beneficial, ownership of the three children.
By Clause 9 of the family trust deed, it was provided that the interests granted or created in the respective beneficiaries shall vest in them immediately upon execution of the deed; Clause 21 conferred upon the trustees power either to use the income accruing under the trust for the benefit of the charitable trust during the period prescribed in each case upto the time that each of the three children attained majority or to accumulate the income and deliver it on the expiry of the periods specified to the trustees of the charitable trust.
Clause 26 provided that notwithstanding anything.
contained in Clauses 21 to 25 the trustees could expend the income accruing under the settlement to each of the beneficiaries therein for the maintenance, education, health, marriage and.
advancement of the beneficiaries.
In computing the nett wealth of the assesses under the Wealth Tax Act 1957, as on March 31, 1958 and March 31, 1959, the valuation dates respectively for the assessment years 1958 59 and 1959 60, the Wealth Tax Officer and the Appellate Assistant Commissioner included the value of the shares held by the trustees under the family trust, on the ground that these shares were held by them for the benefit of the minor children within the meaning of Section 4(1)(a) (iii) of the Act.
On appeal the Appellate Tribunal reversed this decision but.
upon a reference, the High Court decided the issue against the assessee.
In the appeal to this court, it was contended on behalf of the Revenue that the word "benefit" in the Section meant immediate or deferred benefit and the amendment of Section 4(1)(a)(iii) by Act 46 of 1964 whereby the words "immediate or deferred" were introduced before the word "benefit" in the Section, was in effect only declaratory; and that in any event it was clear from the recitals in the preamble and the other terms of the family trust deed that the intention of the appellant was to make a settlement for the benefit of his minor children within the meaning of the Section prior to its amendment.
420 HELD: (per Wanchoo and Sikri, JJ.).
Considering the terms of the family trust deed as a whole, the shares transferred to the trustees were not held for the benefit of the three minor children as on March 31, 1958 and March 31, 1959 within the meaning of section 4(1)(a) (iii)and could not therefore be included in the nett wealth of the as e. [426E] By the terms of the deed, it, war.
the charitable trust which was entitled to the income of the shares in Schedules A, B and C during the years before the minor children attained majority; upto that time the children had no interest whatsoever in that income.
It could not therefore be said that the settlement was for the immediate benefit of the minor children.
[426B C] Although the non obstante clause 26 purported to override the provisions of Clauses 21 to 25, the inclusion of Clause 21 appeared to be a typographical error.
In any event even assuming that there was a conflict between Clauses 21 and 26, the earlier disposition under Clause 21 would Prevail over the later directions contained in Clause 26.
Sahabzada Mohammed Kamgar Shah vs Jagdish Chandra Deo Dhabal Deo ; , 611.
and Ramkishore Lai vs Kamal Narain (1963) Supp.
2 S.C.R. 417, 425; referred to.
[427B C] (per Shah J. dissenting): The primary intention of the appellant as disclosed in the preamble of the family trust deed was to make provision for his children; from the terms of the trust deed and particularly from reading Clauses 9 & 26 together, it was clear that there was a vested interest immediately arising in favour of the children on the execution of the instrument, and that they were the real beneficiaries.
The High Court had therefore rightly held that the shares transferred to the family Trust were for the immediate benefit of the settlor 's minor children within the meaning of Section 4(1)(a)(iii) and were liable to be included in the computation of wealth of the appellant.
[435C E] (By the Court): The words "immediate or deferred" introduced into Section 4(1) (a)(iii) by Act 1946 of 1964 were not merely declaratory.
The amendment made a deliberate change.
The word 'benefit ' must therefore be construed apart from the amendments and in the context meant "for the immediate benefit of the individual or his wife or minor child".
[422C, D]
