The Commissioner of Hindu Religious Endowments, Orissa, de manded contribution under section 49 of the Hindu Religious Endowments Act and took steps to enforce certain other provisions of the Act against the appellants and certain properties.
These properties, the appellant.% claimed, were not math as defined in the Act and the public had no free access to its premises and had no right of entry or worship of the deity installed therein.
The Commissioner held that the properties were math as defined in the Act and that the properties constituted a 'religious endowment ' to which the Act applied.
Thereafter, the appellants instituted a suit and prayed for setting aside of the decision of the Commissioner and for a declaration that the Act did not apply to the properties in suit.
The trial Court dismissed the suit, which on appeal was confirmed by the High Court.
In appeal by special leave.
HELD: The appeal must be dismissed.
(1)An institution comes within the definition of 'Math ' if it satisfies three conditions (i) that the institution be for the promotion of.
the Hindu religion; (ii)that it be presided over by a person whose duty is to engage himself in spiritual service or who exercises or claims to exercise spiritual head ship over a body of disciples; and (iii) that the office of such person devolves in accordance with the directions of the founder of the institution or is regulated by usage.
[441E] There was ample evidence on the record to show that the property was presided over by the Mahant, that the Mahant exercised spiritual headship over the disciples, and that the succession to the office of the Mahant was regulated by the usage of the institution.
There could be no question that such an institution must have been for the promotion of the Hindu religion.
[441F] Religious endowment includes the premises of the Math.
If the Premises of the property had been used both for secular purposes and for religious purposes, it according to the explanation to sub section
(12) of section 6, shall be deemed to be a religious endowment and its administration shall be governed by the provisions of the Act.
This makes it clear that the premises of the math is not only deemed to be a religious endowment, but is deemed to be a Hindu Public religious en dowment to which the Act applies, as the provisions of the Act govern its administration.
It follows that an institution which comes within the definition of math under the Act, ipso facto, comes within the expression 'Hindu public religious endowment ' and therefore become subject to the provisions of the Act.
[441H 442B] 437 The definition of 'temple ' requires that the place would be a temple if it be used as a place of public religious worship.
There is no requirement that an institution to be a math must be a public institution for the promotion of the Hindu religion.
The use of the word 'public ' was not necessary in connection with an institution for such promotion of the Hindu religion as any institution for such promotion of the Hindu religion must be of a public nature.
the object being to promote Hindu religion, there would be no point in shutting the benefit of the institution to anyone among the Hindus.
[442C D] The distinction between a public trust and a private trust is, broadly speaking, that in a public trust the beneficiaries of the trust are the people in general or some section of the people, while in the case of a private trust the beneficiaries are an ascertained body of persons.
The beneficiaries of a math are the members of the fraternity to which the math belongs and the persons of the faith to which the spiritual head of the math belongs, and constitute, therefore, at least a section of the public.
Maths, in general, consequently, are public maths.
[442E F] [QUAERE: Whether there can be a private math or not?] (2)The onus was initially on the appellant plaintiff to show that the order of the Commissioner was wrong and this he could only show by establishing prima facie that the Math was not a math as defined in the Act and that the various properties were not endowed properties.
[443H] (3) The gazetteer could le consulted on matters of public history.
[447B] (4) The documentary evidence on the record did not support the case of the appellant, but showed that the Properties were those of the math.
