The appellant 's mother executed a gift deed in favour of the appellant claiming that she inherited the property in 1920 on the death of her husband, who had inherited it from her father in law.
The respondents claiming title to the property filed a suit challenging the gift deed on the ground that the father in law of the donor (mother) had survived the husband and therefore she could not have inherited the property under the Hindu Law as then prevailing.
For this purpose the respondents relied upon a statement, that the father in law had survived the husband, made by the donor in a mortgage suit in 1925, to establish her case.
When this statement was made there was no dispute in the faimly.
On the questions whether, (i) this statement in the mortgage suit was admissible in evidence and (ii) the statement made by the donor in the gift deed was admissible to contradict the statement she made in the mortgage suit, HELD : (i) This statement in the mortgage suit, which was against proprietary interest of the mother would be admisible in evidence under section 32(3) of the Evidence Act, as she was dead.
It could not be an admission.
so far the appellant was concerned, butit would certainly be a piece of evidence to be taken into consideration, The admissibility of statements under s.32 (3) of the Evidence Act does not arise unless the party knows the statementto be against his interest.
But the question whether the statement was made consciously with the knowledge that it was against the interest of the person making it would be a question of fact in each case and would depend in most cases on the circumstances in which the statement was made.
[158 F G; 159 A B] Srimati Savitri Debi
Raman Bijoy, L.R. (1949) LXXVI I.A. 255,Tucker vs Oldburry UrbanDistrict Council, L.R. [19121 2 K.B. 317 and Ward vs H. section Pitt , relied on.
The statement in question was made by the mother consciously and not at the instance of any one and she must, in the circumstances of the case, be presumed to know that the statement was against her proprietary interest, for thereby she became the widow of the predeceased son of her father in law.
[159 G] (ii) Assuming that the statements in the gift dead would be admissible under section 158 of the Evidence Act the statement made in the mortgage suit in 1925 carries greater weight as it was made at a time when there was no dispute in the family.
[160 E F]
