The landlord of the premises in dispute, obtained a decree for ejectment against his tenant before the commencement of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958.
The sub tenant was not a party to that suit and the sub tenancy was not determined by that decree.
In 1962, the subtenant filed a suit against the landlord claiming to have become a statutory tenant of the premises.
The landlord contended that under section 50 of the Act, no civil court shall entertain any suit in respect of a matter which the Controller is empowered by or under the Act to decide, and that as section 17(3) of the Act empowered the Controller to decide a dispute in regard to the question whether a person was a sub tenant or not, the ,suit was not maintainable.
HELD : Section 50 was not a bar to the suit.
The provision of the Act applicable to a case where the interest of a tenant had been determined before the commencement of the Act, but the interest of the sub tenant was allowed to subsist is section 18(2).
Under this sub section the sub tenant shall, with effect from the date of the commencement of the Act, be deemed to have become, by a statutory fiction, a tenant under the landlord.
There is no provision in the Act under which a dispute in respect of such a sub tenancy could be decided by the Controller.
Any dispute raised by such a sub tenant does not fall under section 17(3), for, section 17(3) applies only to a case where a dispute arises during the subsistence of the main tenancy after the Act came into force, and where the dispute was raised within two months of the issue of the notice of sub letting, by the tenant or sub tenant.
[171 A C] Mohd. Mamood vs Tikam Das, ; , explained.
Moreover, under section 20 of the Delhi and Ajmer Rent Control Act, 1952, on the eviction of the tenant, the sub tenant would be deemed to have become a tenant of the landlord.
There is no provision in the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958, which took away that vested right or empowered the Controller to decide a dispute raised in regard to it.
Section 50, therefore could not have any bearing on the maintainability of the suit.
[171 E G]
