The Metal Corporation of India (Acquisition of Undertaking) Act, 1965, was enacted for acquiring in the public interest, the undertaking of the Metal Corporation of India.
The Act provided that the Corp oration was to vest in the Central Government on the commencement of the Act; and that in the absence of an agreement between the Government and the Corporation, the compensation payable to the Corporation was to be an amount equal to the sum total of the value of the properties and assets of the Corporation on the date of the commencement of the Act calculated in accordance with the provisions of Paragraph 11 of the Schedule to the Act, less the liabilities on the said date, calculated in accordance with the provisions of Paragraph III of the Schedule.
One of the clauses laying down principles of compensation, viz., clause (b) of para 11 is in two parts.
The first part provides for the valuation of plant, machinery or other equipment which has not been worked or used and is in good condition, and the second part provides for the valuation of any other plant, machinery or equipment.
The former have to be valued at the actual curt incurred by the Corporation in acquiring them 'and the latter, at the writtendown value determined in accordance with the provisions of the Income of the constitutional validity of the Act.
HELD : The Act contravened article 31(2) of the Constitution and was therefore void.
[265 C] Under article 31(2), no property shaft be compulsorily acquired except under a law which provides for compensation and either fixes the amount of compensation or specifies the principles on which and the manner in which the compensation is to be determined and given.
If the compensation is illusory or if the principles prescribed are irrelevant to the value of the property at or about the time of its acquisition, the law is bad.
The law, to justify itself, has to provide for the payment of a "just equivalent" to the property acquired, or lay down principles which are not arbitrary but which are relevant to the fixation of compensation.
It is only when the principles stand this test, that the adequacy of the resultant compensation falls outside judicial scrutiny under the second limb of article 31(2).
In the instant case, the two principles laid down in cl.
(b) of Para 11 of the Schedule are irrelevant to the fixation of the value of the machinery as on the date of acquisition.
In the case of unused machinery, if it was Purchased in 1950 for Rs. 100 and, for some reason, had not been used in the working of the Undertaking but had been maintained in good condition, it may cost Rs. 1000 in 1965.
A compensation of Rs. 100 for that machinery could not be said to be a "just equivalent" of it.
Similarly, in the case of used machinery, if it was purchased in 1950 for Rs. 1000, 256 the aggregate of all the depreciation allowances made year after year may exhaust the sum of Rs. 1000 in ten years, with the result that, under the Income tax Act, the assessee will not be entitled to any depreciation after the tenth year.
It could not, however, be said that after the tenth year, the machinery had no value and that the owner was not to be given any compensation.
Indeed, such a machinery, because of subsequent rise in prices, may be sold in 1965 for Rs. 10,000.
Further the constitutional invalidity of cl.
(b) of Para II of the Schedule affect& the totality of the compensation payable; for, machinery is the major part of the undertaking, the entire Undertaking is acquired as a unit, and, in the context of compensation for the entire Undertaking, the clauses of Para H of the Schedule to the Act are not severable.
Therefore, the mere fact that in regard to some parts of the Undertaking, the principles laid down in Para H provide for compensation does no affect the question, especially when it has not been shown that the working out of any one or more of the principles would give a higher compensation to some parts of the Undertaking so that the excess paid under one head would offset the deficiency under another head.
[261 F H; 262 B; 264 B C, F H; 265 A El Vajravelu vs Special Deputy Collector, ; and Jeejeebhoy vs Assistant Collector, ; , followed.
