R was a man of considerable property.
He married four times.
The third wife bore him a son.
When R made a gift of some joint family property to his second wife the third wife gave a notice that the gift was not valid.
R, in his reply to the notice alleged, that she had deserted him and that the son born of her was not his.
These allegations were denied by the third wife.
After the death of R a suit was instituted by the said son claiming a half share of the property left by R. The two living step mothers, namely, the second and fourth wives of R contested the suit.
The questions were whether the plaintiff was the son of R and whether the gift deed was valid.
The trial court held on both points in favour of the plaintiff and the High Court also decided against the two step mothers who thereupon appealed to this Court.
The appellants contended that (1) the courts below had wrongly held the Plaintiff respondent to be the legitimate son of R (2) R,s gift of ancestral immovable property was valid because it was a gift for 'pious purposes.
HELD: (i) Section 112 of the Evidence Act raises, inter alia, a conclusive presumption that a child born during the continuance of a valid marriage between his mother and any man is the legitimate son of the man, and this conclusive presumption can only be rebutted if it is shown that the parties to the marriage had no access to each other at any time when he could have been begotten.
The appellants had completely failed to prove the non access of R to his third wife at any time when the plaintiff respondent could have been begotten.
In these circumstances there was no reason to interfere with the concurrent finding of the courts below that the plaintiff respondent was the legitimate son of R. [357 E F] (ii) The contention of the donee appellant that the gift in her favour by her husband of ancestral immovable property made out of affection should be upheld must fail because no such gift is permitted under Hindu Law insofar as immovable ancestral property is concerned.
The scope of the expression 'pious purposes ' cannot be extended to include such gifts.
[359 D] Kamala Devi vs Bachu Lai Gupta, ; and Guramma Bharatar Chanbassappa Deshmukh vs Malappa, ; , referred to.
(iii) Nor can the proposition be accepted that a father in law can make a gift of ancestral immovable property in favour of his daughter in law at the time of her marriage.
The case of a daughter in law who would become entitled to property in the father in law 's family in her own right stands on a very different footing from the case of daughter who is being married and to whom a reasonable gift of ancestral immovable property can be made.
[360 A B] The rule of Hindu law that gifts made in token of love by a fatherin law to his daughter in law are permitted and become the stridhan pro 354 perty must be taken to refer to gifts of movable properties and such immovable properties as are not joint family properties.
[360 C E] Ws gift of immovable ancestral property to his second wife could not therefore be considered to be valid even if it was in purported compliance with the wishes of his father at the time of her marriage.
[360 G H]
