By a notification of the Delimitation Commission dated July 24, 1964 issued in terms of section 10(1) of the , Ujjain City, which had been a general constituency, was notified as reserved for the Scheduled Castes.
The appellant who was a resident of Ujjain and a citizen of India, Mad a petition under article 226 praying for a writ of certiorari for quashing the notification on the ground that he had a right to be candidate for parliament from the Ujjain City constituency which had been taken away.
The petition was rejected by the High Court on the short ground that the notification could not be questioned in any court because under article 329(a) of the Constitution the validity of any law relating to the delimitation of constituencies or the allotment of seats to such constituencies, made or purporting to be made under article 327 or article 328, could not be called in question in any court.
In appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that the impugned notification, which was an order under section 9 and published in accordance with the provisions of section 10(1) of the Act, was not a law within the meaning of section 329; that in any event under section 10(2) such an order was to have the force of law but was not itself a law; and that the notification was not made under article 327 but article 82 of the Constitution.
HELD : dismissing the appeal, The impugned notification was a law relating to the delimitation of constituencies or the allotment of seats to such constituencies made under article 327 of the Constitution.
An examination of sections 8 and 9 of the Act showed that the matters therein dealt with were not to be subject to the scrutiny of any court of law.
Section 10(2) clearly demonstrates the intention of the legislature that the orders under sections 8 and 9 published under section 10(1) were to be treated as law which was not to be questioned in any court.
There was very good reason behind such a provision.
If the orders made under sections 8 and 9 were not to be treated as final, the result would be that any voter, if he so wished, could hold up an election indefinitely by questioning the delimitation of the constituencies from court to court.
[410 B C, G, H] Although an order under section 8 or section 9 published under section 10(1) is not part of an Act of Parliament, its effect is to be the same.
Section 10(4) puts such an order in the same position as a law made by the Parliament itself which could only be made by it under article 327.
[415 E] 401 Case law referred to.
Article 82 merely envisages that upon the completion of each census the allocation of seats in the House of the People and the division of each State into territorial constituencies may have to, be readjusted.
It is article 327 which enjoins upon Parliament to make provision by law from time to time with respect to all matters relating to or in connection with elections to either House of Parliament, delimitation of constituencies and all other matters necessary for securing the due constitution of such House or Houses.
[406 C]
