The petitioner who was the editor of a newspaper was detained by and order of the Central Government under r. 30(1)(b) of the Defence of India Rules, 1962, and the detention was continued by another order of the Central Government passed six months later, under r. 3OA(9).
The first order directed the petitioner 's detention with a view to preventing him from acting in any manner prejudicial to the defence of India, civil defence, public safety and the maintenance of public order, but the order continuing the detention set out only the defence of India and civil defence.
The petitioner challenged the second order of the following grounds: (i)the detention was punitive and not preventive, because his writings in is paper were the grounds of his original detention but that the paper had since become defunct; (ii) the two additional grounds given in the original order and omitted in the latter order must be held to have been non existent at the time of the original order, and therefore, the original order based on such non existent grounds was illegal, and could not be validly continued under r. 3OA(9); (iii) even if the Government was competent to continue the detention, the validity of the decision of the Government to continue the detention depended upon the existence of relevant circumstances which would necessitate the continuation and such circumstances were demonstrable; and (iv) the Minister who passed the second order should have filed a counter affidavit showing that he applied his mind to the material before he passed the order continuing the detention.
HELD : (i) Assuming that the petitioners writings in his paper were relied on for the purpose of passing the original order, they were not the only materials on which the original order and the order continuing the detention were based.
The authorities had taken into consideration the over all picture of all his anti Indian and pro Pakistani activities.
Therefore, the fact that his paper had since become defunct would make no difference because the jurisdiction to detain is not in respect of a mischief already committed but in anticipation.
that the person concerned may in future act prejudicially.
[436 H; 437 A B; 439 C D] (ii) The decision to continue the detention order was within the scope of r. 30A and was therefore sustainable.
[446 A B] Rule 30 A provides for a review of the order of detention, the procedure therefor,, the different reviewing authorities, the period within which such review has to be made and the obligation to decide whether the detention should be continued or cancelled after taking into account all the circumstances of the case.
Sub rule (9) provides that where a detention order is passed, by the Central or a State Government such order shall be reviewed at intervals of not more than six months by the Government which made the order and upon such review decide whether to continue or cancel the order.
The object of the review is to decide whether there is a necessity to continue the detention order or not in 434 the fight of the facts and circumstances including any development that has taken place in the meantime.
If the reviewing authority finds that such a development has taken place in the sense that the reasons which led to the passing of the original order no longer subsist or that some of them do not subsist that is not to say that those reasons did not exist at the time of passing the original order and that the satisfaction was on grounds which did not then exist.
There is no analogy between the provisions of review in the Defence of India Rules and in the and therefore, the decisions on that Act cannot be availed of by the petitioner.
[438 H; 439 B; 445 F H; 446 A B] (iii) The words used in r. 30(1) (b) and r. 30A are satisfaction in one case, and decision after taking into account all the circumstances of the case in the other.
Unlike r. 30(1)(b), the power to continue the detention after review is not dependent on the solution of the Government.
Under r. 30A the Government is enjoined upon to decide whether the detention should be continued or cancelled.
The substitution of decision instead of satisfaction is an indication that the criterion for continuing the detent on is the existence of those facts and circumstances which necessitate it.
The existence of such facts which is the determinant for the exercise of the power is demonstrable, and if they are shown not to exist the decision would not be a decision within the meaning of r. 30A and would be amenable on that ground to challenge.
The counter affidavit of the Deputy Secretary, on record, disclosed the anti national activities of the petitioner and that the decision under r. 30A that the petitioner had acted and was likely to act in a manner prejudicial to the defence of India and civil defence was arrived at by the Minister after an examination of all the materials before him.
So long as the decision was arrived at on such materials, since this Court does not sit in appeal against such a decision, it would not ordinarily examine the adequacy or the truth of those materials and would not interfere with the decision on the ground that if the Court had examined them it would have come to a different conclusion.
[440 C, 441 F H; 446 F G] Sadhu Singh vs Delhi Administration, ; referred to.
(iv) It was not a case of a mala fide exercise of power or a case of non application of mind by the authority concerned.
Since no allegation, , of malice or dishonesty have been made in the petition personally against the Minister., his omission to file a counter affidavit, by itself, could not be a ground to sustain the allegation of mala fides or non application of mind.
[446 D E]
