The respondent, filed petitions under Am.
226 and 227 in the Assam High Court asking that notifications by the State Government of the transfer of one District & Sessions Judge and the appointment and posting of another be quashed on the ground that the High Court alone could make the transfers and.
in any event, the High Court was to be consulted and was not consulted before the impugned orders were made.
The High Court held that there was no consultation with regard to the posting of one of the District Judges and that his transfer was irregular as the High Court alone could have ordered it; and furthermore that the transfer of the other.
District Judge was for a like reason also irregular.
Holding, however, that none of the District Judges could be said to occupy wrongly the office of District & Sessions judge, the High Court declined the writ of quo warranto and dismissed the petition, but without costs to the State Govenment.
One of the learned Judges of the High Court who comprised the Division Bench that heard the petitions,, in a separate but concurring judgment, passed some scathing remarks on the action of the Government which he described as mala fide and actuated by some ulterior motive.
On being moved by the State Government, the High Court granted certificates under article 132 of the Constitution to appeal to the Supreme Court on the ground that the judgment involved the interpretation of articles 233 and 235 of the Constitution.
By these appeals the State Government sought a reversal of the opinion of the High Court on the two Articles.
Three questions arose for decision in the appeal: (a) who is to order transfer of a District Judge the State Government or the High Court; (b) is the provision regarding consultation in article 233 mandatory or directory and if the former, whether the High Court was not in fact consulted; and (c) whether the remarks complained of about the State Government made by the learned Judge should be expunged.
HELD: (i) Under article 233 the Governor is only concerned with the appointment, promotion and posting to the cadre of district Judges but not with the transfer of District Judges already appointed or promoted and posted to the cadre.
The latter is a matter of control of District Judges which is vested in the High Court under article 235.
[460 G] The word posting means either to station some one at a place or to assign someone to a post, I.e. a position or a job, especially one to which a person is appointed.
In article 233 it bears the second meaning.
The word occurs in association with the words 'appointment ' and 'promotion ' and takes its colour from them.
These words indicate the stage when 454 455 a person first gets a position or job and 'posting 'by association means the assignment of an appointee or promotee to a position in the cadre of District Judges.
The word 'posting ' cannot be understood in the sense of 'transfer ' when the idea of appointment and promotion is involved in the combination.
This meaning is quite out of place because 'transfer ' operates at a stage beyond appointment and promotion.
Transfer, therefore, falls within the control vested in the High Court.
[460 C G] State of West Bengal vs Nripendranath Bagcht,[1966] 1 S.C.R. 771, referred to.
(ii) As the High Court acting under article 235 and not the State Government is the authority to make transfers, no question can arise of a consultation on this account.
In the present case, however, consultation as required by article 233, was necessary before one of the District Judges was promoted and posted as a District Judge.
Chandra Mohan vs U.P. , referred to.
(iii) The power to expunge is an extraordinary power and can be exercised only when a clear case is made out.
Although the opinion of this Court may be that the learned Judge need not have made the remarks complained of, it could not be said that in making them he acted with such impropriety that the extraordinary powers should be exercised.
[462 DIP]
