The respondent company, which was an engineering concern with a workshop at Morvi, obtained a contract from the Western Railway Administration for construction of third class coaches.
Under the contract the respondent constructed three coaches and submitted a bill which was properly certified on October 4, 1958, in accordance with the agreement as to the work done by the respondent.
After the bill had been paid, the respondent wrote to the Additional Collector of Sales tax requesting him under Section 27 of the Bombay Sales tax Act, 1953 to hold that the transaction was a works contract and not a sale, so that no sales tax was payable under the Act.
The Additional Collector held however that the transaction was a sale on which tax was payable.
Dismissing an appeal from this decision, the Sales tax Tribunal took the view that the general conditions of the contract showed the ownership of the coach bodies only passed to the Rail when they were completed and handed over to the Railway, so that way contract was for supply of coach bodies.
Sales tax was therefore payable on the price of these coach bodies.
Upon a reference made to it, the High Court held however that the contract clearly mentioned that the contract was for performance of work of building, erecting and furnishing coach bodies on Broad Gauge under frames which already be longed to the Railway.
The terms of the contract further showed that as soon as the materials were taken by the respondent to the site of the construction of coaches, the ownership in those materials vested in the Railway and all that the respondent had to do was to carry out the work of erecting and furnishing the coach bodies.
When the coach bodies .were ready, the property in them vested in the Railway automatically without any further transfer of rights in it to the Railway.
The ownership in the ready coach bodies never vested in the respondent company at all and although materials for their construction had to be obtained by it and brought to the site, in purchasing those materials it was acting more or less in the capacity of an agent !or the Railway.
Accordingly the High Court came to the finding that the contract between the parties was one entire and indivisible contract for carrying out the works specifi ed in the agreement and that it did not envisage either the sale of the materials by the respondent to the Railway, or of the coach bodies as such; no sales tax was therefore held leviable on the transaction.
On appeal to this Court.
HELD : The terms of the contract led to the only inference that the respondent was not to be the owner of the ready coach bodies and that the property in those bodies vested in the Railway even during the process of construction.
The transaction was therefore clearly a works contract which did not involve any sale.
[547 G] 544 Patnaik & Company vs State of Orissa, ; distinguished.
