S took a loan from the appellant bank on the strength of an arrange merit whereby the State Government of Jammu and Kashmir would repay it in instalments out of the land revenue to be collected by it from S 's lands.
Such payments on behalf of the Government were mistakenly made each year both by the Accountant General and by the Treasury so that the amount credited by the bank in S 's account represented an over payment by the State.
When the Accountant General realised the mistake he asked the bank to reverse the relevant entries in S 's account so as to cancel the over payment, which the bank after initial objection, did.
Thereafter, on the basis of the reversed entries the bank filed a suit for the recovery of its debt.
It was objected by the respondents (successors in interest to S) that it was not open to the bank to reverse the credit entries in the account of S after they had been made in the manner it was done.
The trial Court held that the amount was paid twice over by mistake and therefore the bank was entitled to reverse the entries at the instance of the Ac countant General without reference to section The High Court however, in appeal, rejected the argument on behalf of the bank that section 72 of the Indian Contract Act allowed it to reverse the entries.
In appeal to this Court, HELD : Section 72 of the Indian Contract Act will only apply when it is a case of two persons one paying the money and the other receiving the money on behalf of the person paying it.
The section has no application where money is paid by a person to a bank with instructions that it should be deposited in the account of a third person who is a constituent of the bank.
[795 G] In the present case, for the purpose of payment, Government was the agent of S and whatever money was paid to be credited to the account of S,, even though it was paid through Government, became his money and it could not be paid out of his account which was in substance the effect of reversing the entries, without his consent.
[796 C] Imperial Bank of Canada vs Bank of Hamilton, , distinguished.
