By a resolution dated August 23, 1952 it was resolved to wind up the respondent company and to appoint a liquidator for that purpose.
The paid up capital of the assessee was Rs. 25 lakhs, and on the date of commencement of winding up it had an accumulated profit of Rs. 5,34,041, From time, to time the liquidator distributed the assets in his hands among, the shareholders.
Out of Rs. 15 lakhs distributed on September 9, 1952 the Income tax Officer brought, in the assessment year 1953 54, to tax Rs. 52,400 as 'dividend ' within the meaning of section 2 (6A) (c) of the Income tax Act 1922 as it then stood.
By virtue of an amendment of the said clause as effected by the Finance Act 1956 dividend was to include any distribution made to the shareholders of a company on its liquidation, to the extent to which the distribution is attributable to the accumulated profits of the company immediately before its liquidation whether capitalised or no, On July 24, 1957, the liquidator distributed Rs. 75,000 among the shareholders.
The Income tax Officer in the course of assessment for the year 1958 59 sought to bring the entire amount so distributed to tax as 'dividend ' The Appellate Assistant Commissioner confirmed the order of the Income tax Officer.
In appeal to the Tribunal it was urged on behalf of the assessee that when Rs. 15 lakhs were distributed on September 3, 1952 and Rs. 2 lakhs 25 thousand on September, 25, 1952 the entire accumulated profit was exhausted and thereafter there were no accumulated profits which could be distributed, and that in any event whenever distribution is made of the assets in the hands of the liquidator, accumulated profits and the capital must be deemed to be distributed in the same proportion in which the accumulated profits and the capital stood on the date of the liquidation.
The Tribunal rejected the first contention and did not consider the second.
In reference the High Court held that since the Tribunal had not disintegrated Rs.75,000 distributed for ascertaining whether any part of it came out of theaccumulated profits, no part of Rs. 75,000 could be regarded as dividend.
The Revenue appealed.
HELD : The language used by the Legislature in section 2 (6A) (c) as amended by the Finance Act 1956, is fairly clear. 'Mere is in the bands of the liquidator only one fund.
When a distribution is made out of the fund, for the purpose of determining tax liability, and only for that purpose the amount distributed is disintegrated into its components capital and accumulated profits as they existed immediately before the commencement of liquidation.
In any distribution made to the shareholders of a company by the liquidator, that part which is attributable to the accumu lated profits of the company immediately before its liquidation, whether such profits have been capitalised or not, would be treated as dividend and liable to tax under the Act.
The amount distributed would therefore be deemed to be received by the shareholders partly as accumulated pro M17Stup.
CI/66 5 778 fits and the rest as capital, the proportion being the same which the accumulated profits bore to the capital in the accounts of the company at the commencement of winding up, and that part of the receipt which is attributable to the accumulated profits would be taxable.
The Income tax Officer has therefore in the first instance to determine the accumulated profits in the hands of the company whether capitalised or not, and the remaining capital immediately before the liquidation : he has to determine the ratio between such capital and the undistributed profits, and then to apply the ratio to the amount distributed to determine the component attributable to accumulated profits.
[782 H; 783 C] In the present case therefore the Income tax authorities had to determine what part of the sum of Rs. 75,000 distributed among the shareholders represented accumulated profits.
Only that part of Rs. 75,000 which bore the same ratio to Rs. 75000 which the accumulated profits at the liquidation bore to the total assets of the company immediately before liquidation was dividend.
[783 G] Commissioners of Inland Revenue vs George Burrell, L.R. , referred to.
