The , carved out of the old State of Punjab two new States, Punjab and Haryana, transferred some areas to Himachal Pradesh and constituted Chandigarh, a territory of the old State, into a Union territory.
The old State had a bicameral Legislature and so also has the new State of Punjab; but that of Haryana is to be unicameral.
Under the Act the Legislative Assembly of Haryana is to consist of only 54 members; members of the Legislative Council of the old State belonging to Haryana area are unseated, while those members residing in the Union Territory of Chandigarh continue to be members of the Legislative Council of that new State of Punjab.
The appellants, none of whom was a sitting member of the Legislative Council of the old State, challenged the legality of the Act in a writ petition, which the High Court rejected.
In appeal to this Court, the appellants contended that (i) Constitution of the Legislative Assembly of Haryana by section 13(1) of the Act which departs from the minimum membership prescribed to the State Legislative Assembly violates the mandatory provisions of the Art 170(1) of the Constitution; and (ii) by enacting that members of the Legislative Council of the old State residing in the Union Territory of Chandigarh shall continue to sit in the Legislative Council in the new State of Punjab and by enacting that the members elected to the Legislative Council from the Haryana area shall be unseated, there was denial of equality.
HELD : The appeal must be dismissed.
(i) Power to reduce the total number of members of the Legislative Assembly below the minimum prescribed by article 170(1) is implicit in the authority to make laws under article 4 of Constitution.
Such a provision is undoubtedly an amendment of the Constitution, but by the express provision provided in article 4(2),no such law which amends the First and the Fourth Schedule or which makes supplemental, incidental and consequential provision is to be deemed an amendment of the Constitution for, purposes of article 368.
The Constitution also contemplates by article 4 that in the enactment of laws for giving effect to the admission, establishment or formation of new States or alteration of areas and the boundaries of those States power to modify provisions of the Constitution in order to tide, over a temporary difficulty may be exercised by the Parliament.
[112,H] 1 13 C D] (ii) Parliament could not make adjustments as would strictly conform to the requirements of article 171(3) without fresh elections.
It, therefore, adopted an ad hoe test and unseated members of the Council who were 110 residents of the Haryana area.
There was, however, no discrimination in unseating members from the Haryana Area of which appellants could complain.
The appellants were not the sitting members of the Legislative Council of the old State and no personal right of the appellants was in fringed by unseating those members.
A resident of the State of Haryana merely because of that character, cannot claim to sit in the Punjab Legislative Council.
By allowing the members from the Chandigarh area to continue to remain members of the new State of Punjab no right of the residents of Haryana was violated.
[114 E H; 115 A]
