The appellant was the winning candidate In an election to the Rajasthan Legislative Assembly.
The respondent who was one of the unsuccessful candidates filed an ' election petition and alleged therein that the appellant was guilty of corrupt practice within the meaning of a. 123(4) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
The corrupt practice alleged was that at a meeting presided over by the appellant a poem was read out which represented the respondent to be the greatest of all thieves '.
The Election Tribunal as well as the High Court gave their findings against the 'appellant who came to this Court with certificate.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant that : (i) the statement in question was not a statement of fact but only of opinion, (ii) No attempt had been made to prove that the person who recited the poem containing the statement believed it to be false or did not believe that it was true, (iii) the onus to prove that corrupt practice had been committed lay on the respondent and that had not been discharged.
HELD (i) The mere absence of details as to time and place would not turn a statement of fact into a mere expression of opinion.
[130 F G] In the present case taking the poem as a whole there could be no doubt that when the respondent was called the greatest of all thieves there was a clear statement of fact about his personal character and conduct.
[133 E F] (ii) The appellant presided and his election agent was present at the meeting at which the poem in question was read.
The responsibility for the publication in the circumstances of the case was that of the appellant and it was the appellant 's belief that mattered and not the belief of the person who read it with the consent of the appellant.
[135 E G] (iii) The onus on an election petitioner under section 123(4) is to show that a statement of fact was published by a candidate or his agent or by any other person with the consent of the candidate or his election agent and also to show that that statement was false and related to his personal character or conduct.
This onus is very light and can be discharged by the complaining candidate swearing to that effect.
Once that is done the burden shifts to the candidate, making the false statement of fact to show what his belief was.
[136E F] It was for the appellant to show either that the statement was true or that he believed it to be true.
The appellant had failed to do so.
The High Court therefore rightly held that the respondent had discharged the burden which lay on him.
[137 A B] Case law considered.
