As a result of the Osmania University (Amendment) Act 11 of 1966, section 12(1) of the Osmania University Act, 1959,. was amended to provide for the appointment of the Vice Chancellor by the Chancellor alone; in section 12(2) a provision was introduced whereby he could only be removed from office by an order of the Chancellor passed on the ground of mis behaviour or incapacity after enquiry by a person who was or had been a Judge of a High Court or the Supreme Court and after the Vice Chancellor had been given an opportunity of making his representation against such removal Section 13(1) of the 1959 Act was also amended so as to reduce the term of office of the Vice Chancellor from 5 to 3 years.
The 1959 Act was again amended later in 1966 by the Osmania University (Second Amendment) Act XI of 1966.
Section 5 of this amending Act introduced a new section 13A into the 1959 Act whereby it was provided that the person then holding the office of Vice Chancellor could only hold that office until a new Vice Chancellor was appointed; and that such new appointment must be made within 90 days of the commencement of the Act whereupon the old Vice Chancellor would cease to hold office.
The appellant filed a writ petition claiming, inter alia, that section 5 of the second amending Act introducing the new section 13A was discriminatory as against him and therefore violative of article 14.
The High Court dismissed the petition.
In the appeal to the Supreme Court, it was contended on behalf of the respondents that as the term of office had been reduced to 3 years by the first amending Act, the legislature.
, in order to give effect to this provision and to enable fresh appointments to be made under the Act, had enacted section 13A which had, necessarily, to apply to a person like the appellant who was in office at the time when the provisions came into force.
Such provisions could not, in the nature of things, apply to Vice Chancellors who were to be appointed in future; the appellant was appointed from a panel submitted by a committee constituted under the unamended section 12(2) whereas future Vice Chancellors were to be appointed by the Chancellor alone; furthermore, the appellant had been the Vice Cancellor for 7 years.
Having regard to these circumstances the legislature had chosen to treat the appellant as a class by himself and had differentiated him from persons to be appointed Vice Chancellors in the 215 future; that such classification was reasonable and had a rational relation to the object sought to be achieved by the second amending Act i.e. bringing about uniformity in the tenure of 3 years.
of office fee all Vice Chancellor; that the appellant was not entitled to the benefit of section 12(2) and the legislature was competent to enact section 13A so as to give effect to the amended provisions as early as possible.
HELD: Section 5 of the second amending Act (XI of 1966) introducing s 13A into the 1959 Act was discriminatory and therefore violative of article 14.
[232 E] There was no intelligible differentia on the basis of which a classification of Vice Chancellors into two categories i.e. the appellant as the then existing Vice Chancellor and the future Vice Chancellors to be appointed under the Act,, could be justified.
The term of office of three years for the Vice Chancellor had already been fixed by the first amending Act Therefore the differential principal adopted for terminating the appellant 's service under section 13A in introduced by the second amending Act and directed as against the appellant alone could not be considered to have a rational relation to object sought to be achieved by the second amending Act.
Budhan Choudhary vs The State of Bihar,[1955] 1 S.C.R.1045, 1049; Ram Krishna Dalmia vs
Shri Justice S.R. Tendolkar ; , 296; referred to.
[231 B D] While a Vice Chancellor appointed under section 12 could be removed from office only by adopting the procedure under section 12(2), the services of the appellant, who was also a Vice Chancellor and similarly situated were sought to terminated by enacting section 13A of the Act.
There was no policy underelying the Act justifying this differential treatment.
There was also no justification for the distinction whereby the appellant would appointed under the Act would continue in office for three years [231E G]
