The appellant firm was appointed sole selling agent of a sugar manufacturing company and deposited Rs. 50,000 as security for due performance of the contract; this amount was to carry interest at 6 per cent per annum.
There was no restriction on the use of the said deposit by the, company.
According to cl.
(9) of the agreement the security and interest were to be refunded at the termination of the agency; in default of such payment the appellant firm was entitled to a commission as if agency had not terminated.
The clause further said that "as long as security with interest is not refunded and commission due is not paid this agreement will not be terminated.
" The company was ordered to be wound up before the period of agency came to an end.
Consequent on the winding up the appellant made an application praying for refund of its security deposit along with interest.
It was contended that as the company held the amount of deposit as a trustee the appellant was entitled to priority among the creditors.
On behalf of the liquidators it was denied that the amount deposited was in the nature of a trust entitled to preference over other debts.
The company judge held that he amount was an ordinary debt.
The Division Bench of the High Court also decided against the appellant.
In appeal by special leave to this ' Court.
HELD:The deposit did not amount to a trust.
The question whether the security deposit in a particular case can be said to be impressed with a trust will have to be decided on the basis of the terms of the agreement and the facts and circumstances of each case, without any leaning one way or the other on the fact that the money was given as a., security deposit.
[434 C] If a trust can clearly be spelled out from the terms of the agreement that ends the matter.
But if the trust cannot be spelled out clearly the fact that there was no segregation provided for, and the fact that interest was paid, would go a long way to show that the deposit was not impressed ' with the character of a trust particularly when the person with whom the deposit was made could mix it with his own money and could use it for himself.
In such a case the inference would be that the relationship between the parties was that of a debtor and creditor.
Further besides these circumstances, if there is any other term which suggests one kind of ' f relationship rather than the other that will also have to be taken into account.
[436 B C] In the present case the company was free to use the money for its own purpose and had to pay interest on it.
Further, in cl.
(9) of the agreement the security was put on a par with the commission which was nothing but a debt.
The courts below had therefore rightly treated the security deposit as an ordinary debt.
[436 F] Peter Donald Macpherson vs Dugald Mckechine and Ors.
XXVIII In the matter of Travancore National and 430 Quilon Bank Limited, Official Liquidators and Another Applicants, , In re Manekji Petit Manufacturing Company Ltd. A.I.R. 1932 Bom.
31 1, Maheshwari Brothers vs Official Liquidators, I.L.R. [1942] All. 242, Keshetra Mohan Das vs D. C. Basu, I.L.R. Gee vs Liddell, ; , Knatchbull vs Hallett, (1879 80) XIII Ch.
D. 696.
In re Hallett & Co., and Frank M.Mckey vs Maurcie Paradise, ; , referred to.
