Under section 42(1) of the , no owner of a trans port vehicle shall use it or permit it to be used in any public place save in accordance with the conditions of a permit issued by the appropriated authority.
A "transport vehicle" means, under section 2(33) a "public ser , vice vehiicle" and a "public service vehicle" means,, under section 2(25), a motor vehicle either used or adapted to be used for the carriage of passengers for hire or reward.
The respondent was the owner of a motor vehicle registered as a "motor car" as defined in section 2(16) of the Act and not, as a "transport vehicle".
He was charged with an offence under section 42(1) read with section 123 of the Act, as the car was used on one occasion, for carrying passengers on payment of hire, that is for having used the car as a "transport vehicle" without the requisite permit.
The trial court, and the High Court on appeal, acquitted him on the ground that as section 42(1) uses the words "owner of a transport vehicle" the sub section applies only to cases where the motor vehicle was registered as a transport vehicle.
In appeal to this Court, HELD : It is the use of the motor vehicle for carrying passengers for hire or reward which determines the category of the vehicle and the.appli 'cation of section 42(1).
Therefore, even if the motor vehicle was occasionally used for carrying passengers for hire or reward, it must be regarded when so used, as a "public service vehicle" and therefore a "transport vehicle ' and, if it was so used without the necessary permit the owner who uses it or permits it to be so used would be liable under section 42(1) read with,: section 123.
The interpretation of the High Court would lead to the anomalous result, namely : that whereas the owner of a transport vehicle is required to have the permit, the owner of a motor vehicle not constructed or adapted as a transport vehicle could carry with impunity passengers without any permit, and such an interpretation would defeat the object of the legislature in making the provision in the interest of the safety of passengeii.
A B; 677 H; 678 A B] B section Usman Saheb vs State of Mysore, and.
Jayaram vs State of Mysore, , overruled.
