The Andhra Pradesh Land Revenue (Additional Assessment) and Cess Revision Act, 1962 (Act 22 of 1962) was passed with the object of bringing uniformity in assessment of land revenue in the Telengana and Andhra areas of the State.
It also provided for additional levies on certain classes of land.
When the assessment of land revenue was sought to be collected from the respondents, they filed writ petitions in the High Court challenging the constitutional validity of the Act and the petitions were allowed.
In appeal by the State to this Court.
, HELD : The Act offended article 14 of the Constitution and was there fore void.
Both in Andhra as well as Telengana area under the Ryotwari system, the land revenue which was a share of the produce of the land commuted in money value varied according to the classification of soil based upon its productivity; the soils of similar grain values were bracketed together in orders called 'tarams ' or 'Bhagana ' and the rates were further adjusted in the dry land having regard to the water supply.
But in both the cases, the quality and the grade of the soil divided in 'Tarams ' or 'Bhaganas ' was the main basis for assessment.
[37 E G] Sections 3 and 4 of the Act, in fixing the minimum flat rate for dry or wet lands, ignored the well established taram principle; and in the case of wet lands an attempt had been made to classify different systems on the basis of the ayacuts; but this test was unreasonable and had no relation to either the duration of water supply or to the quality or the productivity of the soil.
The classification attempted in either case had No. reasonable relation to the objects sought to be achieved, namely, imposition of fair assessments and rationalisation of the revenue assessment structure.
An arbitrary method has been introduced displacing one of the most equitable and reasonable methods adopted for many years in the revenue administration of the State.
[44 C E] Further, the imposition of assessment was left to the arbitrary discretion of the officers not named in the Act without giving any notice, opportunity or remedy to the assessees for questioning the correctness of any of the important stages in the matter of assessment such as ayacut taram, rate or classification or even in regard to the calculation of the figures.
It is not possible to read into the section the entire series of the Standing Orders of the Board of Revenue which deal with the mode of assessment: for if it was the intention of the Legislature that 29 the Standing Orders of the Board of Revenue should be brought into the Act by incorporation, it would have certainly used appropriates words to convey that idea.
[45 D E; 48 E F] Kunnathat Thathunni Moopil Nair vs The State of Kerala, ; , East India Tobacco Co. vs State of Andhra Pradesh, ; and Khandige Sham Bhat vs The Agricultural Income tax Officer, ; , applied.
C. V. Rajagopalachariar vs State of Madras, A.I.R. 1960 Mad.
543 and H. H. Vishwasha Thirtha Swamiar of Sri Pejavar Mutt vs The State of Mysore, , distinguished.
