The appellant company carried on the work of transforming And transmitting electrical energy.
There was dispute between the company and the respondent whether certain employees of the company like engineers, draughtsmen, clerks, accountants etc.
mentioned in Appendices III, IV and V of the company 's petition before the Employees ' Insurance Court, were 'Employees ' or not within the meaning of section 2(9) of the Employees Insurance Act, 1948.
The Employees Insurance Court held the said workers to be employees under section 2(9) and this finding was confirmed by the Single Judge as well as the Division Bench of the High Court.
The company appealed to this Court by special leave.
HELD : (i) The premises of the company were a factory within the meaning of the Employees State Insurance Act but the High Court was wrong in laying down the proposition that every inch of the area over which the transmission lines were spread was a factory within the meaning of section 2(12).
The company 's factory had a fixed site and was located within the compound wall of its premises.
[96 E, H] (ii)All the employees of the disputed categories clerks or otherwise were employed in connection with the work of the factory, that is to say, in connection with the work of transforming and transmitting electrical power.
Some of the employees were not engaged in manual labour.
But a person doing non manual work can be an employee within the meaning of section 2(9) (i) if he is employed in connection with the work of the factory.
The duties of the administrative staff are directly connected within the work of the factory.
[99 C, G] Even those employees who worked outside the factory but whose duties were connected with the work of the factory were employees within the meaning of section 2(9)(i).
Among such employees were to be included those attending to sub stations of the factory.
[100 A] Ardeshir H. Bhiwaniwala vs The State of Bombay, [1961] 3 S.C.R.542, State of Uttar Pradesh vs M. P. Singh, ; and Employees ' State Insurance Corporation, Bombay vs Raman, referred to.
