The petitioners were certain textile mills of Ahmedabad.
They filed writ petitions under article 32 of the Constitution against assessment to proper tax by the Corporation of the City of Ahmedabad under the provisions of the Bombay Provincial Municipal Corporation Act, 1949.
The following contentions fell for consideration : (i) The method of adopting a flat rate for a floor area for determining the annual value adopted by the Corporation was against the provisions of the Act, as well as against all recognised principles of valuation for the purpose of rating; it was also violative of article 14; (ii) Rules 7(2) and (3) made under the Act gave unguided power to the Commissioner to specify machinery to be treated as part of the 'land ' for the purpose of taxation and therefore were bad due to excessive delegation.
They also fell beyond the ambit of Entry 49 of List 11 of the Seventh Schedule.
HELD : (i) The method of levy of tax on the basis of floor area was against the provisions of the Act and the Rules made thereunder.
The latter clearly laid down that the rateable value of the property must be assessed after determining the rack rent or the annual rental value in respect of each premises which is to be computed on the basis of the annual rent for which the property might reasonably be expected to let from year to year.
It did not lie in the mouth of the municipality to say that the irregularity was open to correction.
[693 G H; 694 A B; 684 G H] (ii) It had not been established that condition prerequisite for determination of annual value of textile factories at Ahmedabad on the basis of the rental value per foot super of floor area existed at the relevant time, nor had it been shown that the so called contractor 's method was adopted by the Municipal authorities of Ahmedabad.
The method was also not one which is generally recognised by authorities on rating.
[693E] (iii) Applied indiscriminately as it appeared to have been done in the present case the method of taxation on the basis of floor area was sure to give rise to inequalities as there had been no classification of factories on any rational basis.
Further there did not seem to be any basis for diving the factories and the buildings thereof under two general classes as buildings for processing and buildings for non processing purposes Article 14 was therefore clearly violated.
[693 F G] 680 Lokmanya Mills vs The Barsi Borough Municipality, ; , relied on.
Bhuvaneswariah vs State, A.I.R. 1950 Mys.
170 and N. Kunhali Haji vs State of Kerala, A.I.R. 1966 Ker. 14, referred to.
(iv) Rules 7(2) and (3) were invalid on account of excessive delegation of powers by the Legislature.
Under these rules the specification of the classes of machinery for the purpose of taxation is done by the Commissioner with the approval of the Corporation irrespective of the question as to where they are to be found.
It therefore depends on the arbitrary will of the Commissioner as to what machinery he would specify and what he would not.
Moreover, he is the only person who can examine this question as there is no right of appeal.
[701 D F] (v) Entry 49 in List II of the Seventh Schedule only permitted levy of tax on land and buildings.
It did not permit the levy of tax on machinery contained in or situate on the building even though the machinery was there for the use of the building for a particular purpose.
Rule 7(2) which levied such a tax was therefore beyond the legislative competence of the State.
[701 A C] In re.
The Central Provinces and Berar Act No. XIV of 1938, , Diamond Sugar Mills Ltd. & Anr,.
vs State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr. ; , Ralla Ram vs The Province of East Punjab, , R. vs St. Nicholas, Gloucester, , Kirby vs Hunslet Union and Smith vs Willesden Union, , considered.
