The appellant company ran a narrow gauge railway between Shahdara and Saharanpur.
As it operated partly within the Municipal area of Saharanpur the Municipal Board of that place sought to subject railway stores and materials brought within the municipal area to terminal tax as provided by the Rules framed under the United Provinces Municipalities Act, 1916, as amended by Act 1 of 1918.
The exemption from terminal tax given to railway stores and materials by item 2 to Schedule B of the said rules was denied to the appellant company on the ground that it was a 'tramway ' and not a 'railway '.
The company had been originally registered in 1905 under the , (Act 11 of 1886); in 1907 the whole of the Indian Railways Act, 1890, (Act 1 of 1890) with the exception of section 135 had been extended to the company by the Governor General in Council.
The Company 's claim that it was a 'railway ' entitled to the exemption under item 2 of Schedule B aforesaid, was rejected by the Municipal authorities as well as in appeal, by the Additional District Magistrate.
The company therefore filed a writ petition before the High Court which was rejected.
By special leave appeal was filed to this Court.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant that : (i) in the absence of any special definition contained in the provisions granting the exemption in question, the expression 'railway ' occurring in item 2 of Schedule B of the Terminal Tax Rules must bear the commonly understood meaning of a "carriage of passenger send goods, on iron rails"; (ii) by virtue of the definition in section 311(2) of the Government of India Act, 1935, and the provision corresponding to it in the Constitution viz., article 366(20) the appellant 's system though registered under the Tramway.% Act, was a railway, (iii) the mere fact that section 135 of the Railways Act had not been applied to the appellant 's system was not a decisive factor against the appellant as assumed by the High Court.
It was not in dispute that appellant 's system had all the features of a railway.
HELD:Neither the Municipal Act nor the Terminal Tax Rules give any special definition of the expression 'railway ' and there is nothing in the said Act or Rules to indicate that the word 'railway ' in item 2 of Schedule B is used only to refer to a 'railway ' registered under the Rail ways Act or to limit the generality of the expression 'railway ' in any way.
Under those circumstances, if the appellant was a 'railway ' in fact.
, as commonly understood there did not appear to be any controversy on the point it would be a railway notwithstanding the fact that it was rep.
C.I./67 3 244 gistered as a 'tramway ' under the Tramways Act.
The legislature itself had applied the provisions of the Railway Act to the appellant, and the 'appellant also satisfied the definition of a 'railway ' under the Government of India Act, 1935 and the Constitution.
[254B D] If the appellant was a 'railway ' otherwise, the mere fact that the provisions of section 135 of the Railways Act had not been applied to it, was of no consequence.
[251H] Blackpool and Fleetwood Tramroad Company vs Thornton Urban Council, L.R. [1907] 1 K.B.D. 568, Thornton Urban Council vs Blackpool and Fleetwood Tramroad Company, L.R. [1909] AC. 264 and Tottenham Urban Council vs Metropolitan Electric Tramways, Ltd., , referred to.
