The appellant, who was carrying on the business of financing film producers and distributors, had advanced a sum of Rs. 1,00,000 to a firm of film distributors.
Clause 3 of the agreement between the parties provided that the appellant was not entitled to any interest but that he was to share with the distributors their profit and loss; and cl. 7 provided that in case the picture was not released within the stipulated time, the distributors would return to the appellant all the moneys advanced by him together with interest at 9% per annum.
There was delay in releasing the picture and a dispute arose between the appellant and the distributors, which was settled.
The appellant found that a sum of Rs. 80,759 was irrecoverable.
He accordingly wrote it off as a bad debt and claimed it as a revenue loss which should be deducted under section 10(2)(xi) of the Income tax Act, 1922.
The department, the Appellate Tribunal, and the High Court on reference, held against the appellant, on the basis of cl. 3 of the agreement, that the loss suffered by the appellant was a capital loss.
In appeal to this Court, HELD : Since all payments reduce capital one is apt to consider a loss as a capital loss.
But losses in the running of a business cannot be said to be of capital.
To find out whether an expenditure is on the capital account or on revenue account, one must consider the expenditure in relation to the business.
In the present case, the debt was in respect of and incidental to the business of the appellant in the relevant accounting year, and the accounts of his business were kept on mercantile basis.
If cls.
3 and 7 of the agreement are read together, the transaction would be a money lending transaction or a transaction in the nature of a financial deal in the course of the appellant 's business, resulting in a loan repayable with interest.
Therefore, the loss suffered was a revenue loss and the appellant was entitled to claim the deduction of the amount as a bad debt under section 10(2) (xi) of the Act.
[241H; 242E F] Reid 's Brewery Co. Ltd. vs Male, , applied.
