The respondent joined Class III service of the Mysore Government in 1958 as a local candidate.
According to the Mysore Civil Service Rules, 1958 a local candidate meant a temporary Government servant not appointed regularly in accordance with the rules of recruitment to that service.
On September 22, 1961 the Mysore Government passed art order whereby under sub cl.
(i) of cl. 2 local candidates appointed before Dec. 31, 1959, were entitled to have their appointments regularised subject to certain conditions.
According to sub cl.
(ii) of cl. 2 of the Order the services of local candidates were to be regularised with effect from the date of their appointment ', from which their service was continuous provided they were in service on 1st January 1960 and continued to be in service at the time their services were regularised.
Sub clause (iii) said that local service would count for purposes of leave, pension and increments but not for purposes of seniority, and that only the service from the date of regularisation of the appointment in the particular department would count for seniority.
Sub clause (iv) laid down that breaks in service would not be condoned even if such breaks were only for short periods.
There was a break of one day in the respondent 's service on March 1, 1961.
The Mysore Government terminated his service on July 4, 1963.
The respondent filed a writ petition before the High Court claiming that he was entitled to have his appointment regularised under the aforesaid Government Order.
The High Court held that the requirements of the Order were that a local candidate was entitled to its benefit if he joined service before Dec. 31, 1959, and was in service on two dates, namely 1st January 1960 and 22nd September 1961.
On this view the High Court allowed the respondent 's petition whereupon the State appealed to this Court.
HELD : The High Court was wrong in its construction of sub cl.
(ii) of cl. 2 of the Order.
On a harmonious construction of sub cl.
(ii) with the other subclauses of cl. 2 its proper interpretation would be that in order that the regularisation order may apply to a particular case the local candidate must be initially appointed prior to December 31, 1959, he must be in service on January 1, 1960 and continue to be in service without any break till the date of the order.
Since the service of the respondent was not continuous during this period he was not entitled to regularisation of his appointment under the Order.
(133 G]
