The appellant was one of several applicants for a mining lease in Andhra Pradesh.
The State Government however granted it to 'respondent No. 3.
The appellant then filed an application in revision, under section 30 of the Mines & Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act, 1957, read with r. 54, to the Union of India.
Respondent No. 3 filed a counter statement and the State Government filed its comments.
The appellant filed a rejoinder.
The Union Government without hearing the appellant rejected his revision application.
An appeal was filed before this Court.
The question that fell for consideration was whether it was necessary for the Government of India to give reasons for its decision in view of the provisions of the Act and the Rules or aliunde because the decision was liable to be questioned in appeal to this Court.
HELD : (i) In exercising its powers of revision under r. 55 the Central Government discharges functions which are quasi judicial.
The decisions of tribunals in India are subject to the supervisory powers of the High Court under article 227 of the Constitution and of appellate powers of this court under article 136.
Both the High Court and this Court are placed under a great disadvantage if no reasons are given and the revision is dismissed curtly by the use of the single word 'rejected ' or 'dismissed '.
In such a case this Court can probably only exercise its appellate jurisdiction satisfactorily by examining the entire records of the case and after giving a hearing come to its conclusion on the merits of the case.
This would certainly be a very unsatisfactory method of dealing with the appeal.
[308E F; 309B C] If the State Government gives sufficient reasons for accepting the application of one party and rejecting that of others, as it must, and the Central Government adopts the reasoning of the State Government, this Court may proceed to examine whether the reasons given are sufficient for the purpose of upholding the decision.
But when the reasons given in the order of the State Government are scrappy or nebulous and the Central Government makes no attempt to clarify the same, this Court, in appeal may have to examine the case de novo, without anybody being the wiser for the review by the Central Government.
The same difficulty would arise where the State Government gives a number of reasons some of which are good and some are not and the Central Government gives its decision without specifying those reasons which according to it are sufficient to uphold the order of the State Government.
That is why in such circumstances, what is known as a 'speaking order ' is called for.
[309C F] 3 03 A 'speaking order ' is all the more necessary in the case of a decision under r. 55 because there is provision for new material being placed before the Central Government which was not there before the State Government, and further, because the decision, affecting important rights of parties, is given in a summary manner without a hearing being allowed to the parties.
A party is entitled to know why the decision has gone against him.
[320G 321B] The absence in r. 55 of any provision for giving such reasons is not decisive of the matter in view of the above considerations.
[315H] Shivji Nathubhai vs The Union of India, ; , M.P. Industries vs Union, ; , Harinagar Sugar Mills Ltd. vs Shyam Sundar Jhunihunwala, ; and Sardar Govindraov.
State, [1965] 1 S.C.R. 678, followed.
Nandram Hunatram, Calcutta vs Union of India, A.I.R. 1966 S.C.1922 and Commissioner of Income tax vs K. V. Pilliah, , distinguished.
Rex vs Northumberland Compensation Appeal Tribunal Ex parte Shaw, , Vedachala Mudaliar vs State of Madras, A.I.R. 1952 Madras 276, Rantayya vs State of Andhra, I.L.R. 1956 Andhra 712, Annamalai vs State of Madras, A.I.R. 1957 Andhra Pradesh 738 and Joseph vs Superintendent of Post Offices, Kottayam, I.L.R. 1961 11 Kerala 245, referred to.
