J had authorised the appellant a clerk under him, to withdraw moneys from Bank for payments to different persons.
J, discovering that the moneys were not paid to persons concerned, lodged a report.
The appellant admitted to have withdrawn the moneys, but stated that he had handed them over to J, and made entries in the register showing disbursement at J s instance, and J had initiated them.
J was charged under section 409 and the appellant under sections 409, 465, 477A and 120 B I.P.C.
The Trial Court convicted both under sections 120 B and 409 but the Sessions Judge acquitted J and convicted the appellant under section 409 only.
The High Court, too, maintained the appellant 's conviction holding that the moneys having been admittedly received by the appellant, the burden of proof was upon him to show what he had done with them and there being no evidence that he handed them over to J, except his bare allegation he had failed to discharge that burden.
In appeal to this Court, the appellant contended that (i) the case proceeded erroneously as if the appellant had to prove his case beyond reasonable doubt that he had handed over the moneys to J and a reasonable doubt could have been raised in the prosecution evidence if the document called for by the appellant had been produced and his application for their production had not been rejected; (ii) it was not his duty as a clerk to receive these moneys and that he had only received them at the instance of J; (iii) the charge as to criminal breach of trust against the appellant and J being one under section 409 read with section 120 B and there being no charge under section 409 simplicitor a conviction under section 409 only was not valid; (iv) the trial suffered from misjoinder of charges in that there were six items of moneys in respect of which_ misappropriation was alleged and three entries in respect of which falsification of accounts was charged against the appellant; and (v) though he was charged under section 120 B and section 477 A no sanction tinder section 196 A(2) of the Criminal Procedure Code was obtained and, therefore, the entire trial was vitiated.
HELD:The appeal must be dismissed.
(i)There was no question of the appellant raising any reasonable doubt in view of his admission that he had received the moneys.
There was no substance in the contention that if the documents had been produced the appellant could have made out a reasonably probable case that he had handed over the moneys to J. [444A B] (ii)There was evidence that the appellant not only used to receive moneys but also used to disburse them.
Whether it was done by him as part of his duties would clearly be a matter of evidence, which cannot be gone into in this Court as it was not raised in the High Court.
J 440 authorised the appellant to draw and receive the moneys in question far the express purpose of payment to different parties.
There was, therefore, entrustment to the appellant of the said moneys for an express purpose.
[444D, F] Budha Lal vs State of Rajasthan, Cr.
A. No. 156 of 1962 decided on 27th January[1965], referred to.
(iii)If the charge of conspiracy to commit criminal breach of trust is followed by a substantive charge of criminal breach of trust in pursuance of such conspiracy there is nothing to prevent the court convicting an accused under the second charge even if the prosecution fails to establish conspiracy.
In any event, there was no prejudice caused to him as he was aware that there was a substantive charge under section 409 against him.
[444H 445B] Kizhakkeppallik Moosa vs State, A.I.R. 1963 Kerala 68, disapproved.
Willie Slaney vs State of Madhya Pradesh, [1955] 2 S.C.R. 1140, referred to.
(iv)The appellant did not at any earlier stage take objection to the charges under sections 409 and 477 A on the ground that he was likely to be embarrassed in his defence.
He has also not shown that any prejudice was caused to him and that being so this contention also must fail.
[445D] (v)Though the charge under section 120 B required sanction no such sanction was necessary in respect of the charge under section 409.
At the most, therefore, it can be argued that the Magistrate took illegal cognizance of the charge under section 120 B as section 196(2) prohibits entertainment of certain kinds of complaints for conspiracy punishable under section 120 D without the required sanction.
The absence of sanction does not prevent the court from proceeding with the trial if the complaint also charges a co conspirator of the principal offence committed in pursuance of the conspiracy or for abatement by him of any such offence committed by one of the conspirators under section 109 of the Penal Code.
The fact that sanction was not obtained in respect of the complaint under section 120 B did not vitiate the trial on the substantive charge under section 409.
No prejudice could be said to have resulted in view of the appellant 's confession.
[447C F] Abdul Mian vs The King, A.I.R. 1951 Pat.
513, Govindram Sunder Das vs Emperor, A.I.R. 1942 Sind. 63 and Nibaram Chandra Bhattacharyya vs Emperor, A.I.R. 1929 Cal.
754, referred to.
Sukumar Chatterjee vs Mosizuddin Ahmed, Syed Yawar Bhakat vs Emperor, , Ram Pat vs Emperor, (1962) 64 P.L 'R. 519 and Mohd. Bachal Abdulla vs The Emperor, , approved.
