While ascertaining the surplus land under the Pepsu Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, the excess over 30 acres owned by the appellants, a Hindu undivided family was declared surplus.
In ascertaining the surplus, the authorities ignored the transfer of land by the Karta of the family to an outsider by a registered deed.
The appellants unsuccessfully filed writ petition.
In appeal to this Court, the appellants contended that section 32 KK deprives a coparcener in a Hindu undivided family of his rights of property.
in that it takes away the rights of the descendants of the land owner to claim for themselves the permissible area and vest them in the head of the family alone so that there is not only an infringement of the right to hold property under article 19(1) (f) but also discrimination in favour of the head of the family infringing thereby article 14 and that the section cannot be said to be legislation whose object is agrarian reform and, therefore, is not protected by article 31 A. HELD:The appeal must fail.
In Pritam Singh vs State of Punjab [(1967) 2 S.C.R. 536] this Court upheld the validity of section 32 FF and held that that section was protected by article 31 A against any challenge under article 19.
If a transfer or a disposition of land can validly be ignored under section 32 FF for the purpose of ascertaining surplus land and acquisition of such surplus land bit he State and that section is protected by article 31 A, it is difficult to say why section 32 KK which, equates a Hindu undivided family with an individual landowner for the limited purpose of the Act without affecting the other rights of its members is not equally protected by that Article.
The object of enacting section 32 KK was to prevent the landowner and his descendants by reason of their constituting a Hindu undivided family from each of them claiming in his own right the permissible area from the joint holding of the family and thus retain for themselves in the aggregate area larger than 30 standard acres and preventing thereby distribution of surplus area.
[608 F H] The contention that the section is not one relating to agrarian reform is hardly sustainable in view of the objects of the Act in general and of section 32 KK in particular.
Similarly, the contention that the section has the affect of defeating the rights of a member of a Hindu undivided family from the family property also cannot be sustained because his rights in the permissible area retained by the landowner and his right to compensation in respect of the surplus area are not touched by the section.
Nor is it possible to say that the section results in the transfer of rights of the descendants of a landowner in the permissible or surplus area in favour of such landowner.
The section does not effect any change in the rights of 604 the descendants as members of a Hindu undivided family or the relationship of the family inter se except to the extent of depriving the descendants of their right to claim the ceiling area for each of them.
[609 B E] The decision of Ranjit Singh vs The State of Punjab ([1965] 1 S.C.R. 82) points out that the fixing of ceiling on lands and provisions relating to it would form part of and constitute agrarian reform and, therefore, such provisions would have the protection of article 31 A. [607 H]
