The assesses& were offered compensation and interest on the amount of compensation in respect of their property which was first requisitioned under r. 75A of the Defence of India Act, 1939 and later acquired by the State under section 5 of the Requisitioned Land (Continuance of Powers) Act.
The Requisition Act provided that.
compensation payable shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of section 19 of the Defence of India Act and the rules thereunder, but neither section 19 nor the Rules provided that interest shall be paid on the amount of compensation.
The assessee demanded more compensation and interest, and, the High Court in appeal enhanced the compensation and awarded interest on it The Revenue assessed to income tax the amount of interest, which was upheld, in reference, by the High Court.
In appeal.
this Court.
HELD : Interest received by the assessee was taxable.
If the source of the obligation imposed by the statute to pay interest arises because the claimant is kept out of his money, the interest received is chargeable to tax as income.
The same principle would apply if interest is payable under the terms of an agreement and the court or the arbitrator gives effect to the terms of the agreement express or implied and awards interest which has been agreed to be paid Clauses (a) to, (f) of section 19(1) of the Defence of India Act are a Code relating to a arbitration in determining the compensation payable to a person depraved of his property.
Provisions relating to payment of interest, are not, however, part of the law relating to arbitration and there is nothing in cl.
(g) which excludes the application of the substantive law relating to payment of interest when the arbitration is determining the amount of compensation.
In this case, the right to interest arose by virtue of the provisions of Ss. 28 and 34 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, and the arbitrator 'and the High Court merely gave effect to that right in awarding interest on the account of compensation.
[658 E F; 660 D H] Dr. Shamtal Narula vs Commissioner of Income tax, Punjab, Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Patiala, 53 I.T.R. 151, and Satinder Singh & Ors.
vs Amrao Singh & Ors. ; , followed.
The Commissioners of Inland Revenue vs Bellantine, 8 T.C. 59,5, and Simpson (H. M. Inspector of Taxes) vs Executors of Bonner Maurice as Executor of Edward Kay, , distinguished.
