The appellant.
a private person, filed three complaints under section 218 I.P.C. for the prosecution of respondent 1 charging him in each ease with abetment of offences committed by three public servants.
In each complaint respondent 1 was a co accused with another in one with an Ahmad of Tahsildar 's Court.
in another with one Lekhpal, and in the third with the another Lekhpal.
The Ahmad was alleged 10 have intentionaIIy made a false entry about the case intending that the false entry should be used in a judicial proceeding and wrong opinion be formed, the Lekhpals were alleged to have caused the preparation of an incorrect Khasra knowing to be likely that they would thereby cause loss or injury to the appellant.
The respondent 1 filed an application under 561 A Cr.
P.C. slating that the offence, if any, was one under section 193 I.P.C. and the provisions of section 195 Cr.
P.C. barred private complaints, which the High Court accepted.
In appeal, this Court, HELD: The bar of private complaints applied 10 the case of Ahmad, but not to those of Lekhpals.
1832 C D] The difference between sections 192 and 218 I.P.C. is that the former deals with judicial proceeding and the false evidence is intended to be used in a judicial proceeding, while the latter deals with public servants, and there the gist is the international preparation of false record with a view of saving or injuring any person or property and need not have relation to a judicial proceeding as such.
I830 D] Section 192 I.P.C. covers the case against the Ahmad and respondent 1 and the offence is punishable under section 193 I.P.C. which is mentioned in section 195(1)(b) Cr.
P.C. No Court can take cognizance of an offence under section 193 except on the complaint in writing of such court.
The alleged offence against the Lekhpals and respondent 1, their abettor, in the other two cases was of a different order.
The offence of section 218 I.P.C. is not a minor offence included within section 192.
It is distinct offence which can be proceeded against without the bar of section 195 Cr.
The offence was complete the moment the false record was made with the said intention and it was not necessary for the completion of this offence that the record should be used in a judicial proceeding so as to cause an erroneous opinion to be formed touching on a point material to the result of such proceeding.
In the Ahmad 's case this latter condition was the most important ingredient.
[831 B C, D G]
