The appellant along with others was being tried for an offence under section 120B of the Indian Penal Code read with section 167 (81) of the , and section 5 of the Imports and Exports Control Act, 1947.
Although he was at first released on bail by the Presidency Magistrate, the High Court, by an order dated March 6, 1967 in the exercise of its inherent powers cancelled the previous bail orders, as it found that the appellant was interfering and tampering with certain foreigners whom the prosecution intended to examine as witnesses.
The High Court, however, reserved liberty to the appellant to move the court on or after June 26, 1967 far a fresh order of bail as it was contemplated that within the time so fixed, the prosecution would examine the foreign witnesses.
In the appeal to this Court, the appellant challenged the order of the High Court on the ground that the inherent powers of the High Court were not conferred by any legislation or statute, and the deprivation of the personal liberty of the appellant by an order of the High Court in the exercise of its inherent powers was violative of Art, ' II of the Constitution HELD : The High Court 'has the inherent power to cancel bail granted to a person accused of a bailable offence.
This jurisdiction should be invoked in exceptional cases only when the High Court is satisfied that the ends of justice will be defeated unless the accused is committed to custody.
[928A B] The order of the High Court cancelling the bail and depriving the appellant of his personal liberty was according to procedure established by law was not violative of article 21.
[931C] The existing powers and jurisdiction of the High Court, including its inherent powers, had been confirmed and continued by section 223 of the Government of India Act, 1935, and article 225 of the Constitution.
When the Constitution or any enacted law has embraced and confirmed the inherent power and the jurisdiction of the High Court which previously existed, that power and jurisdiction has the sanction of an en acted 'law ' within the meaning of article 21.
[929H; 93A B] Case law discussed.
[On the facts the court noted that there had been unnecessary delay in the examination of the foreign witnesses and directed that the appellant should be released on bail on June 26, 1967.
