The respondents were members of a Cooperative housing society and 'had created a mortgage on their property in favour of the society.
As an amount due under the mortgage was not paid, the matter was referred to the Registrar of Cooperative Societies and he made an order on May 1, 1957 directing the respondent to pay the amount due from August f. 1953 till the debt was discharged.
He further directed that if the amount was not paid, the property could be sold in satisfaction of the amount.
The amount was not paid as directed and the property was therefore sold on April 7, 1958 to the appellant.
As an application was made by the respondents on May 3, 1958 under O. XXI, r. 90 the sale could not be confirmed under O. XXI, r. 92 until this application was disposed of.
The proceedings on the application continued up to October 7, 1958 when an order was passed with the consent of the parties whereby the respondents were granted time till November 21, 1958 to deposit the amount due and the application under O. XXI r. 90 was dismissed as withdrawn.
When the matter came up before the executing court on November 22, the court noted that no amount bad been deposited and although an application was made on behalf of the respondents for a further extension of time, the executing court held that as the society decree holder and the auction purchaser were not willing to extend time, the court could not extend time which had been given under an agreement of the parties by way of compromise.
The court therefore confirmed the sale under O. XXI r. 92.
After appeals to the District Judge and a single bench of the High Court, a Division Bench, in a Letters Patent Appeal, held that O. XXXIV r. 5 would apply in a case of 'this kind and that even if it did not apply.
it was a fundamental principle that before a mortgagor could be pre vented from making the payment and redeeming 'the property.
his rights must have come to an end and they would come to an end only when his title was lost by confirmation of sale.
The court allowed the appeal holding that the application for extension of time was wrongly rejected by the executing court as it had the power to grant an extension.
It further directed that as some amount had been paid by he respon dents, if on making up the accounts it was found that any additional amount was due the court would give reasonable time for this to be deposited.
On appeal to this Court, HELD : The order of the executing court refusing extension of time and confirming the sale in favour of the appellant under O. XXI r. 92 was correct.
[702B] 696 It was not open to the executing court to extend time without the consent of parties, for time between October 7, 1958 to November 21, 1958 was granted by consent of parties.
Section 148 of the Code of Civil Procedure would not apply in these circumstances.
[701H] Though O. XXXIV r. 5(1) recognises the right of the judgment debtor to pay the decretal amount in an execution relating to a mortage decree for sale at any time before the confirmation of sale, the rule does not give any power to the court to grant time to deposit the money after the final decree has been passed.
It is not open to the court to go on fixing date after date and postponing confirmation of sale merely to accommodate a judgment debtor.
A harmonious construction of O. XXXIV r. 5 and O. XXI r. 92 makes it clear that if the provisions of O. XXI r. 92(1) apply the sale must be confirmed unless before the confirmation the mortgagor judgment debtor has deposited the amount as permitted by O. XXXIV r. 5.
[699D E. H; 700E] Janak Rai vs Gurdial Singh ; , referred to.
