Two trucks and a station wagon belonging to the respondent were seized by the customs authorities of the State of Junagarh under the provisions of the Junagarh State Sea Customs Act of S.Y. 1998.
The Junagrah State was merged into the United States of Saurashtra and after further changes became part of the present Gujarat State.
The respondent 's appeal against the aforesaid seizure of his goods succeeded before the Revenue Tribunal which ordered the return of the said vehicles to the respondent.
When however he applied for the return of the vehicles he was informed that they had been disposed of under an order of a Magistrate under section 523 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, and that the sale proceeds had been paid to a creditor of the 'respondent under an attachment order.
The respondent thereupon filed a suit for the recovery of the value of the vehicles.
It appeared in the evidence that the vehicles were kept for several in an.
open place outside the police station at Veraval so that most of their parts were pilfered away and only the skeletons of the vehicles were left.
Finally on the report of the officer incharge of the aforesaid police station they were sold it an auction as unclaimed property after obtaining the order of a Magistrate.
The trial court on the above evidevice decreed the respondent 's suit and the High Court upheld the decree though partly reducing the amount.
The State appealed to this Court It wits contended on behalf of the appellant that the sale was under a judicial order and therefore there was no liability to pay; at the most one or the other officers of the Government could be held guilty of negligence.
It was further contended on behalf of the State that it could not be treated as a bailee because a bailment could arise only under a contract.
HELD : (i) The State Government no doubt seized the said vehicles pursuant to the power tinder the Customs Act.
But the power to seize and confiscate was dependent upon a customs offence having been committed or a suspicion that such offence had been committed.
The order of the Customs Officer was not final as it was subject to appeal and if the authority found that there was no good ground for the exercise of that power the property Could no longer be retained and had under the Act to be returned to the owner.
Thus there was a clear obligation to return the vehicle to the owner if the appeal went his favour.
[944E] There was also an implied legal obligation to preserve tile property intact and to take reasonable care of it so is to enable it to be returned 93 9 in the same condition in which it was seized.
The position of the State Government until the order became final was therefore that of a bailee.
There can be bailment and the 'relationship of a bailor and bailee in respect of specific property without there being an enforceable contract.
Nor is consent indispensable for such a relationship to arise.
Even a finder of goods of another becomes a bailee in certain circumstances.
1.944A D; F H] The High Court was right in confirming the decree passed by the trial court on the basis that there was an obligation on the State Government either to return the said vehicles or in the alternative to pay their value.
[945 E] State of Rajasthan vs Mst.
Vidhyawati, [1962] Supp. 2 S.C.R. 989 and Kasturilal Jain vs State of U.P. ; , held inapplicable.
