The respondent limited companies purchased certain premises in Calcutta for the purpose of providing residential accommodation for their staff.
They instituted suits against the appellants for the recovery of possession of two flats on the ground that as these flats were required for housing their officers, they were reasonably required for the occupation of the respondents within the meaning of section 13(1) (f) of the West Bengal Premises Tenancy Act, 1956.
The Trial Court dismissed the suits but the High Court allowed an appeal and held that a limited company can be a landlord within the meaning of section 13(1) (f) and can reasonably require the premises for its own occupation; and that where there are several landlords, the requirement of the premises by the landlords for the occupation of one or more of them is sufficient to bring the case within section 13(1) (f).
In the appeal before the Supreme Court the only question for determination was whether on the construction of the terms of an agreement which was normally signed between each of the respondents and any officer who was allotted a flat, the officer occupied the flat as a tenant or a licensee, and therefore whether the officer 's occupa tion would be the company 's own occupation within the meaning of clause (f).
Held:Dismissing the appeal: The High Court nightly held that the respondent reasonably required the flats for the second respondent company 's own occupation through officers holding flats on its behalf as licensees.
[29B] Under the standard form of agreement, the occupation of the officer ceased on the termination of his employment, upon his death, or on his transfer and the company was at liberty to allot him any other flat or to assign the premises to any other employee or other person during his absence.
In view of these and its other terms the agreement operated as a license and not as a tenancy.
It created no interest in the land and gave only a personal privilege or license to the servant to occupy the premises for the greater convenience of his work.
[28F H] Under section 105 of the Transfer of Property Act, a lease is the transfer of a right to enjoy the premises whereas under section 52 of the Indian Easements Act a license is a privilege to do something on the premises which otherwise would be unlawful.
The transaction is a lease if it grants an interest in the land; it is a license if it gives a personal privilege with no interest in the land.
[27E F] Errington vs Errington and Woods, ; , 298: Associated Hotels of India Ltd. vs R. N. Kapoor. ; ; 3815.
Addiscombe Garden Estates Ltd. and Anr, V. Crabe and Ors. , 525; referred to.
24 A service occupation is a particular kind of license whereby a servant is required to live in the premises for the better performance of his duties.
Now it is also settled law that a servant may be a licensee though he may not be in service occupation.
[27H] Nippon Menkwa Kalmshiki vs F. Portlock, A.1.R. ; and Torbett vs Faulkner, , 560; referred to.
