There was a cash credit in November 13, 1947, in the capital, account of the Appellant assessee whose accounting period was from November 13, 1947 to November 1, 1948.
The Income tax Officer assessed the said credit as income from undisclosed sources in the assessment for the assessment year 1949 50.
The Appellate, Assistant Commissioner relying on C.I.T. vs Darolia & Sons.
held that the amount was not taxable in the assessment year 1949 50.
The Income tax Officer thereupon assessed the amount in 1948 49 after having issued in November 1958 a notice under section 34(1) (a) of the Indian Income ' tax Act, 1922.
He rejected the appellant 's contention that notice under the said section was timebarred.
In appeal the Appellate Assistant Commissioner held that in the earlier appeal there was no finding that the credit represented the assessee 's income or that it should be assessed in the year 1948 49 and that consequently the notice under section 34 issued in November 1958, was not saved by the second proviso to section 34(3) of the Act.
The appeal filed by the Revenue was allowed by the Tribunal and in reference the Madras High Court relying on its own ruling in A.S. Khader Ismail vs Income tax Officer, upheld the order of the Tribunal.
The appellant came to this Court and relied on this Court 's decision in Income Tax Officer A Ward Sitapur vs Murlidhar Bhagwandas in which the aforesaid Madras decision had been overruled.
The Revenue urged that in answering the reference the effect of section 2 of the Income tax (Amendment) Act 1959 must be taken into consideration.
To this the appellant objected that the point was outside the scope of the questions of law referred by the Appellate Tribunal to the High Court.
HELD:(i) The view taken by the Madras High Court as to the scope of the word 'finding ' in A. section Khader Ismail 's case and followed by it in the present case had been overruled, by this Court.
Accordingly the department could not take advantage of the second proviso to section 34(3).
[20E F] Income Tax Officer, A Ward Sitapur vs Murlidhar Bhagwan Das, , applied (ii)However, the impact of section 2 of the Amending Act of 1959 had to be considered before the reference could be properly answered.
Although the question had not been raised before the Tribunal or the High Court it was only an aspect of the question of limitation which had been referred.
All that section 66(1) requires is that the question of law which is referred to the High Court and which the High Court is to decide must be the question which was in issue before 18 the Tribunal.
When the question itself was under issue there is no further limitation imposed by the section that the reference should be limited to those aspects of the question which had been argued before the Tribunal and it will be an over refinement of the position to hold that each aspect of a question is itself a distinct question for the purpose of section 66(1) of the Act.
[22B D] C.I.T. Bombay vs Scindia Steam Navigation Co. Ltd. 42 I.T.R. 589, applied.
Onkarmal Mehraj vs C.I.T., Bombay 1, , and section C. Prashar vs Vasantsen Dwarkadas, ; , referred to.
[On the above view the case was remanded to the High Court for examining the question of law referred to it after considering the impact of the Amendment Act of 1959.]
