The respondents were selling agents for the goods manufactured by another company.
They were paid 7 1/2% on the sales as selling commission and 5% as contingency expenses.
The question in income tax proceedings was whether the amount not spent out of the grant for contingency expenses was exempt from taxation by virtue of s, 4(3) (vi) of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922.
The High Court in reference held that the "5% commission" received by the respondents represented a special allowance to meet expenditure and was on that account exempt from tax.
The Revenue appealed.
HELD,: (i) In the context in which: the expression 'incurred ' occurs in section 4(3) (vi) it undoubtedly means 'incurred or to be incurred '.
To qualify for exemption the allowance must be granted to meet expenses incurred or to be incurred wholly and necessarily in the performance of the duties of an office or employment of profit.
[41A] (ii) In framing section 4(3) (vi) the intention of the framers of the Act was to grant exemption in respect of amounts received by the assesses, not for his own benefits but for the specific purpose of meeting the expenses wholly and necessarily incurred or to be incurred in the performance of his duties as agent.
It would therefore be reasonable to hold that the allowance granted to meet the expenses wholly and necessarily incurred or to be incurred in the Performance of the duties of the office or employment of the grantee alone qualifies for exemption under the Act, and any surplus remaining in the hands of the grantee after meeting the expenses does not bear the character of the allowance for meeting expenses.
This would be so even if the employer has disabled himself from demanding refund of the amount not expended for meeting the expenses incurred or to be incurred in the performance of the duties of an office of employment or profit, and the surplus remaining in the hands of the grantee acquires for the purpose of the Income tax Act the character of additional remuneration.
[40C E] Tejaji Farasram Kharawala vs Commissioner of Income tax.
Bombay (Mofussil), , disapproved.
(iii) The allowance may be in respect of a period longer than the accounting year or years.
But on that account the whole receipt reduced by the expenses actually incurred in the year of account is not liable to be brought to tax in that year.
In such a case it will be the duty of the Income tax Officer to determine the amount allowed in respect of the year of account in which the expenditure has been incurred and the difference between the amount so determind and the amount actually expended would alone be brought to tax.
[41G] The position in this respect remains the same even after the amendment of section 4(3) (vi) by the Finance Act, 1955.
[41B] 38 Commissioner of Income tax, U.P. vs Sharma & Company. , disapproved.
