V the karta of a joint Hindu family, transferred in 1946 certain properties, of the joint family to the appellant, who was his concubines since 1945.
The joint family disrupted in 1947, and after V 's death, the respondents his widow and sons, filed a suit against the appellant for recovery of possession of the properties alleging that the documents were executed without consideration or for immoral purposes.
and were void.
The appellant instituted suits for partition of the joint family properties and for allotment to her the properties conveyed by the deeds.
The trial court dismissed the respondents ' suit and decreed the appellant 's suit, which the High Court reversed.
In appeal to this Court, the appellant contended that V. agreed to make the transfers in consideration of past cohabitation, having regard to section 2(d) of the her past service was a valuable consideration and V was competent to alienate for value his undivided interest in the coparcenary properties.
The respondents contended that the transfers were by way of gifts and not in consideration of the past cohabitation, and V was not competent to make a gift of the coparcenary properties and even assuming that the transfers were made in consideration of past cohabitation, they were hit by section 6 (h) of the .
HELD: Under the Madras School of Mitakshara law by which V was governed.
he had no power to make a gift of even his undivided interest in the coparcenary properties to his concubine.
[46C] V and the appellant were parties to an illicit intercourse.
The two agreed to cohabit.
Pursuant to the agreement each rendered services to the other.
Her services were given in exchange for his promise under which she obtained) similar services.
In view of her services, he promised to give his services only and not his properties.
Having once operated as the consideration for his earlier promise.
her past services could not be treated under section 2(d) of the as a subsisting consideration for the properties to her.
The past cohabitation was the motive and not the consideration for the transfers which were without consideration and were by way of gifts.
The gifts were not hit by section 6(h) of the Transfer of property Act, by reason of the fact that they were motivated by a desire to compensate the concubine for her past services.
[45E G] The invalid gifts were not validated by the disruption of the joint family in 1947.
After the disruption of the joint family, V was free to make a gift of his divided interest in the coparcenary properties to the appellant, but he did not make any such gift.
[46D] Balo vs Parbati, I.L.R. [1940] All. 370 and Istalk Kamu Musalman vs Ranchhod Zipru Bhate, I.L.R. , 217 referred to. 44
