Under section 35 of the Central Excise and Salt Act, 1944 (Excise Act) a person aggrieved by any decision or order under the Act and rules has an unfettered right of appeal.
Under section 12 of the Act, the Central Government may apply to appeals under the Excise Act the provisions of the (Customs Act) dealing with the procedure relating to appeals, In exercise of this power, the provisions of section 129 of the Customs Act were made applicable to Appeals under the Excise Act.
The section requires an appellant to deposit, pending the appeal, the duty or penalty imposed, and empowers the appellate authority, in his discretion, to dispense with such deposit pending the appeal in any particular case.
The respondent filed an appeal against the duty imposed on him under the Excise Act and prayed for dispensation of the deposit.
The Collector, who was the appellate authority, rejected the prayer and.
when no deposit was made within the time fixed, dismissed the appeal.
The respondent filed a writ petition in the High Court which was allowed, and the Collector, was directed to hear the appeal on merits.
The Collector appealed to this Court.
HELD:Since section 35 of the Excise Act gave a right of appeal and section 129 of the Customs Act whittled down that substantive right, section 129 could not be regarded as "procedure relating to appeals" within section 12 of the Excise Act.
The High Court was therefore right in F holding that the application of section 129 of the Customs Act to appeals under the Excise Act was in excess of the powers conferred under section 12 of the Excise Act.
The facts that an alternative remedy was available to the respondent under the Excise Act, and that he invoked the dispensing power of the appellate authority under section 129 of the Customs Act, did not bar the jurisdiction of the High Court to entertain the writ petition, especially when the jurisdiction of the Collector to insist upon the deposit of duty pending appeal was itself questioned.
[84B D; 86F G] Hoosein Kasam Dada (India) Ltd, vs The State of Madhya Pra desh; , 4 S.T.C. 114, followed.
