The Karta of a Hindu undivided family was assessed to Incometax from year to year until the assessment year 1953 54 either as an individual or as the Karta.
But later, the Income Tax Officer issued notices to him under section 34(1) of the Income tax Act, 1922, for the assessment years 1951 52 to 1953 54 and under section 22(2) for the years 1954 55 to 1956 57 for assessment of the income as having been received by an association of persons consisting of the Karta and his minor son in 1951 52, and the Karta, his minor son and a firm in the years 1952 53 to 1956 57, and assessed the income received as income and associations of persons.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner and the Tribunal, in appeals filed before them, substantially confirmed the order of the Income tax Officer.
The High Court, upon a reference.
held that the income for the assessment year 1951 52 did E not accrue to an association of persons, but confirmed the view taken by the Income tax Officer in respect of the income for the year 1952 53 to 1956 57.
The Karta then moved the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution and contended that section 3 of the Income tax Act, 1922, invested the Income tax Officer with arbitrary and unguided power to assess the income of an association of persons in the hands either of the association or of the persons constituting that association and it therefore offended article 14 of the Constitution.
The High Court rejected the petitions.
In appeals to this Court against the decisions of the High Court in the writ petition and the reference under section 66 of the Income tax Act.
HELD:(i) section 3 of the Income tax Act, 1922, was not violative of article 14 of the Constitution.
The duty of the Income tax Officer is to administer the provisions of the Act in the interests of public revenue, and to prevent evasion or escapement of tax legitimately ,due to the State.
Though an executive Officer engaged in the administration of the Act.
the function of the Income tax Officer is fundamentally quasi judicial.
His decision to bring to tax either the income of the association collectively or the shares of the members of the association separately is not final: it is subject to appeal to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and to the Tribunal.
The nature of the authority exercised by the Income tax Officer in a proceeding to assess to tax income, and his duty to prevent evasion or escapement of liability to pay tax legitimately due to the State, con stitute adequate enuciation of Principles and policy for the guidance of the Income tax Officer.
[72B H] 66 Suraj Mall Mohta & Co. vs A. V. Visvanatha Sastri and Anr. , distinguished.
Shri Ram Krishna Dalmia vs Shri Justice S.R. Tendolkar and Ors.
; , Jyoti Pershad vs The Administrator for the Union Territory of Delhi. ; and Commissioner of Income tax U.P. vs Kanpur Coal Syndicate, referred to, There is no force in the contention that section 23A of the Income tax Act, as it was incorporated by Act 21 of 1930 laid down certain principles for the guidance of the Income Tax Officer in exercising his option, but since the repeal of that section by Act 7 of 1939, the discretion vested in the Income tax Officer to select either the income of the association or the individual member is unfettered.
By the repeal of section 23A(1) the essential nature of the power of the Incometax Officer was not altered.
He remained as before under a duty to administer the Act, for the benefit of public revenue, but his powers were to be exercised judicially and so as to avoid double taxation of the same income.
[73A B; 74F G] (ii) There was abundant material on the record to prove that the Karta, his minor son and the firm formed an association in the years 1952 53 to 1956 57.
Under section 2(9) of the Income tax Act, 1922, read with el.
(42) of 3 of the General Clauses Act, a firm is a person within the meaning of the Income tax Act and a firm and an individual or group of individuals may form an association of persons within the meaning of section 3 of the Income tax Act.
[75F, G] There is nothing in the Act to indicate that a minor cannot become a member of an association of persons for the purposes of the Act.
In any event the High Court had rightly held that the mother and guardian of the minor son must, on the facts, be deemed to have given her implied consent to the participation of the minor in the association of persons.
[75H] Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay vs Laxmidas & Anr.
and Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay North, Kutch Saurashtra vs Indira Balkrishna, , referred to.
(iii)The doctrine of res judicata does not apply so as to make a decision on a question of fact or law in a proceeding for assessment in one year binding in another year.
The assessment and the facts found are conclusive only in the year of assessment: the finding on questions of fact may be good and cogent evidence in subsequent years, when the same question falls to be determined in another year but they are not binding and conclusive.
The finding recorded by the High Court that in the year 1951 52 there was no association of persons constituted by the Karta and his minor son did not in 'the present case have any effect on the finding of the Tribunal that in year 1952 53 and the subsequent years such an association existed.
Furthermore, the association of persons which traded in 1952 53 and the subsequent years was different from the association in 1951 52 because in 1952 an association was formed of the Karta, his son and a firm.
[75B C] (iv)If the person described as a principal officer of an.
association is duly served with a notice under section 23(2) in the manner prescribed by section 23(2), an adjudication of his status as the principal officer, before assessment proceedings may take place, is not obligatory.
The order assessing the association containing a finding that the per.
son served is the principal officer is sufficient compliance with the 67 requirements of the statute.
It is open to the association to challenge the finding of the Income tax Officer in appeal before the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and in further appeal to the Appellate Tribunal.
But the order declaring him as the principal officer of an association of persons will not be deemed to be void merely because the proceeding for assessment was not preceded by a declaration of his status as the principal officer.
[80G 81B] Commissioner of Income tax, Punjab & N.W.F.P. vs Nawal Kishore Kharaiti Lal, (1938) 6 I.T.R. 61, referred to.
