Under an award in an industrial dispute, it was held that the appellants workmen were entitled to half wages from a certain date to the date they resumed duty.
After the final disposal of the companies ' appeal, the workmen were allowed to resume duties.
Thereafter, a dispute arose as to the amount to which the workmen were entitled.
The workmen, by separate applications, applied to the Second Labour Court, West Bengal for determination of the amounts due to them under section 33C(2) of the .
The companies challenged the jurisdiction of the Second Labour Court on the ground that the court had not been specified for the purpose of determining the amount at which the benefit claimed by the workmen was to be computed in terms of money under section 33C(2) of the Act.
The preliminary objection was accepted by the Second Labour Court, against which the workmen filed a writ petition.
This petition was accepted by the High Court, but in appeal, the High Court dismissed the petition.
HELD: The appeal must fail.
The mere fact that a Labour Court has been constituted under section 7(1) of the Act, for the purpose of adjudication of Industrial Disputes as well as for performing other functions that may be assigned to it under the Act does not mean that the court is automatically specified as the Court for the purpose of exercising jurisdiction under section 33C(2) of the Act.
Section 33C(2) confers jurisdiction only on those Labour Courts which are specified in this behalf, i.e., such Labour Courts which are specifically designated by the State Government for the purpose of computing the money value of the benefit claimed by a workman.
The Second Labour Court, West Bengal, was never specified by any order of the State Government as one of those Labour Courts which was to exercise the powers or discharge the functions under section 33C(2).
[10OC E].
Though the Civil Courts are constituted under section 13 of the Bengal, Agra and Assam Civil Courts Act, the power of those courts to take cognizance of civil suits, and decide them is conferred by the Code of Civil Procedure.
It is not by virtue of their constitution under section 13 of the Bengal, Agra and Assam Civil Courts Act that the Courts take cognizance (of civil suits and decide them.
Section 33C (2), in the matter of applications made by individual workmen, is therefore, not comparable with section 13(2) of the Bengal, Agra and Assam Civil Courts Act, but in fact, lays down the requirement which must be satisfied before the Labour Court can take cognizance of the matter raised before it by the applications of the workman section 33C(2) would, thus, serve the purpose in the case of Labour Courts which is served by the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure re lating to cognizance in respect of Civil Courts.
[102B D] 98
