The respondents workmen filed applications in 1962 claiming bonus under the Scheme framed by the Central Government under the Coal Mines Provident Fund and Bonus Schemes Act, 1948 and railway fares and leave wages from 1948 onwards.
The Labour Court, Dhanbad allowed their claims under section 33C(2) of the , which, in appeals to this Court, the appellant Company challenged, contending, that (1) the Labour Court had no jurisdiction to try these applications under section 33C(2); (ii) the applications were barred by Limitation prescribed by the bonus Scheme and/or due to laches.
and (iii) under the said Scheme the workmen were not entitled to bonus as they were employed as domestic servants.
HELD:The appeals must fail.
(i)The right to the benefit which is sought to be computed must be an existing one, that is to say, already adjudicated upon or provided for and must arise in the course of and in relation to the relationship ' between an industrial workman and his employer.
Since the scope of sub see.
2 of section 33C is wider than that of sub s 1, and the sub section is not confined to cases arising under an award settlement or under the provisions of Chapter VA there is no reason to hold that a benefit provided by statute or a Scheme made thereunder, without there being anything contrary under such statute or section 33C(2), cannot fall within sub section 2.
Consequently.
the benefit provided in the bonus scheme made under the Coal Mines Provident Fund and Bonus Schemes Act, 1948 which remained to be computed must fall under sub section 2 and the Labour Court therefore had jurisdiction to entertain and try such a claim, it being a claim in respect of an existing right arising from the relationship of an industrial workman and his employer.
[144B D].
Punjab National Bank Ldt.
vs Kharbanda [1962] Supp.
2 S.C.R. 977 Central Bank of India vs Rajagopalan [1964] 3 S.C.R. 140, and Bombay Gas Co., Ltd. vs Gopal Bhiva [1964] 3 S.C.R. 709 relied on, (ii)There is no justification for inducting a period of limitation provided in the Limitation Act into the provisions of section 33C(2) which do not lay down any limitation.
It is a matter of some significance that though the legislature amended section 33C by Act 36 of 1964 and introduced limitation in that Section, it did so by means of a proviso only in respect of claims made under sub sec.
1 but did not provide any such limitation for claims under sub sec.
[14 4H 145B].
Bombay Gas Co. Ltd. vs Gopal Bhiva ; relied on.
141 The period of three years of limitation provided for by clause (3) of section 9A of ;the Bonus Scheme applies to applications for payment by the Coal Mines Provident Fund Commissioner from the deposit made in the Government treasury and has no application to claims under section 33C(2) which makes no provision for limitation.
[145D E].
(iii)Two conditions are necessary to render an employee ineligible for Bonus under section 1 of the Bonus Scheme: (1) that he is employed as a mali, a sweeper or a domestic servant, and (2) that he performs during the relevant period domestic or personal work.
To render an employee ineligible for bonus under this exception both the capacity and the nature of work are relevant factors.
It follows that even though an employee is employed as a mali, a sweeper or a domestic servant if he does non domestic or non personal work he will be entitled to bonus and would lose his right to A only during that period that he does domestic or personal work.
[146B C].
Bhowra Colliery vs Its Workmen, , relied on.
On the evidence, the respondents were employed in the colliery, they were not assigned the exclusive duty of supplying water at the residence of the junior officers but they supplied water at certain pit heads.
So the exception did not apply.
