The petitioners were detained under r. 30(1) (b) of the Defence of India Rules, 1962, under orders passed by the State Government in March 1965.
Their detention was continued from time to time after review under r. 30A.
One review was made in February 1967 when the scope of such a review was governed by the judgment of this Court in Sadhu Singh vs Delhi Administration [1966] I S.C.R. 243 to the effect that such review did not require a judicial approach to the question of continuance of detention.
Accordingly, at the review in February 1967, no opportunity was given to the petitioners to represent their cases and their detention was continued for a further period of six months.
Thereafter, by its judgment in the case of P. L.Lakhanpal vs The Union of India. ; this Court overruled the decision in Sadhu Singh 's case and held that the function of review under r. 30A was quasi judicial and that in exercising it, the rules of natural justice had to be complied with.
In view of this judgment the respondent held another review in April 1967, when notice was given to the petitioners and they were given a hearing.
Thereafter an order was passed in each case on April 27, 1967, by which the State Goverment directed the continuance of the detention orders for a further period.
In the meantime the present petitions under article 32 of the Constitution were filed on March 20, 1967 based on the judgment of this Court in Lakhanpal 's case.
It was contended on behalf of the respondent State that as the review made in April 1967 was in accordance with the view taken in Lakhanpalls case, the continuance of the detention thereafter was justified; that the State Government had power to pass a fresh order of detention on the same facts and even if the present petitions were to be allowed, it should be made clear that the State Government had such power and that the decision of this Court in the case of Avtar Singh vs The State of Jammu and Kashmir (de cided on June 9, 1967), was not correct.
HELD: (i) The writ petitions must be allowed and the petitioners released.
In the Present cases the orders were passed in March 1965 and should have been reviewed after every six months in the manner explained in Lakhanpal 's case.
That admittedly was not done upto February 1967, though a number of reviews were made in between.
Consequently orders of detention passed in March 1965 fell after six months and there were no orders to continue thereafter.
When 198 therefore the State Government ordered the continuance of detention orders upon the review on April 27, 1967, in accordance with the procedure indicated in Lakhanpal 's case, there were no orders to be continued because in between the reviews were not proper and the detention had become illegal.
[201 C D).
A. K Gopalan vs The Government of India, [1966] 2 S.C.R. 427, distinguished.
Although r. 30A (9) only says that the Government shall decide whether the detention order should be continued or, cancelled, that does not mean that if the Government omits to make a review under r. 30A within six months the detention order will still continue and the detenu continue to be detained thereunder.
The provision for review in r. 30A is designed, to protect the personal liberty of the citizen and is a mandatory provision; if it is not complied with and ' the Government omits to review the detention order within six months, the order must fall and the detenu must be released.
[200 FG] (ii) A fresh order of detention can be passed on the same facts, provided it is not mala fide, if for any reason the previous order of detention or its continuance is not legal on account of some technical or other defect as in the present cases.
There is nothing in the Defence of India Act and Rules which forbids the State Government from cancelling one order and passing another in its place.
[2O2 C].
Ujagar Singh vs The State of Punjab., ; and Godavari Shamrao Parulekar vs State of Maharashtra and Ora., ; , referred to.
The view taken in Avtar Singh vs The State of Jammu and Kashmir, in so far as it says that no fresh order can be passed even to correct any defect in an, order continuing detention under r. 30A(9) is not correct.
[204 B].
