By a notification under the minimum wages were fixed for 'ordinary unskilled labour ' in certain Tea Plantations in Assam.
The respondent Deputy Commissioner issued notices to the appellants that a number of employees were not paid in accordance with the prescribed rate, and required them to pay the outstanding wages with requisite amount of delayed compensation to the employees in conformity with section 20(3) of the Act.
The appellants denied the liability stating that these employees were Lettera Challan workers who were incapable of performing a full normal working day 's work, so they were 'not ordinary unskilled labour '.
The authority did not hold any enquiry or receive any evidence beyond meeting the managers of the appellants where the Government, Labour Officer was present and it held that in the absence of an order of exemption under section 26, Lettera Challan Labour (in spite of the amount of work performed) was to be treated as ordinary labour.
The appellants filed civil suits which the Subordinate Judge dismissed holding that under the the orders of the Authority.
were final and suits were barred.
The High Court upheld the decision of the Subordinate Judge.
Held: The appeals must be allowed Determination of the question whether the jurisdiction of civil courts is excluded or not depends on the terms of the particular statute under construction.
Exclusion of jurisdiction is not to be readily inferred but such exclusion must either be explicitly expressed or clearly implied.
On an analysis of the provisions of the Act under consideration, it is clear that although the Act provides that it is the duty of the authority to give proper hearing to the parties . allowing them to tender such evidence as they think proper before making an order which may have far reaching consequences and which is final under section 20(6) of the Act, the Act is not a complete Code, as there no provision for appeal or revision from the direction of the, authority under section 20(3); nor is any further scrutiny provided by any higher authority against the imposition of penalty,.
The Act in terms does not bar the employer from instituting a suit when his claim is that he has been called upon to pay wages and compensation to persons who are not governed by the notification under the Act.
In such circumstances it is impossible to hold that the legislature meant to exclude the jurisdiction of civil court.
[265B; 266E F; 271E; 271H 272H] Secretary of State vs Mask & Co. 67 I.A. 222 Wolverhampton New Water Works Co. vs Hawkesford, ; , Pyx Granite Co. Ltd. vs Ministry of Housing and Local Government , Raleigh Investment Co. Ltd. vs Governor General in Council, 74 I.A, 50, Firm and Illuri Subbayya Chetty & Sons vs The State of Andhra Pradesh ; , Kala Bhandar vs Municipal 260 261 Committee; , , Kamala Mills Ltd. vs State of Bombay, ; , K. section Venkataraman & Co. vs State of Madras; , and Firm Radha Kishan (deceased) represented by Hari Kishan vs Administrator, Municipal Committee, Ludhiana, ; , referred to. "Lettera Challan" workers do not fall within the expression "Ordinary unskilled workers" which means such unskilled workers as work for the prescribed period of a full day.
On the evidence adduced it is clear that the "lettera challan" labour only works for half the day and is unwilling to work for the prescribed period of full day.
Such a case is covered by the proviso to section 15 and such labour is not entitled to wages for a full normal working day.
[272F G]
