The petitioners were owners of certain land in Greater Bom bay in respect of which a declaration of intention under s.4(1) of the Bombay Town Planning Act, 1954, to prepare a development plan, had been made by the respondent Bombay Municipal Corporation.
They applied to the Municipal Commissioner, in January 1962, for permission to change the existing user of their land and for a commencement certificate under section 12 to construct factory sheds on a part of the land, but their application was rejected by the Executive Engineer, Development Plan.
A tentative develop ment plan for the area which included the petitioner 's land was published on January 9, 1964, in which their land was shown as partly reserved for public roads, partly for industrial purposes and the rest was marked green.
After a large number of objections and suggestions on the tentative plan had been received and considered in accordance with the provisions of section 9 of the Act, the Municipal Corporation finally approved the plan on July 2, 1964 and forwarded it to the State Government for its sanction under section 10.
The State Government sanctioned the final development plan for the ward in which the petitioners ' lands were located on September 14, 1966 after consulting its special Consulting Surveyor, who scrutinised all the objections received by the Municipal Corporation and heard the objectors.
The final plan showed that a major portion of the petitioner 's land was earmarked for a recreation centre.
Although a writ petition filed by the petitioners before the publication of the tentative development plan against the rejection of their application for a commencement certificate was allowed by the High Court on the ground that powers of the Municipal Corporation under section 12 had not been exercised by an officer prescribed under section 86, two subsequent petitions filed by them after the approval of the final plan by the Municipal Corporation to obtain redesi gnation of their land were dismissed.
In the present petition under article 32 of the Constitution, the petitioners claimed that after the reservation of their land as shown in the tentative plan published on January 9, 1964, its redesignation in the final plan for a recreation centre was without authority of law and violative of their rights under articles 14 and 19.
It was contended, inter alia, (i) that sections 9 and 10 of the Act were invalid and unconstitutional in that they empowered the local authority and the State Government to modify, as a result of objections received from other persons, a development plan, against which a particular person may not have objected, without giving an opportunity to that person to represent against a subsequent modification by which his interest may be adversely affected; (ii) that under section 12 the final 275 and only authority who had the power to grant or withhold permission to carry on any development work after a declaration of intention under section 4(1) was the Municipal Commissioner; he could, under section 13, grant or refuse a commencement certificate at will, there being nothing to guide him in such a matter before the preparation of a development plan; even after the preparation of such a plan, a commencement certificate could be refused arbitrarily and there was no provision for any appeal from or revision of the order containing the refusal; and (iii) that by the combined operation of sections 4 and 11 (3), the local authority could easily delay the acquisition of any land designated for a public purpose under section 7 of the Act for 14 years and this constituted an unreasonable restriction on the right to hold property.
Held: The objections raised as to the invalidity of sections 9, 10, 11, 12 and 13 could not be upheld.
(i) The contention that a person was given no opportunity of meeting the objections raised by others with regard to the development plan has no force in the light of the facts disclosed as to the enormity of the task of finalising the development plan.
If the authorities were to hear all the parties with regard to all the suggestions made, give them separate and independent hearings, no development plan could ever be prepared.
The authority was not concerned with considering the advantages or disadvantages which might accrue to a particular person or a group of persons owning lands in different parts of the area concerned, but it had to go by the larger interest of the population at large and the generations to come.
The affidavits show that nothing was done haphazardly.
Suggestions and objections at all stages were carefully considered, the assistance of committees of experts was taken and the plan emerged only after an immense amount of labour had been bestowed in its preparation.
[297B D] (ii) There was enough guidance in the Town Planning Act to enable the Municipal Commissioner to come to a conclusion as to whether a particular commencement certificate should be granted or not and the power exercisable under sections 12 and 13 was neither uncanalised nor arbitrary.
section 13 prescribes that the local authority should make an inquiry before granting or refusing a commencement certificate.
The Authority must therefore look into all material available to it including the tentative plans and the final development plan and then make up its mind as to whether a commencement certificate should be granted or not.
If the provisions of the Act are borne in mind and the rules framed thereunder complied with, there was little or no scope for the local authority acting arbitrarily under section 13 of the Act.
[298A C] The fact that no appeal from the decision under section 13 was provided for is a matter of no moment for the authority under section 13 is no less than the Municipal Commissioner himself or the Chief Officer of the Municipal Borough or a person exercising the power of an Executive Officer of any local authority.
when the ' power had to be exercised by one of the highest officers of the local authority intimately connected with the preparation of the development plan in all its stages, it is difficult to envisage what other authority could be entrusted with the work of appeal or revision.
[297F H] (iii) In view of the immensity of the task of the local authorities to find funds for the acquisition of lands for public purposes, a period ' of ten years fixed by section 11 (3) was not too long.
In the present case the authority had to deal with an area measuring about 169 sq.
miles which was larger than most of the big cities in India.
276 The preparation of a development plan for such an area must take a considerable period of time.
Furthermore, it is not beyond the range of possibility that the final development plan may require modifications.
It could not therefore be held that the limit of time fixed under section 14 read with section 11(3) formed an unreasonable restriction on the right to hold property.
[298G 229A] Joyti Pershad vs Administration for The Union Territory of Delhi, ; Manecklal Chhotalal & Ors.
vs M. G. Makwana and Ors; W.P. 64/1966, cases, relied upon.
