The appellant was appointed as a lecturer in 1952 of a non Government College affiliated to the Bihar University and later as Principal of another college.
Both these appointments were approved by the University.
The Bihar State Universities (University of Bihar, Bhagalpur and Ranchi) (Amendment) Act 13 of 1962 came into force in April 1962, section 4 of which provided that every appointment, dismissal, etc., of any teacher of a college not belonging to the State Government affiliated to the University made after the 27th November, 1961 and before 1st March, 1962 shall be subject to such order as the Chancellor of the University, on the recommendation of the University Service Commission, may pass.
Thereafter, the appellant received an order dated August 8, 1962, from the Chancellor to the effect that he had been pleased to approve under section 4 of the Act, on the recommendation of the Commission, the appointment of the appellant as Principal till November 30, 1962 or till the candidate recommended by the Commission joined, whichever was earlier.
Subsequently, as ' it was realised that the order of August 18.
1962 Might be successfully challenged on the ground that the appellant had not been given an opportunity for a hearing, the Commission gave the appellant a show cause notice on November 8, 1962 and after he was given a hearing the Chancellor passed another order on February 18, 1963 which purported to modify the order of August 18, 1962; the modification was to the effect that the appellant would be given a year or two to sit for an examination and obtain a second class Master 's degree which was the minimum qualification for the post of Principal, failing which his services would be terminated.
The appellant filed a writ petition in the High Court challenging both the orders of August 18, 1962 and February 18, 1963 on the grounds, inter alia; (i) that under sub rule (6) of Rule (1) of Chapter 16 of the Statutes of the University, which provided that notwithstanding any other requirements the qualifications of a teacher already in service and confirmed before the 1st July, 1962, shall be considered to be equivalent to the minimum qualifications for the post he holds, the appellant must be deemed to have the minimum qualifications for a lecturer i.e. a Second Class MaSter 's degree.
and that this deeming would continue when he was appointed Pricipal for which also the minimum qualification was a Second Class Master 's degree with certain experience; (ii) that section 4 of the Act was violative of article 14 of the Constitution.
and (iii) that the order of August 18, 1962 violated the principles of natural justice and it could not be modified after November 30, 1962 as it had worked itself out 231 232 and there was no power of review given to the Chancellor under section 4.
The High Court dismissed the petition.
On appeal to this Court, HELD: allowing the appeal, (i) The Chancellor 's order of February 18, 1963 giving the appellant time to appear at an examination to enable him to obtain a second class Master 's degree failing which his services would be terminated was invalid.
The appellant must be deemed to have the minimum qualifica tion of a second class Master 's degree by virtue of sub rule (6) of the Statutes and as such he was qualified for appointment as Principal.
Sub r.
(6) must be read as a protection to the teachers who were appointed and confirmed before July 1, 1952 and by fiction it gave them the minimum qualification even though they may not actually have it.
That minimum qualification must therefore remain with them always for the future.
for there was nothing to show that it was taken away.
[241G 242A].
(ii) Section 4 was not discriminatory and violative of article 14 of the Constitution on the ground that it fixed two arbitrary dates and had visited teachers appointed, dismissed etc.
between these two dates with a differential treatment as compared to teachers appointed before November 27, 1961.
The report of the Joint Select Committee recommending the establishment of the University Service Commission which would have the effect of curtailing the powers of the governing bodies of affiliated colleges was published on November 27, 1961 and after the passing of Act II of 1962, section 48 A with respect to the Commission was actually put into force from March 1, 17962.
Many irregularities as to appointments, dismissals etc., during this period were brought to the notice of the government and this led to the enactment of section 4 of the Act.
It cannot therefore be said that teachers appointed etc.
between these two dates did not form a class that would have a nexus with the object to be achieved.
[236B F].
Furthermore, section 4 only authorises the Chancellor to scrutinise appointments.
dismissals etc.
made between these two dates for the purpose of satisfying himself that these were in accordance with the University Act and the Statutes, etc.
Read this way, section 4 cannot be said to confer uncanalised power on the Chancellor.
[237A C].
Although section 4 makes no provision for giving the teacher a hearing before passing an order thereunder, it must be read as requiring that the Commission must act according to principles of natural justice and must hear the teacher concerned before making its recommendation.
[237 D E].
(iii) The order of August 18, 1962 must be taken to have fallen when action was taken to give notice to the appellant on November 8, 1962 and a fresh order passed on February 18. 1963.
The latter order must be treated as a fresh order which was passed after giving the appellant a hearing and which was not therefore defective on the round that principles of natural justice had been violated.
[238G].
