The respondent who was an employee of the appellant bank was charged with issuing unauthorised overdrafts to a constituent.
A domestic enquiry was held against him.
In two written explanations before the enquiry he admitted, the allegations against him and only pleaded extenuating circumstances.
At the enquiry he was examined in the first instance; having again admitted his fault he was asked certain questions by the Enquiry Officer in respect of the extenuating circumstances pleaded by him.
Two more witnesses were then examined by the Enquiry Officer.
Finally, according to the latter 's report the respondent was discharged.
In proceedings under section 33(2)(b) of the the Labour Court, Dhanbad held that the enquiry was bad for violation of natural justice inasmuch as the respondent had teen examined before other witnesses and was unduly cross examined.
The bank appealed by special leave.
Held: The rules of natural justice as laid down by this Court have to be observed in the conduct of a domestic enquiry against a workman.
If the allegations are denied by the workman the burden of proving the truth of those allegations will be on the management; and the witnesses called by the management must be allowed to be cross examined by the workman and the latter must also be given an opportunity to examine himself and adduce any other evidence that he might choose, in support of his plea.
But if the workman admits his guilt, to insist upon the management to let in evidence about the allegations will be an empty formality.
In such a case it will be open to the management to examine the workman himself, even in the first instance, so as to enable him to offer any explanation for his conduct, or to place before the management any circumstances which will go to mitigate the gravity of the offence.
But, even then, the examination of the workman, under such circumstances, should not savour of an inquisition.
If, after the examination of the workman the management chooses to examine any witnesses, the workman must be given a reasonable opportunity to cross examine those witnesses and also to adduce any other evidence that he may choose.
[259D F] In the present case the respondent in his written explanations had admitted the charges and therefore there was no violation of natural justice in first examining him.
The questions put to him were not unfair.
The Labour Court was wrong in not giving approval to his discharge.
[258F; 259A, G] Associated Cement Co. Ltd., vs Workman , distinguished.
Strawboard Manufacturing Co. vs Gobind, [1962] Supp.
3 S.C.R. 618, referred to.251 252
