The Government acquired about 500 acres of land from the respondents under the Defence of India Act, 1939, and a settlement was reached in respect of the compensation to be paid for all except about 48 acres of the land.
The question of the compensation payable for the remaining land was referred to arbitration under section 19(1)(b) of the Act to be determined in accordance with section 19(1)(e) which entitled the respondents to compensation at the market value of the land.
The arbitrator considered various sale deeds produced before him but rejected these and fixed the compensation by capitalising the annual profits from the lands.
In an appeal against his award by the respondents under section 19(1)(f) of the Act, the High Court differed from the Arbitrator and enhanced the compensation payable by fixing it on the basis of a sale deed exhibited before the arbitrator.
In appeal to the Supreme Court by special leave given to the appellant Collector, it was contended on behalf of the respondents by way of a preliminary objection that no special leave could have been granted by the Court under article 136 as the judgment appealed against % ,as neither that of a court nor of a tribunal; the High Court while acting under section 19(1)(f) was a persona designata and not a court or a tribunal; proceedings before the arbitrator appointed by the Central Government under section 19(1)(b) were arbitration proceedings leading to an award made by him, when the matter was taken up in appeal to the High Court, the appeal proceedings did not cease to be arbitration proceedings and their original character continued so that the decision made by the High Court should also be considered as an award and the High Court considered as having functioned as an arbitrator.
Held: (i) While acting under section 19(1)(f), the High Court functions as a 'court ' and not as a designated person.
[378E] Hanskumar Kishanchand vs Union of India, ; , disapproved.
The High Court of a State is at the apex of a State 's judicial system.
It is a court of record and it is difficult to think of a High Court as anything other than a 'court '.
No judicial power was ever entrusted to the High Court except as a 'court ' and whenever it decides or determines any dispute that comes before it, it invariably does so as a 'court '.
That apart, when section 19(1)(f) specifically says that an appeal against the order of an arbitrator lies to the High Court, there was no justification.
for thinking that the legislature 373 said something which it did not mean.
Furthermore, neither the Act, nor the rules framed thereunder prescribe any special procedure for the disposal of appeals under section 19(1)(f) and appeals under that provision have to be disposed of in the same manner as other appeals to the High Court according to its own rules of practice and procedure.
[375F G. 377B C] Case law referred to.
(ii) On the facts, the High Court was not right in determining the compensation payable on the basis of the one sale deed as this could not be considered a contemporaneous transaction; the decision of the High Court must therefore be set aside and the case remitted to that court for disposal according to law after giving the parties an opportunity to adduce fresh evidence.
[380D E]
