The respondents filed a suit against the appellant for redemption of a mortgage.
The suit was decreed subject to payment of a sum of Rs. 9,224 12 0 towards principal and interest within six months.
A preliminary decree was directed to be drawn up.
The appellant filed an appeal in the Court of the District Judge and inter alia urged that "the court ought to have directed the Commissioner to deduct the rent received (i) first towards taxes, then (ii) towards interest of the amount, of repairs etc., then (iii) towards interest on the principal amount, then towards (iv) amount of repairs and expenses and then towards the principal of the loan.
" The appeal was dismissed.
A second appeal in the High Court also failed.
The appellant came to this Court by special leave.
It was urged on his behalf that the priorities in section 76(h) of the Transfer of Property Act were subject to the priorities in section 76(d) and therefore interest on the principal amount should, in the present case, have been given priority over the payment of the expenditure on maintenance and repairs.
Held:The appeal must fail.
The object of section 76(d) is not to fix any priorities but to make it obligatory on the mortgagee, in the absence of a contract to the contrary to carry out necessary repairs to the property but the amount he can spend is limited to the difference between rents and profits and payments mentioned in cl.
(c) and the interest on the principal money.
It is cl.
(h) which directs the mortgagee to apply the receipts from the mortgaged property in a certain manner.
The order of application is (1) the expenses properly incurred for the management of the property and the collection of rents and profits and the other expenses mentioned in cls., (c) and (d), (2) interest thereon, (3) the surplus, if any, has to be utilised towards reduction of interest on principal money and (4) the principal money itself.
There is no contradiction between section 76(d) and section 76(h).
The fact that section 76(d) limits the scope of the liability has no bearing on the question whether it lays down any order of priorities inconsistent with those mentioned in cl.
(h) [428B E]
