The property of a trust was sold in execution of a mortgage decree.
The trustees sought to set aside the sale under 0.
21, r. 89 of the Code of Civil Procedure, They deposited five per cent of the purchase money for payment to the auction purchaser and claimed that the mortgagee had agreed to give them time for payment of the mortgage amount, and has agreed in the meantime to abandon the application for execution.
The subordinate judge set aside the sale.
In appeal the District Court reversed that order holding that since the trustees failed to comply with r. 89 of 0. 21 requiring the judgment debtor to deposit in court for payment to the decree holder the amount specified in the proclamation of sale for the recovery of which the sale was ordered, the executing court had no jurisdiction to set aside the sale.
A single Judge of the High Court, in revision, set aside the order on the ground that the sale of the mortgaged property, which belonged to a public trust, without the sanction of the Charity Commissioner was prohibited by section 36 of the Bombay Public Trust Act and was on that account invalid.
The ,High Court remanded the case to the District Court.
In appeal to this Court, HELD:The order of the High Court should be set aside and that of the District Court restored.
(i)Transactions of mortgage, exchange or gift or lease of any immovable property in clauses (a) and (b) of section 36 of the Bombay Public Trusts Act contemplated to be made by the Trustees are voluntary transactions and in the absence of any clear provision in the Act, the expression 'Sale ' in cl.
(a) only means transfer of property by the trustees for a price and does not include a Court sale in execution of a decree.
[457F G] A suit to enforce a mortgage or a proceeding to enforce a mortgage decree against property belonging to a public trust is not a suit or proceeding in which a question affecting public religious or charitable purpose is involved within the meaning of section 56B of the Act and therefore it is not obligatory upon the court to issue notice to the Charity Commissioner.
[458C D] (ii) An order setting aside a Court sale in execution of a mortgage decree cannot be obtained under 0.
21 r. 89 of the Code of Civil Procedure by merely depositing five per cent of the purchase money for payment to the auction purchaser and persuading the decree holder to abandon the execution proceeding.
[459G H] 456 (iii)A Single Judge of a High Court is ordinarily bound to accept as correct judgments of Courts of coordinate jurisdiction and of Division Benches and of the Full Benches of his Court and of this Court.
Any reference to section 165 of the Evidence Act or the Oath of Office of a High Court judge is irrelevant and will not justify a judge in ignoring the rule relating to the binding nature of precedents.
Jaisri Sahu vs Rajdewan Dubey, ; Lala Shri Bhagwan vs Shri Ram Chand, ; ; Pinjare Karimbhai vs Shukla Hariprasad, ; Haridas vs Ratansey, ; and State 'of Gujarat vs Gordhandas,
