The first appellant, his brother H and his son the second appellant, constituted a Hindu Joint family and were governed by the Mitakshara law of the Benares School.
He died in 1952 leaving him surviving his widow.
On December 15, 1956, the widow sold a half share in a house and a shop belonging to the joint family to the first respondent.
The appellants filed a suit for a decree declaring that the sale by the widow was without consideration and for an order can celling the sale deed.
The suit was dismissed by the Trial Court and, in appeal, by the High Court.
In appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellants that under the Benares School of the Mitakshara, a male coparcener is not entitled to alienate even for value, his undivided interest in coparcenary property without the consent of the other coparceners except in certain specified cases, and by section 14(1) of the Hindu Succession Act 30 of 1956 it could not have been intended to confer a larger right on the widow of a coparcener.
HELD: On the death of her husband, the widow became entitled to the same interest which H had in the joint family property under s.3(2) of the Hindu Women 's Right to Property Act, 18 of 1937, in the joint family property of that interest, by virtue of s.14(1) of the , she became full owner on June 17, 1956 and being full owner she was competent to sell it for her own purpose without the consent of the male coparceners of her husband.
[477D G] A male member of a Hindu family governed by the.
Benares School of Hindu Law is undoubtedly subject to restrictions qua alienation of his interest in the joint family property.
but a widow acquiring an interest in that property by virtue of the is not subject to any such restrictions.
That is however not a ground for importing limitations which the Parliament has not chosen to impose.
[478F] Madho Parshad vs Mehrban Singh, L.R. 17 I.A. 194; Balgobind Das vs Narain Lal and Ors.
L.R. 20 I.A. 116 and Chandradeo Singh & Ors.
vs Mata Prasad & Anr.
T.L.R. 31 All.
176 (F.B.); referred to.
