The appellant was a member of the Indian Administrative Ser vice in the Madhya Pradesh Cadre and was compulsorily retired from the Service for misconduct by an order of the President in February, 1963.
In June, 1965 he was appointed Vice Chancellor of the Kurukshetra University, by the then Chancellor of the University.
On March 31, 1966 the new Chancellor who Was in office at the time, ordered the suspension of the appellant from the office of Vice Chan cellor and also issued to him a notice to show cause why his services I should not be terminated.
The appellant filed a petition in the High Court seeking a writ in the nature of mandamus to quash the Chancellor 's order of suspension.
In the meantime the Chancellor passed an order on May 8, 1966, in exercise of the power under Clause 4(vi).
of Schedule I to the Kurukshetra University Act, 1956, read with s.14 of the Punjab General Clauses Act, 1898, terminating the services of the appellant with immediate effect.
The appellant then amended his petition and sought a writ of certiorari to quash the order of May 8, 1966.
The High Court rejected the petition.
In appeal to this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellant, inter alia, (i) that the Chancellor had no power under the Act or the Statutes to terminate the tenure of office of a Vice Chancellor; and (ii) that the Chancellor was bound to hold an enquiry in accordance with the rules of natural justice before determining the appellant 's tenure, but the appellant had not been given a proper opportunity to explain why his services should not be terminated and, furthermore, the Chancellor had taken into consideration evidence which was not disclosed to the appellant.
On the other hand, it was contended for the respondent that since the claim for relief by the respondent was founded on an alleged breach of contract, the remedy of the appellant, if any, lay in an action for damages and not in a petition for a high prerogative writ.
HELD, dismissing the appeal: (i)The absence of a provision setting up the procedure for determining the employment of the Vice Chancellor in the Act or the Statutes or Ordinances does not lead to the inference that the tenure of office of Vice Chancellor is not liable to be determined.
[439H] A power to appoint ordinarily implies a power to determine employment and this rule is incorporated in s.14 of the Punjab General Clauses Act I of 1898.
[437H 438A] S.R. Tiwari vs District Board, Agra, ; and Lekhraj Sathramdas Lalvani vs N. M. Shah, Deputy Custodian cum Managing Officer, Bombay; , ; referred to.
435 An intention contrary to the rule was not evidenced either by the fact that under Clause 4(vii) of the Statutes the appointment of a Vice Chancellor is for three years or because there was no express provision covering the determination of service of a Vice Chancellor for misconduct as there was in the case of teachers.
Clause 4(vii) of the Statutes does not purport to confer upon a person appointed Vice Chancellor an indefeasible right to continue in office for three years; the clause merely places a restriction upon the power of the Chancellor, when fixing the tenure of the office of Vice Chancellor.
It could not be held that a person appointed a Vice Chancellor is entitled to continue in office for the full period of his appointment even if it turns out that he is physically decrepit, mentally infirm, or grossly immoral.
[438E F; 439G H] S.14 of the General Clauses Act is a general provision: it does not merely deal with the appointment of public servants.
It deals with all appointments, and there is no reason to hold, having regard to the context in which the expression occurs, that the authority invested with the power of appointment has the power to determine employment as a penalty, but not otherwise.
[438G H] (ii)The new Chancellor did issue a notice upon the appellant requiring him to show cause why the tenure of his service should not be terminated and the appellant made a representation which was considered; the appellant was informed of the grounds of the proposed termination of the tenure of his service and an order giving detailed reasons was passed by 'the Chancellor.
The High Court had rightly held on the facts that the appellant had the fullest opportunity of making his representation and that the inquiry held by the Chancellor was not vitiated because of any violations of the rules of natural justice.
[443D; 446C] (iii) The power to appoint a Vice Chancellor has its source in the University Act: investment of that power carries with it the power to determine the employment but that power may not be exercised arbitrarily; it can be only exercised for good cause, i.e. in the interests of the University and only when it is found after due enquiry held in a manner consistent with the rules of natural justice, that the holder of the office is unfit to continue as Vice Chancellor.
[441G] A.Francis vs Municipal Councillors of Kuala Lumpur, ; Barber vs Manchester Regional Hospital Board and Anr., ; Vidyodaya University of Ceylon and Ors.
vs Silva.
; State of Orissa vs Dr. (Miss) Binapani, ; ; Ridge vs Baldwin and Ors.
[1964] A.C. 41; referred to.
