The respondent club ran a race course and had built certain structures on land in Bombay which it had leased from the appellant corporation at an annual rent of Rs. 3.75 lakhs.
It had obtained a licence from the State Government to hold race meetings on its course in Bombay as well as on another course owned by it in Poona for which 'it had paid a licence fee of Rs. 13 lakhs for the relevant I year and had apportioned the fee in the ratio of 2: 1 between the Bombay and the Poona courses.
For assessment of the correct rateable value of the property for the rating year 1954 55 the assessing authority made an assessment by the profits basis method on the basis of the Club 's accounts for the year 1953 54 and, in doing so, disallowed certain expenses claimed by the Club in determining the net rateable value at Rs. 11,90,187.
The respondent club thereupon ' filed an appeal before the small Causes Court under section 217 of the Act and although that Court made a few adjustments, it held the Club had failed to prove that the net rateable value determined by the assessing authority was excessive.
The High Court however, in appeal, upheld the Club 's objections as regards the disallowance of several items of expenditure and held that the gross annual value of the property would, after the deductions to be allowed, come to Rs. 2,15,750; and after deducting therefrom the statutory allowance of 10 percent under section 154 on account of allowances for repairs etc.
, the net annual value would come to Rs. 1,94,175.
In the appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant, inter alia, (i) that the 10 percent statutory deduction allowed by section 154(1) covers all expenses for repairs and therefore deduction of costs of repairs and upkeep of the course, if allowed, would mean a duplicate deduction; (ii) that the totalisator maintained by the Club being 'machinery, its value was not to be included in rating under s.154(2); (iii) that the Club wag entitled to a deduction of only half of the licence fee apportioned to the Bombay Course because that fee covered dual purpose i.e. for the premises as a race course and for permission to conduct race meetings on the race course; for the first the burden would be on the lessor and for the second on the tenant; that this was borne out by the scheme of the Bombay Race Courses Licencing Act 3 of 1912 which was to licence the premises and then to licence the person who runs races on such premises; and (iv) that if the expenses claimed were allowed to be deducted, the net rateable value arrived at would be less than the actual rent of Rs. 3,75,000 payable by the Club to the Corporation and that such a result cannot be contemplated under any method of assessing the rateable value.
HELP:Dismissing the appeal: (i)The expenses in question were for the maintenance in good repair of the race track which is the source of 526 receipts earned by teh Club.
Disbursements for the upkeep of the course and all its adjuncts consequently are proper out goings incurred for earning the receipts.
They are not the landlord 's obligation and are not part of or included in teh statutory deduction of 10 percent in section 154(1), which is, in lieu of, the cost of repairs, insurance, etc.
incurred by,the lessor.
The High Court was therefore right in deducting such expenses from the gross receipts.
(ii) Similarly the expenses incurred for the upkeep and re pair of the totalisator were incurred on an adjunct neces sary to an efficient race course and must necessarily be regarded as the outgoings of the business.
The contention that as it was machinery its value could not be included in, rating tinder section 154(2) had no merit.
(iii) The High Court had rightly allowed the deduction of the entire amount of expenditure in connection with the cost of sand and morum, salaries and charges of empolyees, motor lorry expenses, stores and charges for maintenance of horses 'and bullocks, manure and garden expenses, spares of tractors and other machinery and the wheel tax and water tax.
The distribution of these expenses between the tenant and the landlord made by the assessing authority and the small Cause Court could not be sustained on the ground that race meetings were held in Bombay only for Part of the year.
There was nothing to show that the lessor had to maintain the track during the time when race meetings were not held in Bombay.
The measure in arriving at the net rateable value under section 154(1) is what a hypothetical tenant would pay as rent and that would depend upon the amount of profits earned from race meetings held on the race course.
To arrive at the correct amount of such profit all expenses reasonably and properly incurred which go to the making of the receipts have to be deducted from the gross receipts.
[533D] (iv) The licence obtained by the Club was clearly permission to run race meetings on the two race courses and not an instrument licensing the premises as a race course.
Since it is the tenant who would hold the race meetings, the fee, payable for the licence is his burden and not that of the lessor.
Furthermore there was no provision in Bombay Act 3 of 1912 to warrant the construction that the licence obtained under section 4 had a dual purpose as contended.
[533H 534D] (v) The rateable value need not always be equal to the actual rent.
The measure is what a hypothetical tenant is expected to pay for a lease from year to year taking the property as it exists with all its advantages and burdens.
In view of the fact that the Club was only in exclusive possession of some portions of the land and the remainder 'had to be kept open to the public except on race days, it was not surprising that the rateable value came to less than the actual rent.
[534H; 535C] R.v.
Verall , Sanddown Park CAse [1954] 47 R. T. 351 (CA).
(quoted in Ryde on Rating, 11th ed.
523); Port of London Authority vs Assessment Committee, at p. 281, referred to.
