Section 32(1) of the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act 1948 as amended by, Act XIII of 1956 provides that on the first day, of April 1957 every tenant shall subject to certain provisions and exceptions be deemed to have purchased from his landlord the land held by him as a tenant.
Section 88B provides an exception in favour of trusts which are or are deemed to be registered under the Bombay Public Trusts Act, 1950 when the Collector after enquiry certifies to that effect.
After the territorial changes made by the States Reorganization Act 1956 and the further changes made in 1960 certain territories of the then State of Bombay were excluded and certain other areas were brought into the new State of Maharashtra.
Thereafter the Bombay Public Trusts (Unification and Amendment) Act, 1960 was passed, amending the Act of 1960.
Before this amendment, section 28 of the Act provided that all public trusts registered under any of the enactments specified in Schedule A thereto shall be deemed to have been registered under the Act from the date on which the Act was applied to them.
By the amendment Schedule AA was added to the Act and when read with section 28 the effect thereof was that the trusts registered under the Madhya Pradesh Act 1951 were deemed to have been registered under the Bombay Act.
The appellant in the present case was the mahant of a public and religious trust which was administered at Burhanpur, Madhya Pradesh.
The bulk of its properties were in Burhanpur but three pieces of land lay in the new State of Maharashtra.
The appellant relying on the amended section 28 of the Bombay Public Trusts Act and section 88B of the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act sought exemption from the operation of section 32 of the latter Act.
The matter having been decided against him by the High Court at Bombay, he appealed by certificate to this Court.
HELD: Though section 28 of the Bombay Public Trusts Act is couched in general terms it cannot mean that all trusts registered under the Madhya Pradesh Act are to be deemed to be registered under the Bombay Act irrespective of whether they are still situate in Madhya Pradesh and are liable to be administered under the Madhya Pradesh Public Trusts Act.
The Act is intended to apply only to those trusts which as a result of the reorganization of the State have come within the State of Maharashtra and to which the Bombay Act did not apply.
[645B D] 642 In the present case there was no dispute that the trust was administered at Burhanpur and the bulk of the properties, except the three pieces of land situate in Maharashtra lay in Madhya Pradesh.
The fact that a part of its property was situate in Maharashtra State, though the trust was within Madhya Pradesh State, would not mean that the trust would be governed partly by the Madhya Pradesh Act and partly by the Bombay Act.
Such a division of the Trust and its administration was not contemplated by either of the two Acts.
The present trust did not therefore fall within the ambit of section 28 and was not one of those trusts which could be deemed to be registered under the Bombay Act.
Con sequently it was also not a trust which fulfilled the conditions of section 88B of the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act and the appellant could not be said to be entitled to the certificate under that section.
[645F H]
