The Regional Transport Authority, by an order under section 47(3) of the , fixed the number of stage carriages, by increasing their number on a particular route.
The appellant, an existing operator, filed a revision against that order to the State Transport Authority, under section 64A, but the State Transport Authority held that a revision did not lie.
The appellant then filed a writ petition in the High Court and the High Court dismissed it, holding that: (1) at the stage of section 47(3), existing operators were not entitled to be heard by the Regional Transport Authority, and (2) since the order of the Regional Transport Authority was good on merits, it was not necessary to decide whether a revision lay to the State Transport Authority.
In appeal to this Court, HELD: (1) Unlike section 47(1), section 47(3) does not say expressly that representations could be made by existing operators and others.
The expression in section 47(3) that 'the Regional Transport Authority may, having regard to the matters mentioned in sub section
(1) ', only means that the Authority shall have regard to the matters mentioned in sub cls.
(a) to (f) of section 47(1) and has nothing to do the right of making representations.
[638F H] (2) But whether or not an existing operator has an implied right to be heard before an order under section 47(3) is made he can be aggrieved by an order made under that section increasing or decreasing the number of stage carriages depending on the circumstances of the case, and has therefore a right of revision under section 64A, the only condition for filing a revision being that it should be against an order made by the Regional Transport Authority against which no appeal lies.
[639C D, F H] Abdul Mateen vs Ram Kailash Pandey, ; , re ferred to.
(3) Since a revision could be filed under section 64A against the order under section 47(3) the aggrieved operator need not approach the Regional Transport Authority first to review its order.
[640B C] (4) The High Court should have directed the State Transport Authority to dispose of on merits the revision petition against the order under section 47(3), and not gone into its merits itself, but, in view of the time that lapsed since the order was passed (five years, during which the demand for stage carriages must have increased), this Court would not interfere in the exercise of its jurisdiction under article 136.
[640C E] 636
