A property was conveyed to the respondent Municipality by a deed "for the purpose of Sarvajanik Kam (public purpose) as it has been utilised uptodate for shelter of Atit, Abhyaqat, Sadhu, Sant, etc.".
It was also recited in the deed that in the property conveyed there was "a Samadhi (grave) of Nagabawa.
" The Municipality entered possession and made certain constructions which were used for its offices and for shops.
Thereafter, the Municipality sued for a decree for delivering possession of a part of the property against a Sadhu who had unlawfully.
occupied it and the suit was decreed.
Later, in survey proceedings members of the Johari Panch claimed that they had entrusted their temple to the Municipality for administering it for the community, but the compound belonged to them and that the Municipality was merely a trustee thereof.
The Secretary of the Municipality admitted that in the property there existed a temple of the Joharis and that the members of that community had the right to visit the temple at fixed times but that they had no other right.
The Survey Officer declared the Municipality to be the owner of the property and not a trustee for the Johari Panch.
Thereupon, an application under section 19 of the Bombay Public Trusts Act was filed for a declaration that the property was settled in favour of the Municipality for the benefit of the Johari Panch and that the property be registered as property of a public trust under the Act.
The Charity Commissioner declared that there was a public trust, that the Municipality was the trustee thereof, and that the property was transferred in the Municipality for the benefit of members of the public interested in the Samadhi of Nagabawa; but he held that there was no such institution known as Johari Panch and that the property had not been used for the benefit of that community.
In appeal, the District Court set aside the order of, the Charity Commissioner.
The Charity Commissioner appealed to the High Court, which reversed the order of the District Court and restored the order of the Charity Commissioner.
In appeal, this Court, Held: The appeal must fail.
(i) The property was entrusted to the Municipality for providing shelter to sadhus, saints and religious mendicants.
the purpose was religious and charitable within the meaning of section 2 (13) of the 653 Bombay Public Trusts Act.
The trust was not limited to the buildings standing on the land; but extended to the entire property.
Sadhus, religious mendicants and visitors to the Samadhi of Nagabawa are a section of the public.
They have a common bond of veneration for the Samadhi.
The beneficiaries of the trust are an uncertain and fluctuating body of persons forming a considerable section of the public and answering a particular description, and the fact that they belong to a religious faith or a sect of persons of a certain religious faith or a sect of persons of a certain religious persuasion does not make any difference in the matter.
[660 A C].
Mahant Ram Saroop Dasji vs section P. Sahi [1959] Suppl.
2 S.C.R. 583 followed.
(ii) After the transfer of the property was accepted by the Municipality for the purpose mentioned in the deed it was not open to the Municipality to divert the use of that property for its own purposes.
There is nothing in Act 6 of 1873 or in the general law which prevents a Municipality from accepting a trust in favour of a section of the general public in respect of property transferred to it.
Nor does the Act authorise a Municipality, after accepting a trust, to utilise it for its own purpose in breach of the trust.
[657 B C; 658 C].
(iii) The contention, that once it was found that the property was not for the benefit of Johari Panches, the application should have been dismissed, had no force.
The proceedings were commenced under section 19 of the Bombay Public Trusts Act, and it was open to the Charity Commissioner to determine whether a public trust existed, and if the Charity Commissioner was satisfied that there existed a public trust, whatever may be the claim made by the applicants, the Charity Commissioner was bound to declare the existence of the public trust and register it.
Under s.19 an enquiry may be started by the Deputy or Assistant Charity Commissioner on tin application made under s.18 or on an application made by any person having interest in a public trust or on his own motion.
[660 G, H].
(iv) The Sadhu who had unlawfully possessed himself of a part of the property in dispute was not sued in a representative capacity on behalf of the beneficiaries of the trust; he was sued as a trespasser.
Therefore, the judgment did not operate as resjudicata, and the Charity Commissioner was not prevented from determining in an appropriate proceeding whether the property was the property of a public trust of a religious or charitable nature.
[658 F].
(v) The argument, that the decision of the Survey Officer, operates by virtue of section 50 A of the Bombay District Municipal Act, 1901 to destroy the rights of the public, is without substance.
By sub section
(2) of section 50A, if the Collector had passed an order, a suit in a civil court shall be dismissed if the suit was brought to set aside the order of the Collector or if the relief claimed was inconsistent with such order In the present case, the property was entered in the Survey record as that of the Municipality.
But the legal ownership of the Municipality was not challenged in the proceedings before the Charity Commissioner.
The proceeding under section 19 of the Bombay Public Trusts Act was for a declaration that the property was the property of a public trust and therefore was not a suit to set aside the order of the Collector.
nor was it a suit in which the relief claimed was inconsistent with the order of the Survey Officer.
[658 G 659 B].
(vi) A person interested as the Charity Commissioner is in the due administration of property, cannot be denied a right to appeal 654 against an adverse decision in a proceeding to which he is a party, on the ground that he is pleading for acceptance of the view which he had declared as a quasi judicial authority at an earlier stage of that proceeding.
[661 E F].
