After the resumption of the appellant 's Jagir lands in the State by the enactment of the Madhya Bharat Abolition of Jagirs Act, he claimed the mango trees, planted by him on both sides of a long road, as constituting a "grove" within the meaning of section 5(b)(iv) of the Act, and therefore continued to belong to him.
HELD: A grove irrespective of where it was situate, but belonging to or held by the jagirdar was to continue to belong to or to be held by him.
To secure the full and proper use and enjoyment of such a grove, if it was on land other than that which was allowed to be retained by him, sub clause (iv) of section 5(b) further provides that the land on which such a grove stood with the areas appurtenant thereto also shall be settled upon him in accordance with the M. B. Revenue Administration and Ryotwari Land Revenue and Tenancy Act Samvat 2007.
The intention of the legislature appeared to be that properties which the jagirdar was in personal use and possession of or in respect of which he had paid valuable consideration were to be retained by him.
[764 H; 765 A].
The language of sec.
5(b) (iv) does not require that the trees need be fruit bearing trees nor does it require that they should have been planted by human labour or agency.
But they must be sufficient in number and so standing in a group as to give them the character of a grove and to retain that character the trees would or when fully grown preclude the land on which they stand from being primarily used for a purpose other than that of a grove land.
Cultivation of a patch here and a patch there would have no significance to deprive it of its character as a grove.
Therefore, trees standing in a file on the road side intended to furnish shade to the road would not fulfil the requirements of a grove even as understood in ordinary parlance.
[766 C E].
Daropadi vs Mannu Lal, A.I.R. 1929 All. 557.
Kashi vs Jagoo Bai.
A.I.R, 1934 All.
290, Shiv Sahai vs Hari Nandan, A.I.R 1963 All. 413, Hasan vs State of Bombay, , referred to.
