The appellant assessee filed a memorandum of appeal to the Assistant Commissioner, Sales Tax, stating therein that the amount of admitted tax had been paid and forfeited the statement by an affidavit.
Before the hearing, he produced a certificate from the Sales Tax Officer that the tax had been paid.
The Assistant Commissioner relying on the Allahabad High Court 's decision in Swastika Tannery, Jaimau vs Commissioner of Sales tax, U.P. rejected as defective the memorandum of appeal, holding that it was not accompanied by the challan showing the deposit of admitted tax under section 9 of the Uttar Pradesh Sales Tax Act, 1948 and r. 66 of the U.P. Sales tax Rules.
Against this order the assessee directly filed special leave to appeal to this Court without exhausting the remedies of revision and reference provided in the Act.
This Court granted Special Leave and; HELD:The appeal must be allowed.
(i) By the word "entertain" in the proviso to section 9 is meant the first occasion on which the Court take up the matter for consideration.
It may be at the admission stage or if by the rules of that Tribunal, the appeals are automatically admitted, it will be the time of hearing of the appeal.
But on the first occasion when the court takes up the matter for consideration, satisfactory proof must be presented that the tax was paid within the period of limitation available for the appeal.
Rule 66(2) lays down one uncontestable mode of proof which the Court will always accept but it does not exclude the operation of the proviso when equally satisfactory proof is made available to the officer hearing the appeal and it is proved to his satisfaction that the payment of the tax has been duly made and in time.
[512E F; 513E G] In the present case, when the Assistant Commissioner took tip the appeal for consideration, satisfactory proof was available in the shape of a certificate.
Swastika Tannery of Jaimau vs Commissioner of Sales tax, U.P. Lucknow, (1963) 14 S.T.C. 518, disapproved.
Kundan Lal vs Jagannath Sharma, A.I.R. 1962 All. 547; Dhoom Chand Jain vs Chaman Lal Gupta and Anr.
A.I.R. 1962 All.
42: Haji Rahim Bux & Sons & Ors.
vs Firm Samiullah & Sons, A.I.R. 1963 All. 320, approved.
(ii) Though this Court would not ordinarily grant special leave to appeal against an order when other remedies were available and had not been exhausted, there is no inflexible rule that this Court will never entertain such an appeal.
It would have been futile in this case for the assessee to have gone to the court of revision which was bound by the decision in Swastika Tannery of Jaimau vs
Commissioner of Sales tax, U.P. and it would have been equally 506 futile to have gone to the High Court on a reference.
The matter was more easily disposed of by giving special leave in this Court and this was one of those extra ordinary cases in which the ends of justice would be better served, by avoiding a circuity of action and by dealing with this matter in this Court directly.
[513H 514C]
