In 1877, the Muhammadan Anglo Oriental College at Aligarh (M.A.0.
College) was started as a teaching institution under the Allahabad University for the educational regeneration of Muslims in India.
Thereafter, the idea of establishing a Muslim University gathered strength and the Muslim University Association was formed.
The Government of India informed the, Association that a sum of rupees thirty lakhs should be collected before the University could be established.
Therefore, a Muslim University Foundation Committee #as started and it collected the necessary funds.
The contributions were made by Muslims as well as non Muslims.
With the M.A.0.
College as a nucleus the Aligarh Muslim University was then established by the .
The preamble land sections 3 and 4 of the Act show that the M.A.0.
College, the Muslim University Association and the Muslim University Foundation Committed legally came to (end, and that the three bodies voluntarily surrendered whatever properties ,they had to the Aligarh University, so that all theit properties movable and immovable were, vested in the Aligarh university ""Section 23 of the Act provided for the constitution of the court of the University.
By the proviso to section 23(1) no person other than a Muslim could be a member of the Court of the University, and by :a. 23(2)" the Court of the University was to be the supreme governIng body of the University.
By sub section
(3) the Court of the University was given the Power of making statutes.
Section 13 provided for the Governor General of India to be the Lord Rector of the University and section 14 provided that the Governor of: the United Provinces, the members of his Executive Council, the Ministers, one member nominated by the Govern and one member nominated by the Minister in charge of Education to be the Visiting Board of the 'University.
These persons were not necessarily Muslims but they had powers over the administration of the University overriding those of the Court of the University.
Further, sections 28(2) and 30(3) laid down that no Statute or Ordinance or amendment or repeal of an existing Statute or Ordinance would have any validity unless it had been approved by the Governor General in Council.
Section 40 gave further powers to the Governor General in Council to remove any difficulty which might arise in the establishment of the University.
834 In 1951, the Aligarh Muslim University (Amendment) Act, 1951 was passed and it made certain changes in the 1920 Act on account of the coming into force of the Constitution.
Sections 13 and 14 are so amended that in the place of the Lord Rector, the University was to have a Visitor and the powers of the Visiting Board were conferred on the Visitor.
The proviso to section 23(1) was deleted, with the result that, non Muslims could also be the members of the Court of the University.
There were further amendments by Ordinance II of 1965 which was replaced by the Aligarh Muslim University (Amendment) Act, 1965.
As a result of those amendments the Court of the University no longer remained the supreme governing body.
Many of its powers were taken away and those of the Executive Council were correspondingly increased.
The Court practically became a body nominated by the Visitor, every person holding office immediately before the date on which the Ordinance was promulgated ceased to hold office from the said date, and, until the Court was reconstituted, the Visitor might by general or special order direct any officer of the University to exercise the powers and perform the duties conferred or imposed on the Court.
The petitioners challenged the constitutional validity of the 1951 and 1965 Acts, on the following !grounds: (1) the Muslim minority had established the University and therefore had a right to administer it under article 30(1) of the Constitution, and that the amendments deprived the Muslim minority, of this right in violation of the, Article; (2) even if the minority had not established the University, they had a right to administer the University as an educational institution and that they were in fact administering it after it was established; (3).
the right of the Muslim minority under article 26(a) to maintain the University as an institution for charitable purposes, was violated; (4) the right of the Muslim minority as a religious denomination, under article 26(c) and (d), to ad minister the movable and immovable property of the University, was violated; (5) the provisions of the Ad as: amended are different from those of other Statutes creating other universities, and therefore, there was a violation of article If (6) the Muslim minority had been deprived of their right under article 19 to manage the University and to hold the property which was vested in the University;,(7) the Muslim minority had been deprived of theirs property, namely, the property vested in the University, in asmuch as the Court of the University after the 1965 Act was a body very different from the Court under the 1920 Act and there was thus a violation of article 31(1); and (8) the right of the Muslim minority to profess, practise and propagate their religion under article 25, and, their right to conserve their language, script or culture under article 29, were violated.
HELD: (1) The Aligarh University, was neither established nor administered by the Muslim minority and therefore there is no question of any amendment to the 1920 Act violating Art, 30(1) for that Article does not at all apply to the University.
[854 H].
The words establish and administer in article 30(1) must be read conjunctively.
that is, article 30(1) postulates that a religious community will have the right to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice, meaning ther by, that where a religious minority establishes an educational institution It will ' have the right to administer it, but not otherwise.
The word establish for the purpose of the Article means bring into existence and educational institutions include universities.
But Muslims, assuming 835 they are a minority based on religion, did not establish the University.
Before the enacting of the University Grants Commission Act of 1966, there was no law in India which prohibited and private individual or body from establishing a University, that is an educational institution which grants its own degrees.
; but the private individual or body could not insist that the degrees must be recognised by the Government.
Such recognition depended upon the will of the Government generally expressed through statute.
Therefore, there was nothing in 1920 preventing the Muslim minority from establishing a University; but if they did so Its degreea were not bound to he recognised by the Government and that was why the Aligarh University was established by legislation namely the 1920 Act, and provided by section 6 that its degrees shall 'be recognised by the Government.
Thus, when the Aligarh University was established in 1920 and by section 6 of the 1920 Act its degrees had to be recognised by Government, an institution was brought into existence which could not be brought into existence by any private individual or body.
The Act may have been passed as a result of the efforts of the Muslim minority, but that does not mean that the University, when it came into being under the 1920 Act was established by the Muslim minority.
The, conversion of the M.A.O. College into the University was not lay the Muslim minority.
The University was brought into being by the 1920 Act and must therefore be held to have been established by the Central legislature.
[847 F H; 848 A; 849 C H; 850 D H; 851 A B, C D; 852 D E].
St. David 's College, Lampeter vs Ministry of Education, , applied.
In re: The Kerala Education Bill 1957, [1959] S.C.R. 995, explained.
Further, the Muslim minority could not claim any rights on the basis that the University was an eleemosynary corporation and that the minority were in the position of undator perficiens, bicause: (i) it is the donors (some of whom were non Muslims) and not the Muslim minority that could be said to be in the position of fundator perficiens; (ii) even the donors could only have visitorial rights under the English Common Law; and (iii) even those rights have been negatived by the 1920 Act for it specifically conferred such rights on the Lord Rector and the Visiting Board.
[851 E H].
(2) The provisions of the 1920 Act do not bear out the contention that it was the Muslim minority that was administering the University after it was brought into existence.
On the other hand, the administration of the University was vested in the Lord Rector, the Visiting Board, and the statutory bodies created by the 1920 Act whose members were not necessarily Muslims.
It was only in one of them namely the Court of :he University that there was a bar to the appointment of any one else except a Muslim.
But even with respect to the Court, paragraph 8 of the Schedule to the Act shows, that even though the members of the Court had to be Muslims.
the electorate which electe the members of the Court were not exclusively Muslims.
[853 P G; 854 F H].
(3) Assuming that educational institutions would come within article 26(a) as institutions for charitable purposes the right under article 26(a) could not be claimed by the Muslim minority, because, the right to maintain (which includes the right to administer) will only arise where the institution is established by the religious denomination.
In this Article also, the words establish and Maintain must be read conjunctively.
[855 B C, E F].
L/P(N)7SCI 14 836 (4)Article 26(c) and (d) give power to a religious denomina tion to own and acquire movable and immovable property, and if it owns or acquires such property it can administer it in accordance with law.
There is nothing in the amending Acts which in any way bars the Muslim minority from owning, acquiring or administering movable or immovable property.
Assuming that before 1920 the property which was vested in the University Was the property of the Muslim minority, it was voluntarily surrendered to the corporate body created by the 1920 Act, namely, the Aligarh University.
Therefore, when the Constitution came into force there was no property held by the Muslim minority.
As the Muslim minority did not own the property which was vested in the Aligarh University on the date of the Constitution, they could not lay any claim to administer that property by virtue of article 26(d).
[855 H; 856 A B].
The Durgah Committee Ajmer vs Syed Hussain Ali, ; , followed.
(5)Article 14 does not require that the provisions in every University Act must always be the same, because, each university must be taken to be a class by itself having its own problems and it is for the Legislature to decide what kind of constitution should be conferred on a particular university established by it.
Therefore, there can be no question of discrimination on the ground that some other University Acts provide for a different set up.
[856 G H; 857 C].
(6)Article 19(1)(c) does not give any right to any citizen to manage any particular educational institution.
It only gives the right to citizens to form associations or unions, and that right has not been touched by the 1965 Act.
Similarly, article 19(1)(f) does not give any citizen any right to hold property vested in a corporate body like the University.
It only provides that all citizens have the right to acquire, hold and dispose of property of their own.
There is nothing in the 1965 Act which in any way takes away the right of the Muslims of this country to acquire, hold and dispose of property of their own.
[857 D G].
(7)There is no breach of article 31(1) for the 1965 Act did not deprivethe Muslim minority of any property, because the property was notvested in the Muslim minority at any time after the 1920 Act came into force.
Assuming 'Muslim minority ' is a person for the purposes of article 31(1) and the petitioners have a right to file the writs on its behalf, the 1965 Act made no change in the ownership of the property which had already vested in the Aligarh University after the 1920 Act came into force.
(857 H; 858 F H].
(8)The amendments made by the 1965 Act in the 1920 Act do not in any way affect the right, under article 25, of the Muslims to profess, practise and propagate their religion; nor do they affect their right under Art, 29, to conserve their language, script or culture which they might have.
[856 C E].
