During the trial for an offence of dacoity one of the witnesses gave false evidence, and stated, on further examination, that he did so at the instance of the Sub inspector who investigated the case.
The Court gave notice to the Sub inspector to show cause why a complaint should not be laid against him for offences under sections 195, 196 and 205 I.P.C. and he appeared and showed cause.
After the trial, and at the time of delivering judgment in the dacoity case the Court found that the witness had intentionally given false evidence and that the Sub inspcctor had intentionally fabricated false evidence, and thereafter filed a complaint against them before the Joint Magistrate.
They were committed to the Sessions Court to take their trial for offences under sections 195, 196 and 34 I.P.C. as first and second accused respectively.
The Sessions Judge found them guilty.
The Sub inspector (second accused) appealed to the High Court and contended that : (1) the Sessions Judge had committed a gross illegality in relying as against the second accused, upon the evidence of the first accused as a witness in the earlier dacoity case, and the statement of the first accused under section 342 Cr.
P.C. before the Sessions Judge; and (2) the show cause notice was not sufficient com pliance with the provisions of section 479A, Cr.
P.C. as the notice should have been given after the judgment in the dacoity case.
The High Court dismissed the appeal summarily in one word 'dismissed ', without discussing the questions of law and without considering whether there was ,.sufficient other evidence to convict the appellant.
In appeal by the Sub inspector to this Court, HELD : The appeal before the High Court, was an arguable one, and it also raised substantial and important questions for consideration by the High Court.
The High Court was therefore not justified in dismissing the appeal summarily.
[94C] Mushtak Hussein vs State of Bombay. ; Shreekantiah Ramyayya Munipalli vs state of Bombay ; and Chittaranjan Das vs State of West Bengal ; followed.
