Under the Andhra Pradesh (Regulation of Supply and Purchase) Act 1961 the occupier of a sugar factory had to buy sugarcane from canegrowers in conformity with the directions of the Cane Commissioner.
Under section 21 of the Act the State Government had power by notification to tax purchases of sugarcane for use, consumption or sale in a sugar factory.
The tax was leviable subject to a maximum rate per metric tonne.
The maximum rate for khandsari units was less than that for factories; sugarcane purchased for production of jaggery was not taxed at all.
The petitioners were sugar factories in Andhra Pradesh.
They filed writ petitions under article 32 of the Constitution challenging the validity of section 21 mainly on the ground that as the petitioners or their agents were compelled by law to buy cane from the canegrowers, their purchases were not made under agreements and were not taxable under Entry 54 List II having regard to Gannon Dunkerley 's case.
It was further urged that the tax leviable under section 21 was not truly a purchase tax as it was levied with reference to weight of the goods, that it was levied with reference to use and was therefore a use tax, and that it was the entry of the goods into the factory that was sought to be taxed Articles 14 and 301 of the Constitution were also said to be contravened.
Held: (1) There has been a gradual erosion of the laissez faire concept which prevailed in the nineteenth century.
It is now realised that in the public interest persons exercising certain callings or having monopoly or near monopoly Powers should sometimes be charged with the duty to serve the public, and if necessary, to enter into contract& The canegrowers scattered in the villages had no real bargaining power.
In the unequal contest between the canegrowers and the factory owners, the law stepped in and compelled the factory to enter into contracts of purchase of cane offered by the canegrowers on prescribed terms and conditions.
[713 C.F.].
Under Act 45 of 1961 and the Rules framed under it, the canegrower in the factory zone is free to make or not to make an offer of sale of cane to the occupier of the factory.
But if he makes an offer, the occupier of the factory is bound to accept it.
The resulting agreement is recorded in writing and is signed by the parties.
The consent of the occupier of the factory is free as defined in section 14 of the Indian Contract Act.
The compulsion of law is not coercion as 706 defined in section 15 of the Act.
The, agreements are enforceable by law and are contracts of sale as defined in section 4 of the Indian Sale of Goods Act.
The purchases of sugarcane under the agreement can be therefore taxed by the State Legislature under Entry 54 List II.
Section 21 of the Andhra Pradesh Sugarcane (Regulation of Supply and Purchase) Act, 1961 is accordingly not ultra vires.
[712 F H].
State of Madras vs Gannon Dunkerley & Co. ; and New India Sugar Mills Ltd., vs Commissioner of Sales Tax, Bihar, [1963] Supp. 2 S.C.R. 459, distinguished and explained.
Lane vs Cotton, ; E.R. 17, Kirkness vs John Hudson & Co. Ltd. and Ridge Nominees vs I.R.C. , referred to.
The Indian Steel & Wire Products Ltd., vs The State of Madras, ; , relied on.
(ii) Purchase tax need not always be levied with reference to price of goods or with reference to turnover.
It may be levied on the occupier of a factory by reference to the weight of the goods purchased by him.
[717 C E].
It cannot he accepted that a purchase tax must be always levied on goods generally and never with reference to their use, consumption or sale.
Under List II Entry 54 the State Legislature is not bound to levy a tax on all purchases of cane.
It may levy a tax on purchases of cane required for use, consumption or sale in a factory.
The tax so levied is not a use tax.
[717 F 718 B].
McLeod vs Dilworth & Co. ; and C. G. Naidu & Co. vs State of Madras, A.I.R. 1953 Mad.
116, referred to.
The tax under section 21 is not a levy on the (entry of goods into the factory.
Cane cultivated by the factory and entering it cannot be taxed under the section.
[718 G].
Diamond Sugar Mills Ltd., and Anr.
vs State of Uttar Pradesh and Anr.
, ; , referred to.
(iii) Section 21 does not impede free trade, commerce and intercourse and therefore does not offend article 301 of the Constitution.
The tax levied under section 21 does not discriminate against any imported cane.
[719 E 720 A].
A. T. Mehtab Majid and Co. vs State of Madras, [1963] Supp.
2 S.C.R. 435, Atiabari Tea Co ' Ltd., vs State of Assam (Rajasthan) Ltd., vs State of Rajasthan, [1963] 1 S.C.R. 491, referred to.
(iv) The differential treatment of factories producing sugar by means of vacuum pans, khandsari units producing sugar by the open pan process and canegrowers using cane for the manufacture of jaggery is reasonable and has a rational relation to the object of the Act.
There is thus no violation of article 14 of the Constitution.
[720 G H].
Nor does discrimination result from the exemption under section 21(3) of factories which are new or which in the opinion of the Government have substantially expanded.
The exemption is based on legitimate legislative policy.
The question whether the exemption should be granted to a factory and if so for what period and the question whether a factory has substantially expanded and if so the extent of such expansion have to be decided with reference to the facts of each individual case.
It is not possible for the State 707 Legislature to examine the merits of individual cases and the function was properly delegated to the State Government.
The legislature was not obliged to prescribe a more rigid standard for the guidance of Government.
[721 A C].
