The Madhya Bharat Municipalities Act 1954 came into force January 26, 1954.
The Indore City Municipal Act, 1909 which had till then governed the Indore Municipality was thereby repealed.
Under the repealed Act the Indore Municipality used to levy and collect house tax at the rate of 7% of the gross annual letting value.
Under section 73(2) of the 1954 Act house tax was to be assessed on the basis of the gross annual letting value less 10% statutory allowance for repairs etc.
However, even for the period after the passing of the new Act, the Municipal Corporation, purporting to act under section 79 '(1) of the 1954 Act.
adopted ,the latest assessment list prepared under the old Act and levied house tax at the old rate of 7% of the gross.
annual letting value.
The respondents who were trustees of certain house property filed a suit challenging the levy on the basis of the gross annual letting value when section 73(2) of the 1954 Act required the tax to be assessed on the net value after deduction of the statutory allowance.
The suit was decreed by the 'Trial Court and the appeals filed by the Corporation before the District judge and the High Court were dismissed.
The Corporation by special leave, came to this Court and urged: (i) that the levy at 7% of the gross annual letting value prescribed under the rules of the Indore Act was saved by section 2(c) of the 1954 Act; (ii) that under section 79(1) the Corporation was required to prepare a fresh assessment list only once in four years, that it was therefore entitled to adopt for the years in question the latest assessment list prepared under the old Act.
and the said assessment list having been so adopted was conclusive evidence as to the annual rental value of houses and the house tax imposed thereon.
HELD: (i) While section 2(c) saves the rules and taxes.
imposed under the old Act it saves them only to the extent that they are consistent with the new Act.
The saving and deeming provisions of section 2(c) can only apply if the tax is assessed in the manner consistent with the provisions of section 73, that is, if it is assessed on the net and not the gross annual letting value after deducting 10% statutory allowance.
The Corporation could not be allowed to go on imposing the tax on the basis of the gross annual letting value for ever despite the express provision in section 73.
The tax imposed by the Corporation at the rate of 7% of the gross annual letting value was not therefore saved by section 2(c).
[129E H] (ii) Ordinarily the Municipal Corporation has to prepare a fresh assessment list every year.
The legislature has however by section 79(1) empowered the Corporation to adopt the valuation and assessment contained in the assessment list prepared in an earlier year provided, however, that it prepares a fresh list once in every 4 years.
But sub section
(2) 126 of section 79 provides expressly that when such a previous list is adopted for a particular official year it can be done subject to the provisions sections 75 and 76.
The list so adopted has therefore to be published, has to invite objections and has to be authenticated in the manner prescribed by section 76(6) after disposing of the objections if any and it is then only that it becomes conclusive evidence of the valuation and the tax assessed thereon for that particular official year.
If it were otherwise a house owner would have no opportunity to object to the assessment for four years even though the value of his house may have decreased for some reason or the other.
Section 79 has therefore to be construed to mean that though a Municipality need not prepare a fresh assessment list every year and need prepare such list once in every 4 ),ears and can adopt an earlier assessment list such an adopted list becomes the assessment list for that particular year as if it was a new list and to which sections 75 and 76 apply.
[130E 131C] Accordingly, the Corporation was entitled to adopt for the official years in question the latest list prepared under the old Act, and under section 79 that list would become the assessment list for the said years provided that the provisions of sections 75 and 76 are followed.
Even then the appellant Corporation would not be.
entitled to impose house tax on the basis of the gross annual letting value as such imposition would be inconsistent with section 73 under which the annual letting value would be the gross annual letting value less 10% statutory allowance.
[131D] Even on the footing that the resolution passed by the Indore Municipality to levy the tax at 7% of the gross annual letting value and on the basis of which the last list under the ,old Act was prepared was saved and was deemed to have been made under the 1954 Act it could be deemed to have been so made in so far as it was consistent with the provisions of the Act.
Therefore to the extent that it was inconsistent with section 73 it was neither saved nor deemed to have been made under the Act and had to be adjusted in the light of the provisions of section 73(2).
[131G H]
