By notifications issued under the Bombay District Municipal Act 1901, the State of Bombay set up.
the respondent Municipality comprising portions of certain villages.
The Municipality framed House Tax Rules under section 46 of the Act and served notice to the appellant company that it proposed to assess its buildings at a certain amount.
On, the appellants ' objections, it was asked to furnish the cost.
of constructions, which it failed to furnish.
The appellant was served a house tax bill.
Thereupon the.
appellant unsuccessfully filed petitions in the High Court under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution for quashing the notifications, assessment.
and bills.
In appeal to this Court, the appellant, inter alia, contended: (i) that ' the notifications were invalid as sections 4 and 7 of the Act do not permit the Government to constitute a local area by including in it not villages but only portions thereof; (ii) that the House Tax Rules were not in conformity with sections 59 to 63 of the Act.
as they failed to prescribe the basis of valuation of each class of property on which it imposed the house tax; what these Rules provided was merely to impose the house tax at the rate of 15% or Rs. 12/ whichever was more on the valuation arrived at after deducting 10% from the annual letting value without specifying the method by which such annual letting value was to be arrived at: and (iii) that the bill served on the appellant was not in conformity with the Rules, as (a) the buildings could be assessed on their annual letting value and not at a flat rate on the carpet area.
and (b) in assessing the rate it could not include the rate on open lands.
Held: (i) The notifications were not in any way contrary to or ultra vires sections 4 or 7 of the Act.
There is nothing either in sections 4 or 7 to limit the power of the Government in constituting a municipal district to include therein the whole of the village or suburb.
The Act, on the other hand.
permits the Government to include "land adjoining thereto" which shows that a part of land adjoining an existing village or a suburb can, also be added if it is thought expedient so to do.
Likewise, while altering the limits of an existing municipal district it can exclude from or include in it part of the land where it becomes necessary or expedient so to do.
[216G, H] (ii) The word "rate" in section 59(1) means a tax for local purposes imposed by local authorities, the basis of which is the annual value of the lands or buildings arrived at in one of the three ways, viz. (1) the actual rent fetched by such land or building where it is actually let; (2) where it is not let rent based on hypothetical tenancy particularly in the case of buildings and (3) where either of these two modes is not available, by valuation based on capital value from which annual value has to be found 212 by applying a suitable percentage which may not be the same for lands and buildings.
It is legitimate to.
infer that the legislature intended this meaning of the word "rate" in section 59(1) by using the word "rate" as distinct from other imposts specified in that very sub section and designated as toll, cess, tax etc.
[218 C E] In case of buildings or lands or both the municipality cloud impose a "rate" and not a "tax" The rate is as understood in such statutes.
viz., on the basis not of capital but on the annual letting value ascertained by any of the said recognised methods.
Section 60 leaves it to the option of the municipality for arriving at the annual value for assessment of the rate to choose any one of the aforesaid recognised methods, the only restriction being that it must specify in the rules which basis of valuation.
capital or annual letting value or any other basis, it proposes to adopt.[218H; 219B] The Municipality had complied with the procedure required by the Act before a tax was imposed by selecting the tax, by laying down the class of property which it desired to make liable, the amount of the rate at which such property would be liable and lastly the basis of valuation for purposes of the rate on buildings and houses.
[220F G] (iii) (a) Schedule 1 to the Rules expressly provides that the house tax is to be assessed on the basis of the annual letting value.
The annual letting value can be arrived at by any one of the recognised methods.
Neither the Rules nor Sch.
1 constrict the Municipality to adopt any one particular method of arriving at the annual letting value.
It may well be that a flat rate on the carpet area may correspond to the annual letting value of a building in which case it would be the annual letting value as provided by Sch. 1 which would be the basis of assessment.
if it is not, the owner or occupier of the building can legitimately challenge the assessment on the ground that such assessment on the basis of a 11at rate on the carpet area does not reflect the annual value so calculated.
[221E G] Patel Goverdhandas Hargovindas vs Municipal Commissioner, Ahmedabad, and Lokmanya Mills vs Barsi Borough Municipality.v, ; referred to.
(b) The open lands could not be included while rating the factory buildings of the appellant companies as such inclusion was ultra vires the Rules and therefore invalid.
Rule 3(7) expressly excludes the definition of a building or a house in sec.
The word "building" or "house" must therefore bear the meaning given to it by the Rule and not the meaning given to it by the Act.
By virtue of r. 1 (ii) these rules extend to buildings or houses or shops or huts (jhupras) only and a building or a house under r. 3(7) means a building, house, shop, hut (jhupras) etc.
with a roof thereon constructed for human habitation or otherwise.
Open lands obviously are not only not included in the term "building" or "house" but the Rules do not extend to such open lands.
[222H 223B]
