The respondent company, registered under the Indian Companies Act 1913, was formed for the purpose of carrying on the business of an exchange in various commodities including gur and started its business in 1931.
The Articles of Association of the Company provided that no person could remain a member of the company who was found not to be doing any transaction or business through the company.
The Board of Directors of the company on March 14, 1949, passed a resolution sanctioning transactions in 'futures ' in gut.
All the directors present at the meeting were, those who carried on business in 'futures ' in gut with the company and did after March 14, 1949 carry on that business.
The company 's business was devised on the basis of the Companies Act, 1913, as Originally enacted, when there was no prohibition against a director entering into transactions with the company.
Even after the Amendments to the Company 's Act by Act 22 of 1936 which imposed disqualification on directors entering into transactions with their companies, the modus operandi of the business of the company continued to remain the same as it was previously.
The appellant company qualified for membership of the respondent company and entered into dealing with it in 'futures ' in gut and deposited large amounts with the respondent in respect of their transactions.
On February 15, 1950 the Government of India issued a notification amending the Sugar (Futures & Options) Prohibition Order and made it applicable to 'futures ' and Options in Gur.
By that order no person could, after the appointed day, enter into 'future ' in gur or "pay or receive or agree to pay or receive any margin in connection with any such futures.
" The Board of Directors of the respondent on February 15, 1950 resolved to settle outstanding transactions at the prevailing rate on the closing day of February 14. 1950.
The appellants then filed a petition for winding up of the Company.
The High Court dismissed the petition.
In appeal to this Court it was contended that: (i) by virtue of the notification dated February 15, 1950, all outstanding transactions in 'futures ' in gut became void (ii) the resolution dated March 14, 1949, which permitted the company to enter into transactions in 'futures ' in gut was invalid since the directors who took part in the meeting were disqualified under sections 861(1)(h) and 91 B of the Indian Companies.
Act, 1913, as amended by Act 22 of 1936 and the company had not incorporated in its Articles Regulation 94 of Table A, which validated acts done by directors when disqualifications attaching to them were subsequently discovered; (iii) the resolution dated February 15, 1950 was not passed in the interests of the company and the resolution amounted to repudiation 253 of the contracts by the company; and (iv) by reason of the notification by the Government the substratum of the company was destroyed and no business could be carried on by the company thereafter.
HELD: No Case was made out for winding up of the company.
(i) The notification prohibiting transactions in 'futures ' in gut operates only prospectively.
The prohibition imposed against payment or agreement to pay or receive margin is made in connection receipt or agreement and the expression 'such ' futures ' means transactions in futures to be entered.
into on or after the date if the notification.
No express provision has been made to invalidate outstanding transactions in 'futures ' and there are clear indications in the terms of the notification which show a contrary intention.
[259 A D] (ii) The resolution dated March 14, 1949 cannot be challenged in view of Regulation 94 of Table A.
By the operation of section 18 of the Companies Act the Regulation must be deemed to be incorporated in the Articles of Association of the CompanY.The Regulation was not expressly excluded by the Articles; it was not excluded by implication,because, it was not inconsistent with any other express provision in the Angeles.
There is no evidence that the directors were aware of the disqualification which would be incurred by entering into transactions with the company without the express sanction of the directors and by the subsequent discovery of such a disqualification the resolution was not rendered invalid.
[262 C G] Section 91 B imposes a prohibition against a director voting on any contract or arrangement in which he is "directly or indirectly concerned interested".
By passing a resolution that the company shall commence or ".
By passing a in gur the directors were not voting on a contract or business in futures.
in gur the directors were not voting on a contract or arrangement in which they were directly concerned.
[262 H 263 B] (iii) In passing the resolution dated February 15, 1950, the Board of Directors acted, in the light of the situation prevailing then, as prudent businessmen for the protection of the interests of the company and its members.
Since, after the notification.
no reverse transaction to protect the company against loss, if a member failed to pay margin, was possible, the company had to devise effective means to settle the outstanding transactions.
The resolution did not put an end to outstanding contracts; it merely fixed the rate at which transactions were to be settled on the due date, the possibility of any fresh transactions in futures so long as the notification remained in force being completely ruled out.
The contracts, if they were to be settled by payment of differences, could still be settled on the due date at the rates fixed and it was open to the appellants 10 deliver goods ' under the contract if they desired to do so.
Imposition by the Central Government of a prohibition by its notification dated March 1, 1950, restraining persons from offering and the Railway administration from accepting for transportation by rail any gur except with the permit of the Central Government does not lead to frustration of the contracts.
[263 C H; 265 C D] (iv) In the present case the object for which the company was incorporated has not substantially failed and it cannot be said that the company could not carry on its business except at a loss nor that its assets ' were insufficient to meet its liabilities.
Primarily the circumstances existing ' at ' the date of the petition must be taken into consideration for determining whether a case is made out for holding that it is lust and equitable that the company should be wound up [266 C, D] LISup.
C1/68 2 254
