By a notification under section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act issued on March 10, 1965 the respondent State Government notified that certain lands were needed for a public purpose, namely, the construction of the State capital, that the Government was satisfied that they were 'arable lands ' and further directed, under section 17(4) of the Act, that as the acquisition of the lands was urgently necessary, the provisions of section 5A would not apply.
Thereafter, a notification was issued under section 6 containing a direction under section 17(1) of the Act enabling the Collector to take possession of all the arable lands on the expiry of 15 days from the publication of the notice under section 9(1) of the Act.
Both Notifications were signed by an Under Secretary of the respondent Government.
The petitioners challenged the notifications in writ petitions under article 226.
In the original affidavits, the petitioners merely asserted that the Government had not made up its mind regarding the acquired lands as to urgency and that the lands were not arable.
The parties filed a number of affidavits at various stages of the bearing, the Government in order to establish that everything was regularly done, while the petitioners alleged infractions.
In one of the affidavits on behalf of the Government it was stated that file Minister in charge gave oral instructions to the Secretary that he or his under secretaries may take action under section 17(1) and (4) of the Act according to law, that the Secretary was satisfied regarding urgency and gave instructions to the Under Secretary to take the necessary action.
The High Court after considering the affidavits, dismissed the petitions.
In appeal to this Court it was contended that: (i) only a Secretary could sign the notifications and that the Under Secretary who signed the notification under section 6 was not duly authorised to do so; (ii) that there was no formation of opinion by the Government as regards urgency or that the lands were arable; (iii) that this function could not be delegated to the Secretary and even if it could be delegated, a general oral instruction given by the Minister was not according to the procedure prescribed by the Rules of Business; (iv) that since the lands in question were under cultivation, they were not waste or arable lands; and (v) that sub sections
(1) and (4) of section 17 of the Act were violative of articles 14 and 19(1)(f) of the Constitution.
HELD: Dismissing the petitions.
(1) The word 'Secretary ' is not defined in the Land Acquisition Act or the General Clauses Act so as to exclude Additional, Joint, Deputy, Under or Assistant Secretaries.
On the other hand r.13 of the Rules of Business framed under article 166 of the Constitution specifically places a 268 Secretary, Joint Secretary, Deputy Secretary, Under Secretary and Assistant Secretary on equality for authentication of orders and instruments of Government.
The Under Secretary was, therefore, competent to sign the notifications.
[273F; 274E] Even if he did not possess the power as a Secretary he would have been competent as an officer 'duly authorised ', within the meaning of section 6 of the Act, by virtue of r. 13 of the Rules of Business.
[274F] (ii) Under article 166 of the Constitution the validity of the notification could not be called in question on the ground that it was not an order made by the Governor, because, as required by the Article the executive action of the Government was expressed to be taken in the name of the Governor and the order was authenticated in the manner required by r. 13 of the Rules of Business.
In addition, there is also the presumption of regularity of official acts.
Therefore, the bare assertion that Government had not formed an opinion could not raise an issue.
The Government was not called upon to answer the affidavit of the petitioners and the Government need not have undertaken the burden of showing the regularity of their action.[275 E G; 278 D, F] (iii) Rules 7, 10, 13 and 15 of the Rules of Business specifically allow conferral of powers on Secretaries and the determination of the Secretary becomes the determination of the Government.
There is nothing in the Rules or instructions which prescribes that the authority must be in writing or by Standing Orders.
Under Paragraph 3 of the instructions issued by the Governor under r. 15 of the Rules of Business, Standing Orders are necessary for the disposal of cases in the department, and a case is defined as 'the papers under consideration and all previous papers and notes put in connection therewith to enable the question raised to be disposed of '.
Paragraph 4, on the other hand refers to "matters or classes of matters".
Therefore, paragraph 3 only refers to the disposal of cases and not to matters arising In a case, regarding which under paragraph 4, the Minister may arrange with the Secretary whether they are to be brought to his personal notice or not.
The matters in the present case were the application of section 17(1) and (4), to the acquisition of waste and Arabic lands and the Minister could leave this matter to his Secretary as he did.
For this purpose, Standing Orders were not necessary and oral instructions would be sufficient.
The Secretaries concerned were given the jurisdiction to take action on behalf of Government and they satisfied themselves about the need for acquisition under section 6, the urgency of the matter and the existence of waste and arable lands for the application of sub sections
(1) and (4) of section 17.Therefore, on a review of the affidavits, the provisions of the Act and the Business Rules and Instructions, the directions under sub sections
(1) and (4) of section 17 were not invalid.
[280 D G; 281 C D; 282 E G] Shayamaghana Ray vs State, A.I.R. 1952 Orissa 200, referred to.
Emperor vs
Shlbnath Banerji, L.R. 72 I.A. 241, distinguished.
(iv) Arable land under the Act is not only land capable of cultivation but also land actually under cultivation.
The words 'compensation for the standing crops and trees (if any) on such land ' in section 17(3), show that the land may have crops or he fallow and the crops can only be on arable land.
because.
if crops could grow or were actually grown the land Would hardly he waste land [286 A B, E] Baldeo Singh & Ors.
vs State of U.P. A.I.R. 1965 All Smt.
Lakshmi Devi Ors.
vs State of Bihar ' & Ors.
A.I.R. 1965 Pat, 400 269 and Guntur Ramalakshmamma vs Govt.
of Andhra Pradesh, A.I.R. , approved.
Sadruddin Suleman vs
J.H.Patwardhan, A.I.R.1965 Born.224.
over ruled.
(v) The High Court had rightly held that sub as.
(1) and (4) and 17 were not unconstitutional.
[286 F G]
