The police raided the premises of a club and found respondents 1 5 playing "Rummy" for stakes, counters and money on the table and playing cards with the players.
Respondent 6 the Treasurer of the Club, was holding the stake money.
Respondent 7 the Secretary of the club was not present then.
All the respondents were convicted by the Trial Court, but the conviction was set aside by the High Court.
In appeal to this Court, the appellant State contended that this club was a common gambling house as.
a fee of 5 points per game was charged by the club, the playing cards.
were supplied at an extra charge of Rs. 3.
there was a sitting fee of Re. 1 per person who joined the game, and if the game continued beyond a certain time a late fee was levied; and further that.
the presumption under section 7 of the Gambling Act had not been repelled;but on the other hand it had been confirmed by the making of this charge by the club.
Dismissing the appeal HELD: This club was not a common gambling house.
The presumption under section 7 even if it arises in this case, was successfully repelled by the evidence which had been led.
[392 D] Just as some fee is charged for the games of billiards, ping pong, tennis etc.
an extra charge for playing cards (unless it is extravagant) would not show that the club was making profit or gain so as to render the club into a common gambling house.
Similarly, a late fee is generally charged from members who use the club premises beyond the scheduled time This is necessary because the servants of the club who attend on the members have to be paid extra remuneration by way of overtime, and expenditure on light and other amenities has to be incurred beyond club house.
The accounts showed that the sitting fee of 50 raise was charged per person.
This was not such a heavy charge in a Members ' Club as to be described as an attempt to make a profit or gain for club.
Of course, if it had been proved that 5 points per game was charged, that might have been considered as an illegal charge sufficient to bring the club within the definition.
[392 G 393 C] The protection of section 14 was not available in this case.
Rummy is not a game entirely of chance like the 'three card ' game.
It requires certain amount of skill because the fall of the cards has to be memories and the building up of Rummy requires considerable skill in holding and discarding cards.
It is mainly and preponderantly a game of skill.
The chance in Rummy is of the same character as the chance in a deal at a game of bridge.
In fact in all games in which cards are shuffled and dealt out, there is an element of chance, because the distribution of the cards is not according to any set pattern but is dependent upon how the cards find their place in the shuffled pack.
From this alone it cannot be said that Rummy is a game of chance and there is No. skill involved in it of course, if there is evidence of gambling in some other way or 387 388 the owner of the house or club is making a prOfit or gain from the game of Rummy or any other game played for stakes, the offence may be brought home.
[393 F 394 B]
