A Hindu died bequeathing all his properties to his mother absolutely by a will executed three days before his death.
In the will he stated his age to he 19 years, and that he was thereby disposing of his entire properly, movable and immovable, in favour of his mother.
After his death, the nearest reversioner under the law as it then stood, filed a suit for a declaration that the will was not valid because it was executed by the testator when he was a minor and when he was not in a sound disposing state of mind.
The mother of the testator (legatee) contened the suit and asserted in her written statement that when he executed the will the testator was a major and was in a sound disposing state of mind.
The suit was compromised By the compromise, the reversioner admitted that testator when he executed the will was a major and was in a sound disposing state of mind, that the will was valid and genuine, and the testalor 's properties were divided between the reversioner and the legatee There was a decree in terms of the compromise.
Thereafter, the reversioner and the legatee conducted themselves as the absolute owners of their respective shares of the property.
The legatee executed settlement deeds in favour of her daughters with respect to part of the land received by her under the decree.
The daughters took passion of the properties accepting their mother as their absolute owner.
After the death of the legatee, the appellants.
who were the sons of those daughters obtained a deed of surrender from their mothers accepting the legatee as the absolute owner of the properties.
They then filed a suit against the respondents.
who were the descendants of the reversioner who filed the first suit contending that the compromise decree in the first suit was collusive.
that the testator was not a major nor of sound disposing state of mind when he executed the will, that the will did not.
cover all the properties of the testator and that the appellants were in any event entitled to those properties with respect to which there was an intestacy.
as the sisters sons of the last male holder under the Hindu Law of Inheritance (Amendment) Act of 1929.
The respondents contested the suit and case notice to the appellants to produce the original will alleging that it was in the posses 293 sion of the appellants, but the appellants denied the allegation, and the respondents, thereupon, relied upon a certified copy of the wilt produced from the records of the court filed in the first suit.
The trial court dismissed the suit and the High Court confirmed the dismissal in appeal.
In appeal to this Court, it was contended inter alia: (1) that the burden of proof that the will was validly executed by the testator and that he was a major at the time of executing it was upon the respondents ,red that they failed to discharge that burden; and (2) that there was an intestacy with respect to a portion of the land and that the appellants were entitled to it.
HELD:(1) (a) As the lower Courts held that the appellants deliberately withheld the original will, its certified copy could be admitted as secondary evidence of its contents under 8. 65 of the Evidence Act, 1872.
But the High Court was not justified in presuming under section 90 of the Evidence Act, that the will itself was duly executed and attested.
merely because the copy was more than thirty years old and was produced from proper custody.
Such a presumption arises only in respect of the original document and not with respect to a copy.
[297 H; 298 A, C. D, F] Harihar Prasad vs Must.
of Mttnshi Nath Prasad, [1956] S.C.R.1. followed.
Munnalal vs Krishobai, A.I.R. 1947 P.C. 15 and Basant Singh vs Bnj Pad, 62 I.A. 180, referred to.
But, apart from the presumption.
on the oral evidence adduced and from the conduct of the legatee, the High Court was justified, in concluding that the testator executed the will and was at that time in a sound disposing state of mind and in construing the contents of the will as disclosed by the certified copy and holding that it was natural and rational.
[298 G; 299 C, F G] Setthava vs Somayajulu, 56 I.A. 146, applied.
(b) The respondents who relied on the will had discharged the onus which lay on them, namely, of proving that the testator was a major at the time he executed the will.
[299 G H] The statement of the mother of the testator in the written statement of the earlier suit that the testator was a major was not relevant either under section 32(5) or 32(6) of the Evidence Act, because, it was made post litm motam.
The words in the sub ,section, namely, 'before The question in issue was raised ' do not mean before it was raised in the particular litigation in which such a statement is sought to be adduced in evidence.
They mean before the existence of any actual controversy.
When the legatee flied her written statement in the first suit a dispute had arisen as to the age of the testator, and the controversy having existed time when the statement was made; the statement was inadmissible.
1303 B D, F H] Bahadur Singh v, Mohan Singh, 29 I.A. 1 and Kalka Prasad vs Mathura Prasad, 35 I.A. 166, referred to.
But, the statement of the testator in the will that he was a major at the time he was executing it was relevant under the sub sections because.
294 the question of age fails within the sub sections as it indicates the commencement of relationship.
[303 A] Md. Syedol Arffin vs Yeohooi Gark, 43 I.A. 256, Rama Chandra Dutt vs Yogeshwar Narain Dec, I.L.R. , Oriental Govt.
Security Life Assurance Co. Ltd. vs Narisimha Chari, I.L.R. , Gulab Tharkur vs Fadali , Prolhad Chandra vs Ramsaran, A.I.R. 1924 Cal.
420, and Mst.
Naima Khatun vs Basant Singh, A.I.R. 1934 All. 406 referred.
Further the conduct of the appellants and their mothers was consistent only with the fact that it was understood amongst the members of the family that the testator was a major at the time of the execution of the will and that the will was validly made.
[303 H; 304 A D] The documents relied upon by the appellants, namely, a memorandum and an endorsement received from the Taluk Office showing that there were no entires relating to the birth of any children in the testators family in the birth register for the year in which the testator stated he was born, were not admissible in evidence as the writers of the documents were not examined to testify to the contents of those documents and to establish that notwithstanding their diligent efforts the original register was not traceable.
[301 B D] (2) In face of the expressly declared intention in the body of the will that he was disposing of the entire property it is impossible to hold that the testator desired to hold back a portion thereof from his mother and leave it intestate.
merely became, there was discrepancy between the total measurement mentioned in the body of the will and that in the schedule to the will.
[304 H; 305 A]
