Respondents 1 to 13 were Assistant Engineers in the State of Madhya Pradesh before it was reorganised under the .
After the formation of the new State of Madhya Pradesh, they continued to serve in the new State along with officers taken over from the absorbed States and regions, and, it became necessary to integrate the service and to fix the inter se seniority of the officers of the: integrated service.
The Chief Secretaries of the various States that were to be affected by the reorganisation had evolved certain general principles that should be observed with regard to.
the integration work and the Government of India informed the State Governments that the work of integration of services should be dealt with by the State Governments in the light of those principles.
Thereafter, the State Government published a provisional gradation list of the department to which the respondents belonged and notified, that any government servant feeling aggrieved was entitled to send his representation to the Central Government.
Representations were received from respondents 1 to 4, 6 and 7 and some other officers.
and those representations were sent by the State Government to the Central Government for being dealt with in consultation with the Advisory Committee it had constituted for dealing with the representations from officers affected by the reorganisation.
Since the State Government had prepared the list on a basis different from that suggested by the Central Government the latter directed that a revised list should be prepared on the basis of the formula laid down by the Central Government.
Accordingly, the State Government sent a second list prepared on the basis of that formula, and the Central Government, in consultation with the Advisory Committee, examined both the lists and the representations of officers already received and decided that the second gradation list should be approved subject to certain modifications, and certain directions in the ease of officers from the Mahakoshal region.
It was further directed that as the rearrangement as per modifications suggested was likely to affect the ranks of officers of other regions.
the entire list should be reviewed in the light of directions given by the Central Government.
On this direction, the State Government refixed the inter se seniority of officers from the Mahakoshal region, and thereafter, prepared the final gradation list and published it.
The respondents thereupon filed a writ petition in the High Court challenging the validity of the final gradation list on two grounds: (1) the work of integration was exclusively entrusted to the Central Government by section 115(5) of the States Reorganisation Act and that the gradation list as published was illegal and ultra virex because, there improper delegation of its powers and duties by the Central Govern 187 ment to the State Government, and; (2) in the circumstances of the present case the respondents should have been given another opportunity of making a representation before drawing up the final gradation list.
The High Court allowed the petition.
In appeal to this Court.
Held: (1) Even on the assumption that the task of integration was exclusively entrusted to the Central Government, the High Court was in error in holding that there was improper delegation of its statutory power by the Central Government.
[200G] In the present case the steps taken by the Central Government in the matter of integration did not amount to any delegation of its essential statutory functions, because it was the Central Government which laid down the principles for integration.
it was the Central Government which considered the representations and passed final orders, and both the preliminary and final gradation lists were prepared and published by the State Government under the direction and with the sanction of the Central Government.
When the Central Government intimated that the work of integration should be left to the State Government what was meant was that only the preliminary work of preparation of the gradation ' list on the principles decided upon by the Central Government should be left to the State Government concerned.
Such work cannot be done by the Central Government itself as the necessary information regarding the officers can be obtained and tabulated only by the States concerned, and there is nothing in sections 115 or 117 of the Act prohibiting the Central Government in any way, from taking the, aid and assistance of the State Government in the matter of effecting the integration of the services.
The principle delegates non protest delegate, cannot be held ' to have been violated.
if a statutory authority empowers a delegate to undertake preparatory work and to take an initial decision in matters entrusted to it but retains in its own hands the power to approve or disapprove the decision after has been taken.
In such a case the decision will be held to have been validly made if the degree of control maintained by the authority is close enough for the decision to be regarded as the authority 's own.
[198E H; [99D G] Pradyat Kumar Bose vs The Hon 'ble The Chief Justice of the Calcutta High Court, ; followed.
Board of Education vs Rice, , Local Government Board vs Arlidge and Fowler (John) & Co. (Leeds) vs Duncan referred to.
(2) The doctrine of natural justice cannot be imprisoned within the strait jacket of a rigid formula and its application depends upon the nature of the jurisdiction conferred on the administrative authority, upon the character of the rights of the persons affected, the scheme and policy of the statute and other relevant circumstances disclosed in a particular case.
In view of the special circumstances of the present case the respondents were entitled to a second opportunity to make a representation with regard to (a) the inter se seniority list of the assistant engineers of the Mahakoshal region prepared as per the directions of the Central Government, and (b) the combined final gradation list.
As no such opportunity was furnished, the final list, so far as the category affected by the directions given by the Central Government was ultra vires and illegal and that part of the notification must be quashed.
[202D G]
