The assessee firm purchased a Brengun factory from the Government of India and sold the stores and part of the lands and buildings shortly afterwards At a higher price.
It admitted before the Income tax authorities that the purchase and sale in respect of the stores constituted an adventure in the nature of trade, but in respect of the land and buildings sold it contended that they had been purchased by way of investment, and the sale of a part of them did not result in assessable profit.
The claim was rejected by the Income tax Officer, by the Appellate Commissioner, and by the Appellate Tribunal.
The High Court in a reference under a. 66(1) also rejected it.
The firm appealed to this Court by special leave.
HELD : (i) In reaching the conclusion that a transaction is an adventure in the nature of trade, the Appellate Tribunal has to find the primary evidentiary facts and then apply the legal principle involved in the statutory expression "adventure in the nature of trade,, used in section 2(4) of the Indian Income tax Act.
A question of this description is a mixed question of law and fact and the decision of the Appellate Tribunal thereon is open to challenge under section 66(1) of the Act.
[442 F G] (ii) The question whether the transaction is an adventure in the nature of trade must be decided on a consideration of all the relevant facts and circumstances which are proved in the particular case.
The answer to the question does not depend on the application of any abstract rule, principle or formula but must depend upon the total impression and effect of all the relevant facts and circumstances established in the particular case.
[442 H] (iii) In the present case the appellant firm purchased the Brengun factory from borrowed money.
The income from the property was only about 1/6 of the interest payable by the company on the money borrowed.
The first sale was effected by the firm within three months of the purchase.
and the sums received from sale were utilised for paying off the debts as also the dues to the Government.
The firm had not enough financial resources to invest the money required to purchase the factory and the transaction could not therefore be with a view to making a permanent investment, but only for making profit.
It had not been established by evidence that the appellant firm purchased the Brengun factory for purpose of establishing a cycle factory.
Having regard to the total effect of all the relevant facts and circumstances established in the case it was rightly held by the High Court that the transaction was an adventure in the nature of trade and part of a profit making scheme.
[448 B H] (iv) The statement of case is not intended to be a mere copy of the order sheet in a litigation but it must set out the points raised by the .aggrieved party, the reply thereto, if any, and the authorities or statutory 440 provisions relied upon for the view taken by the Appellate Tribunal together with an intelligible summary of the facts found by the Appellate Tribunal.
The Tribunal should clearly state its conclusions and findings of fact and should not leave it to the High Court or this Court to deduce the findings or to collect facts from a large number of documents which are part of the record of the case.
[449 A D] Vankataswami Naidu & Co. vs Commissioner of Income tax, , Californian Copper Syndicate vs Harris, 5 T.C. 159, Martin vs Lowry, I I T.C. 297, Rutledge vs Commissioners of Inland Revenue, 14 Tax Cases 490, Commissioners of Inland Revenue vs Fraser, the assessee.
24 Tax Cases 498, Leeming vs Jones, 15 Tax Cases 333, Saroj Kumar Mazumdar vs Commissioner Income tax, West Bengal, and Commissioners of Inland Revenue vs Reinhold, 34 Tax Cases 389, referred to.
