The husband of the respondent died in October 1944.
For the assessment year 1945 46, his estate was assessed to income tax on a total income of Rs. 22,160.
In January 1946, the respondent encashed 584 high denomination notes of the value of Rs. 5,84,000.
There were proceedings for re assessment of the total income of the assessee, wherein it was stated before the Income tax Officer, on behalf of the respondent, that during the previous 30 years, her husband was giving gifts to the respondent and was also setting apart money exclusively for her and their children and, that the fund so accumulated amounting to Rs. 5,84,000 remained in a cupboard and was found after his death, and therefore, the amount was not liable to tax as the income of her husband in the previous year.
The Income tax Officer disbelieved her explanation and brought the amount of Rs. 5,84,000 to tax as tre income of the respondents ' husband from an undisclosed source in the year of account 1944 45.
The order was con firmed by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner who also referred to the respondent 's declaration under the High Denomination Bank Notes (Demonetisation) Ordinance that the amount was made over by the de,ceased, some time before his death, to her for her benefit and that of her 8 minor sons.
The Appellate Tribunal also upheld the order of the Income tax Officer.
The respondent then filed an application under section 66 (1) to state a case to the High Court.
In that application she asserted that 494 out of the 584 notes were received from a Bank in Calcutta in realisation of a cheque drawn for Rs. 4,94,000 in September 1945 by her eldest son.
The Tribunal rejected the application.
The High Court, under section 66(2) directed the Tribunal to state a case on the question6n: Whether the Tribunal erred in law by basing its decision on a part of the evidence ignoring the 'statement made as regards the withdrawal of Rs. 4,94,000 by 494 pieces of Rs. 1,000 notes from the bank.
The Tribunal, while submitting the statement of case, pointed out that the statement in the petition under section 66(1) was materially different from that made before the Income tax Officer and that the Tribunal was not invited to consider, at the hearing of the appeal, the truth of that statement.
The High Court, thereafter, heard the reference and decided in favour of the assessee, holding that: (1) the Tribunal ignored a part of the declaration made by the respondent that 494 high denomination notes were received from the bank in Calcutta in September 1945; (2) no opportunity was given by the Tribunal to the respondent to clear up the discrepancies in her statements made at the time of the disclosure of the high denomination notes and before the Income tax Officer; and (3) it was not open to the Court hearing a reference under section 66(2) to hold, contrary to the decision recorded at the time when the Tribunal was directed to state the case on a question, that the question did not arise out of the order of the Tribunal.
467 In appeal to this Court, HELD : (1) In the question which was directed to be referred it was assumed that the Tribunal had before it the statement about the receipt of 494 currency notes from the bank at Calcutta.
But that evidence was not before the Tribunal.
No such statement was made either before the Income tax Officer, or before the Appellate Assistant Commissioner or in the appeal before the Tribunal.
The statement was made for the first time in the petition under section 66(1).
Even in the application it was not suggested that the finding of the Tribunal was vitiated because some relevant evidence was ignored.
The order of the Tribunal was not therefore open to the objection that the appeal before it was decided on a partial review of the evidence.
[471 B, D F] (2) The plea of want of opportunity was not raised before the Tribunal, and therefore, the validity of the conclusion of the Tribunal on the evidence could not be assailed before the High Court on the ground that the departmental authorities had violated the basic rules of natural justice, without raising that question before the Tribunal.
[472 H] (3) The High Court was in error in holding that at the hearing of a reference pursuant to an order calling upon the Tribunal to state a case, the High Court must proceed to answer the question without considering whether it arises out of the order of the Tribunal or whether it is a question of law, or whether it is academic, unnecessary or irrelevant especially when by an erroneous order the High Court directed the Tribunal to state a case on a question which did not arise out of the order of the Tribunal.
[472 D E] Observations contra in Chainrup Sampatram vs Commissioner of Income tax, West Bengal, overruled.
(4) When the Tribunal was not invited to state a case on a question of law alleged to arise out of its order, the High Court could not direct the Tribunal to state it on that question.
[471 G H] Commissioner of Income tax vs Scindia Steam Navigation Co. Ltd., followed.
(5) The irregularities in the judgment of the High Court could not be cured by reframing the question referred to the High Court and calling for a supplementary statement from the Tribunal The power to reframe a question may be exercised only to clarify some obscurity in the question referred or to pinpoint the real issue between the tax payer and the department or for similar other reasons.
It cannot be exercised for reopening an enquiry on questions of fact, which was closed by the order of the Tribunal.
Similarly, a supplementary statement could be ordered only on a question arising out of the order of the Tribunal if the court is satisfied that the original statement is not sufficient to enable it to determine the question raised thereby, and, when directed the supplementary statement may be only on such material and evidence as may already 1 on record, but not included in the statement initially made.
[473 B D] Keshav Mills Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay North, Ahmedabad, and Narain Swadeshi Weaving Mills Y. Commissioner of Excess Profits Tax, , referred to.
(6) The Tribunal was not in error in failing to raise and state a case on the question whether the amount of Rs. 5,84,000 was taxable in the accounting year 1944 45.
That question was considered by the Incometax Officer and by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and the explana 468 tion of the respondent was rejected by them, and no argument was raised before the tribunal that the amount, though taxable, was not the income of the year of account 1944 45.
Further, when the High Court did not direct the Tribunal to state a case on the question, it must be deemed to have, rejected the application to refer that question, and the order of rejection having become final, this Court cannot set it aside without an appeal by the respondent.
[474 B, E, H; 475 A]
