The appellant was detained under an order of the Governor of Bihar State under section 3(1)(a)(iii) of the .
The grounds of detention supplied to him mentioned that he was engaged in the black marketing of food grains.
He made a representation before the Advisory Board but his release was not recommended.
In a writ petition before the High Court he urged that the grounds of detention supplied to him were either vague or non existent.
The petition having been dismissed by High Court the appellant by special leave, came to this Court.
HELD:(i) The formation of the opinion about detention rests with the Government or the officer authorised.
Their satisfaction is all that the law speaks of and the courts are not constituted an appellate authority.
Thus the sufficiency of the grounds cannot be agitated before the court.
However, the detention of a person without a trial, merely on the subjective satisfaction of an authority however high, is a serious matter.
it must require the closest scrutiny of the material on which the decision is fo leaving no room for errors or at least avoidable errors.
Since the detenu is not placed before a Magistrate and has only a right of being supplied the grounds of detention with a view to his making a representation to the Advisory Board, the grounds must not be vague or indefinite and must afford a real opportunity to make a representation against the detention.
If a vital ground is shown to be non existing so that it could not have and ought not to have played a part in the material for consideration, the court may attach some importance to this fact.
[509 D G] Shibban Lai Saksena vs U.P. ; and Keshav Talpade The King Emperor, referred to.
(ii) Black marketing is a sufficient ground for detention because it has a definite tendency to disrupt supplies when scarcity exists or scarcity is created artificially by hoarding to attain illegitimate profits.
Indulging in black marketing is conduct which is prejudicial to the maintenance of supplies.
It is hardly necessary to read supplies conjunctively with services, although cases may exist where supplies and services may both be affected.
The word 'and ' is not used conjunctively but disjunctively.
If sweepers strike, no question of disrupting supplies arises but services essential to the life of the community will certainly be disruped.
[510 B] Bhim Sen vs State of Punjab, ; , referred to.
(iii)The grounds of detention supplied to the appellant were either non existent or vague or otherwise deficient and, did not justify the detention of the appellant.
It was a matter of great regret that powers of detention without a trial which should be exercised with the greatest care and attention had been exercised in this case with disregard for truth and accuracy.
[514 B D]
