The respondent landlord of a hotel filed a suit for eviction of his tenant appellant under section 13(1) proviso (b) and (c) of the Delhi and Ajmer Rent Control Act, 1952 on the allegation that the appellant had sub let several rooms.
These occupants were doing business, which were not confined to the residents of the hotel.
The occupants were given ex clusive possession of the rooms occupied by them.
The appellant did not retain any control and dominion over these rooms.
It was not a condition of the grants that the keys would be left at the reception counter, or that the keys would be retained by the appellant.
The occupants were at liberty to take away the keys if they liked.
The occupants availed themselves of the services of the hotel sweeper for their own convenience.
The appellant retained control of the corridor, but the entrance to the corridor was open day and night.
The occupants paid monthly sums to the appellant as the consideration of the sub leases.
The appellanttenant denied the allegations and pleaded that the respondent landlord had waived the breaches, if any.
The suit was decreed which the High Court, in appeal maintained HELD : The landlord was entitled to the decree for eviction.
[558 B] On the question whether the occupier of a separate apartment in a premises is a licensee or a tenant, the test is has the landlord retained control over, the apartment Normally, an occupier of an apartment in a hotel is in the position of licensee as the hotel keeper retains the general control of the hotel including the apartment.
But it is not a necessary inference of law that the occupier of an apartment in a hotel is not a tenant.
A hotel keeper may run a first class hotel without sub letting any part of it.
Where as in this case, the hotel keeper retained no control over the apartment, the occupier was in the position of a tenant.
The onus to prove sub letting was on the respondent.
The respondent discharged the onus by leading evidence showing that the occupants were in exclusive possession of the apartments for valuable consideration.
The appellant chose not to rebut this prima facie evidence by proving and exhibiting the relevant agreements.
[553 D; 554 C D, F H; 555 C; 556 E] Under section 2(g) "premises" does not include " a room in a hotel or lodging house".
The sub lessee of a room in a hotel is, therefore, not a tenant and cannot claim protection under section 13 from eviction, nor can he ask for fixation of standard rent.
But, because a room in a hotel is not premises, it does not follow that the room is not a part of the hotel premises or that a sub letting of the room is not a contravention of cls.
(b) and (c) of the proviso to section 13(1).
[555 F G 556 A] Associated Hotels of India Ltd. vs R. N. Kapoor, [1960]1 S.C.R. 368, followed.
Addiscombe Garden Estates Ltd. & Anr.
vs Grabbe and Ors.
and Helman vs Horsham Assessment Committee, [1949] 2 K.B. 335,referred to.
549 A waiver is an intentional relinquishment of a known right.
There can be no waiver unless the person against whom the waiver is claimed had full knowledge of his rights and of facts enabling him to take effectual action for the enforcement of such rights.
Assuming that the landlord can waive the requirement as to consent, it was not shown that the respondent waived it.
It is said that the respondent knew of the sub lettings as be frequently visited the hotel up to 1953 and he must have known of the occupation of some of the occupants.
But he came to know of the other lettings in 1958 only.
Moreover, the precise nature of the grant was never communicated to the respondent.
[557 B D] Dhanukdhari Singh vs Nathima Sahu, , referred to.
