Certain tenants of ryotwari land in Gwalior district filed a suit under 'section 326 of the Qanoon Mal alleging dispossession by the landlords and praying for restoration of possession.
On behalf of the defendants it was urged that by not paying land revenue the plaintiffs ' rights had been ,extinguished under section ' 82 of the Qanoon Ryotwari.
The Revenue authorities decreed the suit on the view that even when land revenue was not paid the landlord could not take possession without recourse to a suit under section 137 Qanoon.
Ryotwari.
The High Court however allowed landlords ' petition under article 227 of the Constitution holding that it was not obligatory on the landlord to resort to Court in order to eject a defaulting lessee, and that in a proceeding under section 163 of Qanoon Ryotwari it was not sufficient to determine the question of de facto possession alone but it was also necessary to enquire as to whether ' this possession was or was not wrong.
The appellant, who was one of the tenants came to this Court.
Held: (i) Under section 82(3) Qanoon Ryotwari, the right of a Khatedar extinguished if the khatedar keeps in arrears the land revenue of his khata but there is no automatic extinguishment of his right because the proviso to section 137 of the Qanoon Ryotwari enables the Collector to accept arrears if the khatedar is a good payer (khush dehanda) and there are special reasons beyond his control for not paying land revenue.
The proviso would become a dead letter if in every case when there are arrears of land revenue the landlord could take possession forcibly without trying to recover the land revenue under section 137.
[207 E G] Further section 163 of Qanoon Ryotiwari clearly provides for suits of the nature described in section 326 of Qanoon Mat.
Section 326 is very similar 10 section 9 of the , and the words 'disturbed unlawfully '.
in section 326 mean "disturbed not in due course of law".
Otherwise.
there is no reason why a shorter period of limitation and summary procedure is provided in section 326 while section 325 provides a longer period of three years for a suit for possession.
The word 'trespass ' in section 326 would include forcible entry and dispoSsession by the landlord.
[207 G 208A] (ii) Under section 9 of the the question of title is irrelevant under that section.
Section 326 of Qanoon Mal read with Qanoon Ryotwari being similar to that section must be similarly interpreted.
[208B] Midnapur Zamindary Company Limited vs Naresh Narayan Roy, 5t I.A. 293, K.K. Verma vs Naraindas C. Malkani.
I.L.R. [1954] Born.
950, Yar Mohammad vs Lakshmi Das.
I.L.R. [1958] 2 All. 394.
Wali 204 Ahmad Khan vs Ayodhya Kundu, All. 537, State of West Bengal vs Birendra Nath Basunia, A.I.R. , Hillaya Subbaya Hegde vs Narayanappa Timmaya, , Lillu bin Raghushet vs Annaji Parashram,.
387, Bandu vs Naba, Bom. 238 and Dadabhai Narsidas vs The Sub Collector of Broach.
7 Bom.
H.C. Rep. 82 ACJ, referred to.
