The successive Mahants of Uttar Giri Math in Benaras acquired properties and made dispositions of properties to their disciples who succeeded them.
The incumbent of the office of Mahant in 1904 entered into a marriage against the custom of the brotherhood.
One of his collaterals thereupon filed a suit in which he claimed to be put in possession of the properties of the Math, also challenging some of the dispositions of property made by the Mahant.
The defendants contended that all the properties in question did not belong to the Math and that the properties transferred were the personal properties of the Mahant.
The trial Court held that the transferred properties were the personal properties of the Mahant and his predecessors and that only 12 items of property were endowed properties.
In appeal the High Court held that all the items of property were personal property.
In further appeal this Court held that the building in which the brotherhood resided was certainly Math property; as to other properties the case was remanded to the High Court for determining whether, they were personal properties or endowment properties.
The High Court, noting this Court 's view that at least some properties must belong to the Math, observed : "In view of this finding of the Supreme Court the fact that the evidence on the record does not expressly indicate which property belonged to the, Math and which did not.
should lead to the conclusion that all the property belongs to the Math.
Property acquired by a Mahant personally but blended with the Math property will itself become Math property.
" On this view the High Court dismissed the appeal.
The defendants came to this Court.
HELD : The High Court fell into an error in holding that the observations of this Court in the earlier appeal led to the conclusion that all the property belonged to the Math because the evidence on record did not expressly indicate which property belonged to the Math and which did not.
If such had been the intention of the learned Judges bearing the appeal they would have clearly said so.
[607 G H] On the facts of the case it was not possible to hold that the Mahants blended their self acquired and personal property with Math property so as to make the whole partake of the character of the latter class of property.
The Mahants had systematically pursued a money lending business, had transferred properties to others in recognition of the claims of 601 the disciples or voluntarily for lawful consideration and were describing themselves in the Tamliknamas as the absolute owners of the property.
[607 H; 609 GH] On an examination of the evidence only 15 items of property including main building in which the Math was situated were Math property.
About the rest of the, property it could not be said that it was not the personal property of the Mahant.
The transfers of such property by the latter could not therefore be challenged.
[608 OC; 609 H] The fact that the successive Mahants had renounced the world and became sanyasis and had almost uniformly nominated the person who was to succeed them from out of the: disciples or disciples of disciples does not lead to the conclusion that the properties must he treated as Math properties.
[608 C] Parama Nand vs Nihal Chand, 65 I.A. 252 and Raghbir Lala vs Mohanmad Said, A.I.R. 1943 P.C. 7, relied on.
