Certain land which was evacuee property acquired by the Central Government under the Displaced Persons Act, 1954 and under the management of the Managing Officer, was purchased by A at a public auction on January 2, 1961.
Pro visional delivery of the property was given to the vendee on October 10, 1961.
A sale certificate was issued to him on February 8, 1962, and the actual delivery was given on June 22, 1962, on a warrant issued by the Managing Officer.
On July 1, 1962, when A, accompanied by a party, went to the land with a tractor to level the land, the appellants attacked the complainant 's party and caused injuries to some of them.
Upon their subsequent prosecution, the plea taken on their behalf was one of private defence.
Their case was that their relation J was the tenant in the land for over 30 years and his tenancy was never terminated; there was no delivery on June 22, 1962, and the alleged delivery was without the authority of law and of no effect; J therefore continued to be in possession of the property on July 1, 1962.
The appellants had therefore used minimum force to prevent the cormplainant 's party from taking forcible possession of the land.
The Courts below accepted the prosecution version and convicted the appellants under sections 447 and 324 read with 149 and 148 IPC.
On appeal to this Court, HELD : Allowing the appeal : On the basis of the proved facts it could not be said that the appellants had exceeded their right of private defence.
[465 A] It was not disputed that J was in possession of the field on June 22, 1962 and the record established that he continued to be the tenant of the land even after the sale in favour of A.
After the issue of the sale certificate to A, the Government had no interest in the land and the managing officer was not therefore competent to evict J. He bad no interest in the land on June 22, 1962 and could not have issued any warrant for the delivery of the field on that date.
The alleged delivery therefore had no legal force; in the eye of the law it was non est.
[461 B] There was no force in the contention that the delivery in question was effected under section 19(3) of the Displaced Persons Act, 1954.
The provisions of that Section apply only to properties which are under the control of the managing officers or managing corporations and not to properties which have ceased to be evacuee properties.
Furthermore, it was not 456 shown that any action under sub sections (1) and (2) of section 19, which was a condition precedent for taking action under sub section (3), had been taken against J. [460 H] Normally before a tenant can be evicted from his holding his tenancy must be terminated and the eviction should be done through a Court of competent jurisdiction.
A who had become the owner of the land long before June 22, 1962 could not have evicted J from the land in the manner alleged.
(459 E] Lallu Yeshwant Singh vs Rao Jagdish Singh and others; , It could not be said that as A had, rightly or wrongly, taken on of the property on June 22, 1962, J should have agitated the matter in a court of law and the appellants had no right to take the law in their own hands.
The fact that some formalities were gone through in pursuance of an unauthorised delivery order was no ground for holding that possession of the field had passed to A.
It is true that no one including the true owner has a right to dispossess the trespasser by force if the trespasser is in settled possession of the land and in such a case unless he is evicted in due course of law, he is entitled to defend his possession even against the rightful owner.
But stray or even intermittent acts of trespass do not give such a right against the true owner.
The possession which a trespasser is entitled to defend against the rightful owner must be a settled possession extending over a sufficiently long period and acquiesced in by the true owner.
A casual act of possession would not have the effect of interrupting the possession of the rightful owner.
The rightful owner may re enter and reinstate himself provided he does not use more force than necessary.
Such entry will be viewed only as a resistance to an intrusion upon possession which has never been lost.
The persons in possession by a stray act of trespass, a possession which has not matured into settled possession, constitute an unlawful assembly, giving right to the true owner, though not in actual possession at the time, to remove the obstruction even by using necessary force. [462 B E] From the proved facts, it was evident that A and his party, of whom one was armed, had gone to the field with a view to intimidate J and to assert their possession.
They were therefore guilty of criminal trespass and also constituted an unlawful assembly.
The appellants were therefore entitled to prevent hem, by using necessary force, from taking possession.
[462 HI In re Jogali Bhaigo Naiks and Anr.
AIR 1927 Mad.
97, Jai Dev vs State of Punjab, ; Horam and others vs Rex, ; Sangappa and Ors.
vs State, ILR ; in re Mooka Nadar, AIR, 1943 Mad. 590, relied upon.
