Section 23A of the income tax Act, 1922, empowered the Income tax Officer to assess individual members of a company in respect of undistributed assessable income of the company in certain circumstances.
The proviso to this section made section 23A inapplicable to a company in which the public was substantially interested.
The explanation to the proviso laid down that a company shall be deemed to be one in which the public was 84 substantially interested if the shares of the company carrying not less than 25% of the voting power had been allotted unconditionally to or acquired by the public and were held beneficially by the public.
It was found that though the directors 'of the company 's qua directors did not hold more than 75% of the shares, the shares held by such directors as were partners in the firm of the Managing Agents of the company together with the shares held by other partners of the Managing Agents and the shares held by the members of the Managing Agency on behalf of minor children exceeded 75% of the voting power.
Held, that the company was not one in, which the public was substantially interested and section 23A was applicable to it.
No person could be said to belong to the "public" unless he held the shares unconditionally and beneficially for himself.
The words "unconditionally" and "beneficially" indicated that the voting power arising from the holding of those shires should be free and not within the control of some shareholder and the holder should not be a nominee of another.
Directors, qua directors, were not without the pale of the public as there was nothing that required them to act in unison.
What had to be seen was whether there was any individual or a group holding the controlling interest which group acting in concert could direct the affairs of the company at its will.
The partners of the Managing, Agency constituted a group holding more than 75% of the voting power in the company and they could not be counted as public as they must be taken to act in their own interest in unison".
Commissioner of Income tax vs H. Bjordal, [1955] 28 I. T. R. 25, referred to.
Shri Changdeo Sugar Mills Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay, [1961] 41 and Raghuvanshi Mills Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax [1961] 41 , relied on.
