D, a Sidhu Jat of Muktsar Tahsil, Ferozepore District, Punjab was tile last male holder of certain land in that area.
He was succeeded by his widow after whose death, the land was mutated in favour of D 's collaterals in the 5th degree.
D 's daughter filed a suit for a declaration that she was the legal heir of .he land and was entitled to inherit to the exclusion of the collaterals.
The trial court held that the land was not ancestral but the defendants were preferential heirs under the custom of the district.
The decree was affirmed by the first appellate court.
In second appeal, however, the High Court decided in favour of the plaintiff holding that the general custom recorded in Rattigan 's Digest had not been shown to be displaced by any special custom in the Riwaj i am, The defendants appealed.
HELD : The entries in the Riwaj i am on which the appellants relied, did not refer at all to non ancestral property and were therefore not relevant evidence to establish a special custom among the Sidhu jats of Muktsar Tahsil of Ferozepore District entitling collaterals for succession to non ancestral property in preference to daughters.
The appellants had not discharged the onus which lay upon them of proving that the general custom had been varied by a special custom enabling the collaterals to exclude the daughters.
It was manifest therefore that the customary law among the Sidhu Jats of Muktsar Tahsil of Ferozepore district Is regards non ancestral property was the same as recorded generally for the State of Punjab in Paragraph 23 of Rattigan 's Digest i.e. a daughter is preferred to collaterals.
[657 G H] Mst.
Rai Kaur vs Talok Singh, A.I.R. 1916 Lab. 343, Budhi Prakash vs Chandra Bhan, A.I.R. 1918 Lab.
225, Narain vs Mst.
Gaindo, A.I.R. 1918 Lab.
304, Fatima Bibi vs Shah Nawaz.
A.I.R. 1921 Lab.
180, Abdul Rahiman vs Mst.
Natho, I.L.R. [1932] 13 Lab.
458, Mst.
Hurmate vs Hoshiaru, I.L.R. 25 Lab.
228 and Mst.
Subhani vs Nawab and Ors.
, 68 I.A. 1, referred to.
(ii) Even on the assumption that the Riwaj i am entries referred to the non ancestral property of the last male holder the appellants could not succeed.
For though the entries in the Riwaj i am are entitled to an initial presumption in favour of their correctness, the quantum of evidence necessary to rebut this presumption would vary with the facts and circumstances of each particular case.
Where, for instance, the Riwaj i am laid down a custom in consonance with the general agricultural custom of the State, very strong proof would be required to displace this presumption, but where, on the & her hand, this was not the case, and the custom as recorded in the Riwaj i am was opposed to the rules generally 652 prevalent the presumption would be considerably weakened.
Likewise, when the Riwaj i am affected adversely the rights of females who had no opportunity whatever of appearing before the revenue authorities, the presumption would be weaker still, and very little evidence would suffice to rebut it.
[658 B D] Har Narain vs Mst.
Deoki, (1893) 24.
P.R. 124.
Sayad Rahim Shah vs Sayad Hussain Shah, (1901) 102 P. R. 353, Bholi vs Man Singh, ( 1908) 86 P. R. 402 and Mahant Salig Ram vs Mst.
Maya Devi , referred to.
(iii)In.
the present case the High Court bid mentioned three instances in its judgment which showed that the presumption attaching to Riwaj i am had been rebutted in this case.
The appellant 's defendants had not relied upon any instances in support of their case.
The High Court therefore rightly decided in favour of the plaintiffs.
[660 C D] Mst.
Rai Kaur vs Talok Singh, A.I.R. 1916 Lah.
343, Ratta vs Mst Jai Kaur, and R.F.A. No. 220 of 1954 decided by the Punjab High Court on April 11 1961, referred to.
