The three appellants were convicted under section 120B I.P.C. and section 167(81) of the Sea Customs Act for having entered into a criminal conspiracy among themselves and with a Chinese citizen in Hong Cong to smuggle gold into India with the, help of E, an Airlines stewardess.
E gave evidence at the trial as a witness for the prosecution.
Her testimony was clearly that of an accomplice and although she could have been prosecuted, she was not arraigned.
It was contended, inter alia, on behalf of the appellants (i) that it was the duty of the prosecution and/or the Magistrate to have tried E jointly with the appellants and the breach of this obligation vitiated the trial; in the alternative, E 's testimony must be excluded from consideration and the appeal re heard on the facts; (ii) that no oath could be adminis tered to E as she was an 'accused person in 'a criminal proceeding ' within the meaning of section 5 of the Indian Oaths Act as shown by her own statements made to the Customs officials and in Court; she could not therefore be examined as a witness; furthermore, the provisions relating to tender of pardon to accomplices contained in Chapter XIV of the Criminal Procedure Code do not apply to offences under section 120B (first Part) I.P.C. and section 168 (81) of the Sea Customs Act; the only ways in which E 's testimony could have been obtained was either to, take her plea of guilty and convict and sentence her or withdraw the prosecution against her under section 494 Cr. P. C. Not to send up a person for trial with the sole object of taking accomplice evidence is illegal.
Furthermore, under section 351 read with section 91 of the Code it was the duty of the Court to.
have detained E and included her in the array of accused before it; (iii) the evidence of E in respect of the identification of two of the appellants was inadmissible because she had been shown "heir photographs before her statements were taken; (iv) the photostats of certain document 's without the production of the originals were wrongly admitted and should have been excluded; and (v) selection, of E as once out of several accused ",,is discriminatory.
HELD : dismissing the appeal, (i) The offences were non cognizable and were investigated by Customs officers under the Sea Customs Act and not by the Police under Chapter XIV of the Code.
Therefore, no question of the application of sections 169 and 170 arose.
The accused were placed on trial on the complaint of the 625 Assistant Collector of Customs under the authority of the Chief Customs Officer, Bombay.
Although the Magistrate was taking cognizance of offences and not of offenders, it was no part of his duty to find offenders in view of the bar of section 187A if the complaint did not name a particular offender.
All that the Magistrate could do was to take a bond from E for her appearance in court if required.
[629 C E] Under section 118 of the Evidence Act, all persons are competent to testify unles the court considers that they are prevented from under standing the questions put to them for reasons indicated in that section.
Under section 132 a witness is not excused from answering any relevant question upon the ground that the answer will incriminate him or expose him to a penalty of forfeiture of any kind and when compelled to answer such question is protected 'against arrest or prosecution by the safeguard in the proviso to section 132 as well as in Art, 20(3).
The evidence of E could not therefore be ruled out, as that of an incompetent witness.
Since E was a self confessed criminal, in conspiracy with others who were being tried, her evidence was accomplice evidence.
section 133 of the Evidence Act makes the accomplice a competent witness against an accused person.
For this reason also E 's testimony was that of a competent witness.
[630 B H] (ii) The competency of an accomplice is not destroyed because he could have been tried jointly with the accused but was not and was instead made to give evidence in ;the case.
Section 5 of the Indian Oaths Act and section 342 of the Code of Criminal Procedure do not stand in the way of such a procedure.
If any accomplice is not prosecuted but is tendered as a witness, the bar of the Indian Oaths Act ceases because the person is not an accused person in a criminal proceeding.
The interrelation of section 342(4) of the Code and section 5 of the Indian Oaths Act.
both of which prohibited the giving of oath or affirmation to an accused on trial is fully evidenced by the simultaneous amendment of the Code in 1955 by which the right to give evidence on oath is conferred on the accused and provisions in pari materia are made in section 5 of the Oaths Act.
The only prohibition against the use of accomplice testimony exists in the rule of caution about corroboration and the interdiction, of influence in any form by section 343 of the Code.
If any influence by way of promise of pardon has to be made, the provisions of sections 337 and 338 or of the Criminal Law Amendment Act have to be observed.
That, however, applies to special kinds of cases of which the present was not one.
[632 F H] The expression, 'criminal proceeding ' in the exclusionary clause of section 5 of the Indian Oaths Act cannot be used to widen the meaning of 'he word 'accused '.
The same expression is used in.
the proviso to section 132 of the Indian Evidence Act and there it means a criminal trial and not investigation.
The same meaning must be given to the exclusionary clause of section 5 of the Indian Oaths Act to make it conform to the provisions in pari materia to be found in sections 342, 342A of the Code and section 132 of the Indian Evidence Act.
The expression is also not rendered superfluous because, given this meaning, it limits the operation.
of the exclusionary clause to criminal Prosecutions as opposed to investigations had civil proceedings.
[633 D F] (iii) If the court is satisfied that there is no trick photography and the photograph is above suspicion, the photograph can be received in evidence.
It is, of course, always admissible to prove the contents of the document, but subject to the safeguards indicated to prove the authorship.
This is all the more so in India under section 10 of the Evidence Act 626 to prove participation in a conspiracy.
Detection and proof of crime will be rendered not only not easy but sometimes impossible if conspirators begin to correspond through photographs of letters instead of originals.
But evidence of photographs to prove writing or handwriting can only be received if the original cannot be obtained and the photo graphic reproduction is faithful and not faked or false.
In the present case no such suggestion exists and the originals having been suppressed by the accused, were not available.
The evidence of photographs as to the contents and as to handwriting was receivable.
[638 F H] (iv) If the prosecution had to rely only on the identification by E to fix the identity of the suspects, the, fact that their photographs were shown to her would have materially affected the value of identification.
How, ever there was considerable other evidence of identification and the prosecution was not required to rely only on this identification.
(v) Section 337 Cr.
P.C. has been held not to offend article 14 and the matter of taking accomplice evidence outside section 337 by using section 494 or otherwise is not very different.
It cannot be held that there was any breach of the Constitution in selecting E out of several accused to give evidence.
[640 F] Case law discussed.
