The appellant filed a writ.
petition in the High Court for quashing, (a) the order of suspension passed against him by the State Bar Council under s.4.
35 of the , (b) the order of the Bar Council of .India in appeal under section 37 of the Act, confirming the order of suspension, and (c) the order of this Court summarily rejecting his appeal to this Court under section 38, under O.V., r, 7 of the Supreme Court Rules, 1966.
He contended that : (1) the jurisdiction conferred on this Court by section 38 related to a matter under Entry 26 of List III of the Constitution, that it therefore fell under article 138(2), and as there was no special agreement between the Government of India and the Government oaf a State as required by article 138(2), section 38 was not validly enacted; and (2) O. 5, r. 7 of the Supreme Court Rules under which the appeal was placed for preliminary hearing was ultra vires section 38, as the rule cut down and im paired the right of appeal under the section.
The writ petition was dismissed.
In appeal to this Court, HELD : (1) While Entry 26 of List III deals with the legal, medical and other professions, Entry 77 of List I, deals with the constitution, organisation, jurisdiction and powers of the Supreme Court, and also with persons entitled to practise before the Supreme Court.
Since there is a seeming conflict between the two entries they have to be harmonised by reading the, general power in Entry 26 in a restricted sense.
That is, the power to legislate in regard to persons entitled to practise before the Supreme Court under Entry 77 of List I should be held to be carved out from the general power relating to the professions in Entry 26 of List III, and made the exclusive field of Parliament.
[715 E F, H; 716 A C] The object of the is to constitute one common bar for the whole country and to provide machinery for its regulated functioning Though the Act relates to legal practitioners, in its pith and substance it is an enactment dealing with the qualifications, enrolment, right to practise and discipline of Advocates.
Since the Act provides that once a person is enrolled by any State Bar Council he becomes entitled to practise in all court , including the Supreme Court, the Act is a piece of legis lation dealing with persons entitled to practise before the Supreme Court.
Therefore, the Act, including the right of appeal to this Court under section 38, deals with a matter relating to Entry 77 of List I and falls under article 138(1) and within the exclusive field of Parliament.
The Act is not 710 a composite legislation partly failing under Entry 77 of List I and partly tinder Entry 26 of List 111.
It does not fall under article 138(2) and a special agreement with a State Government, is therefore not necessary.
[717 E, F H; 718 A C] State of Bombay vs Balsara, ; , State of Bombay V. Narothamdas, ; and In re : Lily Isabel Thomas; , followed.
C. P. & Berar Sales of Motor Spirit and Lubricants Taxation Act, 1938 , Citizens Insurance Co. of Canada vs Parsons, [1881] 7 A.C. 96, Bhola Prasad vs Emperor, , G. G. in Council vs Province of Madras, (1945) 72 ].A. 91 and Durgeshwar vs Secretary, Bai Council, Allahabad, A.I.R. 1954 All. 728, referred to.
(2) On the express terms of article 145(1)(b) of the Constitution, 7 of O. 5 of the Supreme Court Rules is within the rule making power of this Court, as it merely lays down how and in what manner an appeal filed under section 38 is to be dealt with and does not deal with or affect the right of appeal.
The fact that under the rule the appeal is placed for preliminary hearing and is liable to be disposed of at that stage does not mean that the content of the right of appeal under the section is in any way curtailed, because, the party filing the appeal is heard on all points raised by him even at that stage.
[718 F M] Prem Chand Garg vs Excise Commissioner, [1963] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 885, distinguished.
