The appellants filed a suit praying for the settlement of a scheme in respect of a trust and for an account of the management of the trust by C and for certain incidental reliefs.
Their case was that the trust was a joint foundation made on November 12.
1919 by the ancestors of various parties to the suit and the first respondent 's late father C; that it was founded for conducting certain special and ordinary Pujas in the Mutt and for the feeding of the pupils.
It was alleged that at the time of the foundation C contributed Rs. 25,000 and four others contributed Rs. 6,250 each and the joint founders had at the time of foundation appointed C, who was the largest contributor, as the Manager and executive trustee.
On November 27, 1943 C had nominated the second respondent, his grandson, as the executive trustee.
Various allegations of mismanagement of the trust were made against the second respondent claiming that he had stopped the Pujas and various other activities for which the trust was created.
The Trial Court dismissed the suit on the finding that C was the sole founder of the trust who had conducted it with the money contributed by himself and other persons and that at the time of the foundation the other four contributors did not reserve for themselves any right in the trusteeship of the Mutt.
It also held that the charges of mismanagement were unfounded and no case was made out for framing a scheme.
An appeal to the High Court was dismissed.
On appeal to this Court.
HELD : (i) The High Court was right in finding the appellants had failed to establish that they were joint founders of the trust and that they were entitled in turns to management in proportion to their contribution.
It is not a correct proposition of law to state that every donor contributing at the time of foundation of a trust becomes a founder of the trust.
It may be that in a particular case all the contributors of a trust fund become the founders of the trust itself, but the question when a contributor would become in law a joint founder of the trust would depend not merely upon the fact of his contribution but also upon the surrounding circumstances proved in the particular case and the subsequent conduct of the par ties.
[901 H] In the Matter of the Endowed Schools Act, 1869 and In the Matter of the St. Leonard, Shoreditch, Parochial Schools, 10 A.C. 304 and Settikara Venkatarama Chettiar vs 0.
P. Damodaram Chettiar, referred to.
Even in the case of a private trust a suit can be filed for the removal of the trustee or for settlement of a scheme for the purpose of effectively carrying out the objects of the trust.
If there is a breach of trust or mismanagement on the part of the trustee, a suit can be brought in a civil court by any person interested for the removal of the trustee and for the 898 proper administration of the endowment.
In the present case the appellants being contributors to the trust were interested in the proper administration of the trust and had a sufficient right to bring a suit in case there was mismanagement or breach of trust on the part of the managing trustee and for framing of a scheme.
However, in view of the concurrent finding of both the lower Courts that the allegations of breach of trust or mismanagement had not been established, no ground had been made out on behalf of the appellants for framing of a scheme or for the removal of the second respondent.
[904 A C] Pramatha Nath Mullick 's case, 52 I.A. 245; Manohar Mookerjee vs Peary Mohan, ; and Bimal Krishna 's case, ; referred to.
