The, Government of Mysore, granted a plot of land to the respondents with the added condition that "in the event of the Government requiring the land for any reason whatsoever.
the grantee shall surrender the land to the Government without claiming any compensation".
The Government acquired the land by adopting the procedure prescribed by the Land Acquisition Act but no compensation was awarded to the grantees for the land.
The High Court, in appeal, held that since the Government had failed to exercise the right which it had under the terms of the grant and had acted under the Land Acquisition Act, the grantees were entitled to compensation as provided under the Act.
In appeal, this Court, HELD : After obtaining possession of the land in pursuance of statutory authority under section 17 of the Land Acquisition Act, the Government could not seek to exercise the option conferred by the terms of the grant.
The grantees were entitled to Compensation for the land of which the ownership was vested in them.
But in assessing compensation payable to the grantees, existence of the condition which severely restricted their right could not be ignored.
[B C] The Act is silent as to the acquisition of partial interests in land but it cannot be inferred therefrom that interest in land restricted because of the existence of rights of the State in the land cannot be acquired.
When land is notified for acquisition for a public purpose and the State has no interest therein, market value of the land must be determined and apportioned among the persons entitled to the land.
Where the interest of the owner is.
clogged by the right of the State, the compensation payable is only the market value of that interest, subject to the clog.
[895 B, C] The Collector of Bombay vs Nusserwanji Rattanji Mistri & Ors. ; , followed.
Attorney General vs De Kayser 's Royal Hotel Ltd., ; , referred to.
Government of Bombay vs Esufali Salebhai, I.L.R. 34 Bom.
618, approved.
State of Madras vs A.Y.S. Parisutha Nadar, [1961] M.L.J. 285, disapproved.
