The appellant companies manufactured sugar by carbonation process.
land paid excise duty on sugar manufactured by them under item 1 of Sch. 1 to the Central Excise and Salt Act, 1944.
According to an affidavit filed on behalf of the respondents, these manufacturers employed a process of burning lime stone with coke in a lime kiln with a regulated amount of air whereby a mixture of gases was generated consisting of carbon dioxide, nitrogen, oxygen and a small quantity of carbon monoxide.
The gas thus produced was thereafter compressed so as to achieve pressure exceeding atmospheric pressure and then passed through a tank containing sugarcane juice so as to remove impurities from it and to refine the juice.
For this process of refining it was only the carbon dioxide in the gas which was used and the other gases i.e. nitrogen, oxygen and carbon monoxide escaped into the atmosphere by a vent provided for the purpose.
The carbon dioxide content in this mixture of gases ranged from 27 to 36.5%.
Similarly, another company manufactured soda ash by solvay ammonia soda process for which also carbon dioxide is required and this was produced by the petitioner by burning lime stone with coke in a kiln in the same manner as the appellant 'sugar manufacturing companies employing the carbonation process.
The respondents regarded all the companies as manufacturers of compressed carbon dioxide and levied excise duty on them under Item 14 H in Sch. 1 to the Act.
The appellants filed writ petitions in the High Court challenging the validity of this excise duty but these petitions were dismissed.
It was contended, inter alia, on behalf of the appellants that the lime kiln was maintained to generate a mixture of gases and not carbon dioxide and at no stage in the process of generating this mixture and passing it through the sugarcane juice was carbon dioxide which formed one of the contents of the mixture either compressed, liquidified or solidified.
The mixture of gases so generated was not carbon dioxide as known to the market nor was it according to the specifications laid down by the Indian Standards Institution which required the carbon dioxide content to be at least 99%.
Therefore the excise duty sought to be recovered on the content of carbon dioxide in the mixture of gases could not fall under Item 14 H. Furthermore the duty being on goods it could be charged only on goods known as carbon dioxide in the trade and marketable as such.
22 HELD : The gas generated by the appellant companies was kiln gas and not carbon dioxide as known to the trade, i.e., to those who deal in it or who use ' it.
The kiln gas in question.
therefore is neither carbon.
dioxide nor compressed carbon dioxide known as such to the commercial community and therefore cannot attract Item 14 H in the First Schedule.
It was not correct to say that because the sugar manufacturer wants carbon dioxide for carbonation purposes and sets up a kiln for it that he produces carbon dioxide and not kiln gas.
In fact what he produces is a mixture known both to trade and science as kiln gas one of the constituents of which is, no doubt, carbon dioxide.
The kiln gas which is generated in these is admittedly never liquified nor solidified and is therefore neither liquified nor solidified carbon dioxide, assuming that it can be termed carbon dioxide.
It cannot be called compressed carbon dioxide as understood in the market among those who deal in compressed carbon dioxide.
Compressed carbon dioxide is understood generally as carbon dioxide compressed in cylinders with pressure ranging from 1,000 to 1,800 lbs.
per sq. inch.
The mere fact that at one stage or the other kiln gas is pressed at 40 to 45 lbs.
per sq.
inch by a pump or otherwise cannot mean that it is compressed carbon dioxide.
At the same time the duty being on manufacture and not on sale the mere fact that kiln gas generated by these is not actually sold would not make any difference if what they generate and use in their manufacturing processes is carbon dioxide.
The fact that the gas so generated has carbon dioxide below 99% and does, not conform to the specifications of the Indian Standards Institution also would not matter for the gas may be sub standard, provided what is produced is carbon dioxide.
[32 D H] Union of India v, Delhi Cloth & General Mills Ltd. [1963] Supp.
I S.C.R. 586, referred to.
