The appellant filed an election petition with a pamphlet as annexure thereto.
A translation in English of the pamphlet was incorporated in the body of the election petition, and it was stated in the petition that it formed part of the petition.
The first respondent raised an objection that a copy of the pamphlet had not been annexed to the copy of the election petition served on him and therefore, the election petition was liable to be dismissed under section 86 of the Representation of the People Act.
The High Court accepted the objection and dismissed the election petition.
In appeal, this Court, HELD : The order of the High Court must be set aside.
The words used in section 81(3) are only "the election petition".
There is no mention of any document accompanying the election petition.
Since the election petition itself reproduced the whole of the pamphlet in a translation in English, it could be said that the averments with regard to the pamphlet were themselves a part of the petition, and therefore the pamphlet was served upon the respondents although in a translation and not in original.
[19 E H] Even if this be not the case, it is quit,. clear that section 83 (2) has reference not to a document which is produced as evidence of the averments of the election petition but to averments of the election petition which are put, not in the election petition but in the accompanying schedules or annexures.
Details of averments too compendious for being included in the election petition may be set out in the schedules or annexures to the election petition.
The law then requires that even though they are outside the election petition, they must be signed and verified.
The annexures or schedules are then treated as integrated with the election petition and copies of them must be served on the respondents if the requirement regarding service of election petition is to be wholly complied with.
But this does not apply to documents which are merely evidence In the case but for reasons of clarity and to lend force to the petition are not kept back but produced or filed with election petitions.
They are in no sense an integral part of the averments of the petition but are only evidence of those averments and in proof thereof.
[19 H 20 D] The pamphlet, therefore.
must be treated as a document and not as a part of the election petition in so far as averments are concerned.
When the election petitioner said that it was to be treated as part of her election petition she was merely indicating that it was not to be though that she had .not produced the document in time.
She was insisting upon the document remaining with the petition so that it could be available whenever the question of the election petition or its contents arose.
[20 D E]
