The respondent who was a permanent official in the Delhi Administration was appointed to the Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch).
He was on probation in the new post for a period of 18 months subject to extension of the period and subject to his completing training.
He passed all the departmental examinations.
The period of probation expired in July 1954, and there was no extension of it.
In January 1957, he received a charge sheet with a letter from the Anti Corruption Department asking him to reply to the charge sheet and to, state whether he would like to be heard in person.
The respondent replied that be wanted an opportunity of being heard in person.
There was however no enquiry at all, and much later, by an order dated 23/26th May 1958, the Punjab Government reverted him to his substantive post in the Delhi.
Administration without making any reference to the charges.
The respondent thereupon challenged the order on the grounds namely (1) that on the expiry of the period of probation and on his passing the departmental examinations he became entitled to a substantive permanent appointment; (2) that the impugned order terminated his service under the Punjab Government and removed him from the said service, in viola tion of the provisions of article 311(2) of the Constitution; and (3) under r. 9 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1952, it was mandatory that, before his employment as a probationer could be terminated, be should have been apprised of the grounds of the proposed termination and given an opportunity to show cause against it.
The High Court accepted the second contention and allowed the petition.
In appeal to this Court, HELD : (1) Merely because the respondent had passed all the departmental examinations and completed the period of probation fixed, he could not be considered to be holding the post substantively, or as being entitled to it.
[239 E F] (2) The respondent could not complain against the order reverting him to his former post because, the order of reversion was not by way of punishment.
[239 F] The circumstances preceding or attendant on the order of termination of service of a public servant have to be examined in each case, f(t determining whether the order was by way of punishment.
The motive behind it is immaterial.
it is only in a case whether either of the two tests, namely, (a) whether the public servant had a right to the Post or rank.
or (b) whether the public servant, no matter whether he was a probationer or a temporary servant, has been visited with evil consequences or an aspersion has been cast on his character or integrity, that the order could be said to be by way of punishment.
But the services of a temporary 235 servant or a probationer can be terminated under the rules of his employment and such termination without anything more, will not attract the operation of article 311.
[240 A; 244 A B, C D] Parshotam Lal Dhingra vs Union of India, ; , State of Orissa vs Rain Narayan Das, ; , R. C. Lacy vs State of Bihar, C.A. No. 590 of 1962 dated 23 10 63, A G. Benjamin vs Union of India , C.A. No. 1341/66 decided on 13 12 66, followed.
Madan Gopal vs State of Punjab, [1963] 3 S.C.R. 716, State of Bihar V. Gopi Kishore Prasad, A.I.R. 19 S.C. 689 and Jagdish Mitter V. Union of India, A.I.R. 1964 S.C. 449.
referred to.
(3) As the High Court had not considered the contention of the respondent based on r. 9 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1952, the matter should be remanded to the High Court for consideration of that question.
[244 H]
