Rule 4(3)(b) of the Mysore State Civil services General Recruitment Rules, 1957 requires promotion to be made by selection on the basis of seniority cum merit, that is seniority subject to the fitness of the candidate to discharge the duties of the Post from among persons eligible for promotion.
While making selections for promotions to the posts of senior statistical assistants from the cadre of junior statistical assistants, the State Government did not consider the case of the respondents who were junior statistical assistants, and published a list promoting persons ranking below them in point of seniority.
The respondents filed writ petitions, in which the High Court refused to quash the seniority list but directed the appellant State to Promote the respondents as from the dates on which their juniors were promoted and treat their promotion as effective from that date.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD : While making selections for promotion to the posts of senior statistical assistants from the cadre of junior statistical assistants in 1959, the State Government was under a duty to consider whether having regard to their seniority and fitness they should be promoted.
The promotions were irregularly made and they were, therefore, entitled to ask the State Government to reconsider their case.
In the circumstances, the High Court could issue a writ to the State Government compelling it to perform its duty and to consider whether having regard to their seniority and fitness they should have been promoted on the relevant dates when officers junior to them were promoted.
Instead of issuing such a writ, the High Court wrongly issued writs directing the State Government to promote them with retrospective effect.
The High Court ought not to have issued such writs without giving the State Government an opportunity in the first instance to consider their fitness for promotion in 1959.
[365 B D] Promotion to the post of senior statistical assistant was based on seniority cum merit.
In spite of their seniority, officers junior to them could be promoted if they were unfit to discharge the duties of the post.
Promotion could not be claimed as a matter of right by virtue of seniority alone.
[366 C D] State of Mysore vs H. M. Ballary, [1964] 7 S.C .R. 471, distinguished.
