The appellant lived with his father A in a house adjoining that of the deceased G who lived there with his two sons and a daughter.
An argument developed one evening between the appellant and one of the sons of G.
When G intervened, the appellant 's father A raised a 'lalkara ' asking the appellant to finish him off.
Thereupon the appellant shot and killed G. By this time G 's two sons, his daughter and one M who lived nearby had arrived and witnessed the occurrence.
At the trial the appellant 's defence was a pica of alibi but the Trial Court rejected the defence and convicted the appellant of G 's murder and sentenced him to death.
in appeal, the High Court did not go into the defence evidence because the counsel appearing for the appellant admitted that there was no substance in it.
The High Court accordingly dismissed the appeal and confirmed the sentence of death.
In appeal to this Court against the conviction and the sentence it was contended that the High Court in not examining the defence evidence for itself, committed an error and did not properly discharge its duties.
HELD : (i) Although ordinarily, in a criminal appeal against conviction, the appellate Court, under section 423 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, can dismiss the appeal if the Court is of the opinion that there is no sufficient ground for interference and it is not necessary for the appellate Court to examine the entire record for the purpose of arriving at an independent decision, the position is different where the appeal is by an accused who is sentenced to death, so that the High Court dealing with the appeal has before it, simultaneously with the appeal,a reference for .confirmation of the capital sentence under section 374 of the Code.
On a re ference for confirmation of sentence of death, the High Court is required to proceed in accordance with sections 375 and 376 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and the provisions of these sections make it clear that the duty of the High Court, in dealing with the reference, is not only to see whether the order passed by the Sessions Judge Is correct but to examine the case for itself and even direct a further enquiry or the taking of additional evidence if the Court considers it desirable in order to ascertain the guilt or the innocence of the convicted person.
[407 D G] Jumman and Others vs The State of Punjab, A.I.R. 1957, S.C. 469; Ram Shanker Singh & Ors.
vs State of West Bengal, [1962] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 49 at p. 59; applied.
(ii)(Upon an examination of the entire evidence by the Court) : No s had been made out for interference with, the appellants con[409 D E] 405 Maaslti vs State of U.P., ; at p. 144; referred to.
(iii) The sentence of death must be set aside and instead the appellant sentenced to imprisonment for life Although ordinarily this Court, in exercise of its power under Art 136, does not interfere with a sentence, in the present case there were some special features which had to be taken into account : even according to the prosecution, the murder of G by the appellant was not premeditated; the act of firing at him a to be that of a hot headed person who was incited to do so by his father; the murder was not in any way cruel or brutal.
In all these circumstances, the ends of justice would be met if the lesser penalty prescribed by law was awarded to the appellant.
[413 G H]
