In 1945 one R who was the thekadar of the proprietary rights of a village, sued the appellants and the respondents, other than the first respondent Board of Revenue, for their ejectment under section 171 of the U.P. Tenancy Act.
alleging that the appellants had illegally sub let the lands to the respondents.
The appellants and the respondents made a on cm denying the alleged 'sub letting and stating that the entries in the village records about the respondents being sub tenants were erroneous.
The suit was dismissed in March, 1946, I.e., towards the end of 1353 F on the ground that there was no sub letting and the entries were not correct No attempt was made by anyone to bring the village records in harmony with this decision and the respondents continued to figure as sub tenants in these records.
On his attention being drawn to this, the Lekhpal, on his own authority, removed the entries in favour of the respondents from the records for the year ending 1358 F but the entries for the year 1356 F were left undisturbed as it was not within the Lekhpal 's jurisdiction to alter these.
After the U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act came into force in 1952 i.e., at the beginning of 1360 F, on the strength of the Khasra and Khatauni of 1356F, the respondents claimed Adhivasi rights under section 20(b)(i) of the Act and.
file six suits praying for the recovery of possession of the lands under 'section 232 of the Act.
They lost the suits before the sub Divisional Officer and Additional Commissioner of Varanasi but succeeded in appeals to the Board of Revenue.
The appellants thereafter filed writ petitions for quashing the orders of the Board; and the High Court although of the view that the impugmed orders of the Board of Revenue were wrong, held that the Board had jurisdiction to interpret section 20(b) as it thought proper; and as the orders passed by it were final without being subject to any appeal.
they could not be quashed by certiorari as being mere errors of law.
In appeal to this Court, it was contended, inter alia, on behalf of the appellants that (i) the correctness of the entry in the record of rights of 1356 F could be gone into and was capable of challenge in a court of law exercising jurisdiction under article 226; (ii) in the present case there was an adjudication in March 1946 that the 'respondents were not subtenants; consequently, unless they showed that they had thereafter become sub tenants, the benefit of the entry in their favor in 1356 F could not be availed of by them; (iii) in the Khasra of 1356 F the respondents were only recorded as sub tenants but not as occupants and could not therefore get the benefit of section 20 (b) (i) of the Act.
HELD: Dismissing the appeals.
The record of rights for the year 1356F had not been corrected afterwards.
The court had to go by the entry in the record of rights and 499 no enquiry need be made as to when the respondents became sub tenants after the decision in the suit filed by R. As between the tenant and the sub tenant, the entry in the record of rights in favour of the sub tenant made him the occupant entitled to the adhivasi rights under section 20 of the Act.
[5O4 G H] The Upper Ganges Sugar Mills Ltd. vs Khalil ul Rahman and others; , ; Amba Prasad vs Abdul Noor Khan Sukh Ram & Ors.
, ; and Nanakchand vs Board of Revenue U.P. ; applied.
