The assessee firm sold its assets to two companies and discontinued its business with effect from 1st February 1948.
For the assessment year 1949 50 the income tax department sought to assess, under section 12B of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922, the capital gains made by the asessee.
Capital gains under the section are computed, in a case (a) where there is no dispute about the market value of the asset on the date of transfer and (b) where the assessee has exercised the option under the third proviso to the section to adopt the value of the asset on 1st January 1939 as its actual cost, by deducting from the market value of the asset on the date of transfer the value of the asset on January 1, 1939.
In the present case the department accepted the market value of the assets on February 1, 1948, the date of transfer, and estimated the value of the assets on 1st January 1939, at a certain figure, and brought to tax the difference between the two, rejecting the assessee 's claim under section 25(3) to the benifit of exemption from taxability arising from discontinuance of the business.
The Appellate Tribunal confirmed the order.
It rejected the contention of the assessee that the evidence on the record showed that the market value of some of the assets on 1st January 1939 exceeded the value as estimated by the department and that therefore the capital gains to be taxed would be much less, by merely recording a bare conclusion that the value of the assets on 1st January 1939 could not be more than the estimated value, without considering the evidence.
The High Court, on reference, (1) held against the.assessee that it was not entitled to the benefit under section 25(3), and (2) held aginst the department that the Tribunal misdirected itself in not considering the evidence produced before the Income tax Authorities regarding the valuation on 1st January 1939.
The assessee and the Commissioner of Income tax appealed to this Court.
HELD : (1) It is only income earned by carrying on business that is entitled to exemption under section 25(3).
Capital gains, though by the definition in section 2(6C) are income and liable to tax by virtue of section 6 read with section 12B, not being income which arises from a trading activity, are not entitled to such exemption.
[98OB C] Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay City I vs Chugandas & Co. ; and Commissioner of Income tax, Madras vs Express Newspapers Ltd. , referred to.
[Whether an assessee was entitled to exemption under section 25(3) in respect of a receipt, such as capital gains, which was not chargeable is income under the Income tax Act 7 of 1918, not decided.] [979E] (2) Under the scheme of the Income tax Act, the Appellate Tribunal is the final authority on questions of fact.
While the onus lies upon the 9 7 2 assessee to prove the market value of the assets on January 1, 1939 the Tribunal, in disposing of the appeal under section 33(4) of the Act, is bound to hear the parties and consider the entire evidence produced before the Income tax Authorities.
In the present case, therefore, the Tribunal bad to determine, on a consideration of all the evidence, the value of the assets of the assessee on 1st January 1939.
[977E G]
