The appellant was an assistant medical officer in a railway hospital at Gaya.
Though he had certain privileges ordinarily available to gazetted officers he was only a non gazetted Class III officer.
He was convicted for offenses tinder section 161 I.P.C. and 'section 5 (2) read with section 5 (I) (d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947.
The complaint that he had received illegal gratification, was investigated into by an Inspector of Police.
The Inspector obtained permission from a First Class Magistrate for laying a trap, investigated into the case, and later, after the entire investigation was over, he obtained permission from the Magistrate to investigate into, the case.
The sanction to prosecute required under section 6(1) of the Act, was granted by the Chief Medical Officer, who was the bead of the department.
The conviction was challenged on the following grounds : (1) The investigation was without authority of law, because, under section 5A, the Inspector could not have investigated without the prior permission of a Magistrate of the First Class; (2) The permission granted by the Magistrate did not meet the requirements of law because, it was given casually and without applying his mind to the question as to whether there was any need for departing from the normal rule laid down in the section, namely, that such cases should ordinarily be investigated by an officer of the rank of Dy.
Superintendent of Police or above and there should be good reasons before a Magistrate accords permission to officers below that rank; (3) The presumption under section 4 that the appellant had accepted the sum a motive or reward should not be drawn unless the prosecution proved that the amount was paid as a bribe; (4) The presumption was rebutted by the appellant 's explanation that what was paid to him was the return of a loan; and (5) the sanction to prosecute granted by the Chief Medical Officer was invalid as lie was not the authority competent to remove him.
HELD : (1) There is no basis for the contention that any portion of ' the investigation was done without authority by law.
[567 D].
Investigation under section 4(1) Cr.
P.C. is one and indivisible and includes all the steps taken by the Inspector to ascertain the truth of the complaint alleging that the appellant was attempting to obtain a bribe.
Laying a trap, is a part of the investigation and a permission given under section 5A of the Prevention of Corruption Act enables the officer concerned not only to lay a trap but also to further investigate.
The fact that the Inspector of Police obtain the two permissions, one for laying a trap and 564 another for investigating the case, does not affect the earlier order as the second permission was wholly superfluous.
[566 G H, 567 B D] (2) The order giving permission to.
the Inspector did not give any reasons and there is thus a violation of section 5A.
But an illegality committed in the course of an investigation does not vitiate the result of a trial unless there was a miscarriage of justice.
In the present case the legality of the investigation was not challenged in the trial court and prejudice to the appellant was neither pleaded nor established.
[568 C D, F G].
(3) The presumption under section 4 arises when it is shown that the accused had received the stated amount and that the said amount was not legal remuneration.
[569 D].
(4) The words 'unless the contrary is proved ' in section 4(1) show that the presumption was to be rebutted by proof and not by a bare explanation which is merely plausible.
The 'burden testing on the accused will however be satisfied if he establishes his case by a mere preponderance of probability and it is not necessary for him to prove it beyond reasonable doubt.
In the present case, the appellant 's plea was not accepted by the trial court and the High Court and hence, it must be held that he had not discharged the burden placed on him.
[571 C E].
State of M.P. vs Mubarak Ali, , H. N. Rishbud and Inder Singh vs State of Delhi, [1955] 1 S.C.R. 1150, State of U.P. vs Bhagwant Kishore Joshi, A.I.R. , Munnalal vs State of U.P. ; , C. 1.
Emden vs State of U.P. ; , Dhanvantrai Balwantrai Desai vs State of Maharashtra, A.I.R. and V. D. Jhangan vs, State of U.P. ; , followed.
(5) Under section 6(1) (c) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, the appellant could not be prosecuted without the previous sanction of the authority competent to remove him.
Oral evidence of the officer giving sanction cannot be relied on for deciding the validity of the sanction.
The Court must be satisfied by reference to the rules on the subject.
Schedule 11 to the 1961 Rules relating to discipline and appeal of railway servants makes provision for the punishment of railway servants employed in zonal railways.
Under the Schedule I a head of a department was not competent to impose on Class III officers the punishment of removal from service.
That punishment could only be imposed by an appointing authority or any other higher authority.
Under r, 134.
the authorities competent to make first appointments to non gazetted posts are the General Manager.
the Chief Administrative Officer or a lower authority to whom he may delegate power; but the power has not been delegated to heads of departments.
Therefore, the Chief Medical Officer was neither the appointing authority nor was he competent to.
remove the appellant from his Office.
Hence he was also not competent to grant the sanction for prosecuting the appellant.
D; 573B C, H;574A B].
R. R. Chari vs State of U.P. [1963].1 S.C.R. 121, followed.
