A mortgage deed was executed by the respondent company and one of its directors in favour 'of the State of Kerala.
It was provided inter alia by the terms of the deed that in consideration of the State granting a loan of a sum of Rs. 2.5 lakhs to the company, the latter would supply to the State 3,000 tons of ground ,nut cake within a specified period and make deliveries in accordance with instructions to be given by the State, and the account for this supply will be adjusted against the loan amount and the interest thereon.
It was common ground however that the loan amount, though acknowledged in the mortgage deed as received by the company, was never in fact advanced by the State.
The respondent company arranged for the supply of goods as agreed and sought the necessary instructions for delivery, but, these we 're never given.
The company instituted a suit in March 1953 against the appellant State for damages for failure to, advance the loan amount and for breach of contract to purchase the groundnut cake.
The trial court decreased the suit for Rs. 36,000 being damages for failure to advance the loan and for Rs. 1,23,000 as damages for breach of contract.
An appeal to the High Court challenging the liability of the State to compensate the company for failure to take delivery of the goods was dismissed.
It was contended on behalf of the State that the obligation to take delivery of the goods agreed to be purchased was contingent upon the Government 's advancing the loan amount, so long as the amount was not advanced by the State, the mortgage was not in law effective and the Company could not enforce the contract relating to ground nut cake a. reed to be purchased by the State.
, HELD : Dismissing the appeal) A transaction of mortgage formally executed does not become void or ineffective merely because the mortgagee fails to advance the amount of money undertaken to be advanced by him.
Under the terms of the mortgage deed liability of the State to purchase the groundnut cake.
from the Company was not made conditional upon the State advancing the loan.
By failing to advance the loan amount the State could not avoid liability to carry out the obligation to purchase the goods contracted to be purchased.
Even if it be assumed that the indenture incorporated reciprocal promises, in the absence of any express provision to that effect the contract could not be terminated by the default of the State.
Breach of contract by one party does not automatically terminate the obligation under the contract : the injured party has the option either to treat the contract as still in existence, or to regard himself as discharged.
If he accepts the discharge of the contract by the other party, the contract is 557 at an end.
If he does not accept the discharge, he may insist on performance.
[560 C D; 561 D].
Tatia v Babaji, I.L.R. , Rashik Lal vs Ram Narain and Others, I.L.R. 34 All.
273, Dip Narain Singh V. Nageshar Prasad and Others, I.L.R. 52 All.
338, White and Carter (Councils) Ltd., vs Mc Gregor, ; referred to.
There was no substance in the, contention, that the State was by its default liable to, compensate the Company only for loss arising out of its failure to advance the money, and not out of its 'failure to purchase the goods.
The State 's undertakings to advance the loan and to take delivery of ground nut cake were two independent, though inter related transactions; and by committing a breach of its own obligation to advance the loan, the State did not absolve itself from liability for the breach arising from its refusal to take delivery of the goods offered [561 F H].
