The petitioners were promoted from the Postal Superintendents Service Class II to the time scale of Class I Service, and, respondents 3 to 7 were direct recruits to the time scale of Class I service.
On 30th January 1957, Government fixed the inter se seniority between them by showing the petitioners as senior to respondents 3 to 7.
Subsequently, the petitioners were promoted as Directors of Postal Services, and some time later, respondents 3 to 7 were also promoted as Directors so that, the petitioners were senior to respondents 3 to 7 even in the grade of Directors.
On 5th June 1965 Government revised the seniority of these officers in the time scale of Class I service, by showing respondents 3 to 7 as senior to the petitioners, and on 17th January 1966, their seniority in the grade of Directors was also revised placing respondents 3 to 7 as senior to the petitioners.
The petitioners challenged the two orders in a petition under article 32.
The Government justified its orders on the grounds, that, the order of 30th January 1957 was passed by mistake as a relevant rule, namely, Supplementary r. 2(15) was not given effect to, and, since the revision of seniority in the time scale of Class I Service was justified, the consequiential revision of seniority in the grade of Directors was also valid.
HELD : The revision of seniority in the grade of Directors by order dated 17th January 1966 was not based on any rule or applicable principle.
it was therefore arbitrary and violative of article 16 and must be struck down.
Once that order was quashed, the petitioners would not be affected by the order dated 5th June 1965, and therefore, it was not necessary to decide on its validity.
[638 E G].
Rule 3 of the Rule,; for recruitment lo the grade of Directors of Postal Services in Indian Postal Services Class 1.
in the Posts and Telegraphs Department, shows that appointment to the grade of Directors is made by selection and not on the basis of seniority in the time scale.
It Must therefore be presumed that the promotion and appointment, of the petitioners and respondents 3 to 7 as Director , was based on merit, which was to be taken into account at the time of selection and not on seniority in the time scale of Class I Service.
Once a member of Class I Service in the time scale was selected for promotion to the grade of Directors and given seniority over another officer selected later, the seniority so determined as a result of selection could not be made dependent on the seniority in the time scale.
Therefore, even if there was justification for revising the seniority inter se of the petitioners and respondents 3 to 7 in the time scale of Class I Service, that revision could not in any way affecttheir order of seniority in the grade of Directors to which they were promoted on the basis of selection is accordance with the Rules.
[637 G H;] 638 A C].
