By an order of the State Government, Andhra Pradesh, issued on July 29, 1966, 20% of the total number of seats for admission to medical colleges in the State were reserved, for members of the backward classes described in a list prepared by the Government.
This order and the list were challenged in writ petitions before the High Court on the, ground that another list published by the State Government on June 21, 1963 determining backward classes for the purpose of article 15(4) of the Constitution had been declared invalid by the High Court in an earlier case as being violative of article 15(1); it was contended that the State Government had adopted substantially the same list of backward classes with slight modifications and as the new list also made the reservation in favour of castes and not classes, it infringed the guarantee under article 15(1).
On behalf of the State Government it was urged that caste is one of the relevant tests in determining backwardness, and cannot be ignored in determining socially and educationally backward classes and if a group has been classified as backward on other relevent considerations, the classification is not liable to be challenged as invalid on the ground that for the purpose of classifying, the designation of caste is given.
It was stated in an affidavit on behalf of the State that the new list had been prepared by a Cabinet sub committee and 'approved by the Cabinet after a detailed enquiry of the conditions of the castes in question and on expert advice of the Director of Social Welfare as well as under the guidance of the Law Secretary; and that they were both satisfied that the correct tests were applied in the determination of the backward classes.
The High Court held that the reservations of seats for the members of the backward classes described in the list prepared by the Government were in , Aid.
The State appealed to this Court by special leave.
HELD:dismissing the appeal, The impugned list prepared by the State was ex facie based on castes or communities and wag substantially the same list which bad been struck down by the High Court as invalid in the earlier case.
No materials were placed on the record to enable the Court to decide whether the criteria laid down for determining that the list prepared by the Government conformed to the requirements of cf.
(4) or article 15 were followed.
Article 15 guarantees by the first clause a fundamental right of farreaching importance.
Clause (4) is an exception engrafted upon the guarantee in cl.
(1), but being id the nature of an exemption conditions which justify departure must be strictly shown to exist.
When a dispute is raised before a Court that a particular.
law which is inconsistent with the guarantee against discrimination is valid on the plea that it is permitted 596 under cl.
(4) of article 15, the mere assertion by the State that the officers of the State had taken into consideration the criteria which had been adopted by the courts for determining who the socially and educationally backward classes of the Society are, or that the authorities had acted in good faith in determining the socially and educationally backward classes of citizens, would not be sufficient to sustain the validity of the claim.
If a question arises whether a law which prima facie infringes a fundamental right is within an exception, the validity of that law has to he determined by the courts on materials placed before them.
By merely asserting that the law was made after full consideration of the relevant evidence and criteria which have a bearing thereon, and was within the exception, the jurisdiction of the courts to determine whether by makinig the law a fundamental right has been infringed is not excluded.
[603 C G].
Case law referred to.
