The appellant find a suit for a declaration that a certain contract against him was void and inoperative having been obtained by undue influence, and in the alternative prayed For a decree for specific performance of certain terms in the same contract.
The first respondent objected that the appellant having claimed the agreement to be void and inoperative could not in the same suit pray for specific performance of the same agreement.
The trial court rejected the preliminary objection, but the High Court, in revision, held that the appellant could not in the alternative be permitted to sue for specific performance of the agreement, and therefore the suit must 'fail so far as the relief for specific performance was concerned.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court : HELD : Under 0. 7, r. 7, Civil Procedure Code it is open to a plaintiff to pray for inconsistent 'reliefs.
But it must be shown by the plaintiff that each of such pleas is maintainable.
So far as the relief of specific performance is concerned, the matter must be examined in the light of the provisions of the Specific Relief Act.
Section 37 of the Act provides that a plaintiff suing for specific performance of the contract can alternatively sue for the rescission of the contract but the converse is not pro vided.
Section 35 of the Act states the principles upon which the rescission of a contract may be adjudged.
But there is no provision in this ,section or any other section of the Act that a plaintiff suing for rescission of the agreement may sue in the alternative for specific performance.
The omission is deliberate and the intention of the Act is that no such alternative prayer is open to the plaintiff.
It was therefore not open to the appellant to sue for rescission of the agreement and in the alternative sue for specific performance.
[651 C G] Cawley vs Poole, ; , applied.
Further, in a suit for specific performance, the plaintiff should allege that be is ready and willing to perform his part of the contract.
In the present case no such averment is made in the plaint.
On the other hand, the appellant has alleged that the agreement was a result of fraud and undue influence and not binding upon him.
[652 D E] Ardeshir Mama vs Flora Sassoon, 55 I.A. 360, referred to.
The appellant had not made out a cause of action so far as the relief of specific performance was concerned and hence the appellant was not entitled to be put to election with regard to the two alternative reliefs.
[653 H] 649 In holding that the appellant was entitled in the alternative to ask for the relief of specific performance the trial court had committed an error of law and so had acted with material irregularity or illegality in the exercise of its jurisdiction within the meaning of section 115(c) of the Code of Civil Procedure.
It was therefore competent to the High Court to interfere, in revision, with the order of the trial court on ' this point.
[1654 B D]
