N owned agricultural lands in Bahawalpur State now forming part of Pakistan and also owned some property in Punjab in India.
He died in June 1947 while on a visit to India in the normal course of business, leaving behind three sons, the respondents in the appeal.
On the partition of India, the land in Pakistan originally owned by N and after his death by his sons, had to be abandoned.
After migrating to India, the three respondents filed separate claims as displaced persons and were allotted an area of land in Punjab.
Thereafter a complaint was filed before the Managing Officer that these respondents had received double allotments.
The Managing Officer, held this allegation was not substantiated but came to the conclusion that N, although he had died before the partition, must be treated as a displaced land holder for the purpose of allotment of land as his name continued to be shown in the Jamabandi as the owner of the abandoned land in Pakistan.
In consequence of this finding a large portion of the land allotted to the three respondents was cancelled by an order of the Managing Officer dated September 18, 1961.
Appeals made by the respondents to the Assistant Settlement Commissioner as well as revision petitions before the Chief Settlement Commissioner Punjab, were dismissed.
In dismissing the revision petitions, the Chief Settlement Commissioner relied on para.
17 of "Tarlok Singh 's Land Resettlement Manual" 1952 edition Page 180, to the effect that "Even where a displaced land holder in whose name the land stands in the records received from West Punjab has died, the allotment is made in the name of the deceased".
He therefore upheld the view 4 at the land could only be allotted in the name of N.
The respondents then filed a writ petition against the orders of the Chief Settlement Commissioner which was allowed.
On appeal to this Court, HELD:Dismissing the appeal, The definition of a "displaced person" in para 2(e) of the Notification of July 8, 1949, issued by the Custodian in accordance with provisions of the East Punjab Evacuees (Administration of Property) Act 1947, and the Rules made thereunder, or of a "Refugee" in Section 2(d) of the East Punjab Refugees (Registration of Land Claims) Act 12 of 656 1948, show that these expressions have been used in the relevant enactments with reference to a person who has migrated to India as a result of disturbances or fear of disturbances or the partition of the country.
Therefore if a person had died before the disturbances took place or he had never migrated to India as a result of the disturbances and he died before such migration, he could not come within the meaning of the expression "displaced person" or the word "refugee" under the relevant statutory enactments.
N died in June, 1947, long before the partition of the country and he did not abandon or was not made to abandon his land in Bahawalpur on account of the civil disturbances or the fear of such disturbances or the partition of the country.
[660 A D] There was no force in the contention that even though N never became a refugee or a displaced land holder, the allotment had to be made in his name because he was shown in the revenue records received from West Punjab as the owner of the land and there had been no mutation of the names of the respondents in the revenue records.
The rule in para 17 of "Tarlok Singh 's Manual" consistently with the statutory enactments, would be applicable only to such persons who were land holders 'it the time of their becoming displaced persons or refugees and who died afterwards before allotment could be made in their favour.
It does not apply to a person like N who was not a displaced land holder at the time of his death.
[661 D F]
