A postcard written by R to a lady M requesting her to ask another lady to meet him, was made over to the first appellant a Police SubInspector.
The first appellant asked the second appellant his writer constable to fetch R.
On his arrival, R was asked to pay money otherwise he would be harassed.
R approached the Deputy Superintendent of Police, Anti Corruption Department, as a result of which a trap was laid and the currency notes treated with anthracene given to R for the payment R and one D went to the first appellant, who directed R to pay it to the second appellant.
The first appellant took Out the postcard, tore it and burnt it, while R paid the money.
Another police Sub Inspector and constable both belonging to the Anti Corruption Department were keeping a watch from nearby compound.
The second appellant went to two shot)s and changed some currency notes there.
The Dy.
S.P. searched the first appellant but nothing incriminating was found.
he seized the burnt pieces of postcard, sonic of the unburnt pieces were recognised by R. The Dy.
S.P. seized the currency notes from the shops and their number tallied.
The second appellant was arrested and considerable anthracene powder was found on his person.
The appellants were tried tinder sections 161 ind 165A IPC and sections 5(1)(d) and 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act by Special Judge, Ahmedabad.
An objection was taken to the trial that in view of Bombay State Commissioner of Police Act, 1959, the investigation should have been made by a Superintendent of Police is there was a Police Commissioner in that city, which was upheld and it fresh investigation ordered by a Superintendent of Police.
Because of the fresh investigation, in respect of most witnesses, the police diary contained two statements one recorded by the Dv. S.P. and the other by the S.P.
While deposing in the trial Court, M asserted that she had destroyed the postcard as soon as she read it, and she was cross examined by the prosecution in reference to her earlier statement to the Dy, S.P, to the effect that he had Liven the postcard to the first appellant.
The Trial Court accepted the prosecution case and convicted the appellants, which was upheld by the High Court.
In appeal before this Court, the appellants contended that (i) in view of the order of reinvestigation, the record of the investigation made by the Dy.
S.P.stood wiped out, and therefore M could not have been crossexamined with reference thereof; (ii) the conviction could not solely be,based on the evidence of R and Police witnesses, who were all interested witnesses; (iii) no offence.
was made out under section 161 IPC, as the prosecution had to establish that they were public servants and had obtained illegal gratification for showing or forbearing to show in exercise of their official 'functions, favour, or disfavour to R; and (iv) the Prosecution was barred 23 by limitation by section 161(1)of the Bombay Police Act, 1951 as it was instituted more than six months of the offence.
HELD : The appeal must be dismissed.
(i)Though the first investigation was not in accordance law, but yet it was in no sense non est.
Investigation includes laying of trap.
That part of the investigation was done by the Dy.
The Statements recorded by the Dy.
S.P. in the course of his investigation, though the investigation in question was illegal, were still statements recorded by a police officer in the course of investigation under Chapter XIV of the Code of Criminal Procedure and consequently they fell within the scope of sections 161 and 162 of the Code.[27C F] S.N. Bose vs State of Bihar, Cr.
A. 109 of 1967 decided on March 26, 1968;H. N. Rishbud vs The State of Delhi. ; ; and The State of Bihar vs Basawan Singh, ; , followed.
(ii) While in the case of evidence of an accomplice no conviction can be based on his evidence unless it is corroborated in material particulars but ,is regards the evidence of a partisan witness it is open to a court to convict an accused solely on that evidence, if it is satisfied that that evidence is reliable.
But it may in appropriate case look for coroboration.
In this case, R. and the police witnesses could not be said to be accomplices, and both the courts below have fully accepted their evidence.
So it was open to them to convict the appellants on the basis of their evidence.
That apart their evidence was substaintially coroborated by the evidence of D and the shopkeepers.
[29B D] The State of Bihar vs Basawan Singh, ; ; followed.
Rao Shiv Bahadur Singh vs State of Vindhya Pradesh, , overruled.
Major E.G. Barsay vs The State of Bombay; [1962] 2 S.C.R. 195, distinguished.
(iii) Offence under section 161 IPC was made out, The question whether there was any offence which the first appellant could have investigated or not was irrelevant.
If he had used his official position to extract illegal gratification, the requirement of law was satisfied.
[29F] Mahesh Prasad vs The State of U.P. ; ; Dhaneshwar Narain Saxena vs The Delhi Administration ; , followed.
(iv) Section 161(1) of the Bombay Police, Act, 1951 was inapplicable to this case.
The appellants could not be said to have received bribe under the colour of their duty.
There was no connection between the duties to he performed by them and the receipt of the bribe in question.
All that could be, said was that the first appellant a police officer, taking advantage of his position as a police officer and availing himself of the opportunity afforded by the letter M handed over to him coerced R to pay illegal gratification to him.
This could not be said 4to have been done " under colour of duty".
The charge against the second appellant was that he aided the first appellant in his illegal activity.
[30G 31A] The State of Andhra Pradesh vs N. Venugopal, [1964] 3 S.C.R. 742, referred to.
Virupaxappa Veerappa Kadampur vs The State of Mysore, [1963] Supp. 2 S.C.R. 6, held inapplicable.
