The first appellant 's premises were raided by the Superintendent of Commercial Taxes (Intelligence Branch) exercising the powers of Assistant Superintendent of Sales Tax.
He found a duplicate set of accounts being prepared there and took the various account books into his possession.
The appellant along with others came and snatched away the bundle containing the account books.
The Assistant Sessions Judge as well as the High Court found that the inspection, search and seizure had been made by the Superintendent of Commercial Taxes in purported exercise of his, powers under section 17 of the Bihar Sales Tax Act, 1947.
One of the offences charged against the appellants was that of dacoity under section 395 I.P.C. While the Assistant Sessions Judge acquitted the appellants of this offence the High Court convicted them and sentenced them to two years ' R.I. for it.
In appeal to this Court it was contended : (i) that the power of inspection seizure and search under section 17 can be exercised only in a place of business declared by the dealer under the Act and the Rules and as the place from where the accounts books were seized in the present case was not a place so declared, the inspection, search and seizure were illegal; (ii) that the search was made by the Superintendent in the course of an investigation of a cognizable offence, and as there was a contravention of s.165(4) read with section 103 of the Criminal Procedure Code the search and seizure were illegal; (iii) that the sentences should be mitigated.
HELD : (i) The dealer kept accounts of sales at the place from where they were recovered.
Therefore under the definition in section 2(1) of the Bihar Sales Tax Act the said place was a place of business, and could be lawfully searched by the Superintendent under section 17 read with section 18 of the Act.
The power of inspection search and seizure under section 17 is not limited to a place of business declared by a dealer in his application for registration or otherwise and it can be exercised in respect of any and every place of business.
[154 D G] (ii)In the present case the, Superintendent was only exercising powers under section 17 and was not investigating or dealing with any cognizable or other offence.
The provisions of section 165(4) read with section 103 of the Criminal Procedure Code were therefore not attracted and he was not required to comply with those provisions.
[155 B C]
