From 1958 the, appellant was a Railway employee and often lost his temper and had altercations with other clerks in the office.
In October 1960 he was found to be suffering from a mental illness as he exhibited symptom of acute schizophrenia and showed disorder of thought, emotion and perception of external realities.
He was treated for and was cured of this illness by July 1961 when he resumed his duties.
On the morning of November 25, he went to office as usual but as he was late in attendance, he was marked absent. 'He applied in writing for one day 's casual leave and returned home.
No one noticed any symptoms of any mental disorder at that time.
Just after 1 o 'clock he entered his neighbour 's house and stabbed and killed a girl 1 1/2 year old and later also stabbed and injured two other persons with a knife.
He was thereafter arrested and interrogated on the same day when he gave normal and intelligent answers.
After his arrest and upon a medical examination, the appellant was declared to be lunatic though not violent and the psychiatrist found that he had had a relapse of schizophrenia.
On September 6, 1962, he was ,reported as cured and was thereafter committed for trial ,in February 1963.
The trial court convicted him under sections 302 ' and 324 of the Indian Penal Code and sentenced him to life imprisonment.
During the trial and in the subsequent appeal to the High Court, the ,defence plea was one of insanity which was concurrently rejected by both Courts.
On appeal to this Court by special leave.
HELD: dismissing the appeal: The appellant was not insane at the time of the killing and stabbing and knew the consequences of his acts.
He must therefore be held ,criminally responsible for his acts.[144 H] To establish that the acts done were not offences under section 84 it must be proved clearly that at the time of the commission of the acts the appellant, by reason of unsoundness of mind, was incapable of knowing that the acts were either morally wrong or contrary to law.
There was clear evidence that on the morning of November 25 the appellant 's mind was normal and also that he knew that his act of stabbing and killing was contrary to law.
He concealed the weapon of offence.
He bolted the front door of his house to prevent arrest.
He then tried to run away by the back door.
When an atttempt was made to apprehend him he an back to his house and bloted the door.
He then tried to disperse the crowd by throwing brickbats from the roof.
His conduct immediately after he occurrence displaced consciousness of his guilt.
