The appellant along with certain others was tried for the offence of entering into a conspiracy to cheat the income tax authorities in respect of the income tax assessment of a firm.
The prosecution levelled against him a charge inter alia, of the offence under section 420 I.P.C.
The appellant raised before the Special Judge an objection to the effect that the terms of section 420 I.P.C. were not satisfied inasmuch as (i) an assessment order was not 'property ', (ii) its communication to him was not 'delivery ', (iii) an assessment order was also not a 'valuable security '.
The Special Judge and the High Court rejected these contentions.
The appellant came to this Court by special leave.
HELD : (i) Even if an assessment order is not 'property ' in the hands of the Income tax Officer, it is 'property ' in the hands of the assessee because it contains a computation of his assessable income and a determination of his tax liability.
The word property occurring in section 420 I.P.C. does not necessarily mean that the. thing, of which a delivery is dishonestly desired by the person who cheats, must have a money value or a market value in the hands of the person cheated.
[196 G 197 A] (ii) Communication or service of an assessment order is part of the procedure itself.
But if the necessary allegations are established, the accused must be held to have dishonestly induced the Income tax Officer to 'deliver ' the particular property viz. the assessment order.
Nor could the contention be accepted that the deception, if at all, is practised not when the assessment order is delivered, hut at the stage when the computation of the total income is made by Income tax Officer, for, the process of 'cheating ' employed by an assessee, if successful, would have the result of dishonestly inducing the Income tax Officer to make a wrong assessment order and communicate the same to an assessee.
[197 C D] (iii) An order of assessment is a 'valuable security ' under section 420 [.P.C. because@ it creates a right in the assessee in the sense that he has right to pay tax only on the total amount assessed therein and his liability to pay tax is also restricted to that extent.
[197 F G] On the above reasoning, framing of a charge for an offence under 420 I.P.C. is correct.
