The respondent brought a suit for pre emption of certain leasehold (Parjoti) land in Benaras which was sold under a sale deed in February, 1942.
He claimed that there was a custom pre emption in the whole of the city of Benaras, that he was the owner of a house and land adjacent to the property sold, that he was entitled to preempt as a shaft i jar (pre emptor by right of vicinage) and also as a shafi i khalit (pre emptor by right of appendages), and that the necessary talabs had been performed.
The Trial Court held that there was a custom of pre emption in the locality which was co extensive with Mahomedan Law of preemption, that the respondent was the owner of a contiguous house and therefore entitled to sue, and had performed the necessary talabs but that the vendors and the vendee were not governed by the custom as they did not live in Benaras.
The first appellate court in appeal took the view that the fact that the vendors and the vendee did not reside, in Benaras made no difference to the application of the custom to them; it also examined the question whether lease ' hold property could be preempted and held that though the vendors were lessees and paid some ground rent, they were for all intents and purposes owners and therefore the land was pre emptible.
It therefore allowed the appeal and granted a decree for pre emption.
In second appeal the High Court confirmed the view that the custom would bind the vendors and the vendee even though they did not reside in Benaras and further held that the custom of preemption even in the case of transfer of parjoti land had been proved.
It therefore dismissed the appeal.
In the appeal to this Court it was contended inter alia (i) that the High Court had mis read the judgment of the Courts below when it held that they had found the custom of pre emption existed even with respect to transfer of parjoti land in the city of Benaras and (ii) that Mabomedan Law recognises pre emption only with respect to full proprietary rights and does not recognise pre emption with respect to lease hold rights: as the custom in Benaras which was found proved was co extensive with Mahomedan Law, there could be no pre emption of the land which had been sold by the impugned sale deed because the land was parjoti land.
HELD: As the property sold was lease hold land, it was not open to the respondent to pre empt it under a custom which was coextensive with Mahomedan Law whatever might be the ground on which pre emption was claimed.
[560 B C] (i) The High Court was not right in saying that it had been found by the courts below that the custom of pre emption prevailing in the city of Benaras applied even to transfer of parjoti land.
All 555 that the two courts had found was that the custom prevailing in the city of Benaras was co extensive with Mahomedan Law.
[558C D] (ii) It is well established that under the Mahomedan Law of pre emption there must be full ownership in the land preempted and therefore the right of pre emption does not arise on the sale of leasehold interest in land.
Furthermore, the pre emptor also must have full ownership in order to maintain a suit for pre emption, for reciprocity is the basis of Mahomedan Law of pre emption, [559G] Baboo Ram Golam Singh vs Nursing Sahoy & others, (1875) XXV Weekly Reporter (Sutherland) 43; Phul Mohammad Khan vs Quazi Kutubuddin, I.L.R. [1937] 16 Pat.
519; Dashrathlal Chhaganlal vs Bai Dhondubai, I.L.R. [1941] Bombay 460; Rameshwar Lal Marwari vs Pandit Ramdeo, A.I.R. 1957.Patna, 695, and Oudh Behari Singh vs Gajadhar Jaipuriya, A.I.R. 1955 All. 698; referred to.
Bhagwati Prasad vs Balgobind, A.I.R. 1933 Oudh 161; distinguished.
