S who was Sub Agent of a Phospate company was convicted for a contravention of the Fertiliser Control Order read with section 7(1) of the Essential Commodities Act.
The fertiliser seized during investigation was sold by the order of the Court and the sale proceeds held in deposit.
The trial Magistrate ordered the fertiliser to be returned to the company but S filed an appeal under section 520 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and on December 23, 1963 the Sessions Judge directed the Magistrate to deliver the amount to S upon his furnishing security and executing a bond to the satisfaction of the District Magistrate.
On January 3, 1964 S produced a certified copy of this order and asked to be allowed to take out the amount and furnished a bond.
The Magistrate recommended its acceptance and it was then accepted by the Additional District Magistrate.
On January 11, 1964 the Magistrate directed the issuance of a pay order.
S received it on the same day and deposited it with his bankers on January 13.
The Company meanwhile had filed a revision petition before the High Court and asked the Sessions Judge to stay his order of December 3, 1963.
The Sessions Judge passed an order of stay on January 14.
1964 which was received in the District Magistrate 's office on January 16, 1964.
Even after the receipt of that order in the District Magistrate 's office a communication was sent to the trial magistrate on 20th January,1964 directing him to carry out the Sessions Judge 's order dated December 23, 1963.
The High Court charged the District Magistrate and other appellants for contempt and held that contempt of the Court of the Sessions Judge had been committed because : (a) The Magistrate accepted S 's bond which was not in proper form and thus failed to carry out the Sessions Judge 's order of December 23, 1963; (b) The bond was accepted by the Additional District Magistrate whereas the Sessions Judge had ordered that the bond should be to the satisfaction of the District Magistrate; (c) The District Magistrate directed that the Sessions Judge 's order of December 23, 1963 be carried out although the Sessions Judge 's stay order had been received in his office before that.
The High Court held that there had been gross delay in the communication and execution of the orders of the superior courts by the District Magistrate and the subordinates and that there was a well knit conspiracy to pay the amount in deposit to S in defiance of the orders of the superior courts.
Against their conviction by the High Court the appellants came to this Court.
HELD : (i) There is nothing in section 517 Criminal Procedure Code which excluded the use of an indemnity bond such as was executed in the case.
The Sessions Judge did not order that the bond should be taken in 305 the name of any particular court.
A bond in the name of the Government of West Bengal substantially complied with the order of the Sessions Judge as it could be enforced against S without any trouble [308 F G] (ii) In holding that the District Magistrate alone could accept the bond the High Court ignored the powers of the Additional District Magistrate under the Code of Criminal Procedure.
The practice of courts in Bengal is also against the proposition because such bonds are usually considered for acceptance by the Additional District Magistrate [308 G H] (iii) The High Court went wrong in holding that there was a conspiracy by the officials concerned.
For a conspiracy to be hatched there must be some foundation of gain or purpose.
The conspirators would at least know that there was nothing to be gained by delaying the orders since the money was already paid out.
The stay orders were ineffective since there was nothing to stay.
There was no doubt some delay but it could be dealt with in other ways than punishment for an imaginary contempt of court.
L309 G H,[310 A] In the circumstances of the case the High Court was also wrong in taking into account against the appellants their failure to make an apology.[1310 B] A question whether there is contempt of court or not is a serious one.
The court is both the accuser as well as the judge of the accusation.
It behaves the court to act with as great circumspection as possible making all allowances for errors of judgment and difficulties arising from inveterate practices in courts and tribunals.
It is only when a clear case of contumacious conduct not explainable otherwise, arises, that the condemner must be punished [310 F] [The Court, however, cautioned all concerned that orders of stay, bail, injunctions received from superior courts must receive close and prompt attention and unnecessary delay in dispatching or dealing with them may well furnish grounds for an inference that it was due to a natural disinclination to deal with the matter born of indifference and sometimes even of contumaciousness.
[311 A B]
