In 1947 the Ruler of Virpur State in Saurashtra granted certain agricultural lands to the appellant.
Later these lands were exchanged for others.
In 1948 the administration of Virpur State was assumed by the United State of Saurashtra.
The Saurashtra Government questioned the grant but the Government of India at a conference with the Ruler recognize it as having been lawfully made to the appellant, with the condition that he would not evict the tenants from the lands.
The arrangement was set out in a letter dated November 2, 1949 from the Political Department the Government of India to the Revenue Department, United State of Saurashtra.
Though the appellant was not a party to the arrangement he was aware of and accepted the arrangement and the conditions upon which his grant was confirmed by the Government of India.
The Saurashtra Land Reforms Act came into effect on September 1, 1951.E On January 29, 1954 the Government of Saurashtra issued a notification under section 15(2) of the Act declaring the appellant to be a Girasdar for purposes of the Act subject to the provisions of section 18 thereof, and this was later by another notification, clarified to mean that he was a Girasdar subject to the condition imposed by the Government at the time of his recognition, that he could not evict the tenants.
In the meantime the appellant made an application to.
the Mamlatdar for an allotment of.land for personal cultivation under section 19 of the Act.
This application was allowed by the Mamlatdar but the Revenue Tribunal in revision held that the application under section 19 was not maintainable.
The appellant 's petition before the High Court under section 227 of the Act was dismissed on the grounds that (i) the conditions incorporated in the letter of November 2, 1949 having been accepted by the appellant enured for the benefit of the tenants under section 18 of the Act; (ii) the rights of the Girasdar were restricted by the notification under section 2(15) of the Act declaring him to be a Girasdar and tile appellant was bound by those restrictions.
Against the High Court 's judgment the appellant came to this Court.
HELD: (i) Had the Government of India annulled the grant made to the appellant the annulment would have been an Act of State and could not be questioned before the Municipal Tribunals.
Instead of annulling the grant the government elected to confirm it subject to the conditions incorporated in the letter dated November 2, 1949.
The appellant accepted the grant subject to those conditions and was bound by them.
[408 F] State of Saurashtra vs Jamadar Mohamad Abdulla, , referred to.
406 (ii) The conditions incorporated in the letter dated November 2, 1949 were intended for the benefit of the tenant.
The tenants could claim the benefit of the condition that the appellant could not evict them.
The condition was annexed to the grant to the appellant.
The right or privilege of the tenant arising out of this condition was a right or privilege arising out of a grant within the meaning of section 18.
The expression 'grant ' in section 18 is wide enough to take within its sweep a grant by the Government to the Giraffes and is not limited to a grant by the Girasdar to the tenant.
[409 G H] (iii) On the strength of the order of allotment of land for personal cultivation under section 20(2) the Girasdar is entitled to evict the tenants.
from the land allotted to him.
When the Girasdar applies under section 19 for allotment of land for personal cultivation, he seeks to evict the tenant from the land.
Therefore when the appellant filed his application under section 19 he sought an order which would enable him to evict the tenants in contravention of the condition of his grant that he would not evict the tenants.
In view of section 18 nothing in Chapter IV of the Act enabled him to obtain an order limiting or abridging the rights and privileges of the tenants arising under the condition.
The Mamlatdar could not under section 20 pass an order which would enable the appellant to evict them.
The application filed by the appellant under section 19 was therefore incompetent.
[4 10 F G]
