The appellant who was defeated by the first respondent in the General Election of 1967 to the Punjab Vidhan Sabha, challenged the latter 's election on the ground that he was disqualified from being chosen as a member of the Assembly because he was holding an office of profit under the State Government at the relevant time.
It was admired that the respondent was the Chairman of a Panchayat Samiti and it was contended by the appellant that the allowances paid to the Chairman under Rules 3 to 7 of the Punjab panchayat Samitis and Zila Parishads, Non Official Members (Payment of Allowances) Rules, 1965, made that office an office of profit.
The High Court dismissed that election petition and on appeal to this Court, HELD: The High Court came to a correct conclusion in holding that the allowances paid under Rules 3 to 7 did not convert the office of Chairman of Panchayat Samiti into an office of profit.
The payment to a Chairman under r. 3 is described in the rule as a monthly consolidated allowance in lieu of all other allowances for performing all official duties and journeys concerning the Panchayat Samiti within the district.
This provision clearly shows that the allowance paid is not salary, remuneration or honorarium but an allowance paid for the purpose of ensuring that the Chairman of a Panchayat Samiti does not have to spend money out of his own pocket for the discharge of his duties.
The burden which lay on the appellant to show that the allowance of Rs. 100/ per month was excessive and was not required to compensate the Chairman for his actual expenses had not been discharged.
[426 F G, 427 B C] Rules 4 to 7 only provide for payment of traveling allowance and daily allowance when a Chairman performs a journey in connection with his official duties outside the district.
There is again no evidence from which it could be inferred that the amount received by a Chairman was in excess of his actual expenditure.
[427 H 428 B] There was no force in the contention that the payment of traveling allowance under Rules 3 to 7 was in addition to the payment of the consolidated monthly allowance under Rule 3 and payment of two sets of allowances must necessarily result in profit to the payee.
Rule 3 only covers payment to compensate a Chairman for journeys performed by him for his official duties within the district in which the Panchayat is situated, while rules 4 to 7 govern cases where the journey is performed outside the district.
[428 F G] Ravanna Subanna vs G. section Kaggeerappa, A.I.R. 1954 S.C. 653 at p. 656; distinguished.
