The appellant entered into a contract on July 7, 1958 with the respondent to purchase from him 2000 bales of jute to be imported from Pakistan.
The contract, inter alia.
provided that shipment of the consignment would be made; during August November, 1958, that the buyers would obtain the necessary import licence, that if they failed to obtain the licence by November 1958, the period of shipment would be extended upto December 1958 and that if it was not obtained by.
December 1958, the contract would be settled at the market price prevailing on January 24, 1959.
The contract also contained an arbitration clause hereunder all disputes under the con tract including the question whether the contract had been terminated or completed were to be referred to the arbitration of an Arbitration Tribunal.
The appellants applied to the Jute Commissioner on August 8 for an import licence but this was refused on the ground that the appellants had sufficient stock to carry on for some months more. 'They applied again on Nov ember 29, 1958 when their stock was reduced but the Jute Commissioner refused to issue the licence and ,asked them to meet their requirements from purchases of Indian jute.
The respondents thereafter claimed damages from the appellants on the ground that the appellants had failed to furnish, the import licence as provided in the contract.
The appellants disclaimed their 'liability and thereupon the 'disputes between the parties were referred to the Arbitration Tribunal.
The Tribunal passed an award holding that the appellants had failed to carry out their part 'of the contract and Were liable to pay damages to the respondent assessed at Rs. 34,000 and interest.
The appellants thereafter applied the High Court to set aside the award and contended (a) that they could not be held to have committed breach of the contract as they had done all that could be expected of them to obtain the licence; (b) that owing to the intervening causes, i.e., a change in the policy of the Government, which the parties could not foresee when they entered into the contract, the contract became impossible of performance and ought to have been treated as void under section 56 of the Contract Act; and (c) that the arbitrators had no jurisdiction as the arbitration clause in the said contract perished along with the contract.
A Single Bench of the High Court dismissed the application and an appeal to a Division.
Bench was also dismissed.
On appeal to this Court.
822 Held, dismissing the appeal: (i) The provision in the contract that whereas the delay to provide a licence in November 1958 was to be excused but that the contract was to be settled at the market rate prevailing on January 2, 1959 if the appellants failed to deliver the licence in December1958 clearly meant that the appellants had taken upon themselvesthe absolute burden of furnishing the licence, latest by the end of December 1958 and had stipulated that in default theywould pay damages on the basis of price prevailing on January 2,1959.
That being the position the defence of impossibility of performance or of the contract being void for that reason or that the court should spell out an implied term in the contract to that effect was not.
available to the appellants.
[832 B C].
Since under the Contract Act a promise may be express or im plied, in cases where the court gathers as a matter of construction that the contract itself contains impliedly or expressly a term according to which it would stand discharged on the happening of certain circumstances, the dissolution of the contract would take place under the terms of the contract itself and such cases would be outside the purview of section 56 Although in English law such cases might be treated as cases of frustration, in India they would be dealt with under section 32.
In a majority of cases, however, the doctrine of frustration is not applied on the ground that the parties had agreed to an implied term; the court grants relief under the positive rule enacted in section 56 by pronouncing the contract to be frustrated and at an end if it finds that the whole purpose or the basis of the contract was frustrated by the intrusion or occurrence of an unex pected event or change of circumstances which was not contemplated by the parties at the date of the contract.
In such cases there would be no question of finding an implied term embodying, a provision for discharge because the parties did not think about the matter at all nor could possibly halve an intention, regarding it.
Case law reviewed.
[829 C G].
Even if the appellants had established frustration, it would not be as if, the contract was ab initio void.
In cases of frustration it is the performance of the contract which comes to an end but the contract would still be in existence for purposes such as the resolution of disputes arising under or in 'connection with it: and the question whether the contract was discharged under the doctrine of frustration would still have to be decided under the arbitration clause which operates in respect of such purposes.
[832 E], Union of India vs Kishorilal, , referred to.
(ii) If the arbitrators awarded damages on the basis of the market, price prevalent in Calcutta on January 2.
1959, there Could be no objection to their adopting that Irate for adjudicating the quantum of damages on the ground that such a basis was contrary to the public policy laid down by the Government of Pakistan.
[832 H]
