C was the owner of five original shares in a Rubber Estate in Malacca After his death in December, 1912 his son the first respondent entered into a compromise agreement in July, 1915 with the appellant, who was in partnership with C during his lifetime, whereby it was agreed that out of five sharas, 21/2 would belong to the partnership and the remaining shares to the first respondent, furthermore, the appellant undertook recover the 5 shares and account to the first respondent for 21/2 shares and for the income and dividends arising from them.
In January, 1924, while the appellant and the first respondent were both at Malacca, they entered into another agreement whereby the first respondent transferred his remaining 21/2 shares to the defendant on receipt of 18,000 dollars as consideration.
In September, 1927 the first respondent instituted a suit against the appellant in India for a declaration that he was entitled to all the original five shares and for accounts and consequential relief, as both his agreements with the appellant were vitiated by fraud and fraudulent concealment.
The Trial Court granted the declaration, but the High Court, in appeal held that while the arrangement of July, 1915 was valid, that of January, 1924 was vitiated by fraud and that the appellant was therefore liable to account for 21/2 shares and dividends amounting to 35,535 dollars with interest.
The High Court also rejected a contention raised by the appellant that the period of his absence from the country could not be taken into account for determining the period of limitation and that the suit was therefore barred by limitation.
On appeal to this Court, HELD: (i) The defendant had concealed the fact that he had collected 35,535 dollars 'as dividend on the shares and had the respondent known this, he would not have parted with the shares with all their accrued benefits for 18,000 dollars.
The defendant was under a fiduciary obligation to disclose the true state of affairs.
The two courts had therefore rightly found that the agreement was vitiated by fraud.
[446 F G] (ii) In computing the period of limitation prescribed for the suit, "the time during which the defendant has been absent from India" has to be excluded under sec.
The words of the section are clear and full effect must be given to its language.
The section makes no exception for cases in which the cause of action arose in a foreign country or for cases in which the defendant was in a foreign country at the time of the accrual of the cause of action.
[447 E F] Atul Kristo Bose vs Lyon & Co., (1887) I.L.R. XIV Cal. 457; and Mathukanni vs Andappa, A.I.R. 1955, Mad. 96; referred to and applied.
445 Ruthinu vs Packiriswami, A.I.R. 1928 Mad. 1058; and Subramania Chettiar vs Maruthamuthu, A.I.R. 1944 Mad. 437 disapproved and overruled.
(iii) On the material on record it was necessary to revise the basis of valuation of the shares and to modify the decree passed by the High Court.
