The respondent State approved a scheme in form II for nationalization of certain specific routes after complying with the provisions of sections 68C and 68D of the .
The scheme excluded.
all private operator 's from the notified routes.
The notified routes formed part of highways, having common road sectors and private operators continued to operate on the highways.
The appellant unsuccessfully filed writ petition in the High Court to quash the scheme.
In appeal to this Court, the appellant challenged the validity of the scheme on the grounds that (i) the scheme was a complete exclusion scheme and should have been in form I and as it was in form II it was in contravention of Rule 3 of the Kerala Motor Vehicles(State Transport Undertaking) Rules, 1960 read with section 68C of the Act; and (ii) since there were earlier schemes, they could not be modified by the impugned scheme without complying with the provisions of section 68E.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court: HELD: (i) From the language of section 68C and r. 3 it appears that a complete exclusion scheme in relation to.
any area of route would be a scheme which completely excludes the existing road services of private operators on the area or route in question.
The route includes the highway over it runs.
If other existing services are allowed to continue over a part of the highway relating to the notified route, the scheme is not one of complete exclusion.
The impugned scheme did not exclude the road transport services of other existing routes which overlapped many sectors of the highways relating to the notified routes.
In spite of the scheme the public could get services on the common road sectors from the private operators who continued to operate the highways.
Therefore, the scheme was not in complete exclusion of existing road transport services in respect of notified routes and was not required to be in form 1.
[466 G H, 467 D] Nilkanth Prasad & Ors.
vs State of Bihar.
[1962] Suppl.
1 S.C.R. 728 at 737; Kondala Rao vs Andhra Pradesh S.T.C. Corporation, A.I.R. 1961 S.C. 82, followed.
(ii) On the promulgation of the new scheme the earlier schemes stood modified pro tanto.
As the procedure laid down in sections 68C and 68D were followed the conditions of section 68 were satisfied.
section 68E does not require that the new scheme should expressly say that it cancels or modities the earlier schemes.
[467 G]
