The assessee, an individual, derived income from various.
sources including commission agency business and shares in partnership firms.
In arriving at the net profit for the assessment year 1953 54, he claimed his share of the loss 'from one of the firms in which he was a partner, as a set off against profits from other business.
The loss was the result of speculative transactions.
The Department and Tribunal held against him.
On a reference, the High Court held in favour of the assessee on the basis.
that the observations of this: Court, in Commissioner of Income tax, Gujarat vs Kantilal Nathu Chand, ; namely: that under the first proviso to section 24(1) of the Incometax Act, 1922, losses in speculative business are not to be taken into account when computing the total income, except to the extent to, which they can be set off against profits 'from other speculative business, are obiter.
In appeal to this Court, HELD: The observations in Kantilal Nathu Chand 's case, cannot be regarded as obiter, because the question of the applicability of the proviso directly arose in the ease.
The proviso says in unequivocal terms that any losses sustained in speculative transactions which are in the nature of ' a business shall not be taken into.
account except to the extent of the amount of profits or gains in any other business consisting of speculative transactions.
If this is read with Explanation I, according to which where the speculative transactions carried on are of such a nature as to constitute a business the business shall be deemed to be distinct and separate from any other business, no other view is possible.
[541 G H; 542 A B] Keshavlal Pramchand vs Commissioner of Income tax, Ahmedabad, , Commissioner of Income tax Nagpur vs Ram Gopal Kanhaiyalal, , Manohar Lal Munshi Lal vs Commissioner of Income tax, New Delhi, , Commissioner of Income tax vs Ram Swarup, , Jummar Lal Surajkaran vs Commissioner of Income tax , Hanuman Inves 'tment Company vs Commissioner of Income tax, and Joseph John vs Commissioner of Income tax, , approved.
