On the 7th of March, 1968, the proceedings in the Punjab Legislative Assembly led to rowdy scenes and the Speaker, acting under r. 105 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the Punjab Legislative Assembly made under _article 208 of the Constitution, adjourned the Assembly for two months.
This led to an impasse.
The Assembly was in session but it was put in a state of inaction by the adjournment.
The Budget 'Session of the Assembly had to reach a conclusion before 31st March, as, after that date, no money could be drawn from the Consolidated Fund and no expenditure in the State could be incurred.
The Governor, therefore, on 11th March prorogued the Assembly under article 174(2) (a).
The order of the Governor was caused to be printed in the State Gazette the same day by the Chief Secretary under the Business Rules, and copies of the Gazette were dispatched to the Secretary of the Assembly, the Speaker and other members on the following day.
On 13th March, the Government promulgated the Punjab Legislature (Regulation of Procedure in Relation to Financial Business) Ordinance, 1968.
Section 3 of the Ordinance provides that the sitting of either House of Legislature was not to be adjourned without the consent of the House until completion of financial Business.
On 14th March, the Governor summoned the Legislative Assembly under article 174, fixing 18th March for its sitting, and, under article 175(2), directed the Assembly to consider the Estimates of Expenditure, the Demands for Supplementary Grants and two Appropriation Bills.
On 18th March, after considering certain other matters, the Speaker ruled that the House was prorogued not on the 11th March but on the 18th.
and that in accordance with his earlier ruling dated 7th March, the House stood adjourned for two months.
After some commotion the Deputy Speaker occupied the Chair and the Assembly kept sitting.
The proceedings were conducted without demur even from the opposition.
The Bills were passed.
The Bills were then transmitted to the Legislative Council certified by the Deputy Speaker that they were Money Bills.
The Speaker wrote to the Chairman of the Legislative Council pointing out that there was no certificate by him as required article 199(4) and that he had adjourned the Assembly when the Bills were adopted.
The Legislative Council, however, considered and passed the two Bills and the Governor assented to them.
On the questions whether: (1) the prorogation took effect on 18th March and therefore the summoning of the Legislature before prorogation was invalid; (2) the Ordinance could not be passed by the Governor, because, the prorogation was a fraud on the Constitution and since the 479 prorogation was invalid the House continued to be in session; (3) The Governor 's power to promulgate an Ordinance is confined to Lists II and Iii of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution; (4) Section 3 of the Ordinance was unconstitutional as there was a conflict with, (a) r. 105 of the Rules of Procedure made under article 208 which gives power to Speaker to adjourn the Assembly or suspend sitting in case of grave disorder, and (b) article 189(4) which gives power to the Speaker to adjourn the Assembly or suspend the meeting for want of quorum; (5) ruling of the Speaker given on 18th March was not open to challenge in courts; (6) the further proceedings in the Assembly were illegal and (7) the two Appropriation Acts were ultra vires because, the Deputy Speaker and not the Speaker, certified them as Money Bills to the Legislative Council and the Governor.
HELD: (1) Under r. 7 of the Rules of Procedure framed under article 208.
when a session of the Assembly is prorogued the Secretary of the Assembly shall notify the order in the Gazette and inform the members.
The words indicate that there is already a prorogation and the rest of the rule is intended for communication of the fact to the public and conveying the order to the members.
It cannot be said from this that only the Secretary of the Assembly could so notify and that the Governor could not notify his order of prorogation.
[489 E F; 490 B] Article 174(2), which enables the Governor to prorogue the Legislature does not indicate the manner in which he is to make known his orders.
The means open to him are 'public notification ' that is, notification in the Official Gazette and 'proclamation '.
If he notifies in the Gazette through his Chief Secretary acting under the Business Rules, it becomes a public act of which the Court should take judicial notice.
Therefore, in the present case the prorogation to place on the 11th March, '1968, the date of publication in the Gazette, and the Legislature was resummoned only thereafter.
The resummoning of the Legislature by the Governor was also a step in the right direction as it set up once again the democratic machinery which had been disturbed by the Speaker.
[490 A E] (2) Under article 174(2) there are no restrictions on the power of the Governor to prorogue.
The power being untrammeled and an emergency having arisen, there was no abuse of power by him nor can his motives be described as msla fide.
In fact it was the only reasonable method of getting rid of the adjournment and solving the political crisis.
The House, in fact, transacted other business showing that the prorogation and resummoning were considered valid.
After the prorogation there was no further curb on the legislative power of the Governor to promulgate the Ordinance.
[448 D, F G; 490 E F] Kalyanam vs Veerabhadrayya, A.I.R. 1950 Mad.
243, referred to.
(3) The Governor 's power under article 213 of the Constitution, of legislation by Ordinance is as wide as the power of the Legislature of the State and therefore, includes the power to pass a law under article 209 in relation to financial business.
[490 G H] (4) (a) The inconsistency between the section and r. 105 has to be resolved in favour of the section because the latter part of article 209 itself provides that in cases of repugnancy between the rules of procedure framed under article 208 and a law made under article 209.
, the tatter shall prevail; (b) As regards the conflict with article 189(4) the rule of statutory interpretation namely, that, even if the language of a statute is prima facie wide it should be understood, if possible, as not attempting something beyond the competence of the legislative body applies, because, 480 whether a provision should be struck down or read down depends upon how far it is intended to go.
In the present case, the Ordinance could never provide for want of quorum which is dealt with in the Article and in therefore a constitutional requirement.
The Article continues to operate in situations contemplated by it and section 3 of the Ordinance can only deal with other situations.
Therefore the section could be read down so as to harmonise with the Article.
[492 B C; F H; 493 A] Diamond Sugar Mills vs
U.P. ; ; Romesh Thappar vs State of Madras ; and Kameshwar Prasad vs State of Bihar, [1962] Supp. 3 S.C.R. 369, referred to (5) Whether the Speaker adjourned the Assembly afresh or declared that the former adjournment continued to operate made no difference, because: (a) the former adournment had come to an end by a valid prorogation and [493 F G] (b) on the 18th March the Speaker was faced with a valid Ordinance, which was binding on the Assembly, including the Speaker, by virtue of article 209.
Therefore, the Speaker was powerless and the fresh adjournment by him of the session with out taking the mandete of the Assembly by majority as required by section 3 of the Ordinance was null and void.
[493 D E] It could not be urged that whatever the merits of the Speakers ruling may be, it should be treated as final and beyond challenge in courts.
A decision of the Speaker on a point of order is final under r. 112 of the Rules of Procedure, only if it is raised in relation to the interpretation and enforcement of the rules and the interpretation of the Articles of the Constitution regulating the business of the House and if the question to be decided was within/he Speakers cognizance In the present case, the Speaker did not attempt to interpret articles 208, 209 and 213, and instead of a resolution (which was the proper method of questioning the Ordinance) being passed under article 213(2)(a) disapproving the Ordinance the Speaker asserted himself against a law which was binding on him.
[494 A B, G H] (6) The continuance of the proceedings under the Deputy Speaker was vaild, complying as it did, with the law promulgated by the Governor, and therefore.
the finaneial business transacted before the Assembly had legal foundation.
[495 C D] (7) A provision of law is usually regarded as merely directory, even though a public duty is imposed by it and the manner of performance is also indicated in imperative language when general injustice or inconvenience result to others if strict compliance is deemed mandatory, and they have no control over those exercising the duty.
Judged by this test.
article 199(4) requiring the Speakers certificate cannot be viewed as mandatory but only as director in view of the inconvenience to the State and to the public at large that may be caused by holding the provision imperative and not directory.
If the Constitution s law the necessity of providing a Deputy Speaker to act as the Speaker during the latter 's absence or to perform the office of the Speaker when the office is vacant, it stands to reason that the Constitution could never have reposed a power of mere certification absolutely in the Speaker and Speaker along Further article 212(1) provides that the validities of any proceeding in the Legislature of a State shall not be called in question on the t, round of any alleged irregularity of procedure.
[496 D G; 497 B C, D E] State of Bombay v R.M. 1).
Chamarbauewala, [1957] section R. 874, State of U.P. v Manbodhan Lal Srivastava [1958] SC.R. 533, State of 481 U.P. vs Babu Ram Upadhya ; , M/s. Mangalore Ganesh Bidi Works vs State of Mysore, [1963] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 275, Patna Zilla Brick Owners Association vs State of Bihar, and May 's Parliamentary Practice p. 842.
referred to.
