The assessee a Mill, appointed V, as its General Manager, on a salary of Rs. 1000/ p.m., and car allowance of Rs. 250/ p.m., plus commission of 121/2 % on the net profits of the firm and in case the profits exceeded Rs. 1 lakh, the commission payable was 25%.
In the first year of the appointment the mill suffered loss, next year commission was paid at of the profits, and the next year commission paid was 25% as the profits exceeded the figure stipulated.
After the death of V, one of the Directors was appointed to manage its affairs and given a total remuneration of Rs. 24,000/ per annum and the post of General Manager was abolished.
The assessee claimed deduction from its assessable income the amount paid to V at the rate of 25% of the profits.
The Income tax Officer disallowed the claim and determined Rs. 5,000/ as reasonable amount payable.
Against the amount disallowed, the assessee appealed to the.
Appellate Assistant Commissioner, who allowed payment of commission at 121/2% as in its view that rate was reasonable considering the practice in similar 'business concerns.
The assessee appealed to the Appellate Tribunal and the appeal was dismissed.
The Tribunal took the view that the ' General Manager carried 'responsibility equal to that of the Director, the commission paid to V, in excess of Rs. 24,000/ per annum, i.e., the. amount paid as total remuneration to the Director, was not really paid.
wholly for the purpose of carrying on business.
On reference, the High Court answered the question against the assesaee.
The assessee in appeal to this Court contended that the higher rate of commission on profits was inserted to create the interest of V, who had special aptitude and experience in the line and the mill was running at a loss and it was only after sometime of V 's taking over that the mill made large profits, so the amount paid to V, was an amount laid out or expended wholly or exclusively for the purpose of the business of the assessee, and it was wrongly disallowed.
HELD: In the circumstances established by the assessee, the entire amount paid to V, was an amount laid out or expended wholly and exclusively for the purpose Of the assessee.
In applying the test of commercial expediency for determining whether an expenditure was wholly and exclusively laid out for the purpose of the.
_ business, reasonableness of the expenditure has to be adjudged from the point of view of the businessman and not of the Income tax Department.
It is, of course, open to the Appellate Tribunal tO come to a conclusion either that the alleged payment is not real or that it is not incurred by the assessee in the character of a trader or it is not laid out wholly and exclusively for the purpose of the business of the assessee and to disallow it.
But it is not the function of the Tribunal to determine the remuneration which in their view should be paid to an employee Of the assessee.
An employer in fixing the remuneration of his employees is entitled to consider the extent of his business, the nature of the duties to be performed ' and the special aptitude of the employee, future prospects of extension by 526 the business and a host of other related circumstances.
The question as to whether an amount claimed as expenditure was laid out or expended wholly or exclusively for the purpose of business, profession or vocation as required under section 10(2) (xv) of the Income tax Act has to be decided on the facts and in the light of the circumstances of each particular case.
But the final conclusion on the admissibility of an allowance is one of law.
[529 D; 529H 530 C] C.I.T. Bombay vs Walchand & Co. Private Ltd. 65 I.T.R. 381, applied to.
Swadeshi Cotton Mills Co. Ltd. vs
C.I.T., U.P. , referred to.
