The appellant and its workmen, represented by their unio.n called the Indoxco Labour Union, Jamshedpur, made a joint application to the Government referring certain disputes to the Industrial Tribunal.
The application stated that the number of workmen employed in the undertaking affected were those employed in the company 's factory at Jamshedput, and that the same number were likely to be affected by the disputes.
The Government referred the disputes to the Industrial Tribunal, and the notification also stated that the disputes were between the management of the appellant company 's factory at Jamshedpur and their workmen represented by Indoxco Labour Union.
Two of the demands were (1) payment of overtime to office staff should be 1 1/2 times the ordinary rate .and (2) the union representatives should be allowed special leave to attend law courts for matters connected with the workers and the management, to attend the annual conventions of their federation, to attend to Executive Committee meetings of the union federation and the conventions of the central organisation i.e., INTUC.
The union at a general meeting, held prior to the reference, had passed a resolution changing the name of the union to Indian Oxygen Workers Union and making the workmen of all the establishments of the Appellant company in Bihar eligible for its membership.
By a letter the union informed the appellant company at Jamshedpur of this amendment.
The Tribunal held that (i) the award in this case was to apply to all of the workmen and could not be restricted to the workman working at Jamshedpur; (ii) 11/2 times the ordinary wages 'for overtime work exceeding 39 hours but not exceeding 48 hours per week should be paid; and if the overtime exceeded 48 hours per week, the company would be liable to pay double the ordinary rate of wages; and (iii) the appellant company had been allowing without loss of pay the representatives of the workmen to attend proceedings before conciliation officers and Industrial Tribunals, and that this concession was sufficient; therefore the Tribunal rejected the demand for special Leave with pay to attend the law courts; but held the union 's representatives were to be given special leave to attend (a) meetings of its executive committee, (b) meetings of the federation of the union, (c) the annual convention of that federation when held at Jamshedpur and (d) the convention of the INTUC.
In appeal to this Court, HELD: (i) The award was operative only in respect of the workmen of the appellant company 's factory at Jamshedpur and not the workmen of its other establishments.
[561 C D] The agreement by which the parties agreed to refer the said disputes for adjudication was between the management of the appellant company 's factory at Jamshedpur.
and the wo 'rkmen employed in that factory and represented by their said union, the Indoxco Labour Union.
Under the notification of the Government also 'the disputes referred to the Tribunal 551 were those set out in the said agreement.
Even assuming that the Indoxco Labour Union validly amended its constitution so as to extend its membership to the company 's other workmen in its other establishments, inasmuch as the disputes referred to.
the Tribunal were only those set out in the said agreement, any award made by the Tribunal in respect of those disputes must necessarily be confined to the disputes refered to it, the parties to those disputes and the parties who had agreed to refer those disputes for adjudication.
There is nothing to show in that notification that other workmen of the company had raised similar demands.
or that there were any disputes existing or apprehended which were included in that reference.
[555 D G] The Union did not produce any evidence to show that the amendments purported to have been carried out by the resolution were sent to the Registrar as provided in sections 6(g), 28(3), 29 and 30(3) of the Trade Union Act and regulation 9 of the Central Trade Union Regulation, nor did it produce any communication of the Registrar notifying the fact of his having registered the said amendments.
The only evidence it produced was its letter to the appellant company which indicated that the Registrar notified to the union of his having registered the said amendments.
The Tribunal 's conclusion, therefore, that the union 'section constitution, was duly amended or that the Indian Oxygen Workers Union represented the workmen of the company 's factory at Jamshedpur and that consequently it made no difference that the name of Indoxco Labour Union as representing the workmen concerned was mentioned in the said agreement and the said statement and not that of the Indian Oxygen Workers Union is erroneous and cannot be sustained.
Any award, therefore, made by the Tribunal in these circumstances can operate only in respect of the workmen of the appellant company 's factory at Jamshedpur and the Tribunal 's extension of that award to workmen in the company 's other establishments was clearly without jurisdiction.
[557 D G] The Associated Cement Companies Ltd. vs Their Workmen, ; a 'nd Ramnagar Cane and Sugar Co. Ltd. vs Jatin Chakravorty, , distinguished.
(ii) Under the conditions of service of the co.mpany, the total hours of work per week were 39 hours.
The Bihar Shops and Establishments Act fixes the maximum number of hours of work allowable thereunder, i.e. 48 hours a week, and provides for double the rate of ordinary wages for work done over and above 48 hours.
But no reliance can be placed on the provisions of that Act for the company 's contention that it cannot be called upon to.
pay for overtime work anything more than its ordinary rate of wages if the workmen do work beyond 39 hours but not exceeding 49 hours a week.
Any workman asked 'to work beyond 39 hours would obviously be working overtime and the company in fairness would be expected to pay him compensation for such overtime work.
If the company pays at the ordinary rate of wages for work done beyond 39 hours but not exceeding 48 hours work a week, it would be paying no extra compensation at all for the work done beyond the agreed hours of work.
The company would thus be indirectly increasing the hours of work and consequently altering its condition of service.
[558 C F] If after taking into consideration the fact of the comparatively higher scale of wages prevailing in the appellant company, the Tribunal fixed the rate for overtime work at 11/2 times the ordinary rate of wages, it is impossible to say that the Tribunal erred in doing so or acted unjustly.
(iii) The demand for special leave must be disallowed.
552 The appellant company.
has been allowing those,of its workmen who are the union 's representatives to attend without loss of pay proceedings before conciliation officers and industrial tribunals.
In conceding the demand of the union for more leave the Tribunal does not appear to have considered the adverse effect on the company 's production if furthern absenteeism were to be allowed especially when the crying need of the country 's economy is more and more production.
In awarding this demand the Tribunal also did not specify on how many ' occasions the executive committee meetings of the union and other meetings would be held when the company would be obliged to give special leave with pay to the union 's representatives.
Similarly, there is no knowing how many delegates the union would send to attend the conventions of the federation and the INTUC.
The Tribunal could not in the very nature of things specify or limit the number of such meetings for such an attempt would amount to interference in the administration of the union and its autonomy.
Its order must of necessity, therefore, have to be indefinite with the result that the appellant company would not know before hand on how many occasions and to how many of its workmen it would be called upon to grant special leave.
Further, in case there are more than one union in the company 's establishment, the representatives of all such unions would also have to be given such leave to attend the aforesaid meetings.
In considering such a demand, the question as to why the meetings of the executive committee of the union cannot be 'held outside the hours of work should be considered.
It was said that it may not be possible always to do so if an emergency arises.
But emergencies are not of regular occurrence and if there be one, the representatives can certainly sacrifice one of their earned leave.
Similarly the meetings of the federation and the annual conventions of the INTUC too can be artended by the union 's delegates by availing themselves of their earned leave.
[559 D E; 560 C H] J. K. Cotton and Spinning and Weaving Mills vs Badri Malt, [19641 3 S.C.R. 724, referred to.
