The respondent held a licenee granted by the Government of Baroda under the Baroda Electricity Act 1 of 1964 to supply electric energy within certain defined territories.
On June 23, 1961 the appellant, which was constituted under section 5 of the Indian , served a notice on the respondent to the effect that in exercise of the powers conferred on it by virtue of section 71 of the read together with section 6 Qf the , as amended by the Indian Electricity (Amendment) Act 32 of 1959, the appellant.
had decided to and would exercise the option to purchase the respondent 's undertaking on 3 1 1963 i.e. the date on which the licenee was due to expire.
The respondent challenged the validity of this notice and the High Court held the notice was invalid.
On appeal to this Court.
HELD: The High Court was right in holding that the impugned notice Was invalid and by virtue of that notice the appellant could not compel the respondent to sell the undertaking.
[594 A] Before the option to purchase the undertaking can be exercised, the State Electricity Board must call upon the licensec by means of a notice in writing within the period mentioned in section 6( 1 ) to sell the undertaking to it on the expiration of the period for which the licenee was given.
The impugned notice did not require the licensec to sell the undertaking.
It merely notified the respondent that the appellant Board has decided to exercise and would exercise the option of purchasing the respondent 's undertaking on the date of expiry of the licenee.
[592 D E] Nazir Ahmad vs King Emperor, L.R. 63 I.A. 372: and Ballavdas Agarwala vs Shri S.C. Chakravarty, [1960] 2 S.C.R. 739; referred to.
There was no force in the contention that the notice complied substantially with the requirements of the law and should therefore be given effect to.
The issuing of a notice strictly in accordance with the provisions section 6(1), which prescribes that the notice must specifically call upon the licensec to sell the undertaking, is a condition precedent to the exercise of the power conferred on the State Electricity Board to purchase the undertaking.
Furthermore, on reading the impugned notice, the licensec could not have been definite whether the appellant Board purported to exercise the power under the law as it was on the date of the notice i.e. the as amended by Act 32 of 1959, or as it was under the unamended act.
The rights and liabities of the Electricity Board and the licensee before Act 32 of 1959 came into force were ,SUbstantially different from those after the amendment.
[593 C G]
