There was a strike in the establishment of the appellant company betseen 18th and 30th March, 1964, and again a token strike on 10th April, 1964.
For the misconduct of going on the first strike some of the workmen were charged and given a warning.
The second strike was held to be illegal by an enquiry officer and six of the workmen who had been given a warning in respect of the first strike were dismissed for taking part in the second strike also.
The Labour Court held that in the compromise that had ended the first strike the company had given the undertaking that it would not take any action by way of punishment against the workmen, and therefore the warning in respect of the first strike which was given only after the enquiry report relating to the second strike had been already received, was not only not bona fide but illegal.
Because this warning was taken into account against the six workmen who were dismissed, the Labour Court set aside the order of dismissal, although holding that the second strike was ille.gal because of want of notice under subs.
4 of section 6 S of the U.P.
The company appealed to this Court.
HELD: (i) The Labour Court rightly held on the facts that the warning given to the workmen in respect of the.
first strike was not only not bona fide but also.
against the terms of the settlement by which the first strike was ended.
[548 G] (ii) The second strike was, as held by the Labour Court, illegal and therefore 'misconduct ' under sub cl.
(2) of cl. 21 of the Standing Orders of the company.
Any punishment imposed under el.
22 of the said Orders in respect of an illegal strike after a fair enquiry, being a managerial function would not normally be interfered with.
But in the present case the management was not entitled to take into.
account the warning given in respect of the first strike in view of the settlement it had entered into with the workers to end that strike.
The Labour Court was therefore again right in holding the punishment of dismissal of the six respondents as vindictive and unjustified.
[548 H 549E]
