On January 8, 1959 the Bombay State Electricity Board purporting to exercise its powers under section 7 of the read with section 71 of the gave notice to the res pondent that it would exercise its option of purchasing the electric supply undertaking which the respondent ran under a licence, on the expiry of the said licenee on February 10, 1962.
On the creation of the State of Gujarat the appellant corpOration was formed and succeeded to the rights and liabilities of the Bombay State Electricity Board.
The respondent filed a writ petition in the High Court in which he challenged the right of the appellant to purchase his undertaking.
The High Court came to the conclusion that though the notice issued on January 8, 1959 was a valid notice under section 7(4) of the Act that by itself was not sufficient to compel the respondent to sell his undertaking to the appellant; before the respondent could be compelled to sell his undertaking it was necessary for the appellant to exercise its option to purchase the undertaking on the expiration of the period of licenee, which it had not done.
respondent 's writ petition was therefore allowed.
The appellant came to this Court.
The questions that fell for consideration were: (i) whether the High Court 's interpretation of section 7 was correct; (ii) whether the appellant was empowered under section 71 of the to exercise the powers of the local authority under section 7.
HELD: (i) The provisions of the sub section of section 7 must be read together.
So read the section only means that before a licensee can be compelled to sell his undertaking the authority entitled to purchase must elect to purchase the same by exercise of the option given to it under the licence read with section 7 of the Act followed by a notice as required by section 7(4) of the Act.
In section 7 the expression 'option of purchasing an undertaking ' merely means the right of purchasing the undertaking.
The word 'option ' is used because two courses are open to the concerned authority namely.
either to purchase the undertaking or renew the licence.
Once the authority elects to purchase then the notice prescribed in subs.
4 should be given before the period mentioned therein.
The object of the provision is that the licensee must know in good time what course authority is going to adopt.
Otherwise there is bound to be considerable inconvenience to the licensec as well as to the public.
[584 F H, 585 C D] There is no good reason for reading into section 7 a requirement that after a notice under section 7 (4) is issued the authority must again exercise its option to purchase on the expiration of the period of license.
The exercise of option to purchase as well as electing to purchase is one integral process and not two independent steps.
By the very act of electing to purchase the authority exercises its option to purchase.
, [585,E F] 581 In the present case therefore the requirements of section 7 were fully complied with by the notice issued on January 8, 1954.
[585 F G] (ii) It is true that before section 71 can be held to be attracted to a case it must be shown that the right or option.
to purchase the undertaking of the licensee vested in the State Government or a local authority under the provisions of the Act.
In the present case the right to purchase vested in the concerned authority by virtue of section 7, and it could not be said that the right accrued only by virtue of the agreement under which the licence was granted.
The right to purchase may accrue either because it is directly conferred by section 7 or because it is obtained as a result of a contract compelled by that section.
In either case it is a 'right obtained by the authority by virtue of section 7.
The appellant Board was therefore empowered by section 071 to issue the notice under section 7.
[586 F 587 A] Fazilka Electric Supply Co. Ltd. vs The Commr.
of Income tax, Delhi, [1962] 3 Supp.
S.C.R. 496, distinguished.
Okara Electric Supply Ltd. & Anr.
vs State of Punjab, ; applied.
