The petitioners were arrested and detained on February 11, 1968 under the by the orders of the District Magistrate, Tripura.
They challenged their detention on the following among other grounds: (i) that the District Magistrate passed the orders of detention on February 9, 1968 but made his 'report to the State Government only on February 13 and therefore the report was not made 'forthwith ' as required by section 3(3),; (ii) that the State Government did not communicate the approval to the detenus and without such communication the order could not be effective; (iii) that the State Government recorded its approval under section 3(3) on February 19 but communicated it to the Central Government only on February 22 and this was not done 'as soon as may be ' within the meaning of section 3(4); (iv) that the grounds supplied were vague; (v) that the detention order was mala fide.
One of the petitioners also relied on 'the fact that the grounds were supplied to him in English which he did not understand.
HELD: (i) The word 'forthwith ' has been interpreted by this Court in Joglekar 's case to mean the period during which the detaining authority could not "without any fault of his own" send the report.
In the present case the order of detention passed on February 9 was communicated to the State Government on February 13 but the District Magistrate in his affidavit had explained that he was occupied with urgent official work and that 10th and 11th were holidays.
Thus the 're was delay only because the report was not made on the 12th.
Even if the meaning from the 'ruling in Joglekar 's case is applied strictly, the delay was explained sufficiently.
[565 C; 566A, D] Keshav Nilkanth Joglekar vs The Commissioner of Police Greater Bombay, ; at p. 658 60, applied.
(ii) There is no provision in the Act that the approval under section 3(3) must be communicated to the detenu.
Section 3(3) does not specify that the order of approval is anything more than an administrative aproval by the State Government.
If this be so the necessity of communication of the approval does not arise with that strictness as does the decision under r. 30A (8) of the Defence of India Rules.
Although it may be fair even under the to inform the detenu of all the stages through which his detention passes, and it may be desirable to have a provision to that effect included in it, the existing state of the law did not justify the importation of the strict 'rule to cases under this Act.
D, G] 563 The scheme of the is merely to approve the original detention by the District Magistrate and the continued detention after 12 days is not under any fresh order but the same old order with the added approval, and what the detenu can question is the original detention and not the approval thereof.
[567 H] Raja Harish Chandra Raj Singh vs Deputy Land Acquisition Officer [1962] 1 S.C.R. 676, Bachhittar Singh vs State of Punjab,[1962] Supp.
3 S.C.R. 713 and Biren Dutta & Ors.
vs Chief Commissioner of Tripura & Anr.
, [19641 8 S.C.R. 295, distinguished.
(iii) The State Government having reached its decision on February 19, its communication under section 3(4) to the Central Government on February 22 was not so delayed that it is not covered by the expression 'as early as may be ' which was explained in Joglekar 's case to mean 'what is reasonably convenient '.
Various things have to be done before the report to the Central Government can be made and a gap of 3 days is understandable.
[568 D] (iv) The grounds in the present case had been supplied to the detenu with sufficient particularity to enable them to make an effective representation.
The cases of Rameshwar Lal Patwari and Motilal Jain were distinguishable.
[569 F 570 A] Rameshwar Lal Patwari vs State of Bihar, ; and Motilal Jain vs State of Bihar, ; distinguished.
(v) On the facts and circumstances of the case the allegation of mala fides against the detaining authority could not be accepted.
[570 B] (vi) The objection that the grounds of detention were given in a language which the detenu did not understand was raised in this Court for the first time.
The Court could not entertain this belated complaint especially when the detenu did not seem to have suffered at all for this reason.
If there was the slightest feeling that he had been handicapped the court would have seriously considered the matter.
[572 A B] Harikisan vs State of Maharashtra & Ors., [1962] 2 Supp.
S.C.R. 918, referred to.
