The appellant creditor lent moneys to the first respondent on the guarantee of the second respondent.
, The appellant filed a suit against the respondents for recovery of the amount due.
and the suit was decreed.
While passing the decree, the Trial Court directed that the appellant would not be at liberty to enforce the decree against the second respondent ' until he had exhausted his remedies against the first respondent.
The appellant challenged this direction.
The High Court dismissed the appeal.
In appeal on certificate, this Court : HELD: The direction must be set aside.
In the absence of some special equity the surety has no right to restrain execution against him until the creditor has exhausted his remedies against the principal.
For making an order under O.XX r. 11 (1 ) of C.P.C. the court must give specific reasons.
The direction postponing payment of the amount decreed must be clear and specific.
The injunction upon the creditor not to proceed against the surety until the creditor has exhausted his remedies against the principal was of the vaguest character.
It was not stated how and when the creditor would exhaust his remedies against the principal.
[622 A, F G] It is the duty of the surety to pay the decretal amount.
On such payment he will be subrogated to the rights of the creditor under section 140 of the Indian Contract Act.
and he may then recover the amount from the principal.
The very object of the guarantee is defeated if the creditor is asked to postpone his remedies against the surety.
In the present case the creditor is banking company.
A guarantee is a collateral security usually taken by a banker.
The security will become useless if his rights against the surety can be so easily cut down.
The impugned direction cannot be justified under O.XX r. 11 (1).
Assuming that apart from O.XX r. 11(1) the Court had the inherent power under section 151 to direct postponement of the execution of the decree, the ends of justice did not require such postponement.
[623 A C] Lachhman ,Joharimal V. Bapu Khandu and Surety Tukaram Khandoji, (1869) 4 Bom.
High Court Reports, 241.
