In an election to a Parliamentary constituency, having 2,19,554 voters 1,20,008 votes were polled.
of these 4,168 votes were declared invalid.
The appellant won by securing 1,541 votes more than the next candidate the respondent.
The respondent filed an election petition on the ground that the polling was disturbed as the polling centres were in some cases changed without due notification, at some polling stations almost no votes were cast because of fi 'ring at rioters and at some polling stations the polling hours were reduced.
Only 1,894 votes were polled at these polling booths, in which the total number of voters attached were 8,620.
so 6,726 voters could not vote.
The Judicial Commissioner ordered fresh poll in these polling stations.
In appeal by the returned candidate, this Court.
HELD: The appeal must succeed.
The decision of the Judicial Commissioner that the election was in contravention of the Act and the Rules was correct in the circumstances this case but that did not alter the position with regard to section 100(1)(d) (iv) of the Representation of the People Act.
That section requires that the election petitioner must go a little further and prove that the result of the election had been materially affected.
And in this case this burden had not been discharged.
[643 F] The evidence in this case which had been brought by the election 'petitioner was the kind of evidence which was criticised by this Court.
Witnesses were brought forward to state that a number of voters did not vote because of the change of venue or because of firing and that they had already decided to vote en bloc for the election petitioner.
This kind of evidence was merely an assertion on the part of a witness, who could not speak 'for 500 voters for the simple reason that as this Court said the casting of votes at an election depends upon a variety of factors and it is not possible for anyone to predicate how many or which proportion of votes wilt go to one or the other candidates.
This conclusion is further forified if one examines the polling pattern in this election.
Not more than 55% of the voters cast their votes. !This immediately cut down the ' figure of 6,726 to a little over half and the margin from which the election petitioner could claim additional votes therefore becomes exceedingly small.
From the pattern of voting as was disclosed at the various polling booths to which the voters had gone, it was clear, that 1,541 votes could not.
by any reasonable guess, have been taken off from the lead of the returned candidates so as to make the election petitioner successful. 'In ,so far as the other contesting candidates were concerned, they had received so few votes that even if they had received all the votes that had not been cast, it would have mattered little to the result of the election.
The Judicial Commissioner reached his conclusion by committing the same error which was criticised in Vashist Narain Sharmas case.
He took the statement of witnesses at their word and held on the basis of 638 these statements that all the votes that had not been cast would have gone to the election petitioner.
[642 B 643 E] Vashist Narain Sharma V. Der Chandra and Ors. ; , followed.
