Under section 4 of the Kerala Buildings Tax Act, 1961, buildings constructed after the coming into force of the Act and having a floor area of one thousand square feet or more were subjected to tax on a graduated scale.
The tax was levied on the basis of floor area only and no classification was attempted.
The High Court in writ petitions filed by the present respondents held the charge to be invalid because of violation of the equality clause of the Constitution.
The State appealed.
HELD: (i) The law bY which a tax is levied must not only be within the competence of the legislature concerned but it must also not be inconsistent with any provision of the Constitution.
The validity of a taxing statute is open to question on the ground that it infringes the fundamental rights.
[648 B C] K.T. Moopil Nair vs State of Kerala, ; and Khandige Sham Bhat vs Agricultural Income tax Officer, ; , relied on.
(ii) In the application of the principles expounded by this Court for determining whether there has been denial of equal protection of the laws, the Courts, in view of the inherent complexity of fiscal legislation admit a larger discretion to the Legislature in the matter of classification, so long as k adheres to the fundamental principles underlying the doctrine of equality.
The power of the legislature to classify is of 'wide range and flexibility ' so that it can adjust its system of taxation in all proper and 'reasonable ways.
[648 H] But when objects persons or transactions essentially dissimilar are treated by the imposition of a uniform tax, discrimination may result, for, refusal to make a rational classification may itself in some cases result in denial of equality.
[649 C] in enacting the Kerala Building Tax Act no attempt at any rational classification has been made by the Legislature.
The Legislature has not taken into consideration in imposing tax the class to which a building belongs, the nature of construction, the purpose for which it is used, its situation, its capacity for profitable user and other relevant circumstances which have a bearing on matters of taxation.
They have adopted merely the floor area of the building as the basis of tax irrespective of all other considerations.
The High Court was therefore right in holding that the charging section of the Act was violative of the equality clause of the Constitution.
[649 B] Shri Ram Krishna Dalmia vs Shri Justice S.R. Tendolker & Ors. ; , referred to.
646 New Manek Chowk Spinning & Weaving Mills Co. Ltd. V. Municipal Corporation o/the City of Ahmedabad; , , applied.
[Question whether imposition of a tax only on buildings constructed after the coming into force of the Act and the exempting building completed before that date would violate article 14 of the constitution left open.] [650 A]
