The respondent Company carried on business of manufacture and sale of machinery and parts of machinery etc.
For its manufacturing activities, it maintained a foundry and in 19 '52 it purchased two arc furnaces for use in this foundry.
As the furnaces were found unsuitable they were sold to a purchaser at a profit.
For the assessment year 195859 the sales tax assessing authorities included the sale price of the furnaces in the turnover of the Company although it was maintained by the Company that the sale represented art isolated sale of its fixed capital assets.
An appeal to the Sales Tax Appellate Tribunal was rejected but the High Court allowed a revision petition on the view that it was impossible to hold that the sale of the are furnaces was either ingrained in the business activity of the assessee or would constitute its normal business activity; and that the mere fact that the sale price exceeded the cost price of the arc furnaces was not sufficient to establish that the sale was a business activity or that it was actuated by the profit motive.
On appeal to this Court.
HELD: The High Court had rightly concluded that the sale proceeds of the furnaces could not be included in the turnover of the assessee for determining its liability to sales tax.
The furnaces were admittedly imported for the purpose of being installed as a part of the plant in the foundry of the assessee.
There was no material to show that there was any intention at the time when the furnaces were purchased of selling them at a profit.
Although the assessee was dealing in the sale of heavy machinery and machinery parts it was nowhere proved that furnaces were ever manufactured or sold by it or were part of its business or ingrained therein.
The are furnaces were either fixed assets or discarded goods which had been found to be unserviceable Or unsuitable.
The assessee could not therefore be said to be a dealer within the definition given in section 2(b) of the Central Act.
[783 F 784 B] State of Andhra pradesh vs Abdul Bakshi & Bros., 15 S.T.C. 644 and State of Gularat vs Raipur Manufacturing Co. Ltd., 19 S.T.C. 1; distinguished.
Ambica Mills Ltd. vs State of Gujarat, 15 S.T.C. 367, State Gujarat vs Vivekananda Mills, 19 S.T.C. 103, referred to.
