The respondents flied returns for the year 1953 54 and they were provisionally assessed on 14 10 1954, and regular assessment was.
made on 27 2 58.
For the next four succeeding years the respondents filed returns, and for all the years the regular assessments under section 23 of the Income Tax Act, 1922 were made after 27 2 58.
SinCe no estimate of the tax payable on their income as required by section 18A was seat nor the in advance paid, the Income Tax Officer while assessing them under section 23 held that they were liable to pay interest under section 18A(8) and in addition he applied the provisions of section 18A(9)(b) and imposed a penalty for each year of assessment by virtue of section 28 read with section 18A(9)(b).
The respondents preferred appeals to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner on the ground that the levy of interest and penalty 'was unauthorised.
The appeals were dismissed, and the respondents went :in revision, which was also dismissed.
Thereupon, the respondents filed writ petitions in the High Court to quash the order and succeeded.
The High Court held that section 18(3) of the Act did not apply to the facts of the case as there had been a provisional assessment under section 23B of the Act in 1954.
In appeals to this Court, by the Revenue the question for consideration was whether the expression "any person who has not hitherto been assessed" in section 18A(3) of the Indian Income Tax Act, 1922 after the all Income Tax Amendment Act 67 of 1949 should be interpreted so as to 'include a person who has only been provisionally assessed under section 23B ,of that Act.
HELD : The appeals must be dismissed.
Even when the tax is provisionally assessed, there necessarily has to be a determination of the total income of the assessee.
The only difference is that under section 23 the total income is determined after the Income Tax Officer has satisfied himself fully about the correctness of the return fled by taking steps, if necessary, under sections 22(4) and 23(2) of the Act.
In the case of a provisional assessment under section 23B. of the Act, the powers under sections 22(4) and 23(2) of the Act are not to be exercised and the Income Tax Officer has to determine the tax on the basis of the return filed by the assessee after taking into consideration the accounts and documents available, if any, and after giving effect to certain allowances and losses.
In other words, what the Income Tax Officer has to do is to assess provisionally the total income of the assessee and thereafter he has to determine the tax payable on the basis of that provisionally assessed income.
[731 A D] It is important to notice that in section 18A(1) the expression "assessed" is used without any qualification or restriction as to whether the assessment should be a regular assessment or any other type of assessment 725 under the Act.
It is also manifest that in section 18A sub section (5) the two expressions "provisional assessment" and "regular assessment" are expressly mentioned.
The expression "regular assessment" is also repeatedly used in section 18A, sub.
section 6, 7, 8 and 9.
There is therefore, no warrant for restricting the meaning of the word "assessed" in section 18A(1) so as to include only a "regular assessment" under section 23 of the Act.
There is no reason why Parliament did not add the word "regularly" in the sub section so as to qualify the word "assessed".
Since there is no such qualification, the word "assessed" in section 18A(3) should be read in its ordinary sense as including every kind of assessment including a provisional assessment under section 23B of the Act.
[732 A C] There is nothing in the 1961 Act to suggest that Parliament intended to explain the meaning or clear up doubts about the meaning of the word "assessee" in section 18A(3) of the earlier Act.
Generally speaking a subsequent Act of Parliament affords no useful guide to the meaning of another Act which came into existence.
before the later one was ever framed.
Under special circumstances, the law does however admit of a subsequent Act to be resorted to for this purpose but the conditions under which the later Act may be resorted for the interpretation of the earlier Act are strict; both must be laws on the same subject and the part of the earlier Act which it is sought to construe must be ambiguous and capable of different meanings.
[733 F H] Kirkness (Inspector of Taxes) vs John Hudson & Co. Ltd., ; In re MacManasway, and Inland Revenue Commissioners vs Dowdall, O 'Mahonay & Co. Ltd., , referred to.
