The assessee a Hindu undivided family ( ) was assessed in 1944 45 for the income of its previous year ending October 30, 1943.
The income shown in the return was from iron foundry business and property, and income from these sources only was taken into account in the original assessment.
The assessee through a son of the karta was also a partner in the firm Raj Narain Durga Prasad.
The accounting year of the firm ended on April 1, 1944 and the assessee 's return,did not show any income as share of profit in the firm nor was mention made in the return of the existence of the partnership.
In December, 1943 the assessee along with Raj Narain Durga Prasad started a joint venture of supplying Sarpat and bamboo to the Government.
Between the commencement of the joint venture and February 18, 1944, the assessee made investments in the Sarpat and bamboo business to the tune of Rs. 27,000 (as found by the Tribunal).
The Income tax Officer, when he discovered the assessee 's connection with the firm Rajnarain Durga Prasad gave a notice under section 34 of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922 and made in 1952 a revised assessment for 1944 45, assessment year, in which he added the income of the assessee as found in the books of the firm to the income already assessed.
Later, he discovered the assessee 's investments in the Sarpat and bamboo business and in 1954 he made another revised assessment for the assessment year 1944 45 treating the said investments as representing income from undisclosed sources.
The assessee challenged both the assessments on the ground that section 34(1)(a) was not attracted.
The assessee 's plea was rejected by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and the Tribunal.
The High Court in 'reference also held against the assessee who by special leave appealed to this Court.
The contentions on behalf of the appellant were; (i) As regards income from firm Rajnarain Durga Prasad it was submitted that the accounting year of that firm ended on April 1, 1944 which was well after the close of the assessee 's previous year which ended on October 28, 1943.
Neither the.
income of the firm, nor the share of assessee had been determined till then, and it was not possible for the assessee to show the said income in the return for 1944 45.
Moreover the full facts came to the knowledge of the Income tax Officer when the assessment for the next assessment year was made.
Therefore section 34(1)(a) was not attracted.
(ii) As regards investments in the Sarpat and bamboo business the assessee submitted that the business itself commenced in December, 1943 and having regard to the definition of previous year ' in section 2(11) as it existed at the relevant time, the income from this source could not be shown as income of his previous year which ended on October 28.
The income from this source was duly disclosed to the Income tax Officer and was actually assessed in 1945 46.
Therefore in the case of the 1954 revised assessment also 'section 34(1)(a) was not attracted.
801 HELD: (i) The High Court had rightly observed in dealing with the 1952 assessment that there was no finding of the appellate tribunal that the share of income from the firm was not known at the time when the return was filed.
In view of the admitted fact that the return filed by the assessee did not disclose the fact of partnership in the firm Raj Narain Durga Prasad it was no longer open to the assessee to urge that section 34(1)(a) was not attracted, particularly when the burden lay upon the assessee to show that the Income tax Officer was aware of the income received from the firm.
[804 G H] (ii) It is now weD settled that the only way in which income from undisclosed sources can be taxed is to take it as the income of the relevant financial year.
Therefore the investments made by the assessee in Sarpat and bamboo business between December, 1943 and February, 1944 were rightly taxed by the Income tax Officer in the year 1944 45.
The disclosure of the investments by assessee in the proceedings for 1945 46 cannot be treated as a disclosure for the purpose of assessment year 194445.
The plea that the revised assessment made in 1954 was not covered by section 34(1)(a) could not therefore be accepted.
[806 B C] Section 68 of the Indian Income tax Act, 1961 which provides that amounts credited.
in the account books of the assessee and not satisfactorily explained by him should be treated as income of the 'previous year ', does not alter the position under the old Act.
Even under the new Act the position, except where the credits are found in the assessee 's account books, is probably not different from that laid down in the cases under the old Act.
[806 D F] Commissioner of Income tax, Bihar and orissa vs
P. Darolia & Sons, and Bishan Dutt vs Commissioner of Income tax, U.P. & V.P. , applied.
Jethmal vs Commissioner of Income tax, , approved.
P.R. Mukherjee vs Commissioner of Income tax, West Bengal.
referred to.
