The appellant corporation in accordance with its Road Widening Scheme sought to acquire some of the land belonging to the respondent.
The 'respondent was not satisfied with the compensation offered by the appellant or awarded by the arbitrators, and under 8. 387(4) and (5) of the Madhya Bharat Municipal Corporation Act, 1956 he filed an application for fixation of compensation in the Court of the District Judge, Indore.
The appellant in its reply submitted that the compensation awarded by the arbitrator was too low.
The Additional District Judge rejected an application filed by the appellant for withdrawing its claim over a portion of the land in question.
He fixed compensation for the land at the rate of Rs. 30/ per sq.
with interest at 6% per annum from the date of the delivery of the possession, and also awarded a solatium of 15% to the respondent.
The 'revision application filed against the judgment of the Additional District Judge by the Corporation was dismissed by the High Court.
On the question of compensation the High Court held that it could not interfere with the order of the Additional District Judge as he had committed no irregularity in the exercise cf his jurisdiction.
By special leave the Corporation appealed to this Court.
The questions that fell for consideration were (i) whether the Corporation was entitled under law to withdraw from acquisition proceedings, (ii) whether the respondent was entitled under the Act to a solatium in addition to the compensation, (iii) whether the High Court was right in 'refusing to go into the question of sufficiency of compensation.
HELD: (i) There was no provision in the Act for enabling the .Corporation to withdraw from the acquisition proceedings.
In fact there automatic vesting of land in the Corporation under section 305 once the requisite conditions were satisfied.
[17 B C] (ii) The Additional District Judge was right in awarding 15% solatium.
[ 19 E] The Borough Municipality of Ahmedabad vs Yavendra Vajubhai Divatis, I.L.R. , approved and applied.
(iii) The High Court could not in a revision under section 392 go into questions of fact and determine the amount of compensation and it was right in declining to go into.
the question.
Even if the powers under section 392 are wider than those under section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure they do not extend to determining questions of fact.
[19 G]
