The respondent company, carried on manufacturing business in collaboration with so.me. non resident German firms.
For each of the assessment.years up to.
1961 62, the Income tax Officer issued a notice to the respondent under section 43 of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922, intimating that he intended treating the respondent as the agent of the non resident firms, and thereafter passed orders treating the respondent as agent of the firms.
For the assessment year 1962 63 no notice under section 43 was issued ' or served upon the respondent by the Income tax Officer and no order under that section was passed treating the respondent as their agent.
The respondent received from the Income tax Officer notices if demand under section 29 together with an order under section 18A(1) calling upon the respondent to make advance payment of the tax for the assessment year 1962 63 as agent of the firms.
The respondent denied its liability to make advance payment of tax.
The Commissioner of Income tax 'rejected the respondent 's representation.
The respondent, thereupon, filed writ petitions in the High Court challenging the demand of the advance tax and for quashing the notices of demand.
The High Court granted the writ.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court, HELD: The respondent could not be treated as an agent if the nonresident firms for the assessment year 1962 63 as advance tax could not be demanded under section 18A for that assessment year treating the respondent as such statutory agent.
Having regard to the scheme of the Income tax Act, the assessment for each year is self contained and the vicarious liability imposed by an appointment under section 43 only extends to the liability for the assessment of the year for which the appointment is made and cannot extend to the liability for any other assessment.
Nor can the expression "for all purposes" used in section 43 extend the liability to any other assessment excepting the liability for the assessment year for which the appointment is made.
The expression for all purposes", only indicates that when an appointment is made for a particular assessment year it is good for all purposes as far as the assessment is concerned i.e., for all purposes for imposing tax liability, determing the quantum of the liability and for recovering it.
The liability sought to be imposed under section 18A in the present ease is not in respect of the income tax for the assessment year for which the appointment is made, but for a subsequent assessment year.
For the recovery of income tax of the said subsequent year unless there is a fresh appointment of the respondent under section 43 of the Act as a statutory agent, no such liability can be imposed on the respondent by the income tax Authorities.
[27 C F] In the present case, no notice was served on the respondent intimating that it would be treated as the agent of the non resident firms for the 22 assessment year 1962 63.
No. opportunity was given to the respondent to be heard in the matter, not was any formal order passed under section 43 by the appellant treating the respondent as the agent of the non:resident firms for the assessment ,year 1962 63.
Although a person may fail in a particular year to resist the claim that he is an agent, circumstances may alter in the next year and he may be able to resist the claim then.
Hence notice shall have to be given by the Income tax Officer for each assessment year to appoint a person as agent.
[27 G 28 A]
