The respondent was an employee of the appellant.
After a domestic inquiry in respect of alleged misconduct he was dismissed.
As an industrial dispute was pending an application was made to the Industrial Tribunal under section 33(2)(b) of the .
The tribunal held that though the enquiry was fair, the findings of the enquiry Officer were perverse and therefore it did not give its approval the order of dismissal.
By special leave the appellant came to this Court, contending that since the enquiry was held to be fair the Tribunal no jurisdiction to interfere with the findings of fact arrived at by the Enquiry Officer.
HELD: (i) Earlier decisions of 'this Court make it clear that when in Industrial Tribunal is asked to give its approval to an order of dismissal under section 33(2)(b) of the Act, it can disregard the findings given y the Enquiry Officer only if the findings are perverse.
The findings are reverse when either they are not based on legal evidence or they are such as no reasonable person could have arrived at on the basis of material before the domestic tribunal.
[739 G 740 C] Bangalore Woolien, Cotton and Silk Mills Company Ltd. vs Dasappa B) (Binny Mills Labour Union) & Ors.
[1960] II L.L.J. 39, Lard Krishna Textile Mills vs Its Workmen, ; , State lndhra Pradesh vs
section Sree Rama Rao; , , applied.
(ii) A domestic tribunal though not bound by the technical rules rout evidence contained in the Indian Evidence Act cannot ignore subsintive rules which would form part of principles of natural justice.
The principle that a fact sought to be proved must be supported by statements lade in the presence of the person against whom the enquiry is held nd that statements made behind the back of the person charged are not be treated as substantive evidence, is one of such basic principles which.
domestic tribunal cannot disregard.
The previous statement of a witness not substantive evidence unless affirmed as truthful by the witness when actually examined in the presence of the workman charged.
A finding by the domestic tribunal based not on substantive evidence but on hearsay, is perverse, because hearsay is not legal evidence.
[743 C E; 745 Khardah Co. Ltd. vs Their Workmen, ; , State of ysore V.S.S. Makapur; , and M/s. Kesoram Cotton ills Ltd. vs Gangadhar, ; , relied on.
(iii) In the present case the findings of the Enquiry Officer were held by the Industrial Tribunal to be perverse as they were not sed on legal evidence and were not justified by the material before m. [749 C E] 736
