The election of the first respondent to the Andhra Pradesh Legislative Assembly at the General Election hold in 1967 was challenged by the appellants in an election petition.
Various corrupt practices were alleged appellants to have been committed by the first respondent, his agents and supporters.
One of these was that the first respondent paid a bribe to one R who had also filed nomination papers, in order to secure his withdrawal as a candidate.
After the issues were framed the appellants made an application to the Court for impleading R but it was dismissed.
The first respondent then filed an application under section 86(1) praying for the dismissal of the election petition on the ground that there had been compliance with section 82(b) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 inasmuch as R against whom corrupt practice had been alleged had not been made a party.
The appellants filed an application seeking to with draw the allegation against R and in the alternative to implied him as are not.
They also prayed for condonation of delay in making the respondent.
The learned Judge of the High Court trying the election petition dismissed the aforesaid applications and refused to condone the delay.
The ' appellants came to this Court.
The contentions in the appeal were: (i) that the allegation against R did not amount to an allegation of corrupt practice, (ii) that section 5 and section 29(2) of the were applicable to the case and the High Court and this Court had power to condone the delay made by the election petitioner in impleading a necessary party, (iii) that R, having withdrawn from the contest was not a 'candidate '.
and (iv) that the procedure under section 99 ought to have been followed in respect of R. HELD: (i) The taint of illegal gratification attaches not only to the payer but also to the payee.
It could not therefore be accepted that the allegation against R that he had received illegal gratification did not amount to corrupt practice.[682 C D] (ii) The plea for condonation of delay in impleading R could not be accepted.
It is well settled that amendments to a petition in a civil proceeding and the addition of parties to such a proceeding are generally possible subject to the law of limitation.
But an election petition stands on a different footing.
The trial of such a petition and the powers of the court in respect ' thereof are all circumscribed bY the Representation of the People Act.
The Indian of 1963 is an Act to consolidate and amend the law of limitation 67f suits and other proceedings and for 680 purposes connected therewith.
The provisions of this Act will apply to all civil proceedings and some special criminal proceedings which can be taken in a court of law unless the application thereof has been excluded by some enactment: the extent of such application is governed by section 29(2) of the .
However the cannot apply to proceedings like an election petition inasmuch as the Representation of the People Act is a complete and self contained code which does not admit of the introduction of the principles or the provisions of the 'law contained in the Indian .
[686 H 687 B] Kamaraja Nadar vs Kunju Thevar, and Basappa vs Ayyappa, ; applied.
A. Sreenivasan vs Election Tribunal, Madras, 11 E.L.R. 278 and Tipperary case, (1875) 30 'M & H. 19, referred to.
After the amendment of the Representation of the People Act in 1966 there is now no section in the Act which equates an order made by the High Court under section 98 or section 99 to a decree passed by a civil court subordinate to the High Court.
An appeal being a creature of statute, the rights conferred on the appellant must be found within the four corners of the Act.
Sub section
(2) of the present section 116 A expressly gives this Court the discretion and authority to entertain an appeal after the expiry of the period of thirty days.
No right is however given to the High Court to entertain a petition which does not comply with the provisions of section 81, section 82 or section 117.
Any hardship resulting from this situation is a matter which can be set right only by the Legislature.
The Legislature in its wisdom has made the observance of certain formalities and provisions obligatory and failure in that respect can only be visited with a dismissal of the petition.
[688H 689 C] Vidyacharan Shukla vs Khubchand Baghel, [1964] 6 S.C.R. 129, distinguished.
O bitter: Even though the Indian does not apply to an election petition provisions like section 9 and section 10 of the providing for computation of time which are in pari materia with sections 12 (1) and 4 of the would apply to such a petition.
[689 E] (iii) A candidate who has withdrawn from the election remains a 'candidate ' within the meaning of section 79(b) and section 82(b) of the Act.
[689 F] Har Swarup vs Bril Bhushan, [1967] IS.C.R. 342, Mohan Singh vs Bhanwarlal, ; and Amin Lal vs Hunna Mat ; relied on.
(iv) Section 99 only enjoins upon the High Court to give an opportunity to a person sought to be held guilty of a corrupt practice if he was not a party to the petition, but does not apply to a person who is a necessary party.
[690 C D]
