The appellants, who had been in occupation of certain agricultural lands for more than 30 years as sub tenants., applied under section 18 of the Punjab Security of Land Tenures Act, 1953 to purchase the lands.
The final authority under the Act, held that the 'appellants were not entitled to purchase the land.
The appellants flied a writ petition in the High Court.
The High Court held that the appellants being sub tenants were not entitled to apply under section 18 of the Act.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: The Legislature did not intend to confer any rights under section 18 on the sub tenant.
The word 'landowner ' is defined in section 2(1) of the Act to mean a person defined as such in the Punjab Land Revenue Act, 1887.
Under the latter Act, a landowner does not include a tenant.
The definitions of the words 'tenant ' and 'land owner ', make it clear that 'a tenant of a tenant cannot be a tenant of the land owner, Further, [213 G; 214 E] (a) The first proviso to sub section
(1) of section 18 makes it clear that a tenant who has sublet the land or a portion, as the case may be.
to any other person during the period of his continuous occupation is disabled from applying under section 18 unless during the period of his continuous occupation the tenant was suffering from legal disability or physical infirmity or if a woman was a widow or was unmarried; [214 E F] (b) If it was intended that a sub tenant should be entitled to purchase under section 18, some provision in the Act would have been there to solve the difficulties which would arise if there was competition between the tenant and the sub tenant; [215 A B] (c) If the contention of the appellant was correct, the sub tenant would become the owner of the land under section 18(4)(b) on the purchase price being deposited.
No satisfactory answer was given 'as to what will then happen to the rights of the tenant; and [215 C] (d) Section 18(5) refers to mortgage of the land but it does not refer to the mortgage of the rights of a tenant.
[215 D]
