The respondent, by a registered lease deed, let to the appellant for a period of five years the backyard of a residential house in Madras.
The backyard consisted of vacant land.
According to the lease deed the appellant was allowed inter alia to boil and dry paddy on the said land and he was also allowed to erect a temporary shed for keeping the paddy on condition that while vacating the land he would dismantle the same.
The deed also specifically provided that the appellant "should not erect any kind of permanent super structure on the said vacant site so as to entitle him to claim in future the value thereof." In continuation of his stipulation the appellant erected permanent super structures on the land.
On the expiry of the lease of the appellant refused to vacate the land.
The respondent thereupon filed a suit for his eviction.
The appellant claimed protection under the Madras City Tenants ' Protection Act, 1921, Within the prescribed time he flied an application under section 9 of the Act asking for an order that the respondent be directed to sell the land for a price to be fixed by the court.
The trial court decreed the respondent 's suit.
The first appellate court reversed the decree of the trial court but the High Court restored it.
In appeal by special leave to this Court the questions that fell for determination were: (i) Is the tenant of a vacant site in the backyard of a residential house a tenant of land within the purview of section 2(2) of the Madras City Tenants ' Protection Act, 1921 ? (ii) Having regard to the proviso to section 12 is such a tenant entitled to the protection of sections 3 and 9 of the Act in a case when he has erected buildings on the land in contravention of an express stipulated in a registered deed ? HELD: (i) If the respondent had let the residential building together with its appurtenant land the tenancy would not be a tenancy of land within the meaning of the Act.
But the respondent did not let the building with land appurtenant thereto.
He retained the building and let the land separately.
The letting was of land and nothing else.
The appellant was not a tenant of a building as defined in section 2(1) either before or after its amendment by Madras Act XIII of 1960.
He was a tenant of land as defined in section 2(2).
[162 A C] (ii) (a) Under section 3 a tenant on ejectment is entitled to he paid as compensation the value of any building erected by him.
A tenant entitled to compensation under section 3 and against whom a suit for ejectment has been instituted is entitled to purchase the whole or part of the land by invoking the procedure under section 9.
The effect of the main part of section 12 is that nothing in any contract made by a tenant takes away or limits his rights under sections 3 and 9.
The proviso to 159 however, saves stipulations as to erections of buildings made by a tenant in a registered writing.
[162 D E] (b) A stipulation as to the erection of buildings made orally or in an unregistered writing is not protected by the proviso and a tenant erecting a building in breach of the covenant is entitled to the benefits of as. 3 and 9.
[162 E F] R.V. Naidu vs Naraindas, [1966] 1 S.C.R. 110 and Naraindas vs Naidu, referred to.
(c) A stipulation for giving vacant land after demolition of the building which the tenant has been authorised to construct thereon is not one as to the erection of buildings within the proviso to section 12.
Therefore in the present case the stipulation that the appellant could erect a temporary shed on condition that while vacating the land he would dismantle the same was not protected by the proviso to section 12.
[164 C D] Vajrapani Naidu vs New Theatre Carnatic Talkies, ; , relied on.
Vajrapuri vs New Theatres Carnatic Talkies, , 477 8, referred to.
(d) But in the present case the lease deed also contained an express stipulation that the appellant would not erect permanent structures of any kind so as to entitle him to claim the future value thereof.
This stipulation was clearly one as to the erection of buildings.
[164 E] In contravention of the stipulation as to the erection of buildings in the registered deed the appellant erected permanent structures on the land after the date of the lease.
The effect of the proviso to section 12 is that nothing in the Act affects the stipulation.
Sections 3 and 9 are subject to and controlled by section 12.
The stipulation overrides the tenant 's right under section 3.
If the tenant erects a permanent structure in contravention of the stipulation he is not entitled to any compensation under section 3.
As he is not entitled to any compensation under section 3 he cannot claim the benefit of section 9.
The High Court rightly held that the appellant was not entitled to the benefit of section 9.
[164 C 165 B]
