By notification under section 40(1) of the Defence of India Act, 1962 the powers of the Central Government in respect of certain sections of the Act including section 29 thereof were conferred on Collectors, District Magistrates, Deputy Commissioners and political officers in Nefa.
The Additional District Magistrate of Batala in the Punjab acting under section 29 of the Act passed an order requisitioning a shop belonging to the respondent which was occupied by the appellant as a tenant.
The appellant challenged the order of requisition in a writ petition to the High Court without success.
In appeal before this Court the question that fell for consideration was whether an additional District Magistrate was empowered under section 10(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure to exercise the powers under section 29 of the Defence of India Act delegated by the Central Government to District Magistrates.
HELD: The powers of requisitioning are of a very drastic nature and involve the fundamental rights in respect of property guaranteed under article 19 ( 1 ) (f) of the Constitution.
The Central Government while making the delegation of its power under section 29 of the Act must ordinarily be presumed to be fully conscious of this aspect of the matter and it was for that reason that an officer or authority of the high status of a District Magistrate in the District was empowered to exercise that power.
There was also No. reason in the present case to deviate from the normal rule that the expressions or words used in the notification must be read as such and not in any other manner unless the context requires that the latter course should be followed, and the words "District Magistrate" could not be possibly read as "Additional District Magistrate".
[207 B D] The notification issued under section 10(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure could not serve to confer on the Additional District Magistrate the powers of the District Magistrate under section 29 of the Defence of India Act for the same reasons as prevailed with.
the Nagpur High.
Court in Prabhulal Ramlal Kabras case in denying to the Additional District Magistrate the power of the District Magistrate under R. 26 of the Defence of India Rules.
[207 E, 206 E F] Prabhulal Ratnlal Kabra vs Emperor, A.I.R. 1944 Nag. 84, approved and applied.
Ajaib Singh vs State of Punjab, ; , Central Talkies Ltd. Kanpur vs Dwarka Prasad, ; and Guru Dutt vs Sohan Singh & Ant.
I.L.R. 1965 Punj.
134, referred to.
