The issue of prerogative writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, quo warrantto, prohibition and certiorari had their origin in England in the King 's prerogative power of superintendence over the due observance of law by his officials and Tribunals.
The powers of the Supreme Court as well as of all the High Courts in India under articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution respectively are very wide.
The Supreme Court as well as the High Courts in India can make an order or issue a writ in the nature of certiorari in all appropriate cases and in appropriate manner so long as the broad and fundamental principles of English law regulating the exercise of jurisdiction in the matter of granting such writs are adhered to.
A writ of certiorari can be availed of only to remove or adjudicate upon the validity of judicial acts, which expression includes the exercise of quasi judicial functions by administrative bodies or other authorities or persons obliged to exercise such functions but does not include purely ministerial acts.
In granting a writ of certiorari the superior Court does not exercise the power of an appellate Tribunal, the control exercised through it being merely in a supervisory and not appellate capacity.
It does not review or reweigh the evidence upon which the determination of the inferior Court is based nor does it substitute its own views for those of the inferior Tribunal.
A writ of certiorari is generally granted when a Court has acted without or in excess of its jurisdiction.
The want of jurisdiction may &rise from the nature of the subject matter of the proceeding or from the absence of some preliminary proceeding or the Court itself may not be legally constituted or may suffer from a certain disability by reason of extraneous circumstances.
If the jurisdiction of the Court depends upon the existence of some collateral fact the Court cannot by a wrong decision of the fact assume jurisdiction which it would not otherwise possess.
A writ of certiorari is available in those cases where a Tribunal though competent to enter upon an enquiry acts in flagrant disregard of the rules of procedure or violates the principles of natural justice where no particular procedure is prescribed.
251 A mere wrong decision cannot be corrected by a writ of certiorari as that would be using it as the cloak of an appeal in disguise but a manifest error apparent on the face of the proceeding based on a clear ignorance or disregard of the provisions of law or absence of or excess of jurisdiction, when shown, can be so corrected.
Held, that in view of the facts and circumstances of the case the High Court was not right in holding that sufficient and proper grounds existed for the issue of certiorari in the present case.
Ryots of Garabandho vs Zemindar of Parlakimedi (70 I.A. 129, 140); Election Commission, India vs Saka Venkata Subba Rao ([1953] S.C.R. 1144, 1150).
Rex vs Electricity Commissioners ([1924] 1 K.B. 171, 205); Walshall 's Overseers vs London and Northern Western Railway Co. (4 A.C. 30, 39); King vs Nat Bell Liquors Limited ([19221 2 A.C. 128, 156); Banbury vs Fuller, ; ; Queen vs Commissioners for Special Purposes of the Income Tax ; Rex vs Northumberland Compensation Appellate Tribunal ([1952] 1 K.B. 338, 357); Veerappa Pillai vs Raman & Raman Ltd., ([19521 S.C.R. 583, 594); and Halsbury, Vol.
IX, 2nd edition, page 880, referred to.
