The respondent leased to the appellant a plot of land for a certain period and stipulated in the lease deed that the appellant would give notice of renewal of the lease within a certain time.
The appellant made the request for renewal of the lease 12 days after the time fixed.
The respondent asked the appellant to vacate the premises stating, that the request being made out of time, was ineffective.
The appellant flied a suit for a declaration that he was entitled to the renewal, and stated that the delay in making the request he excused as (a) it was due to oversight; (b) the respondent had not altered her position for the worse or to her detriment within the space of 12 days; (c) neither party had treated the matter of time as being as the essence of the transaction; (d) the appellant had constructed a service station for petroleum products of immense utility to the public of the locality; and (e) the appellant was in possession of the land.
The Court dismissed the suit, and this decision was affirmed in appeal.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, .
HELD: The lease fixed a time within which the application for renewal was to be made.
The time so fixed was of essence of the bargain.
The tenant lost his right unless he made the 'application within the stipulated time.
Equity will not relieve the tenant from the consequences of his own neglect which could well be avoided with reasonable diligence.
At common law stipulations as to time in a contract giving an option for renewal of a lease of land were considered to be of the essence of the contract even if they were not expressed to be so and were construed conditions precedent.
Equity followed the common law rule in respect of such contracts and did not regard the stipulation as to time as not of the essence of the bargain, the reason being that a renewal of a lease is a privilege and if the tenant wishes to claim the privilege; he must do so strictly within the time limited for the purpose.
[241 D, E] With regard to equitable relief against a failure of the tenant to give notice of renewal within the stipulated time the relief cannot be given in equity save under special circumstances such as unavoidable accident, fraud, surprise, ignorance,, not wilful or inequitable conduct on the part of the lessor precluding him refusing to give the renewal.
[241 F] Grounds (b) *and (e) stated for the delay could not be regarded as special circumstances.
As to ground (d) it was not shown that the service station was of immense public utility.
The fact that the appellant constructed a service station was an irrelevant consideration.
Ground (c) was not established and it was not shown that the time was not the essence of the bargain.
As to ground (a) there was some evidence to show that the delay in giving the notice of renewal was due to oversight.
But it was not shown that the delay was due to any unavoidable 239 accident, excusable ignorance, fraud or surprise.
The delay arose from mere neglect on the part of the appellant and could have been avoided by reasonable diligence.
[242 E] Jamshed Khodaram Irani vs Durjorji Dhunjibhai, L.R. 43 I.A. 26, PIrate vs Nicoll , 145; Eaton vs Lyon ; ,692; Reid & Anr.
vs Grave & Ors. , 248, Ram Lal Dubey vs Secretary of State for India,, 39 C.L.J. 314 and Maharani Hemanta Kumari Devi vs Safatulla Biswas & Ors. , referred to.
