The appellant firm had a number of factories including one at Kamptee in Vidharba.
Its head office was also situated there,.
The factory at Kamptee and the head office were treated as separate establishment.
the factory being registered under the Factories Act and the Head Office under the C.P. and Berar Shops and Establishments Act, 1947.
Respondent No. 1 was originally employed at the aforesaid factory but later he was directed to work at the head office.
When the Head Office dismissed him from service he challenged the order of dismissal by an application under section 16 of the C.P. & Berar Industrial Disputes settlement Act.
The Assistant Commissioner dismissed the application holding that Respondent No. 1 at the material time was not an employee of the factory but was employed in the Head Office.
The Industrial Court refused, in revision, to interfere with the Assistant Commissioner 's order.
Respondent No. 1 filed a writ petition under article 226 of the Constitution.
The High Court observed that unless it was established that the employment of Respondent No. 1 in the factory was legally terminated it could be assumed merely because he was direct to work in the head office, that his employment was changed and the head office was substituted as his.
employer in place of the said factory.
, As the order passed by the Assistant Commissioner was not clear on this question the High Court remanded the case for disposal according to law.
The firm appealed to this Court.
HELD: (i) A contract for service is incapable of transfer unilaterally.
Such a transfer of service from one employer to another can only be effected by a tripartite agreement between the employer, the employee and the third party, the effect of which would be to terminate the original contract of service by mutual consent and to.
make a new contract between the employee and the third party.
So long as the contract of service is not terminated, a new contract is not made as aforesaid, and the employee continues to be in the employment of the employer.
Therefore, when an employer orders him to: do certain work for another person the employee still continues to be i.n his employment.
The only thing that happens in such a case is that he carries out the orders of his master.
employee has the right to claim his wages from the employer and not from the third party to whom his services are lent or hired.
It may be that such a third party may pay his wages during the time that he has hired his services, but that is because of his agreement with the employer.
that does not preclude the employee from claiming his wages from the employer.
the hirer may also.
exercise control and direction in the doing of the thing for which he is hired or even the manner in which it is to be done.
But if the employee fails to.
carry out his direction he cannot 273 dismiss him and can only complain to the employee.
The 'right of dismissal vests with the employer.
[279 &F] Such being the position in law, in the present case the High Court was right in setting aside the order of the Assistant Commissioner and the Industrial Court on the ground that unless a finding was reached on the facts of the case that the contract of service with the said factory came to an end and a fresh contract with the head office came into being, Respondent No. 1 continued to be in the employment of the factory and the head office therefore was not competent to dismiss him.
[281 F] Mersey Docks and Harbour Board vs Coggins & Griffith (Liverpool) Ltd. ; at 17, Century Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Northern Ireland Road Transport Board, [1942] A.C. 509, Quarman vs Burnett, ; , Jones vs Scullard, , Nokes vs Doncaster Amalgamated Collieries, Ltd. [1940] 3 All England Law Reports 549 and Denham vs Midland Employees Mutual Assurance Ltd., , referred to.
Jestamani Gulabrai Dholkia vs The Scindia Steam Navigation Company ; , distinguished.
