The appellant who was suspected of having taken part in a dacoity was put .up 'for identification by the witnesses in a test identification parade which was conducted by a Magistrate of the Third Class.
The Magistrate noted in Co1.
5 of the prescribed form the fact of identification by a witness, in Co1. 7 he recorded further statements made by the witness after he had purported to identify the accused.
Later the appellant was tried for the offence under section 395 at the Indian Penal Code, and convicted.
His appeal to the High Court failed.
In this Court it was urged on behalf of the appellant that the record of the test identification parade was inadmissible in evidence as the statements the rein were recorded by a Magistrate of the Third Class who was not empowered under section 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure to record such statements.
HELD: A Magistrate when called upon to conduct verification proceedings should confine his attention only to the steps to he taken to ensure that the witnesses were able to identify certain persons alleged to have been concerned in the commission at the crime or to identify certain things which were said to be the subject matter thereof.
The Code of Criminal Procedure does not sanction his transgression of this limit and recording at other statements which may have a bearing in establishing the guilt of the accused except in accordance with section 164 of the Code.
[296 C D] In the present case the Magistrate was called upon only to conduct the ' identification proceedings.
He was not required to record any confession or to interrogate witnesses to elicit any other facts or call upon them to make any statement beyond mere identification.
The statements in Co1. 7 would therefore be inadmissible in evidence.
This would however not be applicable to the record under Col. 5 [296 G] As the High Court had not taken into consideration the statements in Col. 7 its judgment could not be said to suffer 'from the infirmity of having relied on inadmissible evidence.
[296 H] Deep Chand vs State of Rajasthan, ; , applied.
Nazir Ahmad vs King Emperor, A.I.R. 1936 P.C. 253 and Ramkrishan Mithanlal Sharma vs State o/Bombay; , , referred to.
