In the Delhi region there are four textile units.
namely, the D.C.M., the S.B.M., the B.C.M., and the A.T.M. The D.C.M. and the S.B.M. are under one management.
Since 1940 they had also a common retirement benefit scheme with a scale of gratuity.
The ' workmen in all the units were receiving basic wages plus dearness allowance.
On March 4, 1958, an industrial dispute between the four units and their workmen was referred to the Industrial Tribunal and one of the matters in dispute related to gratuity.
The Tribunal in its award framed two schemes relating to the payment of gratuity, one relating to D.C.M. and S.B.M., and the other, to B.C.M. and A.T.M. They were made operative from January 1, 1964.
Both employers and employees appealed to this Court.
On the questions: (1 ) Whether in view of a settlement between the management of A.T.M. and its workmen it was open to the Tribunal to ignore the settlement and impose the scheme on the management; (2) Whether in view of the unstable financial condition of A.T.M. the burden of payment of gratuity on A.T.M. was excessive; (3) Whether a uniform scheme applicable to the entire industry on the region cum industry basis should have been adopted instead of schemes applicable to individual units; (4) Whether in determining the quantum of gratuity, basic wage alone should be taken into account and not the consolidated wage including dearness allowance; (5) Whether in deciding this question, an overall view of similar and uniform conditions in the industry in different centers in the country, could he taken into consideration; (6) Whether it was not necessary for the Tribunal to fix the age of superannuation when introducing a gratuity scheme; (7) Whether gratuity should have been awarded even in cases of dismissal for misconduct; (8) Whether provision should have been made for payment of gratuity to badli workmen irrespective of the number of days for which they worked in a year; (9) Whether the schemes should have been made operative from the date of reference; and (10) What is the scope of the expression 'average of the basic wage '.
HELD: (1) The settlement between the workmen and management of A.T.M. did not bar the jurisdiction of the Tribunal to make the Scheme of gratuity applicable to A.T.M. [340] Under the settlement all that was agreed to was, that an award should be made and if it he found that A.T.M. acquired financial stability then it would be liable to pay the gratuity to its workmen.
It was not agreed that the proceedings before the Tribunal should be dropped and that it 308 was only after A.T.M. became financially stable that a fresh claim should be made by the workmen.
[320 D F] (2) The trading accounts of A.T.M. showed that since 1959 60 the Mills had achieved some stability, and that by 1961 62 all previous losses were wiped out.
Therefore, though it was a much weaker unit than the others, it was financially stable from the date on which the scheme became operative.
[321 A C] (3) A unit wise approach in framing the gratuity scheme 'for the four units was appropriate in the present case.
[323 B C; 340 D E] No inflexible rule has been laid down by this Court that gratuity schemes should he framed only on the region cure industry principle.
In the present case, if a common scheme was framed for the entire industry in Delhi for all four units, in view of the financial condition of A.T.M., the benefits under such a scheme would be not only low, but would be lower than the existing benefits available to workmen in the D.C.M. and S.B.M. Units.
[321 C D, H; 322 E F, H] Garment Cleaning Works vs Its Workmen, [1962] 1 S.C.R. 711: and Burhanpur Tapti Mills Ltd. vs Burhanpur Tapti Mills Mazdoor Sangh, , followed.
Bharatkhand Textile Mfg. Co. vs Textile Labour Association ; , explained.
(4) The Tribunal was in error in relating the gratuity awardable to the workmen to the consolidated wage instead of the basic wage.
[340 G] (a) In determining the scope of an industrial reference words used, either in the claim or in the order of reference, should not necessarily be given the meaning they have under the Industrial Disputes Act.
Therefore, merely because the expression "wages" in the Act includes dearness allowance, the Tribunal could not base the gratuity scheme on consolidated wages.
[325 D F] (b) An industrial tribunal cannot adjudicate on disputes not referred; but when called upon to adjudicate ' whether a certain scheme, on the terms indicated in the reference should be framed, such basic guidance does not limit its jurisdiction.
The Tribunal, in this case, was in error in thinking that in determining the rate of gratuity it was limited to the number of days of service in the order of reference as the applicable multiple.
On that assumption, since the gratuity would be too low if only basic wage was chosen, it was not justified in choosing consolidated wage.
The proper procedure would have been to choose only the basic wage and fix upon a larger number of days of service as the appropriate multiple.
[327 E H] (c) The decisions of this Court in May and Baker (India) Ltd. vs their Workmen, [1961] II L.L.J. 94 (S.C.), British India Corporation vs Its Workmen, [1965] II L.L.J. 556 (S.C.), British Paints (India) Ltd. vs Its Workmen, , Hindustan Antibiotics Ltd. vs Their Workmen, and Remington Rand of India vs The Workmen, are conflicting and no principle can be extracted as to whether basic wage or consolidated wage should be considered for purposes of gratuity.
Ordinarily, in those circumstances, this Court would not have interfered with the conclusion of the Tribunal choosing consolidated wage; but, the Tribunal had failed 309 to take into account the prevailing pattern in the textile industry all over the country.
It is country wide industry and in that industry, gratuity has never been granted on the basis of consolidated wages.
[329 C F; 330 A] (d) The primary object of industrial adjudication is to adjust the relations between employers and employees with the object of promoting industrial peace.
If the basic wage alone is taken for purposes of gratuity, it would produce in the present case, a scheme which deprives the workmen of the D.C.M. and S.B.M. of benefits which had been granted to them under the voluntary scheme introduced by the management of those two units and disturb industrial peace therein.
But on that account, the Tribunal was not justified in introducing a fundamental change in the concept of gratuity granted by numerous schemes in the textile industry all over the country.
The appropriate remedy is to frame a scheme consistent with the normal pattern prevailing in the industry and introduces reservations protecting benefits already acquired.
[326 C F] (e) In the report of the Central Wage Board for the cotton textile industry, also, gratuity was directed to be given on the basis of wages excluding dearness allowance.
[330 G] (f) In D. C.M. Chemical Works vs Its Workmen, this Court affirmed the award relating gratuity to consolidated wages.
Though the unit also belonged to D.C.M. it is a unit entirely independent of the textile unit.
So, it cannot be regarded as an effective or persuasive precedent justifying variation from the normal pattern of gratuity schemes in operation in the textile industry all over the country.
[331 H; 332 A B, D E] (5) If all over the country, in textile centres, payment of gratuity.
is related to the basic wage and not to the consolidated wage any innovation Delhi region alone is likely to give rise to serious industrial disputes in other centres in the country.
If maintenance of industrial peace is a governing principle of industrial adjudication, it would be wise to maintain a 'reasonable degree of uniformity in the diverse units all over the country and not to make a fundamental departure from the prevailing pattern.the basic wage is low in all other centres, and if it does not play an important part, there is no reason why it should play, only in the Delhi region, a decisive part so as to make a vital departure from schemes in operation in other centres in the country.
The acceptance of the award the Tribunal in the present case is likely to create conditions of great instability in other parts of the country in the textile industry.
Therefore, the Tribunal 's award granting gratuity on the basis of consolidated wage could not be upheld.
[332 G H; 333 A E] (6) It is not necessary, for a gratuity scheme to be effective, that here should be fixation of the age of superannuation.
[323 C D] Burhanpur Tapti Mills Case, , referred Further, on the terms of the reference the plea of the employers to fix the age of superanuation was beyond the scope of the 'reference, nor was such fixation incidental to the framing of the scheme.
[323 H 324 c] (7) The object of providing a gratuity scheme is to provide a retiring benefit to workmen who have rendered long and unblemished service to the employer and thereby contributed to the prosperity of the employer.
It is therefore not correct to say that no misconduct, however grave, may not be visited with forfeiture of gratuity.
Misconduct could be (a) 310 technical misconduct which leaves no trail of indiscipline; (b) misconduct resulting in damage to the employers ' property which may be compensated by forfeiture of gratuity or part thereof; and (c) serious misconduct such as acts of violence against the management or other employees or riotous or disorderly behaviour in or near the place of employment which, though not directly causing damage, is conducive to grave indiscipline.
The first should involve no forfeiture, the second may involve forfeiture of an amount equal to the loss directly suffered by the employer in consequence of the misconduct, and the third will entail forfeiture of gratuity due to the workmen.
[324 F G; 336 D F; 341 A B] Garment Cleaning Works vs Its Workmen, ; (1961) I L.LJ. 513, Wenger & Ca.
vs Its Workmen, [1963] II L.L.J. 403 (S.C.), Motipur Zamindari (P) Ltd. vs Their Workmen, [1965] II L.LJ.
139 (S.C.) Calcutta Insurance Co. vs Their Workmen, [1967] II L.LJ. 1 (S.C.), and Remington Rand of India vs The Workmen, [1968] I L.L.J. 542 (S.C.).
referred to.
(8) The award does not require to be modified with regard to badli workmen.
If gratuity is to be paid )for service rendered then there are no grounds for holding that a badli workman must be deemed to have rendered service giving rise W a claim of gratuity, merely because, for maintaining his name on the record of the badli workmen, he is required to attend the mills.
[338 A B] (9) The award needs no modification with regard to the date of commencement of the schemes.
The liability of A.T.M. to pay gratuity arose after it acquired sufficient financial stability and the unit acquired financial stability only from January 1, 1964.
If in respect of the A.T.M. which had no scheme.
gratuity becomes operative from January 1, 1964, there is no reason why respect of B.C.M. any different rule should be provided for.
As regards D.C.M. and S.B.M. there was already a more advantageous gratuity scheme in operation and the workmen in those two units were not prejudiced by directing the scheme applicable to them, to commence from January 1, 1964.
If effect was given to the schemes before January 1, 19 '64, it may rake up cases in which workmen have left the establishment many years ago and it would not be conducive to industrial peace to allow such questions to be raised after a long delay.
In the absence of any principle, the matter must be decided on considerations of expediency.
[338 G H; 339 A D] (10) The expression 'average of the basic wage ' means wage earned by a workman during a month, divided by the number of days for which he had worked, and multiplied by 26 in order to arrive at the monthly wage for the computation of gratuity payable.
[333 C D] [Appropriate directions modifying the schemes were accordingly given.]
