After the reply of the respondent a railway employee in respect of certain charges p.referred against him was received, a departmental enquiry was held.
The Enquiring Officer found all the charges proved.
A show cause notice, was then served stating that it had been tentatively decided by the Chief Commercial Superintendent that the respondent should be dismissed from service.
This notice was served after the ' Chief Commercial Superintendent had recorded an order stating that he had seen the enquiry proceedings, that the procedure had been correctly followed, and that he agreed with the findings of the Enquiring Officer.
The respondent submitted his explanation; thereafter his dismissal was ordered.
The respondent filed a writ petition in the High Court.
The single Judge allowed the petition holding that the Chief Commercial Superintendent was bound to> pass a detailed order expressing his views about each of the charges and that a general agreement with the findings of the Enquiry Officer did not satisfy the requirements of r. 1713 of the Conduct and Disciplinary Rules.
This decision was affirmed by the Division Bench.
In 'appeal, this COurt, HELD: The: appeal must be allowed.
(i) Rule 1713 does not lay down any particular form or manner in which the disciplinary authority should record its findings on each charge.
All that the Rule requires is that the record of the enquiry should be considered 'and disciplinary authority should proceed ' to give its findings on each charges.
This does not and cannot mean that it is obligatory on the disciplinary authority to discuss the evidence and the facts and circumstances established at the departmental enquiry in detail and write as if it were an order or a judgment of a judicial tribunal.
The rule certainly requires the disciplinary authority to give consideration to the record of the proceedings which was done by the Chief Commercial Superintendent.
When he agreed with, the findings of the Enquiry Officer that all the charges mentioned in the charge sheet had been established it meant that he was affirming the findings on each charge and that would ' certainly fulfil the requirement of the Rule.
[345 H 346 D] (ii) There was no force in the respondent 's contention that the disciplinary authority was not entitled to have finally made up its mind before the explanation to the second show cause notice had been received by it and at a stage prior to the issuance of the notice.
The procedure which is. to be followed under article 311(2) of the Constitution of 'affording a reasonable opportunity includes the.
giving of two notices, One at the enquiry stage and the other when the competent authority as a result of the enquiry tentatively determines to inflict a particular punishment.
344 It is quite obvious that unless the disciplinary or the competent 'authority arrives at some tentative decision it will not be in a position to determine what particular punishment to inflict and a second show cause notice cannot be issued without such a tentative determination.
[346 E] Khem Chand vs Union of India & Ors., ; , followed.
