The tenants occupying the ground floor of a building set up a workshop therein.
According to the landlord 's son M, who resided in the first floor, the workshop was a nuisance and caused him great annoyance.
M and tenants agreed to refer the dispute to arbitration.
The landlord was not a party to the agreement.
The award directed that the tenants would run workshop up to certain time and ' thereafter remove the machinery.
and on that day give.
vacant possession of the ground floor to the landlord.
The award was signed by the arbitrators, the tenants, and M, and it was attested by the landlord.
It was filed in Court under section 14 of the Arbitration Act.
The tenants and M stated in Court that they had no objections against the award.
The Court pronounced judgment according to the award and decree followed.
On the expiry of the date fixed for removing the, machinery and for vacating the premises, M and the landlord jointly applied for the execution of the decree.
The tenants objected under section 47, Code of Civil Procedure to the execution contending that (i) the award was beyond the, scope of the reference and was invalid and the decree based on the invalid award was void; (ii) the decree was passed in contravention of the Delhi and Ajmer Rent Control Act, 1952 and was void; and (iii) the landlord could not execute the decree.
HELD: (i) The award was filed in Court under section 14 of the Arbitration Act and on notice to the tenants and in their presence a decree was passed according to the award under section 17.
It was not open to the tenants then to take the objection that the award was in excess of the authority on the arbitrators or was otherwise invalid.
Having regard to the scheme of ss, 14 to 17 and 31 to 33 all questions regarding the validity of the award had to be determined by the Court in which the award was filed and by no other Court.
An award which is invalid on any ground can be set aside under section 30.
After a decree is passed on the award it is not open to the parties to the reference to raise any objection as to the validity of the award.
As between them the decree conclusively determines that the award is valid.
Nor can the decree be pronounced to be a nullity oh the ground that the award was invalid.
[435 E G] Rabindra Deb Manna vs Jogendra Deb Manna A.I.R. 1923 Cal. 410, and Shib Kristo Daw vs Sottish Chandra Dutt approved.
(ii) The decree for delivery of possession to the landlord was a nullitv and could not be enforced in execution.
Section 13(1) of the Delhi and Ajmer Rent Control Act, 1952 prohibited the Court, from passing a decree or order for recovery of possession of any premises in 433 favour of a landlord against a tenant except in such a suit or proceeding instituted by the landlord against the tenant for recovery of possession on one of the grounds stated therein, and unless the Court was satisfied that a ground of eviction existed.
The decree in the present case was on the face of it one for recovery of possession of the premises in favour of a landlord against a tenant.
The Court passed the decree according to an award under section 17 of the in a proceeding to which the landlord was not a party without satisfying itself that a ground of eviction existed.
[436 C E] Peachey Property Corpn.
Robinson [1966] 2 All E.R.981, applied.
(iii) The decree in so far as it directed the removal of the machinery from the premises was clearly.
valid and separable from the rest of the decree and could be executed by M.
