The appellant entered into a contract in respect of certain forests in a Jagir in Madhya Pradesh.
Under el. 1 of the contract, he was entitled to cut teak trees of more than 12 inches girth.
Under cl. 5, the stumps of trees after cutting, had to be 3 inches high.
After the passing of the Abolition of Proprietary Rights (Estates, Mahals.
Alienated Lands) Act, 1950 a notification was issued vesting the estate in the State.
and the appellant was prohibited from cutting timber in exercise of his rights under the contract.
After some negotiations, a letter was written on February 1, 1955, to the appellant, on behalf of the State, that the appellant 's claim to cut trees under the contract would be considered only if he gave up his claim to a sum of Rs. 17,000 which he had already paid under the contract and was willing to pay a further sum of Rs. 17,000.
The appellant, by his letter dated February 5, 1955 expressed his willingness to pay the additional sum but reserved his right to claim a refund of the first sum.
The State Government rejected the appellant 's right to cut trees.
He then filed a Suit claiming specific performance of the contract on the grounds: (1) The forest and trees did not vest in the State under the Act; (2) Even if they vested, the standing timber, having been sold to the appellant, did .not vest in the State; and (3) In any event a new contract was completed on February 5, 1955, and the appellant was entitled to its specific performance.
In appeal to this Court, HELD: (1) The forest and trees vested in the State under the Act.360 F G] Mahadeo vs State of Bombay, [1959] Supp.
2 S.C.R. 339; State of M.P.v.
Yakinuddin; , and Mulamchand vs State of M.P., C.A No 393 of 1965 dated February 20, 1968, followed.
(2) Under the contract the appellant had not become the owner of the trees as goods.
The property in the timber could pass to the appellant only when the trees are felled, but before they were felled, the trees had vested in the State.
[391 B] Under el.
5 of the contract there was no sale of the whole of the trees, and, under cl. 1 it had to be ascertained which trees fell within the description of trees which the appellant was entitled to cut.
Till that was done they were not 'ascertained goods ' within section 19 of the .
[391 A B] (3) Even if the letter of ist February could be treated as an offer, there was no unconditional acceptance of the offer, because, there was 381 a reservation by the appellant of his right to claim refund in his letter dated 5th February and hence there was no concluded contract.
[391 C D]
