The appellant a tenant of.
the respondent l(a big, land owner).
applied.
for purchase of the.land cultivated by him under section 18 of the Punjab Security of Land Tenures Act, 1953 alleging that he had been in possession of the land for more than.
six years and the land was outside the reserved area of the land oWner.
The respondent alleged.
that th land was reserved.
The Assistant Collector .held that the appellant was entitled.
to purchase the land '.
The respondent filed an appeal t the Collector.
The Collector dismissed the appeal.
The responder then filed a revision to the Commissioner.
While the revision was pending the Financial Commissioner gave a decision in another matter that a selection by land owner under s2 5B(1) for permissible area under the Act had the same force as. 'reservation.under section 5, of the Act.
There respondent thereupon filed an application stating that the entire land dispute was included in the permissible area selected by him under section 5 B and as this disentitled the tenant from purchasing the land prayed that he may be allowed to raise this plea which involved a question of jurisdiction.
The Commissioner satisfied himself that the selection document was filed within time and felt that the land could not purchased and submitted the case to the Financial Commissioner with the recommendation that the.
revision be accepted.
The Financial Commissioner however dismissed the revision holding that as the respondent had not put the plea of selection before Assistant Collector or Collect he could not be allowed to do so at that stage.
The respondent filed a petition in the High Court and the High Court allowed the petitioning that the Financial Commissioner should have accepted the recommendation made by the Commissioner.
In appeal this Court, HELD: The Financial Commissioner should have gone into question whether Commissioner 's report was acceptable or not on merits The question whether the land sought to be purchased by the appellant was part of the reserved or selected area was a jurisdictional f Under section 18 of the Act a tenant is only entitled to purchase land is not included in the reserved or selected area of the land ow Under section 18(2) the Assistant Collector is only authorized to determine the value .of the land after making such enquiries as he thinks fit.
is not authorized expressly to go into the question whether the sought to be purchased is included in the reserved or selected are the land owner or not.
But he should go into these questions be embarking or determining the price and by wrongly deciding.
449 tion he cannot finally confer on himself jurisdiction to deal with the matter.
The revisional power of the Financial Commissioner under section 24 of the Act read with section 84 of the Tenancy Act being the same as that of the High Court in exercise of that power the Financial Commissioner had jurisdiction to go into the question whether the Assistant Collector or the Collector had rightly assumed jurisdiction.
[453 E G] As the question whether the selection by the land owner was made in time and whether it was genuine and valid had to be decided the matter must be remanded to the Financial Commissioner for decision on these points.
Chaube Jagdish Prasad vs Chaturvedi, [1959] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 733, 746 and Jagannath Ramchandra Datar vs Dattaraya Balwant Hingmire, C.A. No. 585 of 1964 dated 9 9 1966, followed.
Rai Brij Raj Krishna vs
S.K. Shaw ; , Queen vs Commissioners for Special Purposes of Income tax, and Colonial Bank of Australia vs Willan L.R. , held inapplicable.
