In connection with an investigation in January 1958 relating to another case, the appellant, who was employed as a railway guard on the Eastern Railway, was found in possession of pecuniary resources disproportionate to his known sources of income.
As it was thought that he ' had come in possession of these pecuniary resources by committing acts of misconduct defined in clauses (a) ,to (d) of section 5(1) of the Prevention of Corruption Act 2 of 1947, on the recommendation of the Deputy Superintendent of Police for the area, an Inspector of Police was appointed by an Order dated 27th February 1959 of the Magistrate, Ist Class, Sahibganj, to investigate the case against the appellant.
The Investigating Officer, upon completion of the investigation and after obtaining sanction of the appropriate authority for prosecution of the appellant, submitted a charge sheet on March 31, 1960.
The Trial Court convicted the appellant under section 5(2) of the Act and s.411 I.P.C.
In appeal, by a judgment dated September 14, 1965,.
the High Court set aside the conviction and sentence of the appellant under section 411 I.P.C. but confirmed his conviction under section 5(2) of the Act and reduced the sentence awarded by the Trial Court.
On December 18, 1964 Parliament enacted the Anti Corruption Laws (Amendment) Act 40 of 1964 which repealed sub section (3) of section 5 of the.
Act and enlarged the scope of criminal misconduct in section 5 by inserting a new clause (e) in section 5(1) of the Act.
In appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant (i) that section 5(3) of the Act having been repealed while the appeal was pending in the.
High Court, the presumption enacted in section 5(3) was not available to prosecuting authorities after the repeal 'and it was not open to the High Court to invoke the presumption in considering the case against the appellant; the presumption contained in section 5(3) was a rule of procedural law and as alterations in the form of procedure are always retrospective in character, unless it was provided otherwise, it was not open to the High Court to apply the presumption in the present case; (ii) that the statutory safeguards under section 5A of the Act had not been complied with as the Magistrate had not given reasons for entrusting the investigation to a Police Officer below the rank of Deputy Superintendent Police; and (iii) that the charge against the appellant under section 5(2) the Act was defective as there were no specific particulars of misconduct as envisaged under clauses (a) to (d) of section 5(1) of the Act, nothing was stated about the amounts the appellant took as bribes and the 412 persons from whom he had taken such bribes so that the, appellant had no opportunity to rebut the presumption raised under section 5(3) of the Act and to prove his innocence.
HELD: Dismissing the appeal v: (i) The High Court was right invoking the presumption under section 5(3) of the Act .even though it was repealed on December 18, 1964 by the Amending Act.
Although as a general rule the amended law relating to procedure operates retrospectively, there is another equally important principle, which is also embodied in section 6 of the General Clauses Act, that a statute should not be so construed 'as to create new disabilities or obligations or impose new duties ties in respect of transactions which were complete at the time the amending Act came into force.
The effect of the application of this principle is that pending cases although instituted under the old Act but still pending are governed by the new procedure ' under the amended law, but whatever procedure was correctly adopted and concluded under the old law cannot be opened again for the purpose of applying the new procedure.
In the present case, the trial of the appellant was taken up when section 5(3) of the Act was still operative.
The conviction of the appellant was pronounced on March 31, 1962 long before the amending Act was promulgated.
It Was not therefore possible to accept the contention that the conviction pronounced by the trial Court had become illegal or in any way defective in law because of the amendment to procedural law made on December 18, 1964.
[417 G; 418 D] James Gardner v, Edward A. Lucas, at p. 603; King V, Chandra Dharrna, ; In re a Debtor [1936] .1
Ch.237 and In re Vernazza; ; referred to.
(ii) Although the Magistrate 's order on the, petition filed by the DepUty Superintendent of Police suggesting that the Inspector of Police be empowered to investigate the case does not state any reasons for his granting the permission sought, the High Court had rightly concluded 'that as the Magistrate was working in the area for a period of two years prior to the passing of the order in question he must have known that the Deputy Superintendent of Police could not devote his whole.
time to the investigation of the case and therefore the inspector of Police .should be entrusted to do the investigation.
[419 F] (iii) The charge, as framed, dearly stated that the appellant accepted gratification other than legal remuneration and obtained pecuniary advantage .by corrupt ,and illegal means.
The absence of sufficient particulars could not invalidate the charge though it may be a ground for asking for.
better particulars.
The appellant never complained in the trial court or the High Court that the charge did not contain the necessary particulars, he , was.
misled on that account in his defence.
In view this and the provisions of section 225 Cr.
P.C. it could not be said that charge was defective.
[421 F]
