The appellant 's election to the M.P. Legislative Assembly in February 1957 was challenged by an election petition mainly on the allegation ,that he was disqualified from being a candidate as he held certain offices of profit under the Government.
The trial Judge allowed the election petition holding that the appellant held an office, of profit under the Government being on the panel of lawyers prepared by the Central 'and Western Railway Administration and having been at the material time a Professor of Law in a Government College on a regular salary of Rs. 250 per month; it was also held that on the material before the court it could not be said that the appellant held the post of the President Member of a Tribunal constituted under section 73 of the Madhya Pradesh Town Improvement Trust Act, 1960.
On appeal to this Court, HELD: Dismissing the appeal: (i) "By office" is meant the right and duty to exercise an employment or a position to which certain duties are attached.
The appellant held such an office by his enagagement on the, basis of a letter of appointment dated February 6, 1962 addressed to him by ' the Chief Commercial Superintendent of the Railway and his reply thereto whereby he accepted certain obligations and was required to discharge.
certain duties.
lie was not free to take a brief against the Railway Administration.
Whether or not the Railway Administration thought it proper to entrust any particular case to him, it was his duty to watch 'all cases coming up fog hearing against the Railway Administration and to give timely intimation of the same to the office of the Chief Commercial Superintendent.
Even if no instructions regarding any particular case were given to him, he was expected to appear in court and obtain adjournment.
In effect this cast a continuing duty on him to protect the interests of the Railway as long as his engagement continued.
The fact that the appellant would be paid only if he appeared in a case and the possibility of the Railway 's not engaging him was a matter of no moment.
An office of profit realy means an office in respect of which a profit may accrue.
It is not necessary that it should be possible to predicate of a holder of an office of profit that he was bound to get a certain amount of profit irrespective of the duties discharged by him.
[426 F 427 C] Although it was open to the appellant to terminate the engagement at any time and he might even commit a breach of etiquette by 'accepting a brief against the Railway without formally putting.
an end to the engagement that would ' not detract from the position that he was in duty bound to work for the Railway Administration and see that it causes did not suffer by default.
So long as the engagement was not put an end to, he was holding an office of profit in the Railway Adminis 423 tration, and as such was disqualified for being elected to the Legislative Assembly of Madhya Pradesh.
The Statesman (Private) Ltd. vs
H.R. Deb and others ; ; Mcmillan vs Guest [1942] Appeal Cases 561; referred to.
[427 E F] (ii) Although it was not necessary for the purpose of the present case to express any final opinion on the point, on the facts, there was great force in the appellant 's contention that he did not hold an office of profit by being a Professor of Law in a Government College on a salary of.
Rs. 250 per month.
The Management of the College in question had been handed ' over W the University The appellant was only a temporary Government servant.
He had never become permanent nor had a ,lien on the post.
He was sent on deputation to the University in 1959 and in the ordinary course of things such deputation would have come to an end in 1964 when he attained the age of superannuation.
No order was passed in respect of him at any time either by the Government or by the University until after the firing of the election petition.
[430 F 431 B] (iii) On the facts, it was difficult to hold that the appellant held the office: of profit as the President of a Tribunal constituted under section 73 of the Madhya Pradesh Town Improvement Trust Act, 1950.
He had never been approached for the purpose nor had he ever signified his willingness to act under the terms of the notification.
He had never taken charge of 'any office nor had he ever discharged any function with regard to the office.
[431 G]
