The appellants and one H were tried on the charge that on July 2, 1962 they had formed an unlawful assembly and in prosecution of the common object of the unlawful assembly i.e., to rescue their cattle which had damaged the maize crop of one B and had on that account beer detained by the villagers, made an assault on persons resisting the rescue causing injuries to various persons including B as a result of which B died.
The Trial Court, relying on the evidence of certain witnesses, held that H had caused injuries with a spear to B which resulted in her death.
It therefore convicted H of an offence under section 302 I.P.C. and the appellants for an offence under section 302 read with section 149 I.P.C.
The High Court appeal acquitted H as it entertained a doubt about his presence in the unlawful assembly, but confirmed the conviction of the other appellants.
In appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellants that because of the acquittal of H, the conviction of the other appellants for an offence under section 302 read with section 149 I.P.C. could not, in law, be sustained; when according to the prosecution case H was responsible for causing the: death of B and he was acquitted, the appellants who were charged with sharing the common object of the unlawful assembly could not be convicted for the vicarious liability arising out of the offence committed in prosecution of the common object of the unlawful assembly.
HELD: Dismissing the appeal: The order of conviction of the appellants for the offence under section 302 read with section 149 I.P.C. was not rendered illegal because H was held not to have been a member of the unlawful assembly.
[56.2 B] There was clear evidence to show that B was one of the persons upon whom an attack was made and injuries inflicted by the unlawful assembly of which the appellants and others were members.
On the findings of the High Court, the offender who actually caused injuries to B could not be ascertained: it follows that the injuries were, caused to B by some members of the unlawful assembly.
[561 H] Failure to prove the presence of the named offender among the members of the unlawful assembly will not affect the criminality of those who are proved to be members of the assembly if the other conditions of the applicability of section 149 I.P.C. be established.
[56.1 A]
