The appellant was tried for causing the death of his mother by inflicting injuries with a spear.
The Sessions Judge convicted the appellant of the offence of culpable homicide not amounting to murder, and sentenced him to suffer rigorous imprisonment for seven years.
An appeal preferred by him from jail was summarily dismissed by the High Court.
Thereafter the State filed an 'appeal against the order acquitting the appellant of the offence of murder.
The High Court issued notice to the appellant and after hearing counsel on both sides, convicted the appellant of the offence of murder, and in substitution of the sentence imposed by the Court of Session, sentenced him to suffer rigorous imprisonment for life.
Appeal was filed in this Court by special leave.
On behalf of the appellant it was urged that the judgment of the High Court dismissing summarily the appellant 's appeal against conviction under section 304 became final, and that the judgment of the Court of Sessions got merged into the judgment of the High Court and thereafter the High Court was incompetent in an appeal filed by the State to modify that order and convict the appellant for the offence of murder.
Reliance was placed on sections 369 and 430 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
HELD: (i) The right to appeal against the order of acquittal is expressly conferred upon the State by section 417 of the Code and section 369 does not purport to place any restriction upon the exercise of that right.
Section 369 ' occurs in Chapter XXVI and prima facie applies to judgments of the courts of first instance.
[571] (ii) Finality of the judgment of the Appellate Court disclosed by section 430 is subject to two restrictions i.e. the judgment may be set aside or modified in an appeal under section 417 of the Code by the High Court and in exercise of the power conferred upon the courts under Ch.
XXXII which deals with the exercise of power to entertain references and revisions.
Judgment of a High Court in appeal is not subject to the exercise of any appellate or revisional power exercisable under the Code.
The exception declared in section 430 therefore only applies to judgment of a court subordinate to the High Court exercising appellate power.
[571 G] (iii) There is no warrant for the argument that when an appeal preferred by a person convicted of an offence is dismissed summarily by the High Court under section 421 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
the judgment of the trial court gets merged in the judgment of the High Court and cannot thereafter be modified.
The summary dismissal of the appeal of the person accused, binds the accused but not the State which has not been heard.
[572 A, D] If after the appeal of the accused is summarily dismissed the State or the complainant seeks to prefer an appeal against the order of acquit 570 tal, the High Court is not prohibited by any express provision or implication 'arising fro.m the scheme of the Code from entertaining the appeal.
When, however, the High Court issues notice to the State in an appeal by the accused against the order of conviction and the appeal is heard and decided on the merits all questions determined by the High Court either expressly or by necessary implication must be deemed to be finally determined, and there is no scope for reviewing those orders in any other proceeding: The reason of the rule: is not so much the principle of merger of the judgment of the, trial court into the judgment of the High Court, but that a decision rendered by the High Court, after hearing the parties on a matter in dispute is not liable to be reopened between the same parties in any subsequent enquiry.
[572 E, F] (iv) The fact that at the earlier hearing the High Court called for the record of the ease from the court of session in exercise of the power under section 421(2) and after persuing the record dismissed the appeal, was not relevant in determining the legal effect of the order of the High Court.
[575 D] U.J.S. Chopra vs State of Bombay, ; , applied.
Pratap Singh vs State of Vindhya Pradesh (Now Madhya Pradesh) ; , distinguished.
State vs Babulal and Bherumal, A.I.R. 1956 Raj. 67, State vs Kalu, A.I.R. 1952 M.B. 81 and State vs Mansha Singh Bhagwant Singh, I.L.R. (1958) Punjab 1475, referred to.
