The returned candidate 'at an election to the Gujarat Legislative Assembly held in February 1967 had taken his oath as prescribed by article 173 of the Constitution in the Gujarati version of the relevant form set out in the Third Schedule to the Constitution.
In the said version the term "Legislative Assembly" was translated as "Rajya Sabha".
In an election petition it was urged that the term "Raiya Sabha" was equivalent not to "Legislative Assembly" but to "Legislative Council", 'and there fore the oath was not taken by the returned candidate in the proper form and his election was liable to be set aside.
The High Court having decided against the election petitioner appeal against its judgment was filed in this Court.
HELD: (i) The word 'sabha ' means a gathering or a meeting or an assembly of persons for a definite purpose.
Giving the word 'sabha ' the said meaning in the word 'Raiya Sabha ' it would not be possible to hold that the oath was not in compliance with the form prescribed in article 173(a) of the Constitution.
No doubt by common parlance in many of the States in Northern India the expression 'Rajya Sabha ' has come to mean the Legislative Council of a State while the State Legislative Assembly is known as Rajya Vidhan Sabha.
But in the absence of any authoritative translation of the expression "State Legislative Assembly" in Gujarati the popular meaning of the expression could not give proper guidance.
The State of Gujarat has no Legislative Council of the State.
The Legislature consists of one house only, namely, the State Legislative.
Assembly.
There could therefore be no misapprehension either in the person taking the oath or in the Returning Officer when he was accepting the nomination paper with the oath in Gujarati form that the candidate who afterwards won the election was being nominated as a candidate to fill a seat in the Legislative Council of the State and not in the Legislative Assembly.
[630 D G] As the essential requirements of the oath given in the form in the Third Schedule were not deviated from in the Gujarati form used in this case it could not be held that the oath subscribed in this case was not in compliance with article 173 merely because of the popular meaning of the word "Rajya Sabha".
(ii) Non, compliance with the provisions of a statute or Constitution will not necessarily render a proceeding invalid if by considering its nature, its design and the consequences which follow from its non observance one is not led to the conclusion that the legislature or the Constitution makers intended that there should be no departure from the strict words used, [633 G H] 628 In the present case the essential requirement of article 173 read with Form VII A was that the person taking the oath or making the affirmation would bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution and would uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India.
The words which precede this portion are merely descriptive of the person and of his nomination as a candidate.
It is reasonable to think that a mere misprint in the form of the oath or a mere inaccuracy in rendering the expression "Legislative Assembly" in Gujarati would not be fatal to the election of the candidate, if otherwise valid.
[634 A] Kamaraja Nadar vs Kunju Thevar, , Murarka Radhey Shyam Ram Kumar vs Roop Singh Rathore, ; ; Ch.
Subbarao vs Member, Election Tribunal, Hyderabad, ; ; State of U.P. vs Manbodhan Lal Srivastava; , and State if Punjab vs Sat Pal Dang and State of Punjab vs Dr. Bolder Prakash & Ors.
, ; , applied.
