The appellant imported 1,65,000 pieces Chinese silver dollars from Tibet through Sikkim State under two Reserve Bank import licences.
As there were two licences the dollars were divided into two lots.
One lot bore the mark 'H.D. ' and the other 'H.N. ' The appellant made two applications hearing Nos. 32 and 34 to the Officer in charge, Land Customs Station, for the grant of permits for passing the goods across the frontier.
Application No. 32 related to the lot marked 'H.N. ' and the application No. 34 related to the lot marked 'H.D. ' On May 16, 1957 the two consignments arrived at the land customs station, Kalimpong and were examined and appraised by the land customs officer in charge of the station.
On the duty being paid, the officer endorsed the applications certifying that the duty was paid and permitting the import of the goods. 'The consignments there were then delivered at Siliguri to the carriers for carriage by air to Dum Dum.
On May 17, 1957 one consignment together with application No. 34 was sent by plane from the Sonapur airstrip and on the same date reached Dum Dum and was delivered to the appellant at Calcutta.
On May 18, 1957 the Range Officer, Matidhar seized the second consignment bearing the marks 'H.D. ' together with application No. 32 when they were about to be despatched from the Sonapur airstrip.
The seizure was made under section 5(3) of the Land Customs Act on the ground that the mark on the consignment was 'H.D. 'whereas the accompanying import application No. 32 related to the consignment marked 'H.N. ' The Collector of Land Customs, Calcutta after hearing the appellant held that offences under section 5(3) and section 7(1) of the , and section 167(8) read with of the had been committed by the appellant.
He directed confiscation of the goods under those sections read with section 23A of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947.
Departmental remedies having failed the appellant filed a writ petition in the High Court.
Appeal in this Court was filed by the appellant with certificate.
The questions that came up for consideration were inter alia: (i) whether the seizure and confiscation.
of the goods was authorised by section 5(3) of the , and (ii) whether the finding that the appellant had committed offences under that section and other provisions of law was perverse and liable to be quashed.
HELD: (i) Section 5(3) of the .
by itself does not require that all imported goods must always at all times, and at all places be accompanied by a permit.
After the permit the goods become a part and parcel of the mass of other like goods in India.
There is no duty 534 to keep the permit with the consignment for aH times and at all places.
Nor is the importer under a duty to keep the consignment in his hands.
He can sell portions of it to different buyers and obviously he could not give the permit to every consumer.
[540 G H] Before March 29, 1968 when the Central Board of Revenue framed the Chinese Silver Dollars (Import) Rules, there was no provision in the Act or Rules in force which required the appellants to keep the permits at Sonapur airstrip with the dollars seized on that date.
Section 5(3) was not infrinrged when the carriers did not produce the permit concerning the goods at the Sonapur airstrip on May 18, 1957, and the goods could not be confiscated under section 5(3).
[541 C] (ii) Nor were the goods liable to confiscation under section 7(1) of the .
There was no evidence to show that the seized dollars were not covered by licences.
On the materials on record the conclusion was irresistible that due to the inadvertence of the carriers the permits were inter changed and that application No. 34 was sent with 'H.N. ' consignment and application No. 32 was kept with 'H.D. ' consignment.
No inference of smuggling could be drawn from the fact that 'H.D. ' consignment was found with application No. 32.
In the circumstances the finding that the appellant had smuggled the goods and was guilty of an offence under section 7(1) of the must be characterised as perverse.
[541 D E; 542 B C] (iii) It was also not proved that the appellant committed any offence ' under sections 8(1) and 23A of the Foreign Exchange Regulations Act read with sections 19 and 167(8) of the .
Although the offence under these sections may be proved by circumstantial evidence in the present case there was no evidence direct or circumstantial to prove the offence.
[542 D] Issardas Daulat Ram vs Union of India, [1962] Supp.1 S.C.R. 358, referred to.
(iv) Having regard to the facts on the record no tribunal could reasonably come to the conclusion that the dollars were liable to confiscation if they properly understood the relevant enactments.
In the circumstances the order of the Collector confiscating the goods was liable to be quashed by a writ of certiorari.
[542 F] Regina vs Medical Appeal Tribunal, ; , 582, applied.
