In petitions for the writ of habeas corpus under article 32 of the Constitution for release from detention under orders passed under section 3(2) of the Prevention of Detention Act, HELD: The reasonableness of the satisfaction of the detaining authority cannot be; questioned in a Court of law; the adequacy of the material on which the said satisfaction purports to rest also cannot be examined in a Court of law.
But if any of the grounds furnished to the detent are found to be irrelevant while considering the application of cls.
(i) to (iii) of section 3(1)(a) of the Act and in that sense are foreign to the Act, the satisfaction of the detaining authority on which the order of detention is based is open to challenge and the detention order liable to be quashed.
[640 H 641 C] Even if any one of the grounds or reasons that led to the satisfaction was irrelevant, the order of detention would be invalid even if there were other relevant grounds, because it could never be certain to what extent the bad reasons operated on the mind of the authority concerned or whether the detention order would have been made at all if only one or two good reasons had been before them.
Similarly, if some of the ground supplied to the detent are so vague that they would virtually deprive the detent of his statutory right of making a representation, that again may make the order of detention invalid.
If, however, the grounds on which the order of detention proceeds are relevant and germane, to the matters which fall to be considered under section 3(1)(a) of the Act, it would not be open to the detenu to challenge the order of detention by arguing that the satisfaction of the detaining authority is not reasonably based on any of the said grounds.
Though the satisfaction of the detaining authority contemplated by section 3(1)(a) is the subjective satisfaction of the said authority, cases may arise: where the detenu may challenge the validity of his detention on the ground of mala fides.
[641 B F, 644 C D] In the present case, (1) with respect to some of the petitioners three of the grounds of detention related to cases of assault on solitary individuals either by knife or by using crackers.
It could not be held that these grounds had any relevance or proximate connection with the maintenance of public order.
Therefore the orders of detention of these petitioners were illegal and ultra virex.
The expression "public order" in section 3 (1) of the Act does not take in every kind of infraction of law.
When two people quarrel and fight 'and assault each other inside a house or in a street, it may be said that there is disorder but not public disorder.
Such cases are dealt with under the powers vested in the executive authorities under the provisions of ordinary criminal law but the culprits cannot be detained on the 636 ground that they were, disturbing public order.
The contravention of any law always affects order but before it can be said to affect public order, it must affect the community or the public at large.
A line of demarcation between serious and aggravated forms of disorder which directly affect the community or injure the public interest must be drawn and the, relatively minor breaches of peace of a purely local significance which primarily injure specific individuals and only in a secondary sense public interest.
A mere disturbance of law and order leading to disorder is thus not necessarily sufficient for action under the Preventive Detention Act but a disturbance which will affect public order comes within the scope of the Act.
A District Magistrate is therefore entitled to take action under section 3( 1 ) of the Act to prevent subversion of public order but not in aid of maintenance of law and order under ordinary circumstances.
The difference= between the concepts of 'public order ' and 'law and order ' is similar to the distinction between 'public ' and 'private ' crimes in the realm of jurisprudence.
In considering the material elements of crime, the historic Jests which each community applies are intrinsic wrongfulness and social expediency which are the two most important factors which have led to the designation of certain conduct as criminal. 'Public ' and 'private ' crimes have been distinguished in the sense that some Offences primarily injure specific persons and only secondarily the public interest, while others directly injure the public interest and affect individuals only remotely.
[641 H 642 D; 643 G, H] The State of Bombay vs Atma Ram: Sridhar Vaidya, ; ; Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia vs State of Bihar, ; ; Shibban Lal Saksena vs The State of Uttar Pradesh, ; , followed.
(2) One of the grounds of detention supplied to some of the other petitioners, stated, that they had become a menace to the society and there had been disturbances and confusion in the lives of peaceful citizens of the locality and that the inhabitants thereof were in constant dread of disturbances of public order.
The ground was extremely vague and gave no particulars to enable the petitioners to make an adequate representation against the order of detention and this infringed the Constitutional safeguard provided under article 22(5).
Therefore, the orders of detention of these petitioners were illegal and ultra vires.
The Constitutional requirement that the ground must not be vague must be satisfied with regard to each of the grounds communicated to the person detained subject to the claim of privilege under el.
(6) article 22 of the Constitution and therefore even though one ground was vague and the other grounds were not vague, the detention was not in accordance with procedure established by law and was therefore illegal.
[648 B C] Dr. Ram Krishan Bhardwaj vs The State of Delhi, ; , followed.
