The appellant was the Head Clerk to the Executive Electrical Enginear of the State Electricity Board He was convicted under section 5(2) read with section 5(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act on the allegation that on July 8, 1961 he had committed an offence in obtaining a bribe for the Executive Engineer by resorting to corrupt and illegal means or by otherwise abusing his position 'as a public servant.
An appeal against the conviction was dismissed by the High Court.
In appeal to this Court by special leave, the High Court 's findings on questions of fact were not challenged but it was contended that upon these findings the appellant could not be convicted of the charges because he was not a "public servant" within the language of section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act or section 21 at the Indian Penal Code.
It was further contended that the appellant was performing only routine clerical duties and could not be treated as an 'officer ' within the meaning of section 21(12)I.P '.C.
HELD: On the facts found the appellant was an officer in the service or pay of a Corporation as defined in section 21(12), I.P.C. and therefore a public servant ' within the meaning of that section and also of section 2 of the Prevention of Corruption Act.
[691 D] The true test in order to determine whether the appellant was 'an officer ' of the Corporation within the meaning of section 21(12), Indian Penal Code, would be: (1) whether he was in the service or pay of the Corporation, and (2) whether he was himself either armed with some authority or representative character by the Corporation; or whether his duties were immediately auxiliary to those of some one who was armed with such authority or representative character.
In the present case, the High Court found that the appellant was a person performing duties immediately auxiliary to those of the Executive Engineer who was the Head of the Office.
The very designation "Head Clerk" denotes that there are other clerks attached to the office who occupy subordinate positions in relation to the Head Clerk and the duties of the Head Clerk from the nature of things are bound to be immediately auxiliary to the Head of the Office.
[691 A] Reg.
vs Ramaiirao Jivbaji, ; Nazamuddin vs Queen Empress, I.L.R. ; Emperor vs Karam Chand Gobind Ram,A.I.R. ; and G. 4.
Monterio vs The State of Ajmer, A.I.R.1957 S.C. 13; referred to.
683 Held Also: The appellant cannot be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 81 of the because he was not acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of that Act.
On a plain reading of section 81 of the the officers and servants of the State Electricity Board are deemed to be public servants only when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of that Act.
So far as the receiving of a bribe is concerned, it cannot be brought within the scope of acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of the Act.
Therefore the appellant while taking the bribe, cannot be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21, I.P.C. in view of the language of section 81 of the .
[687 E] Gill vs The King.
75 I. A. 41; Hori Ram Singh vs The Crown, ; and State of Maharashtra vs Jagatsing Charansingh, ; ; referred to.
