A hire purchase agreement was entered into between the appellants and respondent No. 1 Under that agreement a motor transport truck was made available to respondent No. 1 for doing transport business.
The agreement contained an arbitration clause for settlement of disputes When disputes arose reference was made to an arbitrator.
Respondent No. 3 a praetising lawyer was named as the arbitrator.
During the pendency of the arbitration proceedings respondents Nos. 1 and 2 filed a civil suit in which they claimed a declaration that the hire purchase agreement was brought about by fraud and was not binding on them on various grounds.
The suit was registered and the court ordered summons to be issued to the two appellants.
A notice was also issued by respondent No. 1 to the appellants and the arbitrator with a copy of the plaint.
When the arbitrator made an award after recording the evidence of the appellants respondents Nos. 1 and 2 filed an application under section 3 of the Contempt of Courts Act on the allegation on that the appellants and respondent No. 3 had committed contempt of court in proceeding with the arbitration reference in spite of the notice under section 35 of the Arbitration Act being given and in spite of the knowledge of the suit which was filed by respondents 1 and 2.
The application was contested by the appellants as well as the arbitrator.
The appellants contended that in obeying the orders of the arbitrator to produce evidence they did not commit any contempt.
Respondent No. 3 denied that he conducted the arbitration proceedings in order to defeat the object of the suit.
The High Court found the appellants and respondent No. 3 guilty of contempt of court on the view that their conduct had a tendency to bring into contempt the proceedings before the Civil Court.
In appeal to this Court by certificate, HELD: The High Court was in error in holding that in the circumstances of the case the appellants and respondent No. 3 were guilty of contempt of court.
Section 35 of the Arbitration Act does not expressly prohibit the arbitrator from continuing the hearing of the reference.
Its only effect is that "all further proceedings in a pending reference shall, unless a stay of proceedings is granted under section 34, be invalid".
For this consequence to follow, however.
two important and distinct conditions must be satisfied, namely, (1) that such legal proceedings must be upon the whole and not merely part of the subject matter of the reference and (2) that a notice of such legal proceeding must be given to the arbitrator.
Even on the assumption that these conditions were satisfied the only effect is that the further proceedings before the arbitrator after the receipt of the notice are rendered invalid and there is no prohibition under section 35 requiring the arbitrator not to carry on the arbitration proceedings after the receipt of the notice.
[672 G 673 B] 669 It is well established that an authority holding an enquiry in good faith in exercise of the powers vested in it by a statute is not guilty of contempt of court, merely because a parallel enquiry is imminent or pending before a court.
To constitute the offence of contempt of court there must be involved some 'act done or writing published calculated to bring a court or a judge of the court into contempt or to lower his authority ' or 'something calculated to obstruct or interfere with the due course of justice or the lawful process of the court '.
[673 C] Reg.
vs Gray , Arthur Reginald Perera vs The King, , Tukaram Gaokar vs S.N. Shukla, ; and Rizwan ul Hasan vs State of Uttar Pradesh, ; , 588, applied.
It followed therefore that even if the action of the appellants and respondent No. 1 in the present case was assumed to be improper it would not justify the finding that they were guilty of contempt of court when their action was in no way calculated to obstruct the course of justice or to prejudice the trial of the civil suit.
