One T filed a suit claiming Rs. 3 lacs damages for libel against a newspaper.
The suit was decreed by a Judge of the Bombay High Court.
Thereafter, an article was published in a publication brought out by the first appellant and of which the second appellant was the editor, printer and publisher.
The article contained insinuations that there was a connection between a loan of Rs. 10 lacs, granted to a firm in which the Judge 's brother was a partner, and the judgment m the defamation case; and that the Judge knew, about the loan having been granted to the firm.
The appellants were found guilty of contempt of court.
In appeal to this Court, it was contended that: (1) In the article no aspersion was cast on the integrity of the Judge nor was any imputation of dishonesty made; (2) Proceedings for contempt for scandallzing a Judge have become obsolete, the proper remedy being for the/judge to take action for libel; (3) The allegations were made in the bona fide belief that they were truthful and there was no evidence that the Judge did not know about the transaction; and (4) The statements, if at all, amounted to a charge of bias against the Judge and could not be regarded as contempt.
HELD: (1 ) The obvious implications and institutions made in the various paragraphs of the article, read as a whole, create a strong judicial impact on the mind of the reader about the Jack of honesty, integrity and impartiality on the part of the Judge in deciding the defamation suit.
[785 C D] It is open to anyone to express fair, reasonable and legitimate criticism of any act or conduct of a Judge in his judicial capacity or even to make a proper and fair comment on any decision given by him.
But, if an article attributes improper motives to the Judge, it not only transgresses the limits of fair and bona fide criticism but has a clear tendency to affect the dignity and prestige of the court and would amount to contempt of court.
[785 A, 791 F] (2) It will not be right to say that committals for contempt of court for scandalizing the court have become obsolete.
[791 D] (a) But such summary jurisdiction by way of contempt must be exercised with great care and caution and only when its exercise is necessary for the proper administration of law and justice.
[791 E] (b) There is a distinction between a mere libel or defamation of a judge and what amounts to contempt of court.
The tests are: (i) Is the impugned publication a mere defamatory attack.
on the Judge or is it calculated to interfere with the due course of Justice or the proper administration of law by his court? and (ii) Is the wrong done to the Judge personally or is it done to the public? The publication of a disparaging 780 statement will be an injury to the public if it tends to create an apprehension in the minds of the people regarding the integrity, ability or fairness of the Judge or to deter actual and prospective litigants from placing complete reliance upon the courts administration of justice, or if it is likely to cause embarrassment in the mind of the Judge himself in the discharge of his judicial duties.
[791 G H; 792 A C] B.R. Reddy vs State of Madras, ; , Re: The Editor.
Printer and Publisher of the 'Times of India ' and in re: Aswini Kumar Ghose vs Arabinda Bose, ; , Brahm Prakash Sharma vs State of U.P., ; Re: Hira Lal Dixit & Ors. ; and State of M.P. vs Revashankar , followed.
Re: Read and Huggonson, 2 Atk. 471, In the matter of a Special Reference from the Bahama Islands , McLeod vs St. Aubyn, , Reg.
vs Gray, ; Rex vs Editor of the New Statesman ; Ambard vs Attorney General for Trinidad and Tobago, (.1936) A.C. 322, Debi Prasad Sarma .v.
The 'King Emperor.
70 I.A. 216 and Reg.
vs Commissioner of Police the Metropolis, Ex parte Blackburn, , referred to.
(3) Assuming good faith can be held to be a defence in a proceeding for contempt, in the present case, no attempt was made to substantiate 'that the facts stated in the article were true or were rounded on correct data.
On the other hand, it was established that some of the material allegations were altogether wrong and incorrect.
[792 E F] B.R. Reddy 's case; , , referred to.
(4) The mere fact that his brother happened to have a pecuniary interest in the firm could not per se establish that the Judge would also have a financial interest therein so as to constitute legal bias.
[792 H; 793 A]
