The respondents, who were Hindus filed a suit against the appellants who were Muslims, for a declaration that the Hindu residents of their villages had the right to take out religious and non religious processions.
with appropriate music along the roads and public highways in the: villages, including those by the side of two mosques in the villages.
The appellants contended that in 1931, in proceedings under section 107, Criminal Procedure Code, there was a compromise between the Hindus and the Muslims of the two villages, whereby it was agreed that Hindus would not play music between two land marks near the mosques, and that such a restriction was necessary to enable them to say their prayers in the. mosques.
The trial court held the respondents were bound by the compromise.
The first appellate court also held that the respondents were bound by the compromise, but that the respondents could take the processions between the landmarks with 'music in a low sound except drumbeating.
Both parties appealed to the High Court.
The High Court held, that the respondents were not bound by the compromise, that no restriction could be imposed on the right of the respondents ' community (Hindus) to take out processions with appropriate music, and that the restrictive order of the first appellate court that only low sound music could be played should be set aside.
In appeal to this Court.
HELD: (1) As the compromise was not arrived at in a suit fought.
in a respresentative capacity, it did not debar the parties from asserting, their legal rights in a civil court.
[567 D] Babu Ram Singh vs Subban Mochi, A.I.R. 1929 All. 519, explained.
(2) The respondents have the right to take out both religious and ' non religious processions with accompaniment of music on the roads and highways subject only to (a) an.y order of the local authorities regulating the traffic; (b) any directions of the Magistrate under any law fOE the time being in force; and (c) the rights of the public.
[568 G] Manzur Hasan vs Muhammad Zaman, (1924) 52 I.A.61, applied.
