Whatever else may or may not fall within article 286 (1) (b) of the Constitution, sales and purchases which themselves occasion the export or the import of the goods as the case may be, out of or into, the territory of India come within the exemption.
The view that no sale or purchase can be said to take place in the course of export or import unless the property in the goods is transferred to the buyer during their actual move ment, as instance, where the shipping documents ,are in dorsed and delivered within the State by the seller to a local agent of the foreign buyer after the goods have been actually shipped or where such documents are cleared on payment, or on acceptance, by the Indian buyer before the arrival of the goods within the State, puts too narrow a construction upon article 286 (1)(b) and is not correct.
A sale by export involves a series of integrated activi ties commencing from the agreement of sale with a foreign buyer and ending with the delivery of the goods to a common carrier for transport out of the country by land or sea.
Such a sale cannot be dissociated from the export without which it cannot be effectuated and the sale and 'the result ant export form parts of a single transaction.
Of these two integrated activities which together constitute an export sale, whichever first occurs can well be regarded as taking place in the course of the other.
Even in cases where the property in the goods passed to the foreign buyers and the sales were thus completed, within the State before the goods commenced their journey from the State, the sales must be regarded as having taken place in the course of the export and therefore exempt under article 286 (1) (b).
The Commerce clause (article 1, section 8 (3)) and the Import Export clauses [article I, sections9 (5) and 10 (2)] of the American Constitution are widely different in lan guage, scope and purpose, and a varying body of doctrines and tests have grown around them interpreting, extending or restricting from time to time, their operation and applica tion in the context of the expanding American commerce and industry and much help cannot be derived from them in the solution of the problems arising under article 286 of the Indian Constitution.
Speeches made by the members of the Constituent Assembly in the course of the debates on the draft Constitution cannot be used 'as aids for interpreting the Constitution.
Administrator General of Bengal vs Prem Nath Mullick [22 I.A. 107 at 118], A.K. Gopalan vs The State [(1950) S.C.R. 88], United States vs Trans Missouri Freight Association at 318] referred to.
143 1114
