By a notification dated August 4. 1947 issued under section 12(1) of the ' Foreign Exchange Regulation.
Act, 1947 and the, Foreign Exchange Regulation Rules, 1952, and amended thereunder, the Central Government prohibited the export to countries mentioned in its Schedule.
of goods, except by post.
unless a declaration supported by such evidence as may be prescribed is furnished by the exporter to the prescribed authority that the amount representing the full export value of the goods has been paid or would be paid within the prescribed period.
In 1957, the respondents shipped goods after furnishing to the prescribed authority, namely, the Collector of Customs a declaration in the statutory form prescribed under the Foreign Exchange Regulation Rules, and the Collector of Customs passed the, goods for shipment.
In 1965, the Dy.
Collector of Customs issued a notice to the respondents calling upon them to show cause why a penalty under section 167(8) of the , should not be imposed, on the basis that the respondents under valued the goods deliberately, that they gave in the prescribed form false particulars supported by false evidence, that there was a failure to repatriate large amounts of foreign exchange contrary to the requirements of section 12(2) and r. 5, that section 12(1) of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act and Rules required a declaration of the actual amount representing the full export value and a mere declaration of any value would not be sufficient compliance with the provisions, that under the circumstances by virtue of section 23 A of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, the exportation constituted an offence.
under section 167(8) of the .
the respondents thereupon.
filed a writ petition contending that the declaration to the Collector of Customs was sufficient compliance with the statutory provisions and that the Collector having passed the consignments for shipment, had no further jurisdiction to take proceedings against them.
A single Judge of the High Court dismissed the petitions, but on appeal, the Divisional Bench allowed the petitions.
In 'appeal to this Court.
HELD: Per Bachawat and Hegde, JJ.
On the facts set out in the show cause notice the respondents could not be held to have contravened section 12(1).
(1) The regulations contained in the Act are enacted in the economic and financial interest of the country.
Therefore, the rigour and sanctity of the regulations should be maintained but at the same time it should not be forgotten that section 12(1) is a penal section, and in interpreting it.
it is not competent to the Court to stretch its language in order to carry out the intention of the ' Legislature.
[752 E] 728 Tolaram Rehumal vs State of Bombay ; , 164, followed; Re.
H.P.C. Production Ltd. [1962] Ch.
Dn. 466, 473, ,red London & North Eastern Ry.
Co. vs Beriman, , 295, applied.
(2) Neither section 12(1) nor any other provision of the Act empowers the rule making authority to add to the restrictions imposed by the section, and for finding out the restrictions imposed by the section one can only look at that section.
The only restriction placed by section 12(1) read with the notification dated August 4, 1947 is that no one should export any goods from this country without furnishing the declaration mentioned in s.12(1).
The items of information called for in the prescribed form cannot be considered as restrictions imposed by section 12(1).
They are merely information called for the proper exercise of the powers under the Act.
In fact many of them do not relate to the restrictions imposed if the section.
[751 C F] (3) So far as goods sold to the foreign buyer are concerned it is possible for the exporter to know the, exact export value, but that would not be the position when the goods are sent on consignment basis, and, in such a case the: exporter can give only an estimated value.
If every declaration which does not state accurately the full export value of the goods exported is held to be, a contravention of section 12(1) then all exports on consignment basis must be held to contravene the restriction imposed by section 12(1), but, the Legislature could not have intended that minor mistakes in giving the full export value should be punished under section 23A.
Therefore, the declarations given in the present case do satisfy the requirements of section 12(1) though they did not correctly furnish all the information asked for in the form, and hence, there was no contravention of the section.
[751 H 752 D] (4) The main purpose of section 12(1) is to get a declaration from the exporter that he has either brought or will bring back the amount representing the full export value of the goods.
The scheme of the Act is that so far as customs authorities are concerned all that they have to see is that no goods are exported without furnishing the declaration prescribed under section 12(1).
Once that stage is passed the rest of the matter is left in the hands of the Reserve Bank and the Director of Enforcement under sections 12(5) and (6).
[752 B, 754 F] (5) Before a case can be held to fall within the scope of sections 23A and 167(8) of the , could be invoked, it must be shown that there has been a contravention of the restrictions imposed by section 12(1); but the language of section 12(1) does not permit the interpretation that the Legislature intended that the offences complained in these proceedings should be punishable under section 23A. The contravention complained of in this case are really contraventions of section 12(2) and r. 5 and they are punishable, the former, under section 23 and the latter.
under sections 22 and 23.
[751 B C, G] Per Sikri, J. dissenting.
On the facts alleged by the Customs authorities no case for the issue of a writ to the authorities had been made out.
(1) The Act was enacted in the interests of national economy.
Since a deliberate large.
scale contravention of its provisions would have serious effects, it should be construed so as to make it workable.
No subject can insist on an interpretation which will have the effect of sabotaging the national economy.
[739 H 740 A] 729 (2) As section 12(1) itself does not impose any restrictions and contemplates rules being made on: (a) evidence which is to support declaration; (b) authority to which the declaration is to be furnished; and (c) the manner of payment; the restrictions imposed by rules which are deferrable to the section must be treated as restrictions imposed by the section.
[740 H] Wellingdale vs Norris [1909] 1 K.B. '57, 64, Wicks vs Director of Public Prosecution, [1947] 1 All E.R. 205, 206, R. vs Wicks, , 53t and Rathbone vs Bumlock, , applied.
Dr. Indramani Payarelal Gupta vs W.R. Nathu, ; , 737, distinguished.
U.S.v.
George R. Eaton; , and Singer vs U.S. 89 L.Ed.258, 290.
referred to.
(3) Even in a case where the amount has not been received, there must be declaration of some actual figure, which, according to the declaration represents the 'full export value ' It may be an estimate if the goods have not been sold before the export, but a figure must be indicated.
The requirement of supporting evidence and r. 5(2)(ii) requiring the statement of the invoice value in the declaration indicate that an actual figure has to be mentioned.
SeCtion 12(1) and the notification impose a conditional prohibition an on exporter which he can lift by a unilateral declaration.
When such a power is conferred on an exporter by a statute good faith, on his part must be implied and is a condition prerequisite.
Section 22 provides that the declare shall not give any information which he knows or has reasonable cause to believe to be false or not true Clerical mistakes and mistakes made bona fide even in respect of material particulars would not come within the mischief of the section.
but a deliberate falsehood and deliberate evasion of the provisions of the section would be a contravention of section 12(1) for otherwise the ambit of the section read with section 23A would be narrowed to the point of extinction.
An exporter and persons concerned in the export, could with impunity give a deliberately false declaration but in apparent compliance with section 12(1) and deprive this country of foreign exchange.
There is no distinction, between an exporter and the persons concerned in the export when no declaration under section 12(1) is given at all and in a case where the exporter gives a deliberately false declaration for the purpose of the applicability of section 167(8) of the .
[1744 D 745 D] (4) Since the same contravention may attract penalties under the as well as the Foreign Exchange Act it will be incongruous to hold that the restrictions imposed by section 12(1) are different for the two acts.
[740 F G] The Mayor of Portsmouth vs Charles Smith, 10 A.C. 364, 371, applied.
(5) Section 23A of the Foreign Exchange, Act deems the restrictions imposed under section 12(1) to have been imposed under s, 19 of the , without prejudice to the provisions in section 23 dealing with penalty and procedure for contravention of the provisions of section 12 or any rule or direction or order made thereunder of Foreign Exchange Act and therefore, offenders who violate those restrictions could be proceed with both under the Foreign, Exchange Regulation Act as well as the .
It may be that action can be taken against an exporter under other sections of the Foreign Exchange ReguLation Act 730 or the , but that does not prevent action under section 23A read with section 12(1) with the aid of customs authorities, both against exporters and persons concerned in the prohibited export.
[745 E H]
