An Indian Firm (the appellant) entered into a contract with a Russian Firm (the respondent) for supply of certain machinery.
In pursuance of the contract, the appellant opened a confirmed, irrevocable and divisible letter of credit with a Bank in India for the entire value of the equipment.
The respondent supplied all the machinery and received 25% of the money payable under the letter of credit from the Bank.
Thereafter, the appellant complained that the performance of the machinery was not efficient and filed a suit seeking an injunction restraining the respondent from realising the balance of amount payable under the letter of credit.
The parties, however, entered into an agreement, by which it was agreed that the appellant would withdraw the suit, the respondent would not demand any payment under the letter of credit for 6 months, the parties would try to settle the dispute amicably during that period, 'and if no settlement was reached the period would be extended by a further period of 6 months.
The appellant withdrew its suit, but before any settlement was arrived at the Indian rupee was devalued, as a result of which the appellant had to pay an additional sum for the machinery supplied.
There was correspondence between the parties wherein the respondent insisted upon the appellant opening an additional letter of credit.
for the extra amount and the appellant objected to such a course.
The original dispute between the parties was not amicably settled and when the extended time under the agreement was about to expire, the appellant filed a suit on the original side of the High Court for restraining the Bank and the respondent from taking any steps in pursuance of the letter of credit.
A temporary injunction was also prayed for and it was granted, but the order was reversed by the Appellate Bench of the High Court.
In appeal to this Court, on the question whether the order of temporary injunction was sustainable, HELD: (1 ) An irrevocable letter of credit has a definite implication.
It is independent of and unqualified ' by the contract of sale or other underlying transactions.
It is a mechanism of great importance in international trade and any interference with that mechanism is bound to have serious repercussions on the international trade of this country.
The autonomy of an irrevocable letter of credit is entitled to protection 'and except in very exceptional circumstances courts should not interfere with that autonomy.
[929 B C; 931 G] Urquhart Lindsay and Co. Ltd. vs Eastern Bank Ltd., ; Hamzeh Malas and Sons vs British Imex Industries Ltd., and Dulien Steel Products Inc. o/Washington vs Bankers Trust Co., Fed.
Rep. 2nd Series, 298, p. 836, applied.
(2) The allegation of the appellant that the respondent had no assets in this Country and therefore if the respondent was allowed to take away 921 the money secured to it by the letter of credit the appellant could not effectively enforce its claim arising from the breach of the contract, was not made in the pleadings.
Nor do the facts pleaded in the plaint amount to a plea of fraud.
[929 B; 931 H] (3) It could not be contended that the letter of credit was not enforceable as the original contract was modified by the later agreement and subsequent correspondence between the parties.
The contention was not taken either in the plaint or in the High Court.
It is not a mere legal contention as it bears on the intention of parties.
Further, a perusal of the entire correspondence between the parties shows that in the absence of an amicable settlement, the parties continued to be bound by the original contract subject only to extension of time granted for payment of ' price.
[932 B D, F]
