The plaintiffs (appellants herein) obtained settlements of certain land owned by a deity in village Siripur Majrahia in Bihar.
The contesting defendants (respondents herein) owned lands in the villages of Kazi Dumra and Shankarpur which were separated from Siripur Majrahia by a river.
The plaintiffs claimed that in consequence of the changes in the channel of the aforesaid river the lands in suit were lost to villages Kazi Dumra and Shankarpur by diluvion and were annexed to their land in village Siripur Majrahia by gradual increment and accretion.
The deity was also made defendant No. 18 in the suit although no relief was claimed against it.
The trial court dismissed the suit and the plaintiffs appealed to High Court, again impleading the deity as a respondent.
They, however, failed to deposit the cost of the guardian ad litem of the deity appointed by the High Court and the Court thereupon dismissed the appeal as against the deity.
The contesting defendants urged at the hearing that the entire appeal had become incompetent in view of the dismissal of the appeal against the deity.
Accepting the contention the High Court dismissed the appeal.
It held inter alia, that the appeal had abated against the deity.
The plaintiffs filed appeal, with certificate, in this Court.
On behalf of the respondents reliance was placed on Muni Bibi vs Trilokinath and it was urged that the decision of the trial court on the question whether the suit lands appertained to village Siripur Majrahia operated as res judicata between the deity and the contesting co defendants, that the appellate court could not record an inconsistent finding that the suit lands appertained.
to village Siripur Majrahia and that in the circumstances, the entire appeal before the High Court had become incompetent.
HELD: (i) The High Court was in error in holding that the appeal had abated either wholly or in part.
None of the parties to the appeal had died and there was no question of abatement of the appeal.
[973 E] (ii) The deity was not a necessary party to the appeal and the plaintiffs were entitled to prosecute: their appeal against the contesting defendants in the absence of the deity.
[973 G H; 974 A B] (iii) The case of Muni Bibi vs Trilokinath shows that a decision operates as res judicata between co defendants if (1) there is a conflict of interest between them; (2) it is necessary to decide that conflict in order to give the plaintiffs the reliefs which they claim and (3) the question between the co defendants is finally decided.
In the present case the third condition was not satisfied.
The question whether the suit lands appertained to Siripur Majrahia was not finally decided between the deity and the co defendants.
On the filing of the appeal by the plaintiffs, the question became once more the subject of judicial enquiry between the deity and the contesting defendants.
[974 B D] Muni Bibi vs Trilokinath, L.R. 58 I.A. 158, referred to.
972 (iv) Before the appeal was finally heard and decided, it was dismissed as against the deity for non payment of its guardian 's costs.
The appellate court did not give any decision on the merits of the case in the presence of the deity.
There was no final decision against the deity on the question of title to the suit lands.
The decision of the appellate court against the contesting defendants would not lead to conflicting and inconsistant decrees.
The High Court was in error in holding that the appeal against the contesting defendants became incompetent.
[974 D E]
