Clause 3 of the Cotton Textile (Control of Movement) Order, 1948, promulgated by the Central Government under section 3 of the Essential Supplies (Temporary Powers) Act, 1946, does not deprive a citizen of the right to dispose of or transport cotton tex B tiles purchased by him.
It requires him to take a. permit from the Textile Commissioner to enable him to transport them.
The requirement of a permit in this respect cannot be regarded as an A unreasonable restriction on the citizen 's right under sub clauses (f) and (g) of article 19(1) of the Constitution.
The policy underlying the Control Order is to regulate the transport of cotton textiles in a manner that will ensure an even distribution of the commodity in the country and make it available at a fair price to all.
The grant or a refusal of a permit is to be governed by the policy and the discretion given to the Textile Commissioner is to be exercised in such a way as to effectuate this policy.
The conferment of such a discretion cannot be called invalid and if there is an abuse of power there is ample power in Courts to undo the mischief.
Messrs. Dwarka Prasad Laxmi Narain vs The State of Uttar Pradesh (([1954] S.C.R. 803) distinguished.
It was settled by the majority judgment in the Delhi Laws Act case ([1951] 'S.C.R. 747) that the essential powers of legislation cannot be delegated.
The Legislature must declare the policy of the law and the legal principles which are to control any given cases and must provide a standard to guide the officials or the body in power to execute the law.
The Legislature has laid down such a principle in the Act and that principle is the maintenance or increase in supply of essential commodities and of securing equitable distribution and availability at given prices.
The preamble and the body of the sections in the Essential Supplies (Temporary Powers) Act, 1946, sufficiently formulate the legislative policy and the ambit and the character of the Act is such that the details of that policy can only be worked out by delegating that power to a subordinate authority within the framework of that policy.
Therefore section 3 of the Act is not ultra vires the Legislature on the ground of delegation of legislative power.
Section 4 of the Act enumerates the classes of persons to whom the power could be delegated or sub delegated by the Central Government and it is not correct to say that the instrumentalities have not been selected by the Legislature itself.
Accordingly section 4 of the Act is not ultra vires on the ground of excessive delegation of legislative powers.
Shannon vs Lower Maintand Dairy Products Board ([1938] A.C. 708) applied.
382 The requirements of a permit by clause 3 and the provisions of clause 4 of the Central Order which empower the Textile Commissioner to direct a carrier to close booking or transport of cloth apparel, etc., are not in conflict with sections 27, 28 and 41 of the Railways Act.
These clauses merely supplement the relevant provisions of the Railways Act and do not supersede them. ' Section 6 of the Act does not either expressly or by implication repeal any of the provisions of the preexisting laws ; nor does it abrogate them.
Those laws remain untouched and unaffected so far as the statute book is concerned.
The repeal of a statute means that the repealed statute must be regarded as if it had never been on the statute book.
The effect of section 6 is not to repeal those laws or abrogate them but simply to by pass them where they are inconsistent with the provisions of the Essential Supplies (Temporary Powers) Act, 1946 or the orders made thereunder.
Even assuming that the existing law stands repealed by implication, such abrogation or repeal is by force of the legislative declaration contained in section 6 and is not by force of the order made by the delegate under section 3.
Accordingly there is no delegation involved in the provision of section 6 and it cannot be held uncon stitutional on that ground.
