Appellant No. 1 filed a petition challenging the election of the first respondent from the Lambi Assembly Constituency ( 'reserved seat) in the district of Ferozepur, Punjab, at the 1967 general election.
It was urged in the petition that the nomination paper of appellant No. 2 had been wrongly rejected by the Returning Officer who had held that appellant No. 2 was a mochi and as such not a member of the chamar caste mentioned in item 9 of the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950 issued under article 341 of the Constitution.
It was also urged that the Returning Officer had at first accepted the nomination paper but had subsequently reviewed his own order.
The High Court dismissed the petition, whereupon an appeal was filed in this Court.
HELD: (i) On the evidence it was not possible to hold that the Returning Officer had after announcing his decision accepting the nomination paper reviewed his own order afterwards.
(ii) No ground had been made out for disturbing the conclusion of the trial court on the evidence that appellant No. 2 was a mochi and not a member of the chamar caste.
(iii) It was not open to this Court to scrutinise whether a person properly described as a mochi also fell within the caste of chamars and could describe himself as such.
The question was one the determination of which lay within the exclusive power of the President under article 341 of the Constitution.
[1003 B C] , Basavalingappa v.D. Munichinnappa & Ors. ; and Bhaiya Lal vs Harikrishen Singh & Ors., ; , applied.
Article 341 empowered the President to specify not only entire castes races or tribes but also parts or groups within castes, races or tribes which were to be treated as Scheduled Castes in relation to a particular State or Union Territory.
So far as chamars and mochis are concerned, a reference to the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950 shows that the President was not of opinion that they were to be considered to belong to the same caste in all the different States.
In several States chamars and mochis were put on the same footing but not so in the State of Punjab.
Even after the Reorganisation of the Punjab Act, 1966 when the question of specification of Scheduled Castes in the territories created came up for his consideration the President did not take the view that mochis should be classed with chamars in so far as the States of Haryana, Punjab and the Union Territory of Chandigarh were concerned though he directed that in the Union Territories of Delhi and Himachal Pradesh mochis and chamars were to be placed in the same group.
[1000 E, H; 1001 A D]
