The assessee Electricity Board constituted under the Electricity Supply Act, 1948, supplied and distributed electric energy within the State of Madhya Pradesh.
In the assessment years in question the Electricity Board sold, supplied and distributed electric energy to various consumers, It also supplied steam to Nepa Mills.
The mill was supplying water free and the Electricity Board was making a pro rata charge of conversion of water into steam.
The mill had also agreed to re imburse the Board for the loss sustained on account of the mills not taking the full demand of steam.
In proceedings under the C.P. & Bearar Sales Tax Act, 1947 'and the Madhya Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, 1959 the question for consideration, inter alia, were (i) whether electricity was 'goodS ' within the meaning of the two Acts and whether the Board was a 'dealer ' within the, meaning of section 2(c) of the 1947 Act and section 2(d) of the 1959 Act; and (ii) whether the supply of steam amounted to 'sale ' 'and was therefore taxable.
The High Court, in reference, held that electricity was not 'goods ', that the Board was not a 'dealer"in electricity and that the supply of steam was not taxable as it was not supplied With 'a profit motive.
In appeal by special leave to this Court by the Commissioner of Sales Tax, HELD: (i) The Electricity Board carried on the business of selling, supplying and distributing electricity which fell within the meaning of the expression 'goods ' in the two Acts and was therefore a 'dealer '.
[945 H] The definition of "goods" is very wide and includes all kinds of movable property.
The term 'movable property ' when considered with reference to 'goods ' as defined for the purposes of sales tax cannot be taken in a narrow sense and merely because electric energy is not tangible or cannot be moved or touched, like, for instance, a piece of wood or a book, it cannot cease to be movable property when it has all the attributes of such property.
It is capable of abstraction, consumption and use which, if done dishonestly, would attract punishment Under section 39 of the .
It can be transmitted, transferred, delivered, stored, possessed etc.
in the same way as any other movable property.
If there can be sale and purchase of electric energy like any other movable object, it st be held that electric energy was intended to be covered by the definition of 'goods ' in the two Acts.
If that had not been the case there was no necessity of specifically exempting sale of electric energy from the payment of sales tax by making a provision for it in the Schedule to the two Acts.
[945.E H] 940 Kumbakonam Electric Supply Corporation Ltd. vs Joint Commercial Tax Officer, Esplanade Division, Madras, 14 S.T.C. 600, Malerkotla Power Supply Company vs The Excise & Taxation Officer, Sangrur & Ors.
22 S.T.C. 325, Naini Tal Hotel.
Municipal Board, A.I.R. 1946 All.
502, Erie County Natural Gas & Fuel Co. Ltd. vs Carroll, , County of Durham Electrical etc.
Co. vs Inland Revenue , referred to.
Rash Behari vs Emperor, A.I.R. 1936 Cal.
753 distinguished.
(ii) On the facts of the present case the arrangement relating to supply of steam in return of water supplied by the mills on payment of actual cost was not one of sale but was more in the nature of a workS ,contract Where the main object of work undertaken by the payee of the price is not the transfer of a chattel qua chattel, the contract is one for work and labour.
[946 G H] The Government of Andhra Pradesh vs Guntur Tobaccos Ltd., 16 S.T.C. 240, and HaLsbury 's Laws of England, HI Edn.
34 page 6, referred to.
