A private complaint was filed against the appellant who was a Deputy Superintendent of Police.
According to the statement of the complainant there was a dispute between him and certain hawkers who wanted to trespass on his land and at his instance the police was informed.
The appellant came to the spot, threatened and assaulted him, and suggested to the hawkers to enter upon the load, whereupon the hawkers took possession of the land.
The Magistrate after recording the statement of the complainant issued summons to the appellant and others for answering charges under sections 149, 341, 342.
352, 500 and 504 of the Indian Penal Code read with section 34 thereof.
The appellant filed a petition for revision under section 435 Cr.
P.C. before the Sessions Judge in which the main point taken was that the previous sanction under section 197 Cr.
P.C. required for the prosecution of the appellant had not been obtained.
The Sessions Judge ordered that the complainant be asked to obtain the required sanction before prosecuting the appellant.
But the judicial Commissioner 's Court ordered that the order of the Magistrate issuing the summons be confirmed.
In appeal to this Court by special leave, HELD: The language of section 197 Cr.
P.C. clearly is that no court can take cognizance of an offence alleged to have been committed by any person belonging to the categories mentioned in the section which would include the appellant when he is accused of an offence alleged to have been committed by him while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty.
In the present case it was not clear in what capacity the appellant came to the spot.
On the basis of the statement of the complainant it was not established that he came in the capacity of a police officer.
Ordinarily if a person is in possession of some property and other persons are threatening to dispossess him it is no part of the duty of a police officer to take sides and decide the dispute in favour of one party or the other or to force one natty to give up possession to the other, even if he was satisfied that the party seeking to take possession was lawfully entitled to do so.
This the police officer could only do if there had been any direction by a competent court for rendering help in the matter of delivery of possession.
[In dismissing the appeal the Court observed that it would be open to the appellant to establish during the course of further proceedings that the requisite sanction under section 197 must be obtained.] Ronald Wood Mathams vs State of West Bengal, , H.B. Gill vs The ICing, 75 I.A. 41, Phanindra Chandra Neogv vs The King, 76 I.A. 10, Matalog Dubey vs H. C. Bhari; , , 1054 934, Amrik Singh vs State of Pepsu, ; and Nagraj vs State of Mysore, ; , referred to.
