A suit for damages was filed on the allegations that the plaintiffs and defendants were all members of an association and that the defendants committed a tort against the plaintiffs by conspiring and preventing the plaintiffs from being elected to the office of trustees of the association.
One of the defendants tendered an unconditional apology which was accepted by the plaintiffs and a decree was passed in terms of the compromise.
The other defendants, thereafter, filed written statements contending that the release of one of the defendants from his joint liability as a tort lessor extinguished the plaintiff 's rights against the remaining defendants and raised questions regarding valuation and court fees.
The trial court took up the issue regarding court fees, held there was a deficiency and granted time to the plaintiffs to make good the deficiency.
The plaintiffs, instead, applied for amendment of the plaint and the trial court allowed the application.
The High Court, in revision filed by the defendants gave appropriate directions regarding payment of court fee.
The High Court, also decided, with the consent of both sides, that the decree against one of the defendants namely, the compromise decree, was complete accord and satisfaction and that the cause of action against all the defendants being one and indivisible, the decree operated as a bar against further proceedings against the remaining defendants.
In appeal to this Court, it was contended that the subject matter of revision before the High Court being only the order of the trial court regarding court fee, the High Court had no jurisdiction to decide any other point.
HELD: (1) The High Court had no power to decide any other issue even if the parties had consented.
The order of the High Court could not be justified under section 24, Civil Procedure Code, because, it was not a case of the High Court withdrawing the case to itself and trying the same.
[9 '63 D E] (2) The High Court having decided the question of maintainability of the suit against the.
other defendants, the trial court would feel handicapped if the matter were to be remitted to it.
The appropriate procedure is for this Court to decide the question.
[963 E F] (3) The rule which is in consonance with equity, justice and good conscience and which also recognises that the liability of tort feasors is joint and several, is that, before the other joint tort feasors can rely on accord and satisfaction, a plaintiff must have received full satisfaction or L6Sup.
CI/69 10 960 what the law must consider as such from one of the tort feasors.
What is full satisfaction would depend on the facts and circumstances of each case.
[970 C E] In the present case, the apology which was embodied in a decree could not be treated as full satisfaction for the tort alleged to have been committed by the defendants.
But it must be treated as an election on the part of the plaintiffs to pursue their several remedy against the defendant tendering the apology.
[970 E F] Ram Kumar Singh vs Ali Husain, All. 173, Makhanlal Lolaram vs Panchamal Sheoprasad, A.I.R. ; Har Krishna Lal vs Haji Qurban Ali, Luck.
284 and Shiva Sagar Lal vs Mata Din A.I.R. 1949 All. 105; and English and American Law, referred to.
