In pursuance of its policy of reorganising its business by concentrating more on manufacturing side than agency business, the appellant company gave up more than half of its agencies in Calcutta and some agencies in other places including Madras.
The Union representing the workmen wrote to the Labour Commissioner to intervene stating that due to the company 's said policy it feared retrenchment.
The company served notices on some of the employees for retrenchment to take effect two days thereafter.
Also notice was given to the Labour Commissioner and the Conciliation Officer as required under section 25F (c) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
On reference of the dispute to the Industrial Tribunal, the company justified the retrenchment and the Manager of the Calcutta branch gave evidence that retrenchment was done in pursuance of the said policy decision taken by the company.
The Tribunal held that a good case for retrenchment was not made out and ordered reinstatement.
The Tribunal did not accept the manager 's evidence holding that the development on the manufacturing side of the company 's business should have been contemporaneous with the surrender of agencies in Calcutta.
The Tribunal also held that the policy decision was actuated by parochial considerations for transferring the company 's resources from Calcutta to Madras, that there was overload of work on the remaining employees; that the retrenchment could have been avoided by transferring the retrenched employees to other branches specially as their conditions of service included the liability of being transferred; and that the retrenchment was in breach of a. 25F(c) as the notice of retrenchment was two days prior to the date of the retrenchment and not with immediate effect, the proviso to r. 77(1) of the West Bengal/ndustrial Disputes Rules, 1958, did not apply and a notice of one month, as required by sub el.
(1) of that rule, was necessary.
The company filed a petition for a writ of certiorari.
The Single Judge of the High Court set aside the. award and remanded the case to the Tribunal only for enforcing the retrenchment according to the principle of "last come first go".
The Division Bench of the High Court in appeal, agreed with the findings of the Tribunal and held that the Single Judge was not competent to interfere with those findings.
In appeal this Court, HELD: Some of the findings arrived at by the Tribunal and which influenced its verdict were beyond its competence.
The rest were either speculative or contrary to the evidence on record and were consequently liable to be set aside in a writ petition for certiorari.
(i) A writ of certiorari is generally granted when a court has acted without or in excess of its jurisdiction.
It is available, in those cases 977 where a tribunal though competent to enter upon an enquiry, acts in flagrant disregard of the rules of procedure 0r violates the principles of natural justice where no particular procedure is prescribed.
But a mere wrong decision cannot be corrected by a writ of certiorari as float would be using it as the cloak of an appeal in disguise but a manifest error apparent on the face of the proceedings based on a clear ignorance or disregard of the provisions of law or absence of or excess of jurisdiction, when shown, can be so corrected.
[985] Basappa vs Nagappa, ; , Dharangadhara Chemical Works Ltd. vs State of Saurashtra, [1957] S.C.R. 152 and Andhra Pradesh & Ors.
vs Sree Ram Rao, ; , followed.
(ii) The Tribunal wrongly rejected the company 's evidence on the ground that the policy decision being the function of the Board of Directors, the Manager was not competent to depose about it and that if the company, wanted to establish it, it should have produced a resolution of the Board.
In its letter to the Labour Commissioner and also during conciliation proceedings the union had assumed that the company had taken the said decision, that consequently, retrenchment was apprehended and that therefore that officer should intervene.
In these circumstances, the finding that the company had failed to establish its policy was not only beyond the scope of the enquiry before the Tribunal but totally invalid.
[987 D F] 1.
K. Iron and Steel Co. vs Iron and Steel Mazdoor Union, , followed.
(iii) It is within the managerial discretion of an employer to organise and arrange his business in the manner he considers best.
So long as that is done bona fide it is not competent for a tribunal to question its propriety.
If a scheme for such reorganisation results in surplusage of employees, no employer is expected to carry the burden of such economic tribuanaldead weight and retrenchment has to be accepted as inevitable.
however unfortunate it is.
The Legislature therefore, provided by section 25F compensation to soften the blow of hardship resulting from 'an employee being thrown out of employment through no fault of his.
The Tribunal having come to the conclusion that the said policy was not actuated by any motive of victimisation or unfair labour practice and therefore was bona fide, any consideration as to its reasonableness or propriety was clearly extraneous.
It is not the function of the Tribunal, to go into the question whether such 'a scheme is profitable or not and whether it should have been adopted by the employer.
So long as retrenchment carried out is bona fide and not vitiated by any consideration for victimisation or unfair labour practice and the employer comes to the 'conclusion that he can carry on his undertaking with reasonable efficiency with the number of employees retained by him after retrenchment, the Tribunal ought not ordinarily to interfere with such decision.
The fact that in the earlier year some temporary appointments were made or that the Union 's Secretary deposed that work had accumulated would not mean that the surplus age calculated by the manager was unjustified.
Accumulation of work at a given point of time, unless it is constant, may be seasonal or due to various reasons and not necessarily because there Was no surplusage.
[987 G, 989 D F] (iv) While reorganising its business, it is not incumbent on a company to develop its manufacturing side at the very place where it has surrendered its agencies, namely, Calcutta, nor to do so at the very same time.
These considerations which the Tribunal took into account were 978 totally extraneous to the issue beore it and the Tribunal ought not to have allowed its mind to be influenced by such consideration and thereby disabling itself from viewing the issue from proper perspective.
The finding that the policy decision was actuated by parochial considerations, namely, for transferring the company 's resources from Calcutta to Madras at the cost of the former, was without evidence and was entirely speculative.
Even assuming that the company decided to concentrate its activity in Madras there is nothing in the Industrial Law to compel it to continue its business in Calcutta.
[988 D, G] D. Marcropollo & Co. vs Their Employees Union , Ghatge & Patil Concern 's Employee 's Union vs Ghatge & Patil (Transport) (P) Ltd. [1968] 1 S.C.R. 300, and Workmen of Subong Tea Estate vs The Outgoing Management of Subong Tea Estate, ; , followed.
(v) The liability of an employee to be transferred and the right of the company to transfer him did not mean that there was a corresponding obligation on the company to transfer the employee to another branch.
No evidence was led by the Union to show that if transferred, these men could have been absorbed at other places, or that there were vacancies or that the work there was the same as was done by them at Calcutta.
There was no evidence whether wage scales, dearness allowance and other conditions of service were the same in Madras and other centres.
It is true that the company had started developing its manufacturing business in Madras but the Tribunal made_ no enquiry whether these employees could have been fitted in the manufacturing work when they had done only administrative and 'other duties connected with the agency business, yet the Tribunal drew the conclusion that because the company failed to transfer these employees to other centres retrenchment was not justified.
[989 G 990 A] (vi) Rule 77(1) of the West Bengal Industrial Disputes Rules, provides that when an employer finds it necessary to retrench any workmen he shall, at least _one month before the date of actual retrenchment, give notice thereof to the Labour Commissioner and the Conciliation Officer.
The proviso to it states that where an employer retrenches any workman with immediate effect by paying him wages in lieu of notice he shall immediately after such retrenchment give notice thereof to the said officers.
Though the notice of retrenchment was not given immediately after the retrenchment but two days before it, the company had substantially complied with the requirements of the proviso to r. 77(1).
The object of the proviso clearly is that where it is not possible for an employer to give one months notice to the two authorities concerned by reason of his retrenching the employees with immediate effect, information should be supplied to the two officers immediately after such retrenchment.
instead of giving such information after the retrenchment it is given two days before the retrenchment takes place it is hardly possible to say that the requirement of the proviso was not carried out.
So long as the object underlying the proviso was satisfied it did not make any difference that information was given a little earlier than the date when retrenchment took place.
[990 C]
