The predecessor in interest of the appellants filed a suit under two mortgages claiming as principal and interest in respect of the first mortgage a sum of Rs. 51,200 and in respect of the second mortgage a sum of Rs. 60,200.
The trial court applying section 17 of the Mysore Money Lenders Act, 1939 held that the principal amount of the loan in the case of the first mortgage.
deed was the consideration shown therein, namely Rs. 20,000, and similarly the principal amount under the second mortgage was Rs. 24,000.
Accordingly the trial court passed a decree for the amount of Rs. 44,000 towards principal under the two mortgages and an equal amount as laid down in the aforesaid section 17, towards interest.
The High Court in appeal held that the principal amount of the original loan was Rs. 15,017 8 0 in respect of the first mortgage and Rs. 22,954 in respect of the second mortgage the aggregate being Rs. 37,971.50 Np.
The High Court therefore passed a decree for Rs. 37,971.50 Np.
as principal and the same amount as interest.
The High Court further held that this would be the arrears of interest to which the appellants would be entitled up to the date fixed for payment of the redemption money by its judgment.
The High COurt also made a direction that the principal amount would carry interest at 6% per annum from the date fixed for redemption till realisation.
The appellant in appeal to this Court by certificate urged: (i) that the High Court was wrong in reopening the accounts in respect of loans prior to the two mortgage deeds which 'formed the consideration for the two mortgage deeds in suit and it should have held, like the trial court, that the principal amount was Rs. 44,000 for the mortgages; (ii) that the arrears of interest under section 17 of the Act should be interpreted to mean arrears only up to the date of the institution of the suit, and the High Court should have granted future interest subsequently instead of granting it only with effect from the date fixed for redemption.
The Court also had to consider whether there was a conflict 'between O. 34 r. 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure and section 17 of the Act.
HELD: (i) Section 17, in prescribing the maximum amount of arrears of interest to be allowed, refers to "the principal of the original loan" and not "the principal of the loan".
If the latter expression had been used, it could have been argued in the present case that the sums of Rs. 20,000 and Rs. 24,000 which purported to be the principal amounts of the two loans evidenced by the two mortgage deeds in suit, were the principal amounts of the loans to be taken into account in 1083 working out the maximum amount of interest permissible under section 17 of the Act.
The expression "the principal of the original loan" makes it clear that, in determining the amount of arrears of interest allowable, the court must go behind the transaction of the loan and found out what was the actual cash originally advanced as principal and ignore all the interest that may have been added subsequently to that original advance in order to make up the consideration for the loans in suit.
In the present case therefore the High Court was justified in looking at the transactions prior to the two mortgage deeds to find out what were the actual cash amounts originally advanced which, together with interest and after adjustment of accounts formed the principal amounts for the two mortgage deeds.
(ii) Section 17 is in the form of a directive to a Court not to pass a decree on account of arrears of interest for a sum greater than the principal of the original loan.
Obviously, the directive is to be carried out by the court at the time of passing the decree and, consequently, it would be at that time that the court will see how much it is awarding for arrears of interest.
The maximum prescribed for the arrears of interest must, therefore be held to be the maximum amount in respect of interest payable up to the date of the decree when the court carries out the directive laid down in this section.
The decree of an appellate court takes effect _from the date of the decree of the original court, so that no question can arise of holding that the arrears of interest under section 17 of the Act must be computed up to the date on which the High Court passed the decree.
(iii) There is no conflict between O '.
34 r. 11 C.P.C. and section 17 of the Act.
Section 17 confines itself to laying down the maximum of arrears of interest to be allowed up to the date of the decree and is not concerned with the interest that is to be allowed for the period thereafter.
Admittedly the Code of Civil Procedure was applicable to the present suit and consequently interest subsequent to the date of the decree had to be awarded in accordance with O. 34 r. 11 C.P.C.
The interest under the mortgage deeds was payable @ 1% per mensem but under the provisions of the Act read with the provisions of the Usurious Loans Act (Mys.
Act ix of 1923) the fair interest payable on the loan would be @ 9 ' per cent per annum.
[The Court gave appropriate directions for the calculation of interest.]
