The appellant was the highest bidder for the exclusive privilege of retail vend of toddy and arrack for the year 1968 69, in a group of 1168 shops situated in 19 tehsils in the districts of Raichur and Gulbarga.
He made the deposits of money required under rr. 7(f) 'and 10 of the Mysore Excise (Disposal of Privileges of Retail Vend of Liquors) Rules, 1967 made under section 71 of the Mysore Excise Act, 1965.
The highest bid of the appellant was accepted and confirmed by the Divisional Commissioner of Gulbarga under r. 17(1) on June 4, 1968.
Thereafter, the appellant made further deposits required by rr.
17(5) and 19(2).
In all he deposited about Rs. 40 lakhs by June 15.
On June 18 he applied to the Divisional Commissioner for the issue licence.
He however, did not comply with r. 19(1) and (3) which required that a statement of immovable Properties should be furnished and that he should furnish security or sureties, respectively.
The Divisional Commissioner Gulbarga issued a notice to the appellant to show cause why the sale should not be cancelled and the deposits already made forfeited under r. 20(2).
The appellant prayed for two months time for compliance with the requirements of r. 19, but the Divisional Commissioner rejected the application and cancelled the sale.
He did not pass any order forfeiting the deposits.
The appellant filed a writ petition in the High Court for quashing the order and under directions of the Court deposited another Rs. 50 lakhs.
The 4th respondent, who was the next highest bidder applied to be made a party to the petition and contended that the appellant was a benamidar for other persons and so acceptance of his tender was forbidden by r. 12.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition holding (1) that the appellant did not comply with the mandatory requirements of r. 19 in that he did not furnish the statements and apply 'at once ' for licences as required by r. 19(1); (2) the appellant was a benamidar; and (3) the authorities should consider the advisability of accepting the bid of the 4th respondent.
On the very next day after the judgment of the High Court, the respondent State issued licences in respect of 1168 shops to the 4th respondent.
In appeal to this Court.
HELD : The licences issued to the 4th respondent should be cancelled and a writ of mandamus should issue for the grant of licences to the appellant.
[26 A] 15 (1)(a) The opening part of r. 19(4) requires the purchaser to furnish to 'the tehsildar ' the location of shops and the boundaries of the shop sites that is to the tahsildar within whose tehsil the shops are situated.
If the shops are situated in more than one tehsil, the details can be fur nished to the several tahsildars, but in such a case it is not possible to give effect to the last part of the sub rule and also to the provisions of sub rr.
(3) and (4).
The statement of immovable properties under the last part of sub r.
(1) can be furnished to only one tahsildar so that he can peruse the same; and on such perusal or on independent inquiry ascertain under sub r.
(3) whether or not purchaser is of doubtful solvency and satisfy himself under sub r.
(4) whether or not the value of the immovable property tendered as security is adequate.
Sub rr.
(3) and (4) do not contemplate findings by more than one tahsildar nor do they provide any machinery for resolving the conflict of opinion, if any, between two or more tahsildars.
The last part of sub r.
(1) and sub rr.
(3) and (4) do not apply where the shops are situated in two or more tahsils.
Consequently, those provisions were not attracted to the sale in the present case and the appellant was not required to comply with those provisions.
[22 E] (b) In the absence of 'an independent enquiry under sub r.
(3), the appellant could not be regarded as a person of doubtful solvency.
(c) Under the Mysore Excise Licences (General Conditions) Rules, 1967, a licencee is required to commence his business on July 1.
The expression 'at once ' in r. 19(1), means within a reasonable time before July 1.
In the present case, the appellant sufficiently complied with subrule.
[23 D E] (d) Under r. 17(2) it is only the excise commissioner or the State Government that could revise the order of the divisional commissioner confirming a sale and the divisional commissioner himself was not authorised to revise his, own order or cancel it.
[23 G] Therefore, the High Court was in error in holding that the appellant committed breaches of r. 19.
[Rule 19 is clumsily drafted, its import is not clear, its tight time schedule works hard ship and its procedure is cumbersome.
The Government should immediately consider the question of redrafting the rule.] [24 C D] (2) The appellant was a retired inspector drawing a pension of about Rs. 75 per month and, is not an income tax or wealth tax assessee.
He evidently has the backing of powerful financiers, but the purchase is not illegal merely because the appellant obtained necessary funds from some financiers.
The onus of proving that appellant was a benamidar was on the 4th respondent and from the materials on record it is not possible to hold that he is a benamidar for some other person.
[25 D] (3) Under r. 17(4), it is only when the highest bid is rejected that the next highest bid may be considered.
Where there is an acceptance of the highest offer and 'if for some reason it is revised, r. 17(4) cannot be invoked.
In such a case there must be a fresh disposal of the right of retail vend of liquor in accordance with the Rules.
Therefore, the High Court erred in observing that the 'authorities should consider the advisability of accepting the 4th respondents bid.
[26 E]
