The appellant was charged for the murder of a fellow student in a railway compartment.
The appellant was noticed washing blood stained clothes, and bathing in a river.
He was taken to the village Mukhiya, where he made a statement and signed it.
In this statement, he admitted his presence at the scene of murder but stated that the crime was committed by someone else, that he was injured by the knife of assailant when he tried to prevent the crime, and that when the assailant jumped off the train he 'followed suit being apprehensive of arrest on the charge of murder.
Thereafter, the appellant was handed over to the police.
A blood stained knife, which could be the cause of the victim 's injuries, was found on his person.
Only an incised skin deep injury, which could not account for the profuse blood stains on the clothes was found on him.
In his statement under section 342 C.P.C. the appellant denied all connections with the crime stating that he was injured at another place in a scuffle blood staining his clothes, books etc.
he admitted being taken to the Mukhias house, and stated that he had signed a blank paper there on being assaulted and threatened, but he denied making the statement in writing ascribed to him.
In appeal to this Court, the appellant contended that the statement ' recorded by the village Mukhiya before handing over the appellant to the police was inadmissible in evidence; and if admissible, the statement had to be taken as a whole, and one portion of it could not be acted upon while rejecting the other.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: (i) The contention that the statement was not voluntarily made and as such could not be admitted in evidence must be rejected.
No suggestion had been made to any one of the persons who had taken the appellant to the Mukhiya and had been tendered for cross examination that any one of them had assaulted the appellant.
nor was any suggestion made that the appellant had been coerced or threatened with dire consequences, if he did not make the statement.
The appellant 's own version that he was made to give his signature on a blank piece of paper cuts at the root of his case that he made a statement as a result of a threat or assault, for in that case, all that was necessary was to get his signature.
[1041 E G] (ii) In the circumstances of this case, the exculpatory part of the statement made before the Mukhiya being not only inherently improbable but also contradicted by the other evidence was rightly rejected and the inculpatory part was rightly accepted.
[1047 D] Rex vs Clewes, ; ; Hanumant vs 'The State of Madhya Pradesh, [1952] S.C.R. 1091; Palvinder Kaur vs The State of Punjab, , Emperor vs Balmakund, I.L.R. 52 All.
1011 and Narain Singh vs The State of Punjab, ; referred to. 1034
