B was an employee of the East India Railway and a subscriber to the State Railway Provident Fund.
He elected to be governed by the Provident Fund Sterling Account Rules, according to which payment of his provident fund on retirement was to be made in sterling.
B 'addressed letters to the Railway Accounts Officer in August 1947 and again after his retirement in February 1956 requesting that the amounts standing to his credit in the provident fund account be remitted to his bank in the United Kingdom.
The Railway administration drew cheques in respect of B 's provident fund in favour of the Reserve Bank of India and instructed that bank to convert the amount into sterling and to transmit it to B 's Bank in the United Kingdom.
The respondent had obtained a money decree against B and upon applying for execution of that decree obtained an order for attachment of the cheques lying with the Reserve Bank.
The cheques were encashed and the amount realised was deposited in the executing court.
The appellant claimed immunity from attachment of the cheques under section 3 of the and the respondent 's execution application was thereupon struck off.
On filing a second execution application, the respondent obtained an order for attachment of the money lying in the executing court.
A further application by the applicant claiming immunity from attachment was rejected by the executing court on the ground that the monies attached by the court lost their character as Provident fund monies long before they were attached and were not therefore immune from attachment.
The High Court in revision confirmed the order of the executing court.
On appeal to this Court, HELD : Allowing the appeal The order of attachment passed by the executing court was contrary to section 3 of the .
The Railway administration was in respect of the provident fund money in the position of a trustee for B and it had undertaken to discharge its obligation by arranging to have the amount converted into sterling and to remit it to B. The Reserve Bank was the agent of the Railway administration for converting and remitting the amount on its behalf.
Until the money was converted and transmitted by the Reserve Bank to B, it remained at the disposal of the Railway administration.
So long as the money remained under the control of the Railway administration as provident fund money, it was exempt from attachment under section 60(1)(k) (PC read with section 3 of the Provident Funds Act, 1925.[131 B F] 29 The High Court was in error in relying on illustration (d) of section 50 of the Contract Act.
B had not authorised the Reserve Bank to receive payment of the money on his behalf, nor had he sanctioned payment to the Reserve Bank in discharge of the liability of the Railway Administration.
[32 A B]
