The appellant, the Swatantra party candidate, was declared elected to the Lok Sabha as against the Congress party candidate.
On April 10, 1967, the first respondent, an elector in the constituency filed an election petition.
In the petition he charged the appellant with corrupt practice under section 123(2) proviso (a) (ii) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
The allegation was that one: S.M., with the consent of the appellant or his election agents, told the electors in speeches that if they voted for the Congress candidate, they would commit the sin of cow Slaughter and would become objects of divine displeasure.
On September 25, 1967 the first respondent 'obtained 'an order giving him leave ,o amend the petition by adding a charge with regard to the sin of Brahma hatya and Sadhu hatya.
On February 29, 1968 the trial commenced and one of the witnesses said that he heard S.M. giving a speech on February 8, 1967, where S.M. told the electors that Sri Shankaracharya had commanded them not to vote for the Congress and that a contravention of the mandate would be visited with spiritual censure.
On an objection being raised by the appellant 's counsel, the first respondent agreed that the statement of the witness should not be treated as part of the evidence.
The trial proceeded, 11 witnesses were examined and the appellant agreed to the marking of the full reports of the speeches of S.M. as exhibits and adopted a definite line of cross examination on the footing that the first respondent would not rely on the charge with regard to the command of Sri Shankaracharya.
However on March 5, 1968, the first respondent 'applied for an amendment of his petition to include a charge of corrupt practice based on the command of Sri Shankaracharya and the High Court allowed the amendment.
The, High Court set aside the 'appellants election on its finding that the corrupt practice in relation to the command of Sri Shankaracharya was proved.
In appeal to this Court on the questions (1) Whether the High Court should have allowed the amendment; and (2) Whether the appellant was guilty of any corrupt practice, HELD : The appellant 's election was rightly set aside.
(Per Bachawat, J.) : (1) The High, Court erred in allowing the amendment.
When a corrupt practice is charged against the returned candidate the election petition Must set forth full particulars of the corrupt practice so as to give the charge a definite character and to enable the Court to understand what the charge is.
It must be substantially proved as laid and evidence cannot be allowed to be given in respect of a charge not dis 7Sup CI/69 15 218 closed in the particulars.
Section 86(5) of the Act, however, allows amendment of particulars, but the Court shall not allow any amendment of the petition which will have the effect of introducing particulars of a corrupt practice not previously alleged in the petition, and normally, an application for amendment should be made within a reasonable time.
Though the Court has power to allow an amendment even after commencement of the trial, leave to amend would not he granted if the petitioner was not acting in good faith or had kept back facts known to him.
[221 B D, G H; 222 A B] In the present ease, the first respondent knew of both items of corrupt practice ' from his witnesses who were present at the speeches made by S.M.
If S.M. had told the electors about the mandate of Sri Shankaracharya, the witnesses must have given information to the first respondent, and no explanation was given by the first respondent as to why he withheld the information at the time of filing the petition or when he first amended his petition.
He was aware of the difference between the two charges of telling the electors about the sin of gohatya and that of telling the electors about the sin of disobeying the command of their religious leader.
But the :first respondent deliberately refrained from taking the new charge earlier and moved the application for amendment in bad faith at a very late stage of the trial.
Ordinarily, in an appeal under section 116A of the Act, this Court would not interfere with the discretion of the High Court in granting amendments, but since the order of the High Court has resulted in 'manifest injustice, this Court has the power and duty to correct the error.
[222 B D, F H; 223,A E] (Per Hegde, J.) The High Court has given good reasons in support of its order allowing the amendment and no case was made out to interfere with it.
[227 D] (2) (Per Bachawat, J.) There is ' no absolute ban on cow slaughter in several states in India and the Swatantra party was agitating for such a total ban.
Public criticism 'of the Congress party for not abolishing cow 'Slaughter was permissible, but the criticism ceases to be legitimate if the speaker commits the corrupt practice of undue influence under section 123(2) of the Act.
Under section 123(2), proviso ( a) el.
(ii), there is such undue influence if any person, with the consent of the candidate or his election agent, attempts to induce an elector to, believe that he will be tendered an object of divine displeasure or spiritual censure.
[224 D F] In the present case, S.M. spoke at the meeting on February8, 1967 with the consent of the election agent of the appellant.
S.M.was a Kirtankar of repute and well known and respected for his lectures on Hindu religion, while his audience consisted mostly of illiterate and ortho dox Hindus of rural areas who are filled with horror at the slaughter of a cow.
The dominant theme of the speech was that those who commit the sin of gohatya would be visited with divine displeasure.
Therefore, even apart from the charge relating to the command of Sri Shankaracharya, the speech was calculated to interfere with the free exercise of electroral right.
The corrupt practice was thus committed at the meeting on February 8, 1967, with the consent of the election agent of the appellant.
[224 G H; 225 G H; 226 F G 227 B C] Narbada Prasad vs Chhagan Lal, ; , followed.
(Per Hegde, J.) Everyone of the speeches made by S.M., read as a whole, are fanatical outpourings and a direct challenge to the concept of a secular democracy, and fell within the vice of the proviso (a)(ii) of section 123(2) of the Act.
[227 E] 219
