A joint family consisting of two brothers G and A and their wives, sons and daughters was possessed of joint family properties.
Between 'the years 1911 and 1940 several other properties were acquired.
In 1930, the son of A was taken in adoption by G. The adopted son died in 1944, and both the brothers denied the adoption and purported to effect a partition.
In the partition deed the lands were unequally divided between the brothers, G getting twice as much as A, but the brothers continued to be in joint possession of the lands.
There was no division of their house at all and the brothers had a joint mess even after the date of partition.
After the partition deed was executed the two brothers executed various alienations.
The first respondent, claiming to be the adopted son of another son of A, filed a suit in 1954 after the death of G and A, challenging the partition deed as fraudulent, that it was never acted upon and was only intended to defeat the rights of two widows in A 's family.
The appellant , contested the suit and supported all the alienations.
The trial court decreed the suit except with respect to one sale deed, and the High Court, in appeal, held in favour of the first respondent even with respect to that item.
In appeal to this Court, it was contended that : (1) The partition deed was not a sham transaction; (2) 'Even if the partition deed was bogus, there was in law a severance of joint family status; (3) The later acquisitions between the years 1911 and 1940 were not joint family properties but belonged exclusively to G; and (4) The High Court should not have reversed the decree of the trial court with respect to the sale deed, because it was not challenged in the plaint.
HELD : (1) The scheme of the partition was to deprive the widows .
in A 's family of any claim for maintenance out of the joint family properties but to limit their rights to the smaller share :given to A.
In view of the state of law before the decision in Anant vs Shankar, A.I.R. 1943 P.C. 196 the two brothers decided to execute a bogus deed of partition in order to avoid any legal consequences which may follow if either of the widows should take a son in adoption.
Therefore, the deed was not genuine.
[249 D G; 250 F G] 246 (2)In order to operate as a severance of joint status, it is necessary that the expression of intention to separate himself, by the 'particular member must be definite and unequivocal.
If the expression of the intention is a mere pretence or sham, there is, in the eye of law, no separation of the joint family status.
[251 C D] Merla Ramanna vs Chelikani Jagannadha Rao, A.I.R. 1941 P.C. 48, applied.
(3)There is no presumption that a joint Hindu family, because it is joint, possesses any joint family property or if there was a nucleus, any acquisition made by any member of the joint family is joint family property.
It is only after the possession of an adequate nucleus is shown that such a presumption is drawn and the onus shifts on to the person who claims the property as a self acquisition to make out his claim.
In the present case, the income from the nucleus was more than sufficient for the purchase of the various items acquired later, and there was no proof that G had any separate income of his own out of which he could have: acquired those items.
Therefore, the later acquisitions were also joint family properties.
[251 E G 252 C D, E F] Appalaswami vs Suryanaravanamurti, I.L.R. applied.
(4)The first respondent challenged all the alienations in the plaint and the High Court was right in holding that the sale without consideration and hence was not genuine and was not binding on the first respondent.
[253 D E]
