The Municipal Board Sitapur took various steps to levy water tax as authorised by section 126(1)(x) of the U.P. Municipalities Act, 1916, and the special resolution imposing the tax with effect from October 1, 1957 was passed on April 23, 1957.
The High Court held the levy to be, invalid.
In appeal filed by the Municipal Board this Court had to consider the effect of (i) the omission to publish the preliminary proposal separately in the manner prescribed by section 131(3) read with section 94, (ii) the nonpublication of the modified proposal in accordance with section 132(2) and (iii) the non publication of the special resolution directing the imposition of the tax in accordance with section 94.
HELD: The High Court was in error in quashing the imposition of the water tax.
(i) Procedural defects in the imposition of the tax are cured by section 135(3).
Such defects cannot be regarded as fundamental or as invalidating the imposition, if no substantial prejudice is caused thereby to the inhabitants of the municipality.
The issue of the notification under section 135(2) is conclusive proof that all necessary steps for the imposition of the tax have been taken in accordance with the. provisions of the Act.
[389E F] Municipal Board vs Raghuvendra, ; , Buland Sugar V. Municipal Board, ; and Berar Swadeshi Vanaspathi vs Municipal Committee, Shegaon, , applied.
(ii) In the present case there was substantial compliance with section 131(3).
The proposal was not separately published in the prescribed form but the omission to do so was a mere irregularity.
The object of the publication under section 131(3) is to inform the inhabitants of the proposal so that they can file their objections to it.
That object was fully achieved by the publication in the local newspaper.
[390 B D] (iii) The inhabitants submitted all objections which they could possibly raise both with regard to the rate of tax and the exemption limit.
Noprejudice was caused by not inviting fresh objections to reduction of the rate of tax or the exemption limit.
The non publication of the modified proposal was a mere irregularity and the defect was cured by section 135(3).
[390 E] (iv) Section 134(2) does not provide for the publication of the special resolution passed under it.
Assuming that it had to be published under the general provisions of section 94, the non publication was a mere irregularity cured by section 135(3).
[391 C]
