After this Court held in State of Madras vs C. G. Menon, ; that the Fugitive Offenders Act, 1881, was inconsistent with article 14 of the Constitution and was on that account unenforceable after 26th January 1950, the Government of India, Ministry of External Affairs issued a notification on May 21, 1955 indicating the procedure for securing the presence of a fugitive offender in India from the United Kingdom and other Commonwealth countries.
Under the Notification, the Magistrate concerned is to issue a warrant of arrest of the fugitive offender under the Criminal Procedure Code, 1898, and the warrant is to be sent to the Government of India, Ministry of External Affairs through the concerned State Government.
Thereafter, the Ministry is to address the appropriate authority in the Commonwealth country through the High Commissioner for India for the surrender of the fugitive offender.
In 1962, the Indian Extradition Act was passed, but as Hong Kong was not included in the First Schedule, that Act could not be resorted for the surrender of the respondent who was a fugitive offender residing in Hong Kong.
Action was therefore taken in the present case, pursuant to the notification.
The Chief Presidency Magistrate Calcutta issued a warrant under the Criminal Procedure Code for the arrest of the respondent and the warrant was forwarded by the Government of West Bengal to the Ministry of External Affairs, Government of India.
The Ministry forwarded the warrant to the High Commissioner for India, Hong Kong, who in his turn requested the Colonial Secretary, Hong Kong, for an order extraditing the respondent under the Fugitive Offenders Act 1881 (44 & 45 Vict Ch. 69).
The Central Magistrate, Hong Kong, endorsed the warrant and directed the Hong Kong police to arrest the respondent referring to the Republic of India as a British possession to which the Fugitive Offenders Act was applicable.
On the questions : (1) Whether the Chief Presidency Magistrate had no power to issue the warrant as it would have extraterrestrial operation; (2) Whether the Fugitive Offenders Act, having ceased to be part of the law of India, could be resorted to for obtaining extradition of fugitive offenders; (3) Whether the instructions of the Government of India for obtaining extradition are an invasion upon the authority of courts; and (4) Whether the , operates as a bar to the requisition made by the Ministry of External Affairs for the extradition of the ,respondent, HELD : (1) The Courts of the country which make a requisition for surrender proceed upon prima facie proof of the offence and leave it to the State to make a requisition upon the other State, in which the offender has taken refuge.
Under section 82 of the Criminal Procedure Code, when a warrant is issued by a Magistrate in India, it can be executed anywhere 321 in India and has no extra territorial operation.
By making a requisition to another State, in pursuance of such a warrant, for assistance in securing the presence of the offender, the warrant is not invested with extraterritorial operation.
If the other State requested Agrees to lend its aid to arrest the fugitive, the arrest is made by the issue of an independent warrant or endorsement or authentication of the warrant of the court which issued it.
By such endorsement or authentication the State expresses its willingness to lend its assistance in implementation of treaties or international commitments to secure the arrest of the offender.
The offender arrested pursuant to the warrant or endorsement is brought before the Court of the country to which requisition is made and that court holds enquiry to determine whether the, offender may be extradited.
[326 F327B] Courts in India have no authority to sit in judgment over the order passed by the Hong Kong Magistrate.
He acted in accor dance with the municipal law of Hong Kong and agreed to surrender the offender : his action cannot be challenged in this Court even if it is wrong.
The invalidity of the arrest in Hong Kong, if any, cannot affect the jurisdiction of Indian Courts to try the respondent if and when he is brought here.
[334] Emperor vs Vinayak Damodar Savarkar, I.L.R. , approved.
(2)But, in fact the Colonial Secretary of Hong Kong was, according 0 the law applicable in Hong Kong, competent to give effect to the warrant issued by the Chief Presidency Magistrate, Calcutta and the Central Magistrate, Hong Kong had jurisdiction under the Fugitive Offenders Act to direct that the respondent may be surrendered to India.
Whatever may he the position in India after it has become a Republic the United Kingdom and several Colonies have treated the Fugitive Offenders Act is applicable for the purpose of honouring the requisition made by the republic of India.
Merely because, for the purpose of the extradition procedure, in a statute passed before the attainment of independence by the former colonies and dependencies, certain territories continue to be referred as 'British Possessions ' the 'statute does not become inapplicable to those territories.
The expression 'British Possessions ' in the old statutes merely survives as an artificial mode of reference.
Though it is not consistent with the political realities, it does not imply political dependence of the Governments of the territories referred to.
The order of surrender passed by the Magistrate in Hong Kong was valid according to.
the law in force in Hong Kong.
[338 H; 337G] Re.
Government of India and Mubarak Ali Ahmed, , Re.
Kweshi Armah , Zacharia vs Republic of Cyprus, ; and Halsbury 's Laws of England 3rd edn.
5 article 987, p. 433, referred to.
(3) This Court, by holding in C. G. Menon 's case that since India became a Republic the Fugitive Offenders Act could not be enforced in his country, presented the Government of India with a problem which had to be resolved by devising a machinery for securing the presence of fenders who, were fugitives from justice.
The notification was issued only in the nature of advice about the procedure to be followed and was not in any manner intended as an affront to the Courts or to impose any executive will upon the courts in judicial matters.
[339 E F] In the present case, the Chief Presidency Magistrate, Calcutta, had power to issue the warrant for the arrest of the respondent because there was prima facie evidence against him.
If the warrant was to be success 322 fully executed a against the.
Respondent, who was not in India, the assistance of the executive government had to be obtained.
Therefore, the issue of the warrant and the procedure followed in transmitting it were not illegal and not even irregular.
(4)Extradition is the surrender by one State to another of a person desiredto be dealt with for crimes of which he had been accused or convicted.
Such a surrender is a political act done in pursuance of a treaty or an ad hoc arrangement, and founded upon the principle that it is in the interest of all civilised communities that criminals should not go unpunished.
While the law relating to extradition between independent States is based on treaties, whether an offender should be handed over pursuant to a requisition is determined by the domestic law of the State on which the requisition is made.
Therefore, the fact that the , could not be availed of for securing the presence of the respondent for trial in India, did not operate as a bar to the requisition made by the Ministry of External Affairs, Government of India, if they were able to puksuade the Colonial Secretary, Hong Kong, to deliver the respondent for trial in this country.
if the Colonial Secretary was willing to do so, it cannot be said that the warrant issued by the Chief Presidency Magistrate, Calcutta, for the arrest of the respondent with the aid of the requisition for securing his presence from Hong Kong in India, was illegal.
[325 H; 340 C F]
