The appellant and S were, charged for an offence under section 302 I.P.C: and under the Explosive Substances Act.
The prosecution relied upon the evidence of the approver.
The approver 's statement was corroborated, (a) by the recovery of a piece of cloth which was part of the same cloth used in the clime, (b) by the evidence of that the box was made for the appellant, and (c) by the evidence regarding despatch of the parcel by the appellant.
The Sessions Judge convicted the appellant and S, against which both appealed.
The conviction of the appellant was upheld by the High Court, as it considered that the statement of the approver was corroborated by the evidence of other witnesses so far the,appellant was concerned.
But the High Court acquitted S being of the view that there was no independent corroboration of the approver 's evidence which lead to the inference that S was instrumental in the commission of the crime.
In appeal to this Court, the appellant contended that (i) the affect of acquittal of S was to, weaken, if not to destroy, the approver 's evidence so far as it concerned the appellant, relying on the principles of issue estoppel; and (ii) there was no corroboration of the approver 's evidence so far as the appellant was concerned.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD : (i) For the principle of issue estoppel to arise, there must have been distinctly raised and inevitably decided the same issue in the earlier proceedings between the same parties.
But the principle cannot be invoked in the present case because the parties are different and the decision upon any issue as between State and S, in the same litigation cannot operate as binding upon the 'State with regard to the present appellant.
[242 D E] Pritam Singh vs State of Punjab, A.I.R. 1956 S.C. 415.
and Manipur Administration vs Thokchom Bira Singh, ; , followed.
Sambasivam vs Public Prosecutor, Federation of Malaya, , King vs Wilkes, ; at pp.
518 519, Marz vs The Queen, ; , Again in Brown v, Robinson, , 301, applied.
(ii)The application of approver 's evidence has to satisfy a double test.
His evidence must show that he is a reliable witness and that is a test which is common to all the witnesses.
If this test is satisfied the second test which still remains to be applied is that the approver 's evidence must receive sufficient corroboration.
It would not however, be right to expect that such independent corroboration should cover the whole of the prosecution case.
In the present case, the High Court had rightly applied this Principle and reached the conclusion that the approver 's evidence was materially corroborated so far as the appellant was concerned.
[243 A C] 237 Sarwan Singh vs State of Punjab, ; , followed.
