The respondent, was selected by the Deputy Inspector General of Police for admission to the Police Training College, and the result declaring him successful was issued by the order of the Inspector General of Police, and his appointment announced in the police Gazette.
While the respondent was serving as a Sub Inspector of Police, charges were framed against him, under section 7 of The .
The Superintendent of Police gave a report mentioning his past record, and recommended his removal from service.
Notice to show cause, enclosing the findings of the Superintendent of Police was served on the respondent.
The Deputy Inspector General, hold the enquiry, and agreed with the findings of the Superintendent of Police.
The respondent filed an appeal to the Inspector,General of Police, which was rejected.
In their order, both the Deputy Inspector General and Inspector General, took into consideration the past record of the respondent.
The respondent filed a suit for a declaration that his removal was illegal and ineffective.
The trial court dismissed the suit, but the High Court decreed the suit holding that no opportunity was given to the respondent to explain his past record which was taken into consideration.
in appeal to this Court, the State contended that the respondent had notice that his past record would be taken into consideration, and alternatively, if the past record was taken into consideration for imposing lesser penalty, it was not necessary to mention in the show cause notice that the past record would be considered.
The respondent contended that there has been breach of article 311(1) of the Constitution as he was appointed by the Inspector General of Police and removed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police and that he should have been tried under section 29 of the , before he was charged under section 7.
HELD : The suit must be dismissed.
(i) The respondent had notice that his past record would be taken into consideration because the Superintendent of Police had mentioned it 'in his, order, a copy of which was supplied to him.
Further, on the charges against the respondent, he had been dealt with leniently and if the record was taken into consideration for the purpose of imposing a lesser punishment and not for the purpose of increasing the quantum or nature of punishment, then it was not necessary that it should be stated in the show cause notice that his past 'record would be taken into consideration.
[397A; G H] State of Mysore vs K. Manche Gowda, ; , 548, referred to.
(ii) The first appellate court 's conclusion that the respondent had been appointed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, was a finding of fact and was binding on this Court.
But apart from that the only document relied on by the respondent was the result sheet declaring him 393 successful after training and this had no relevance to his appointment as.
Sub Inspector of Police.
[398 A G] (iii) A Police Officer may also be liable to be prosecuted under section 29 of the but it is not necessary that in every case which falls within section 7 the Police Officer should first be prosecuted under section 29 before he can be proceeded under under section 7.
Section 7 deals with disciplinary Proceedings makes certain breaches criminal offences.
Section 29 does not in any way limit the operation of section 7.
[399 C]
