The amount of dues under the Indian Income tax Act, 1922 the U.P. Sugar Factories Control Act.
1938 and the were recoverable as arrears of land revenue.
Section 286(1) of the U.P. Zamindari Abolition & Land Reforms Act provides that if any arrears of land revenue could not be recovered by any of the processes mentioned in cls.
(a) to (e) of section 279, the Collector may realise the same by attachment and sale of the interests of the defaulter in any other immovable property of the defaulter, and section 286(2) provided that money recoverable as arrears of I" revenue, may be recovered by process "under this section" from any immovable property of the defaulter.
As the appellant company was unable to meet its liabilities in respect of income tax dues, sugar cess and the amount due for cane supplied to it, the immovable property of the company were sold to meet the dues.
The appelant challenged the sale contending that (i) the immovable prop" of the company would be attached and sold only after the processes prescribed in cls.
(a) to (a) of a. 279 ie.
by the age of movable properties were resorted to; (ii) the sale was illegal or irregular as the Collector ignored the intimation of the Income tax Officer staying the sale for recovery of income tax; and (iii) the appellant was prevented from raising funds for making the deposit as provided by r. 285H (of the rules framed under the Act) for setting aside the sale as the purchaser was appointed as the Authorised Controller and put in possession of all the properties of the appellant.
Dismissing the appeal this Court, HELD : (i) Power to recover arrears of land revenue from a defaulter is governed by the processes mentioned in cls.
(a) to (e) of section 279 of the Act and section 286(1) places certain restrictions upon the power of the Collector to recover land revenue by attachment and sale of lands other than the holding in respect of which the land revenue is due.
But the restrictions on the power of the Collector operated only when land revenue is in arrears.
Restrictions, if any, upon the p ower of the Collector to recover dues under statutes, as arrears of land revenue arise, from the statute which is the source of the liability and not from the U.P. Zamindari Abolition & Land Reforms Act, which merely sets out the processes for recovery of the dues.
To hold that sub section
(2) of section 286 requires the Collector in the first instance to recover out of the movable property or by arrest and detention of the defaulter before immovable property of the defaulter is attached and sold is to amend the substantive provisions of the Acts under which the liability for money due is recoverable as land revenue.
For instance, under a. 46 of the Income tax Act, 1922, the powers exercisable by the Collector in recovering arrears of income tax, which are recoverable as arrears of land revenue are not restricted to the Land Revenue Code; the Collector is entitled to exercise all the powers of ' a Civil Court for the purpose of recovery of an amount due under a decree under the Code of Civil Procedure, an the Code, of Civil procedure im 469 poses no obligations to recover the dues by sale of movables or by arrest and detention of the defaulter before immovable property may be attached.
The provisions of the Act, which authorise recovery of sums of money as arrears of land revenue, do not require the Collector to follow any sequence of the processes for recovery; it is competent to the Collector to resort to any process prescribed by section 279 in aid of recovery of the dues which are recoverable as arrears of land revenue, [473 H 474 D; 475 H] (ii) The sale was not illegal or irregular for the reason that the Collector ignored the intimation of the Income tax Officer staying the sale for recovery of income tax dues.
The immovable property could have been put up for sale for recovery of sugar cane cess and the cane price which were many times more than the income tax dues.
[476 G] (iii) There was no force in the contention that the appellant was unable to raise funds and make the deposit under r. 285H because the purchaser was appointed the Authorised Controller, who took possession of all the properties of the Company.
The appellant could not comply with the provision of r. 285H for having the sale set aside as the movables were not sufficient to enable the appellant to raise the amount required for deposit under r. 285H. [476 H]
