On March 16, 1968 the petitioner was arrested and ordered to be detained under section 3(1) (a) (1) of the Jammu and Kashmir Preventive Detention Act, 1964.
On September 16, 1968, the order was revoked and another order was served on him.
on September 24, 1968 the petitioner was served, with the grounds for the fresh order of detention His case was referred to the Advisory Board on October 26, 1968 and the Board recommended his detention.
Under section 10 of the Act, as amended by section 13A, of the Amending Act 8 of 1967, the Government is required to refer a case to the Advisory Board within 60 days from the date of detention: In a petition for the issue of a writ of habeas corpus it was contended that : (1) Since the case of,, the petitioner was not referred to the Advisory Board within 60 days of the date of detention (March 16, 1968) the detention was invalid; (2) The authorities acted mala fide in making the detention order; (3) The grounds in support of the order were vague and indefinite; and (4) 'Mat his being subjected to solitary confinement while in detention was illegal.
HELD : (1) There was no reason for not accepting the statement of the State that it was not intended, when the detention order of March 16, 1968 was passed that the petitioner was to be kept in detention for a period longer than 6 months.
Therefore, his case fell within the terms of s.13A(1)which provides that 'notwithstanding anything, contained in this Act a person may be detained for a period not longer than 6 months without obtaining the opinion of the Advisioiry Board.
In the present case the petitioner was detained under the first order only for a period of 6 months when that order was revoked by the second order of detention.
[579 C] (2)The grounds for the two orders are not identical; When the first Order was passed the petitioner was not intended to be detained for a period exceeding 6 months.
Thereafter, in consequence of further information that the petitioner was violent by nature and was a perpetual threat to the maintenance of public order, the Government had to issue a fresh order.
Therefore.
it could not be said that the Government acted mala fide inmaking either the original or the fresh order.
[579 G H; 580 A B] (3) The order clearly stated facts relevant to the grounds of detention, except those which Government considered to be against public interest to disclose.
Under section 8 (2) it is open to the Government to withhold such facts.
Because of the withholding of such facts the grounds in the order of detention could not be said to.
be vague or indefinite.
[580 C E] 575 (4) Notwithstanding the broad principles of the rule of law, equality and liberty of, the individual enshrined in the Constitution, it tolerates on account 1 the peculiar conditions prevailing, legislation in relation to preventive detention, which is a negation of the rule of law, equality and liberty.
But it is implicit in the Constitutional scheme that the Power to detain is not a power to publish, and the restrictions placed must, consistently with the effectiveness of detention, be minimal.
Since a detenu is not a convict he cannot be subjected to solitary confinement.
