The respondent was a permanent employee of the Northern Railway and was served with a charge sheet in November, 1956, which levelled two charges against him.
He was accused of having been instrumental in compelling the shut down of an air compressor and, in contravention of a direction given by the General Manager, Northern Railway, on June 19, 1956, of having addressed a number of meetings within the Railway premises.
An enquiry committee after investigating the charges came to the ' conclusion that the respondent was not proved beyond all reasonable doubt but that the 'respondent was guilty of the second charge.
The General Manager, who was the disciplinary authority, after examining the report of the committee, accepted its findings on the second charge but differing from its conclusion on the first charge tentatively came to the conclusion that the respondent was guilty of that charge as well.
After the issue of a show cause notice to the respondent and the 'rejection of his explanation, the General Manager directed, by an order of August 20, 1957, that the respondent be removed from service.
The respondent challenged the order of his removal by a writ petition.
The petition was allowed and an appeal to a Division Bench was dismissed.
The questions for decision in the appeal to this Court were (i) whether the High Court was within its jurisdiction in the exercise of its powers under article 226 of the Constitution to set aside the conclusion reached by the General Manager on the first charge; (ii) whether the appellate court was right in its view that if an order of removal is based on number of grounds and one or more of those grounds are found to be unsustainable, the order is liable to be struck down; and (iii) whether the direction issued by the General Manager on June 19, 1956 was violative of article 19(1) (a) to (c) and (3).
It was contended on behalf of the appellant that the rights guaranteed under article 19(1) (a), (b) & (c) are inviolable and they cannot be interfered with except in accordance with sub articles 2, 3 & 4 of article 19; that the Railway workers had a right to assembly in any place they chose and could express their views so long they did not disturb the work going on in the premises.
HELD : Allowing the appeal and dismissing the writ petition : (i) The High Court exceeded its powers in interfering with the findings of the General Manager on the first charge.
It was open to the General Manager to accept the evidence which the, Enquiry Committee had rejected on the first charge and he was not bound by the conclusions reached by the corn 549 mittee.
On the facts in the present case it could not be said that the finding ofthe disciplinary authority was not supported by any evidence nor could it be said that no reasonable person could have reached such a finding.
Hence the conclusion reached by the disciplinary authority must prevail and the High Court in the exercise of its certiorari jurisdiction could not have interfered with its conclusion.
[552 A C] Union of India vs H. C. Goel, ; ; Syed Yakoob vs K. section Radhakrishnan & Ors.
, ; ; relied on.
(ii)There was no force in the contention that the punishment imposed could not be sustained if it was held that one of the two charges on the basis of which it was imposed, was unsustainable.
If the order in an enquiry under article 311 can be supported on any finding as substantial misdemeanor for which the punishment imposed can lawfully be impose it is not for the Court to consider whether that ground alone would have weighed with the authority in imposing the punishment in question [552 G] State of Orissa vs Bidyabhan Mohapatra, [1962] Suppl.
1 S.C.R. 648; followed.
(iii)The General Manager 's direction prohibiting the holding of meetings within the Railway premises was not violative of article 19(1).
The Northern Railway was the owner of the premises in question and was entitled to enjoy its property in the same manner as any private individual subject to only such restriction as the law or the usage, may place on them.
There is no 'fundamental right for any one to hold meetings in Government premises.
Freedom of speech, freedom, to assemble peacefully and the freedom to form Associations or Unions does not mean that these rights can be exercised by the citizens in whatever place they please.
The exercise of those freedoms will come to an end as soon as the right of some one else to hold his property intervenes.
Such a limitation is inherent in the exercise of those rights.
The validity of that limitation is not to be judged by the tests prescribed by Sub articles
(2) and (3) of article 19.
[554 D] Marsh vs Alabama, 90 Law Edn.
P. 265, Tucker vs State of Texas.
90 Law Edn.
p. 274); distinguished.
