The appellant Company, which was incorporated in 1946, purchased and installed, machinery from time to time valued at Rs. 75 lacs.
In respect of its assessment to, income tax for certain years, it was allowed 'initial depreciation ' on new machinery 'installed in the relevant previous years and was also allowed 'normal depreciation ' at appropriate rates.
In the assessment year 1956 57 the aggregate of all depreciation allowances including 'initial depreciation ' exceeded the original cost of machinery but in respect of that year as well as for the assessment years 1957 58 and 1958 59, the Income Tax Officer failed to deduct 'initial depreciation and the company was allowed 'normal depreciation ' in, excess of the amount permissible under proviso (c) to section 10(2)(vi) of the Income Tax Act, 1922.
On November 20, 1964, the Income Tax Officer issued notices of reassessment for the three years under section 148 of the Income Tax Act,.
The Company filed returns under protest and thereafter challenged the notices of re assessment by a writ petition under article 226 of the Constitution.
It was common ground that excessive depreciation was in fact allowed to the Company and that certain income escaped assessment, but it was contended on behalf of the appellant that the income did not escape assessment "by reason of the omission or failure on the part of the assessee to disclose fully and truly all material facts necessary for assessment of that year".
A Single Judge of the High Court held that while the Company committed no error in failing to take into account the 'initial depreciation ' while entering the written down value in its return, it was not open to the Company to set out only those facts which exaggerated its claim.
He therefore rejected the petition.
In dismissing a Letters Patent appeal, the High Court took the view that there was apparently "a mistake and error on the side of the Company as well as the Income Tax Officer" and that the Income Tax Officer could reasonably come to the conclusion that it was due to the omission and failure on the part of the assessee in disclosing fully and truly all material facts necessary for the assessment that the error was committed by the Income Tax Officer as a result of Which some income had escaped assessment.
On, an appeal, HELD : The judgment of the High Court must be set aside and the case remanded.
Although the High Court held that the Income Tax Officer had decided that certain income had escaped assessment, it did not consider whether the income escaped assessment by reason of omission or failure on the part of the Company to disclose fully and truly all material facts necessary for assessment, within the meaning of section 34 of the 1922 Act.
Calcutta Discount Co. Ltd. vs Income Tax officer, Companies District 1, Calcutta and Anr., ; referred to.
