The Respondent Girasdars in the State of Saurashtra mortgaged their lands with possession with the appellants, who paid the land revenue and other dues.
By the Saurashtra Land Reforms Act (25 of 1951), the, rights of the Girasdars were extinguished, and the tenants of Girasdars became occupants of land held by them.
The Land Reforms Act provided for the Mamlatdar to allot land to a Girasdar for personal cultivation.
The special Mamlatdar declared the lands in dispute to be Khalsa and full assessment had to; be taken, and that there was no need to grant 'any occupancy rights.
The Saurashtra Agricultural Debtors Relief Act, 1954 was enacted scaling down the debts and for providing for rest oration of their property, to the debtors.
Thereupon the respondents applied.for adjustment of their debt to the Court having jurisdiction under the Debtors Relief article The ' appellants relied on the order of the Special Mamlatdar declaring the lands as Khalsa and contended that the lands having been declared as Kholsa, the respondents had lost their rights therein.
HELD : The rights of the respondents Girasdars in this case were not extinguished under the Land Reforms Act and it was open to the court exercising jurisdiction under the Debtors Relief Act to scale down the debt and provide the restoration of the land in possession of the mortgagees to, the mortgagors on taking fresh account between the parties and directing.
payments by one party to the other.
The Saurashtra Land Reforms Act aimed at regulating the relationship of persons in position of Landholders and their tenants, and to enable the tenants to become the real owners of the soil under direct tenancy from the State.
It was not meant to extinguish or affect the rights of Landholders as mortgagors unless the persons in occupation had become tenants either by contract or by operation of law.
No adjudication of the rights of the debtors and creditors inter se was done.
All that the Special Mamlatdar decided and had jurisdiction to decide under the Land Reforms Act was whether the respondents could be given occupancy certificates or allotted any land Gharkhed and the Special Mamlatdar merely ordered that the lands being Khalsa full assessment had to be taken in respect of them and there was no need to grant occupancy rights.
In order to get such occupancy rights the appellants had to show that they had become tenants which they could not be under the provisions of section 6 of the Land Reforms Act.
The fact that they had all along paid the revenue and other dues to the State, if any, would not clothe them with tenancy rights.
That apart, it has not been shown that the respondents were awarded any compensation in respect of the 691 Khalsa lands given in mortgage to the appellants.
The occupancy certificates, if any, given by the Special Mamlatdar to the appellants could not under the provisions of the Land Reforms Act extinguish the title of the respondents.
[695 H; 696 H]
