The Imperial Chemical Industries (Export) Glasgow was a subsidiary of Imperial Chemical Industries London.
With effect from 1st April 1948 the former terminated the services of four selling agents in India and in their place appointed the respondent company (another subsidiary of the Imperial Chemical Industries, London) as their sole selling agents.
The four former selling agents were to be paid compensation for the termination of their services and this was done through the accounts of the respondent.
In its income returns for the years 1949 50, 1950 51, 1951 52 and 1952 53 the respondent showed as its income the net amount of commission arrived at after deducting from the gross commission the compensation paid to the former selling agents.
The Income tax Officer in his order for the year 1951 52 held that the said deductions were not permissible.
His order was confirmed by the Appellate Assistant Commissioned and the Income tax Appellate Tribunal.
The Tribunal held that there was no agreement between the Imperial Chemical Industries (Export) Glasgow and the respondent company casting on the latter the liability to pay the compensation to the former selling agents out of the commission earned by it; the Tribunal further said that even if there was an agreement it was not acted upon.
In reference under section 66(1) of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922 the High Court took the opposite view and held that the claim made by the respondent company was allowable.
The revenue appealed to this Court.
The questions that fell for consideration were : (i) whether the High Court was justified in interfering with the Tribunal 's finding of fact on a question not referred to it; (ii) whether the compensation amounts paid by the respondent to the former selling agents were expenditure laid out wholly and exclusively for 'the purpose of business; (ii) whether the income in question was diverted before it reached the respondent by virtue of an overriding title.
HELD : (i) It is well established that the High Court is not a Court of Appeal in a reference under section 66(1) of the Act and it is not open to the High Court in such a reference to embark upon a reappraisal the evidence and to arrive at findings of fact contrary to those of the Appellate: Tribunal.
It is the duty of the High Court while hearing the reference to confine itself to the facts as found by the Appellate Tribunal and to answer the question of law in the context of those facts.
It true that the finding of fact will be defective in law if there is no evidence 805 to support it or if the finding is perverse.
But in the hearing of a reference under section 66(1) of the Act it is not open to the assessee to challenge such a finding of fact unless he has applied for the reference of the specific question under section 66(1).
[809 B D] In the present ease the assessee had in its applications under section 66(1) expressly raised the question about the validity of the finding of the Appellate Tribunal as regards the agreement but the question was not referred by the Appellate Tribunal to the High Court and the contention of the assessee with regard to the question must be deemed to have been rejected.
The assessee did not thereafter move the High Court under section 66(2) of the Act requiring it to call for a statement of the case on that specific question.
The High Court was therefore in error in embarking upon a reappraisal of the evidence before the Appellate Tribunal and setting aside the finding of the Appellate Tribunal that there was no agreement as claimed by the assessee for the payment of compensation to the former selling agents out of its own commission and.
that if there was such an agreement it was not acted upon.
[809 F H] India Cements Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, 60 I.T.R. 52, Commissioner of Income tax vs Sri Meenakshi Mills Ltd., and Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay City I vs Greaves Cotton & Co. Ltd., , applied.
(ii) In the absence of proof of the exact terms and conditions of the agreement it was not possible to accept the argument that the amount paid as compensation to the ex agents was an 'expenditure laid out wholly and exclusively for the purpose of the business ' under section 10(2)(xv) of the Act.
[810 D] (iii) The assessee 's documents suggested that the payment of compensation was the exclusive liability of the I.C.I. (Exports) Ltd. and the assessee was not under a legal obligation to pay the amount of compensation to the outgoing agents.
It was not established that the payment of compensation was by an overriding title created either by the Act of the parties or by the operation of law.
An obligation to apply the income in a particular way before it is received by the assessee or before it has accrued or arisen to the assessee results in the diversion of income.
An obligation to apply income accrued, arisen or received amounts merely to the apportionment of income and the income so applied is not deductible.
The true test for the application of the rule of diversion of income by an overriding title is whether the amount sought to be deducted in truth never reached the assessee as his income.
[810 H 811 H] Raja Bejoy Singh Dudhuria vs Commissioner of Income tax, , P. C. Mullick vs Commissioner of Income tax, and Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay City II vs Sitaldas Tirathdas, , applied.
