In proceedings for assessment to tax for each of the assessment years 1956 57 and 1957 58, the Income Tax Officer reduced the rebate in supertax admissible to the respondent under the Finance Acts of 1956 and 1957 on the view that the respondent bank, which was a public limited company, had distributed dividends exceeding 6% of its paid up capital.
In reducing the rebate the Income Tax Officer excluded an amount representing share premium received by the company.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner held that the company 's share premium was liable to be added to its capital in computing the reduction in the rebate in super tax and directed modification of the order of assessment.
The Appellate Tribunal in appeal, as well as the High Court, on a reference, agreed with this view.
In the appeal to this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellant that the amount representing share premium was not to be added to the share capital because (1) the expression "share premium account" in the definition of "paid up capital" in the Explanation to Paragraph D of Part II of the Finance Acts of 1956 and 1957 means an account apart from the reserves maintained by the company; and (2) in view of the provisions of section 78 (3) read with section 78(1) of the , the respondent company was bound to maintain a separate share premium account outside the reserves and to transfer the share premium into that account which the respondent company had failed to do.
HELD : A share premium account is liable to be included in the paid up capital for the purpose of computing rebate if it is maintained as a separate account.
But the Explanation to paragraph D of of the Finance Acts of 1956 and 1957 does not contemplate that the account must be kept apart from the reserves.
if within the reserves it is an identifiable separate account, the share premium will qualify for inclusion in the paid up capital.
[728 H] Although under the 1 of 1956 there was an express provision that the share premium account shall be maintained in a separate account and by virtue of Sch.
VI of the Act the share premium has to be shown in the balance sheet under the head "Liabilities" as part of the share capital and not of reserves, on that account it cannot be assumed that if the share premium is maintained as a separate account within the reserves, reduction in the rebate in super tax is liable to be computed after excluding share premium.
[728 C] In any event with respect to the assessment year 1956 57 the company was being assessed to tax for the previous year of the company ending on 723 December, 1955, when the of 1956 was not in force.
During that period the company was governed by Act 7 of 1913 which contained no provision analogous to section 78 of the C D]
