In respect of his assessment to wealth tax for the assessment years 1957 58, 1958 59 and 1959 60, the appellant filed returns in the status of a Hindu Undivided Family.
His family at the material time consisted of himself, his wife and two minor daughters.
The appellant claimed to be assessed in the status of a Hindu Undivided Family inasmuch as the wealth returned consisted of ancestral property received or deemed to have been received by him on partition with his father and brothers.
The Wealth Tax Officer did not accept the contention of.
the appellant and assessed him as an individual.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner confirmed this view.
However the Appellate Tribunal held that the appellant should be assessed in the status of Hindu Undivided Family but the High Court, upon a reference, disagreed with the view of the Appellate Tribunal and held that as the appellant family did not have any other male coparcener, all the assets forming the 'subject matter of the returns filed by the appellant belonged to him as an individual and not to a Hindu Undivided Family.
On appeal to this Court, HELD:Allowing the appeal: The status of the appellant was rightly determined as that of a Hindu ,Undivided Family by the Appellate Tribunal.
The expression "Hindu Undivided Family" in the Wealth Tax Act is used in the sense in which a Hindu joint family is understood in the personal law of Hindus.
Under the Hindu system of law a joint family may consist of a single male member and his wife and daughters and there is nothing in the scheme of the Wealth Tax Act to suggest that a Hindu Undivided Family as an assessable unit must consist of at least two male members.
[886 C] Under section 3 of the Wealth Tax Act not a Hindu coparcenary but a Hindu Undivided Family is one of the assessable legal entities.
A Hindu joint family consists of all persons lineally descended from a common ancestor, and includes their wives and unmarried daughters.
A Hindu coparcenary is a much narrower body than the Hindu joint family; it in cludes only those persons who acquire by birth an interest in the joint or coparcenary property, these being the sons, grand sons and great grand sons of the holder of the joint property for the time being.
[885 F H] Kalyanji Vithaldas vs Commissioner of Income Tax, 5 I.T.R. 90, Commissioner of Income Tax vs Gomedalli Lakshminarayan considered.
88 3 Commissioner of Income Tax vs A. P. Swamy Gomedalli, , Attorney General of Ceylon vs A.R. Arunachallam Chettiar , Gowali Buddanna 's [1960] 6 I.T.R. 203 referred to.
T.S. Srinivasan vs Commissioner of Income Tax 60, I.T.R. 36 distinguished.
