The appellant, who was at the time the Karta of a Hindu Joint Family, gave notice in January, 1954, to the respondent State under section 80 of the Civil Procedure Code.
Thereafter a suit was filed in July, 1954, by which time a partition had taken place in the family.
In view of this the appellant 's three grand sons were joined as plaintiffs in the suit the plaintiffs sought a declaration that three nazul plots in suit had been in the possession of the plaintiffs and their ancestors from time immemorial and their status was that of Raiyat Sarkar; so that an order of the State Government in the Survey and Settlement Department refusing to recognise their possession over the plots was wrong and ultra vires.
Apart from contesting the suit on the merits, the respondent State contended that plaintiffs 2, 3 and 4 i.e. the appellant 's grand sons had no right to institute a suit because no notice under section 80 C.P.C. was given on their behalf.
The trial court dismissed the suit.
In an appeal, the High Court held that the appellant had lost the right to represent the joint family as karta at the time of institution of the suit because their had been severence of joint status and the notice served by him could not enure to the benefit of other plaintiffs.
On the merits the High Court found that the plaintiffs had shown their possession for the statutory period of 6 years.
On appeal to this Court, HELD: (1) The notice given by the appellant in January, 1954, was sufficient in law to sustain a suit brought by all the divided coparceners who must be deemed to be as much the authors of the notice as the Karta who was the actual signatory of the notice.
There was substantial identity between the person giving the notice and the persons bringing the suit in the present case.
[959 B] At the time of giving notice the appellant was admittedly the eldest member of the joint family and being a Karta he was entitled to represent the joint family in all its affairs.
The cause of action had accrued at the time of giving of the notice and it was not necessary to give a second notice merely because there was a severance of the joint family, before 20th July, 1954, when the suit was actually instituted.
[958 G H] Although the terms of section 80 C.P.C. must be strictly complied with, that does not mean that the terms of the notice 'should be scrutinised in an artificial or pedantic manner.
[960 A] Dhian Singh Sobha Singh & Anr.
vs The Union of India, ; , referred to, 956 State of Andhra Pradesh vs Gundugola Venkata Suryanarayan Garu, ; ; Vellayan Chettiar & Ors.
vs Government of the Province of Madras and Anr.
, A.I.R. 1947, P.C. 197; Government of the Province of Bombay vs Pestonji Ardeshir Wadia & Ors., 76 I.A. 85, distinguished.
(2) On the merits, the appellants had failed to produce reliable oral or documentary evidence to prove that their ancestors had possession over the disputed land for many years.
On the contrary this land was always recognised as Milkiat Sarkar and the respondent State Government was justified in holding it as such.
