The respondent landlord let out to the appellant four shops and later one let out to him two more shops.
The respondent filed a suit alleging that subsequent to the letting of the shops, by a contract, the rent was consolidated and increased and that the shops were sub let by the appellant, so the appellant be ejected from all the six shops under section 13 (1) (e) of the Rajasthan Premises (Control of Rent and Eviction) Act.
The appellant denied the contract and denied the subletting altogether.
The trial court dismissed the suit, and the first appellate court affirmed the decree.
Both these courts concurrently found that new contract of tenancy was not created, it was only an increase of rent, the other terms of the tenancy remained unaltered, and that the two shops were sub let but with the permission of the landlord.
The High Court, in second appeal, reversed the decree of the courts below, and held that there was one integrated tenancy of all the shops, that the four shops were sub let with the permission of the landlord, but the later two were sub let without permission, and that having sub let a part of the premises without the permission, the decree for possession of all the shops must be passed.
appeal to this Court, the appellant tenant contended that (i) the tenancy of all the six shops were not one integrated; (ii) two shops were not sublet without the permission of the landlord; and (iii) the sub letting was before the Jaipur Rent Control Order, 1947 came into force, which was repealed and continued by the promulgation of the Rajasthan Premises (Control of Rent & Eviction) Act, 1950, and therefore ejectment could not be claimed under section 13(1) (e) of the Act.
HELD : The appellant could not be ejected from four shops, but ought to be ejected from the two shops.
(i) A mere increase or reduction of rent does not necessarily import the surrender of the existing lease and the grant of a new tenancy.
In the present case the first two courts on a review of the entire evidence came to the conclusion that the increase of rent did not import a new demise.
This finding of fact was binding on the High Court in second appeal and it erred in holding that there was one integrated tenancy of the six shops.
[991 H 992 B] (ii) In the absence of any pleading and any issue on the question of sub letting, the first two courts were in error in holding that the two shops were sub let with the permission of the landlord.
The permission of the landlord for the sub letting cannot be established from the mere fact that the landlord realised rent after the sub letting in the absence of proof that the landlord had then clear knowledge of the sub lease.
[992 D] The date of the sub letting of the two shops is not mentioned in the plaint.
In the absence of any pleading and any issue on this question the 990 High Court was error in recording the finding that the two shops were sub let towards the end of 1947 after the Jaipur Rent Control Order 1947 came into force.
It can only be said that the sub letting was sometime after 1945.
[992 E] (iii) Section 13(1)(e) of the Act was intended to apply to sub letting before the Act came into force.
If the tenant had sub let the premises without the permission of the landlord either before or after the coming into force of the 'Act, he was not protected from eviction under section 13(1) (e), and it matters not that he had the right to sub let the premises under section 108(j) of the Transfer of Property Act.
The present perfect tense, by words "has sub let" in section 13(1)(e) of the Act contemplates a completed event connected in some way with the present time.
The words take within their sweep any sub letting which was made in the part and has continued up to the present time.
It did not matter that the subletting was either before or after the Act came into force.
Further sections 26 and 27(1) of the Act contemplated that grounds of eviction mentioned in section 13 may have arisen before the Act came into force.
[993 D 994 A]
