The respondent was a firm on which penalty under section 28(1)(c) of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922 was imposed by the Income tax Officer in respect of the assessment year 1948 49.
At the time when the penalty was imposed the constitution of the firm had changed though the same business was continued by the reconstituted firm.
The appeals filed by the respondent before the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and the Tribunal were rejected.
In reference the High Court held that penalty could be legally imposed upon the original firm constituted in the account year relevant to the assessment year 1948 49 and not upon the new firm constituted in 1952.
In coming to their conclusions the Tribunal as well as the High Court proceeded on the assumption that the source and power of the Income tax Officer to impose a penalty was in section 44 of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922.
In appeal by the Revenue to this Court, HELD : (i) Section 44 only applies to those cases in which there has been discontinuance of the business and not to cases in which the business continues after the reconstitution of the firm, or there is succession to the business.
Cases of reconstitution of the firm or succession to the business are covered by sections 26(1) and (2).
The Tribunal and the High Court were therefore in error in relying on section 44 of the Act.
[988 A; 985 D E] (ii) Assessment in Ch.
IV of the Income tax Act 1922 includes a proceeding for imposition of penalty and the expression 'person ' includes for the purpose of section 28 a firm registered or unregistered.
If there is reconstitution of the firm by virtue of section 26, the Income tax Officer will in imposing the penalty proceed against the firm.
If there is discontinuance of the business penalty will be imposed against the partners of the firm.
[988 B D] In the present case, however, this Court could not go into the question whether penalty on the respondent firm was leviable under the terms of sections 26 and 28 even though the question raised by the Tribunal was in terms sufficiently comprehensive to embrace the enquiry.
In a reference under section 66 of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922, only the question which was either raised or argued before the Tribunal may be answered, even if the language of the question framed by the Tribunal may apparently include an enquiry into other matters which could have been but were not, raised or argued.
[988 D F] Shivram Poddar vs Income tax Officer, Central Circle II, Calcutta & Anr., , C. A. Abraham vs Income tax Officer, Kottayam and I.T.R. 425 and Commissioner of Income tax, Madras & Anr.
V. section V. Angidi Chettiar, , applied.
section M. section Karuppiah Pillai vs Commissioner of Income tax Madras, , approved.
