The predecessor in interest of the respondents who was a practising advocate, took on rent certain premises for residence.
He could with the written consent of the appellant landlord set up his professional office also there.
After the death of their predecessor in interest the respondents lived in the premises and sometimes later two of the respondents qualified a.% lawyers and started having an office in the premises.
The appellant filed a suit for the respondents ' eviction on the ground that the respondents had acquired a "suitable residence" by building a large residential house and were liable to be ejected under section 13 (1) (h) of the Delhi & Ajmer Rent Control Act, 1952.
During the pendency of the suit the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 came into force and under section 14(1) (h) of the Act, the word "suitable" was omitted.
The trial Court dismissed the suit holding that since the premises had been let out to their predecessor in interest not for residential purpose alone but also for business purposes, no eviction could be ordered under the provisions of section 13 (1) (h) of the old Act or section 14(1) (h) of the new Act.
The first appellate Court, and the High Court in revision affirmed the order of the trial Court.
Dismissing the appeal this Court, HELD:Assuming, that section 14(1)(h) of the new Act, applied, having regard to its language, the original tenant in the present case was one who was in occupation of premises which were used for a composite purpose, namely, residence and profession.
There could, therefore, be no eviction merely by acquisition of vacant possession of a residence by such a tenant and the position would be the same with regard to his heirs and legal representatives, the present respondents.
Section 14(1) (h) can apply only where a tenant is in occupation of premises which are only residential; then alone he would have to go if he acquires or has residential accommodation of his own.
[14 F] The decision of this Court in Dr. Gopal Das Verma vs Dr. section K. Bhardwaj ; applied apprositely to this case.
The test of dominant intention with regard to the use of the premises was not applied in Dr. Gopal Das Vermals case.
[13 F G; 15A] In view of the finding of the courts below that the premises had been let to the predecessor in interest of the respondents for residence cum profession, the submission that the permission was personal to the predecessor in interest of the respondent, which came to an end on his death could not be entertained.
