Respondent No. 1 was born in undivided India on July 3, 1934.
He went to Pakistan in October 1950.
In 1953 he obtained a visa from the Indian High Commission in Pakistan and came to India on July 22, 1953.
After the expiry of his period of stay he sought permanent settlement in India.
On May 6, 1955 he filed a suit claiming that he was a minor when he went on a trip to Pakistan and had not ceased to be an Indian citizen.
He sought a permanent injunction restraining the Union of India and other authorities from deporting him.
The Munsif who tried the suit held that respondent No. 1 had ceased to be an Indian citizen, and dismissed the suit.
The District Judge in first appeal held that being a minor whose father was in India respondent no.1 could not by leaving for Pakistan, lose his Indian nationality.
In second appeal the High Court of Allahabad remanded the case to the first appellate court to determine the question whether by having spent one year in Pakistan after attaining majority respondent No. 1 had acquired the citizenship of Pakistan.
The High Court rejected the contention on behalf of the State that in view of section 9(2) of the Indian which came into force on December 30, 1955 and Rule 30 of the Citizenship Rules made under the Act, the question whether respondent No. 1 was a citizen of India or not could only be decided by the Central Government.
In taking this view the High Court relied on the decision in Abida Khatoon 's case in which a single Judge of that court had held that section 9 of the was not retrospective and could not take away the vested right of a citizen who had already filed a suit to have his claim for citizenship decided by a court. 'the first appellate court gave after remand a finding favourable to respondent No. 1 and on receipt of this finding the High Court dismissed the State 's appeal.
The State then appealed to this Court.
The questions that fell for consideration were : (i) whether section 9 of the Act would apply to a suit pending on the date when the Act came into force; (ii) whether in view of the fact that the procedure established by law before the commencement of the Act allowed the question as to the acquisition of the citizenship of another country to be determined by courts, there was by giving retrospective operation to section 9, a violation of the guarantee of personal liberty under article 21.
HELD : (i) The language of sub section
(1) of section 9 is clear and unequivocal and leaves no room for doubt that it would cover all cases where an Indian citizen has acquired foreign nationality between January 26, 1950 and its commencement or where he acquires such nationality after its commencement.
The words "or has at any time between the 26th January 1950 and the commencement of the Act, voluntarily acquired the citizenship of another country" would become almost redundant if only prespective operation is given to section 9(1) of the Act.
This according to the settled rules of interpretation cannot be done, [1010 F G] 1007 (ii) The Act has been enacted under the powers of the Parliament preserved by article 11 in express terms and a law made by Parliament cannot, as.
held in lzhar Ahmed 's case be impeached on the ground that it is inconsistent with the provisions contained in other Articles in Part II of the Constitution.
The Parliament had also legislative competence under Entry 17, List I of Seventh Schedule.
It could thus make a provision, about the forum where the question as do whether a person had acquired citizenship of another country could be determined and this is what has been done by r. 30.
[1011 B D] The cases that would ordinarily arise about loss of Indian citizenship by acquisition of foreign citizenship would be of three kinds : (1) Indian citizens who voluntarily acquired citizenship of a foreign, State perior to the commencement of the Constitution; (2) Indian citizens who voluntarily acquired the citizenship of another State or country between January 26, 1950 and December 30, 1955 i.e. the date of commencement of the Act, and (3) Indian Citizens who voluntarily acquired foreign citizenship after the date of commencement of the Act i.e. December 30, 1955.
As regards the first category they were dealt with by article 9 of the Constitution.
The second and third categories would be covered by the provisions of section 9 of the Act.
Therefore, if a question arises as to whether when and how an Indian citizen has acquired citizenship of another country that has to be determined by the central Government by virtue of the provisions of sub section (2) of section 9 read with r. 30 of the Citizenship Rules.
In view of the amplitude of the language employed in section 9 which takes in persons mentioned in category (2) mentioned above, the entire argument which prevailed with the Allahabad High Court in Abida Khatoon 's case can have no substance.
[1011 D H, 1012 C] lzhar Ahmad Khan vs Union of India, [1962] Supp.
3 S.C.R. 235, 244, 245., Akbar Khan Alam Khan & Anr.
vs Union of India, ; and The Government of Andhra Pradesh vs Syed Mohd. Khan, [1962] Supp. 3 S.C.R. 288, referred to.
Abida Khatoon & Anr.
vs State of.
U.P. & Ors.
A.I.R. 1963 All 260, disapproved.
(iii) The contention that retrospective operation of section 9 would contravene article 21 of the Constitution could not be accepted.
If the Parliament was competent under article 11 which is a constitutional provision read with the relevant entry in List I to legislate about ' cases of persons belonging to categories 2 and 3 referred to earlier it could certainly enact a legislation in exercise of its sovereign power which laid down a procedure different from the one which obtained before.
The new procedure would ltself become the "procedure established by law" within the meaning of article ' 21 of the Constitution.
[101 2 E G] The High Court was therefore wrong in the present case in calling for a decision of the lower appellate court on the issue of the plaintiff having acquired or not the citizenship of Pakistan between July 3, 1952 and the date of his return to India.
[High Court accordingly directed to have question determined by Central Government and thereafter dispose of appeal finally].
[1013 B C]
