A suit between J the father of appellants and B the father of respondents, each claiming possession of the suit properties on the strength of an alleged gift deed in his favour, was decreed in favour of J and the decree was confirmed by this Court.
After various attempts by B and after his death by his sons, to defeat J 's rights, one of B 's sons filed a suit for partition of the suit properties on the allegation that they were gifted to the joint family of which B was the karta.
On the question whether the decree in the earlier suit operated as res judicata.
HELD : It is not necessary in order that a decree against a manager may operate as res judicata against coparceners who were not parties to the earlier suit, that the plaint or written statement should state in express terms that he was suing or was being sued as a manager,.
It is sufficient if the manager was in fact suing or was being sued as representing the whole family.
A suit by or against the manager will be deemed to be one brought by or against him as representing the family if the circumstances show that he was the manager and the property involved in the suit was family property.
[1004 H; 1005 A B] In the present, case, B must be deemed to have been sued in the previous suit as the karta of his family, because : (a) the alleged gift in favour of the joint family was at a time when all the sons of B were minors and if true the gift could have been accepted by B only as the karta, (b) there was no conflict of interest between B and his sons and there was no allegation that B did not safeguard the family 's interest while contesting the previous suit; and (c) B did not claim in the earlier suit that the gift was to him in his individual capacity.
[1004 A C; 1005 C] Lalchand vs Sheogovind, Pat. 788, Ram Kishan vs Ganga Ram, Lah.
428, Prithipal vs Rameshwar, Luck.
288, Surendranath vs Sambhunath, Cal. 210, Mulgaund Co operative Credit Society vs Shidlingappa Ishwarappa, I.L.R. , Venkatanarayana vs Somaraju, A.I.R. 1937 Mad.
610 (F.B) and Mani Sahoo vs Lokanath, A.I.R. , referred to.
