Manoharlal s/o Jai Jai Ram commenced an action in the Court of the Subordinate Judge, for valuer of timber supplied to the defendant.
The action was instituted in the name of 'Jai Jai Ram Manohar Lal ' which was the name in which the business was carried on.
The plaintiff signed and verified the plaint as 'Jai Jai Ram Manohar Lal, by the pen of Manohar lal. ' Later he applied to the Court for leave to amend the plaint.
In the application he averred that the business carried on under the name Jai Jai Ram Manohar Lal was a joint Hindu family business and the name was not an assumed or fictitious one as it contained his name and that of his father.
On these averments he prayed that he be allowed to describe him ' self in the cause title as Manohar Lal proprietor of Jai Jai Ram Manohar Lal and in paragraph 1 to state that he carried on the business in timber in the name of 'Jai Jai Ram Manohar Lal '.
The application was 'allowed by the trial Judge.
The defendant then filed a supplementary written statement raising two additional contentions : (1) that the plaintiff was not the sole owner of the business and that his other brothers were also the owners of the business; and (2) that the amendment took effect from the ' date on which it was made and if so, the suit was barred by limitation.
The trial court rejecting these contentions decreed the suit.
The High Court in appeal took the view that the action having been instituted in the name of a nonexisting person ', and Manohar Lal having failed to aver in the application for amendment that the action was instituted in the name of 'Jai Jai Ram Manohar Lal ' on account of a bona fide mistake or omission, the Subordinate Judge was incompetent to grant leave to amend the plaint.
The High Court further held that the amendment allowed by the trial Court took effect only from the date of amendment, and the action was barred by limitation.
Against the judgment of the High Court the plaintiff, by special leave, appealed to this Court.
HELD : (i) The order passed by the High Court could not be sustained.
Rules of procedure are, intended to, be a handmaid to the administration of justice.
A party cannot be refused relief merely because of same mistake, negligence, inadvertence or even infraction of the rules of procedure.
The Court always gives leave to amend the pleading of a party, unless it is satisfied that the party applying was acting mala fide , or that by his blunder he had caused injury to his opponent which may not be com pensated for by an order of costs.
However negligent or careless may have been the first omission and however late the proposed amendment, the amendment may be allowed if it can be made without injustice to the other side.
[25 C E] Purshottam Umedbhai & Co. V. M/S. Manilal and Sons, ; , explained and applied.
Amulakchand Mewaram & Ors.
vs Babulal Kanalal Taliwala, , applied.
23 In the present case the plaintiff was carrying on business as commission agent in the name of 'Jai Jai Ram Maryohar Lal '.
The plaintiff was competent to sue in his own name as manager of the Hindu undivided family to which the business belonged; he claimed to have filed the suit on behalf of the family in the business name.
The observations made by the High Court that the application for amendment of the plaint could not be granted, because there was no averment therein that the misdescription was 'On account of a bona fide mistake, and on that account the suit must fail, could not be accepted.
There is no rule that unless in an application for 'amendment of the plaint it is expressly averred that the error, omission or misdescription is due to a bona fide mistake the court has no power to grant leave to amend the plaint.
The power to grant amendment of the pleadings is intended to serve the ends of justice and is not governed by any such narrow or technical limitations.
[57 B D] (ii) Since the name in which the action was instituted was merely a misdescription of the original plaintiff, no question of limitation arose and the plaint must be deemed on amendment to have been instituted in the name of the real plaintiff on the date on which it was originally instituted.
[27 E] (iii)The defendant raised and persisted in a plea which had no merit even after the amendment was allowed by the trial court.
In the circumstances he must pay the costs in this Court and the High Court.
[27 F G]
