Applications, in which the claim of the workmen of the appellant for computation of their benefit in respect of over time work and work done on weekly off days, were entertained by the Labour Court, under section 33C(2) of the .
The Labour Court computed the amounts due to the various workmen and directed the appellant to make the payments.
Writ petitions filed by the appellant in the High Court challenging the decision of the Labour Court were dismissed.
In appeal to this Court, it was contended that : (1) The jurisdiction of the Labour Court to proceed with the applications was barred by the provisions of the ; and (2) Even if the applications were competent and not barred by the , they were time barred under article 137 of the .
HELD : (1) The is concerned with the fixing of rates rates of minimum wages, overtime rates, rates for payment of work on a day of rest and is not intended for enforcement of payment of wages.
Under section 20(1) of the, , in which provision is made for seeking remedy in respect of claims arising out of payment of less than minimum rates, or in respect of remuneration for days of rest, or for work on such days, or of wages at the overtime rates, the Authority is to exercise jurisdiction for deciding claims which relate to rates of wages, rates for payment of work done on days of rest and overtime rates.
The power under section 20(3) of the given to the Authority dealing with an application under section 20(1) to direct payment of the actual amount found due, is only an incidental power for working out effectively the directions under section 20(1) fixing various rates under the Act.
That is, if there is no dispute as to rates between the employer and the employee and the only question is whether a particular payment at the agreed rate is due or not, then section 20(1) of the would not be attracted at all, and the appropriate remedy would only be either under section 15(1) of the , or under section 33C(2) of the .
[59 D G; 60 B C] In the present case, there was no dispute by the appellant about the rates put forward by the workmen; and a pleading by the, appellant in one ' of the applications that the State Government had not prescribed any rates under the , did not mean that there was a dispute as to the rates claimed by the workmen.
Therefore, the remedy under section 20(1) of the could not have been sought by the workmen, and hence, the question of the jurisdiction of the Labour Court to entertain the applications under section 33C(2) of the industrial Disputes Act being barred because of the, provisions of the , could not arise.[61 A D] 52 (2) (a) Though the question of limitation under article 137 of the 1963Act was not raised either in the Labour Court or the High Court, it could be allowed to be raised in this Court, because, a question of limitation raises a plea of want of jurisdiction and is a pure question of law, when it could be decided on the basis of the facts on the record, and the respondents had sufficient notice of the question.
[55 G H] (b) Article 137 of the governs only applications presented to courts under the Civil and Criminal Procedure Codes.
The use of the word 'other ' in the first column of the article giving the description of the application as 'any other application for which no period of limitation is provided elsewhere in this division ', indicates that the Legislature wanted to make it clear that the interpretation put by this Court in Mulchand vs Gopal Bhiva; , , 722 723 on article 181 of the 1908 Act on the basis of ejusdem generis should be applied to article 137 of 1963 Act also, the language of which, is only slightly different from that of article 181 of the 1908 Act.
That is, in interpreting article 137 of the 1963 Act regard must be had to the provisions contained in the earlier articles.
These articles refer to applications under the Code of Civil Procedure, to two cases of applications under the Arbitration Act, and to two cases of applications under the Code of Criminal Procedure.
This Court in Mulechand & Co. Ltd. case held that the reference to applications under the Arbitration Act had no effect on the interpretation of article 181 of the 1908 Act and that, that article applied only to applications under the Code of Civil Procedure.
On the same principle, the further alteration made in, the articles in 1963 Act containing reference to applications under the Code of Criminal Procedure could not alter the scope of article 137 of the 1963 Act.
Moreover even the applications under the Arbitration Act were to be presented to courts whose proceedings are governed by the Code of Civil Procedure.
The further amendment including applications governed by the Criminal Procedure Code still shows that the applications must be to courts.
The alterations in the 1963 Act, namely, the inclusion of the words 'other proceedings ' in the long title to the 1963 Act, the omission of the, preamble and change in the, definition so as to include 'petition ' in word 'application ', do not show an intention to make article 137 applicable to proceedings before bodies other than courts such as quasi judicial tribunals and executive bodies.
[63 D H; 64 A G; 65 B F] In the present case, since the applications were presented to the Labour Court, a tribunal which is not a court governed by the Civil or Criminal Procedure Codes, the applications are not governed by article 137 of 1963 Act.
[65 G H] Manager Mls.
P. K. Porwal vs The Labour Court at Nagpur, 70 B.L.R. 104, overruled.
