Jurisdiction to try suits and proceedings between landlords and tenants under the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act 57 of 1947 was by virtue of section 28 of the Act given to Small Cause Courts.
Under section 49 of the Act the State Government was authorised to make rules for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of the Act and in particular to make rules among other subjects, for the procedure to be followed in trying or hearing suits and proceedings including proceedings for execution of decrees and distress warrants.
For these purposes the Government of Bombay under r. 5 framed by it provided that the procedure under the would be followed.
By the enactment of the Bombay Reorganization Act 11 of 1960 a separate State of Gujarat was constituted out of the territory which formed the State of Bombay, and the area within the city limits of Ahmedabad formed part of the State of Gujarat.
The Legislature of the State of Gujarat enacted the Ahmedabad City Courts Act 19 of 1961 which by 17 extended the (15 of 1882) as well as the Bombay Rents Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act 57 of 1947 to the City of Ahmedabad with suitable modifications and amendments.
Jurisdiction to try suits under the Bombay Act was by amendment of section 28 thereof given to the Court of Small Causes Ahmedabad.
The appellants were tenants of a house owned by the respondent in Ahmedabad.
Apart 'from the rent the appellants had also agreed to pay municipal taxes and electricity charges.
In 1963 the appellants filed a suit in the Court of Small Causes Ahmedabad for an order inter alia determining the standard rent of the premises in exercise of the power under section 11 of Bombay Act 57 of 1947.
The said court on an application filed by the appellants fixed the contractual rent as the 'interim standard rent ' and directed the appellants to pay rent and municipal taxes, which the appellants accordingly deposited in Court.
The Court permitted the respondent to withdraw the rent so deposited but not the municipal taxes.
The respondent then obtained an order for the issues of a distress warrant under section 53 of the Presidency Small Cause Court , Act 15 of 1882 read with r. 5 of the Rules framed under Bombay Act 57 of 1947 for recovery of the amount due as municipal taxes.
Distress was levied and the order was confirmed.
A revision application in the High Court of Gujarat was rejected.
In their appeal against the High Court 's order the appellants urged : (i) that r. 5 of the Rules 'framed under section 49 of the Bombay Act 57 of 1947 was ultra vires the State Government; (ii) that the Court of Small Causes Ahmedabad had no jurisdiction to pass an order issuing a distress warrant in a proceeding under Bombay Act 57 of 1947 especially 81 when an application under section 11 was pending; (iii) that the municipal taxes and electricity charges did not constitute rent which could be recovered by the issue of a distress warrant.
HELD: (i) Rule 5 was framed under Bombay Act 57 of 1947 in exercise of the authority conferred by section 49(2)(iii).
After the enactment of the Ahmedabad City Courts Act, 1961, r. 5 as originally 'framed by the Government continued in force by virtue of section 87 of the Bombay Reorganization Act 11 of 1960, and applied to the Ahmedabad Small Causes Court.
When r. 5 was framed under Bombay Act 57 of 1947 it was not ultra vires and it was not shown to have become ultra vires after the enactment of the Ahmedabad City Courts Act in its application to the City of Ahmedabad.
[85 F G] (ii) The distress warrant issued by the Court of Small Causes Ahmedabad against the appellant was within its powers.
By the enactment of the Ahmedabad City Courts Act, 1961, the proceedings before the Court of Small Causes at Ahmedabad were governed by that Act and by virtue of the amendment made in section 28 of Bombay Act 57 of 1947 it became a court of exclusive jurisdiction to try suits, proceedings, claims and questions arising under that Act.
Being a court governed by the Presidency Small Causes Courts Act, the Ahmedabad Court of Small Causes was competent to exercise, subject to the Ahmedabad City Courts Act, all the powers which a Presidency Small Cause Court could exercise.
Power to issue a distress warrant being expressly conferred by section 53 of the upon the Courts governed by it, the Court of Small Causes Ahmedabad, was competent to exercise that power.
[85 D E] Section 28 does not make the Court of Small Causes trying suit under the Bombay Act a special Court : it is a court which is comptent to exercise all the powers conferred on it under the statute which governs it.
Its power to issue distress warrant could therefore be exercised even in respect of suits and proceedings which were exclusively triable by it by virtue of the Bombay Act 57 of 1947.
[85 H] Pendency of an application for fixation of standard rent does not suspend the court 's power to issue distress warrant, for until standard rent is determined or an interim order is made, rent at the contractual rate is payable and process for recovery by distress warrant may always be adopted.
In the present case the amount of municipal taxes was due and it was payable by the appellants.
Though deposited in Court it could not be withdrawn by the respondent.
The municipal taxes were therefore ill arrears and a distress warrant could be applied for under section 53 of the Presidency Small Cause Court by the respondent.
It was not necessary for the respondent to approach a higher court against the erroneous order of the Small Cause Court preventing him from recovering the amount of municipal taxes.
[86 B G] (iii) By the express terms of the tenancy the appellants had undertaken to pay the municipal taxes and electricity charges as part of the rent : it was not open to them to contend that these taxes and charger were not rent recoverable by the issue of a distress warrant.
[83 H 84 A]
