It is a well settled doctrine of Hindu law that nobody has a vested right so long as the widow is alive and the eventual reversioner does not claim through any one who went before him.
The interest of a Hindu widow in the properties inherited by her bears no analogy or resemblance to what may be described as an equitable estate in English law and which cannot be followed in the hands of a bona fide purchaser for value without notice.
A Hindu widow has got only qualified proprietorship in her estate which she can alienate only when there is justifying necessity and the restrictions on her powers of alienation are inseparable from her estate.
For legal necessity she can convey to another an absolute title to the property vested in her.
If there is no legal necessity the transferee gets only the widow 's estate which is not even an indefeasible life estate for it can come to an end not merely on her death but on the happening of other contingencies like re marriage, adoption, etc.
If an alienee from a Hindu widow succeeds in establishing that there was legal necessity for transfer, he is completely protected and it is immaterial that the necessity was brought about by the mismanagement of the limited owner herself.
Even if there is no necessity in fact, but it is proved that there was representation of necessity and the alienee after making bona fide enquiries satisfied himself as best as he could that such necessity existed, the actual existence of a legal necessity is not a condition precedent to the validity of the sale.
Therefore if there is no necessity in fact or if the alienee could not prove that he made bona fide enquiries and was satisfied about its existence, the transfer is not void but the transferee would get only the widow 's estate in the property which does not in any way affect the interest of the reversioner.
Debi Prasad Chowdhury vs Golap Bhagat (I.L.R. 40 Cal.
721), Rangasami Gounden vs Nachiappa Gounden (46 I.A. 72), Bajrangi vs Manokarnika (35 I.A. 1), The Collector of Masulipatam vs Cavaly Venkata (8 M. I.A. 529) and Hunoomanpersaud Pandey vs Musammat Babooee Munraj Koonweree referred to.
