The election of the respondent to the Bihar Legislative Assembly at the 1967 general election was challenged by the appellant one of the defeated candidates in an election petition.
Annexure 2 to the petition was a pamphlet alleged to have been issued by the respondent and his supporters in which reference was made to the call of two Muslim religious heads that Muslims should not vote for the Congress party to which Islam was opposed.
The High Court dismissed the election petition whereupon appeal was filed in this Court.
The appellant urged that (i) In the aforesaid pamphlet an attempt was made to induce muslim voters not to vote for a Congress candidate in opposition to the mandate of two named religious heads and this amounted to the corrupt practice of "undue influence" under section 123(2) of the Representation of the People Act 1951; (ii) The reference to the mandate of Islam amounted to the use of a religious symbol within the mischief of section 123(3); (iii) The said pamphlet also came within the mischief in section 123(4); (iv) The Returning Officer who was also the Sub Divisional Officer of the District ordered the arrest of the appellant immediately before the election; this was done mala fide, in collusion with the respondent and the appellant was thereby hampered in his election campaign.
HELD: (i) The pleadings in the appellant 's election petition did not permit consideration of his contention based on section 123(2) of the Act.
In order that a pleading may be sufficient to make out a case of undue influence it must set out full particulars of it in compliance with section 83(1)(c) of the Act comparable to Order 6 r. 4 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
The said provision of the Act read with section 123(2) makes it obligatory on a party setting up a case of corrupt practice by exercise of undue influence as suggested, to give full particulars thereof by stating inter alia who attempted ' to induce electors to believe that .voting for a particular person would render them objects of divine displeasure or spiritual censure and in what manner such attempts were made.
The real charge in the relevant paragraph of the petition in the present case was that the pamphlet complained of misled the electors by false statements.
Such a pleading falls short of an allegation of unique influence by an attempt to make electors exercise their franchise in a particular manner.
[43 H 44 C] (ii) The contention that the case fell under section 123.(3) because of the use of the mandate of Islam as a religious symbol was 'also not borne out by the pleadings and therefore could not be considered.
[44 D] (iii) To bring the case under section 123(4) there must be a publication by the candidate or his agent of any statement of same fact which is up.
CI/69 4 42 false, and which is believed to be false or not believed to be true, in relation to the personal character or conduct of any candidate, or in relation to the candidature or withdrawal of any candidate being a ,statement reasonably calculated to prejudice the prospects of that candidate 's election.
The pamphlet in question did not cast any aspersion on the personal character or conduct of the election petitioner.
Nor was there any false statement in relation to the candidature, of the petitioner.
.Section 123(4) was therefore not attracted to the case.
[44 E F] (iv) The.
evidence in the case did not prove that the Returning Officer caused the appellant to be arrested mala fide or in collusion with the respondent.
The arrest immediately before the election surely hampered the campaign of the election petitioner, but by itself the mere fact of arrest does.
not lead to the conclusion that the Returning Officer was trying to bring pressure on the election petitioner not to contest the election and much less that the arrest was made in collusion with the successful candidate.
[45 G]
