The appellant joined the Indian Civil Service in 1933 and was thereafter allotted to the State of Assam.
On July 29, 1964 he was appointed as Secretary to the Government of India "until 'further orders".
On June, 20, 1966 he received a letter from the Cabinet Secretary advising him that in relation to the question of building up a higher level of administrative efficiency it had been decided by the Government that the appellant should revert to his parent State, or proceed on leave preparatory to retirement, or he should agree to accept some post lower than that of Secretary to the Central Government.
After the appellant had made representations to the Cabinet Secretary and the Prime Minister, he received another letter from the Cabinet Secretary in September, 1966.
affirming the Government 's decision that the appellant 's services would be placed at the disposal of his parent State of Assam or he could proceed on leave preparatory to retirement.
The appellant challenged these orders by a writ petition under article 226 of the Constitution on the ground that the orders were violative of article 311(2).
The High Court dismissed the petition and a Letters Patent appeal was also rejected.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant that the reversion of the appellant to the Assam Service amounted to a reduction in his rank on the ground that he held a higher post in the Government of India and there was no post equal to it under the Assam Government; the post of the Chief Secretary in the Assam Government was equal to the Post of a Joint Secretary in the Government of India and his reversion would therefore indirectly mean a reduction in his rank and also in his emoluments because the highest post in Assam did not carry a salary equal to that of a Secretary in the Government of India.
He also contended that the letters from the Cabinet Secretary spoke of his unsatisfactory work and cast a stigma on him; his reversion must, therefore, be treated as a penalty and as the procedure laid down under article 311(2) was not followed, the orders of the Government of India could not be sustained.
On the other hand it was contended on behalf of the Government that the appellant was on deputation and the deputation could be terminated at any time; that his orders of appointment clearly showed that the appointment was "until further orders" and he had no right to continue in the Government of India if his services were not required; his reversion to his parent State did not amount either to any reduction in rank or a penalty and the orders were therefore quite legal.
HELD : allowing the appeal, It was clear on the facts that the appellant was being reduced in rank with a stigma upon his work without following the procedure laid down in article 311(2) of the Constitution.
[229 G H] 221 As a Secretary to the Central Government the appellant held a tenure post, which was normally for a period of five years and he could expect to continue in that post until 29th July, 1969.
Nothing turned upon the words of the notification "until further orders" because all appointments to tenure posts had the same kind of order.
He was not therefore on a deputation which could be terminated at any time.
The fact that it was found necessary to break into the appellants 's tenure period close, to its end must be read in conjunction with the three alternatives offered to him and these clearly demonstrated that the intention was to reduce him in rank by sheer pressure of denying him a Secretaryship.
[229 B D] The letter addressed to the appellant in June, 1966, containing the ,Offer of a lower post in Delhi was a clear pointer to the fact of his (]emotion.
It clearly told him that his reversion was not due to any exigency of service but because he was found wanting.
This was not a case of reverting the appellant to Assam at the end of a deputation or tenure and the final alternative that he could retire clearly showed that the Government was bent upon removing him from his present post.
As there was no post in the Assam State Service carrying the same emoluments as those of a Secretary to the Central Government, on the facts of the present case the appellant 's reversion to Assam meant a reduction in rank within the meaning of article 311(2).
[228 A B; 229 F]
