Disputes between some Cooperative Central Banks of Andhra Pradesh and their employees, relating to : (i) service conditions such as salary scales, dearness and other allowances, conveyance charges, working hours and promotion, age of retirement, provident fund and gratuity, leave rules, departmental enquiries, probation and confirmation; and (ii) the question whether transfers of some employees were justified, were referred to the Industrial Tribunal under section 10(1)(d) of the .
On the question whether the Industrial Tribunal had no jurisdiction to decide the disputes, because : (1) the disputes could be referred to the Registrar of Cooperative Societies under section 61 of the Andhra Pradesh Cooperative Societies Act, 1964; (2) the Registrar, in dealing with the disputes referred to, him under section 61 of the Andhra Act, could grant relief by amending the bye laws under.s. 16(5); and (3) If the Industrial Tribunal gave relief to the employees it would be altering the bye laws thus making orders contrary to law.
HELD: (1) (a) The Andhra Act is an enactment passed by the State Legislature and received the assent of the President.
Therefore, if any provision of the (a Central Act) is repugnant to any provision of the Andhra Act, the latter would prevail.
But section 61 of the Andhra Act requires reference of a dispute to the Registrar only if the dispute is capable of being resolved by him or his nominee, and if the dispute between the cooperative society and its employee touches the business of the society.
The word 'business ' means actual trading or commercial or other similar business activity of the society.
Therefore, whatever a society does or is required to do for the purpose of carrying out its objects, such as laying down the conditions of service of its employees, cannot be said to be a part of its 'business ', and hence, a dispute relating to conditions of service of the workmen employed by the society cannot be held to be a dispute touching the business of the society.
[2O9 E F; 215 B D, G H] (b) The Registrar could not have granted the reliefs claimed because of the limitations placed on his powers by the Andhra Act.
Most of the Conditions of service which the workmen want to be altered to their benefit have been laid down by the bye laws, so that, any alteration in those con ditions of service will require a change in the bye laws.
But such a change could not possibly be directed by the Registrar, because, under section 62(4) of the Andhra Act, the Registrar or other person or arbitrator to whom the dispute may be referred under section 61 is specifically required to decide the dispute refer red to him in accordance with the provisions of the bye laws.
[2l6 B D, F] 206 The Deccan Merchants Cooperative Bank Ltd. vs m/s.
Dulichand Jugraj fain, [1969] 1 S.C.R. 887, followed.
South Arcot Cooperative Motor Transport Society Ltd. vs Syed Batcha, , approved.
(2)The provisions of section 16(5) of the Andhra Act are irrelevant in,, considering the scope of the jurisdiction of the Registrar under section 61 of the Act, because : (a) any action taken by the Registrar under section 16(5) will not be a decision in a dispute referred to him under section 61; (b) though the Registrar has the power to amend bye laws under section 16(5) any other person or arbitrator, to whom the disputes may be referred, has no such power; and (c) even the Registrar 's powers under section 16(5) to amend bye laws is to be exercised only if he is of the opinion that it would be in the interests of the society and are not contemplated to be exercised in the interests of the workmen or for the purpose of resolving industrial disputes.
[219 B E] (3) The principle that rules framed under a statute have the force of statute does not apply to bye laws of a cooperative society.
They merely govern the internal management, business or administration of a society and may be binding between the persons affected by them but are neither law nor do they have the force of law.
They are just like conditions of service laid down by contract between the parties, or like bye laws under the Articles of Association of a company under the Companies Act, or Standing Orders certified under the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders)Act, 1946.
Therefore, the circumstance that in granting relief, the Tribunal may have to vary the special bye laws framed by the Cooperative Banks does not lead to the inference that the Tribunal would be making orders contrary to law and therefore is incompetent to grant the reliefs claimed.
The jurisdiction granted to the Tribunal by the is not the jurisdiction of merely administering existing laws and enforcing existing contracts.
The Tribunal has the jurisdiction even to vary contracts of service between employer and employees.
Further, in the Andhra Act there is no prohibition that the conditions of service prescribed are not to be altered.
Therefore, the reliefs could only be granted by the Industrial Tribunal and could not fall within the scope of the Registrar 's powers under the Cooperative Societies Act.
[217 H; 218 D H] Dalmia Cement (Bharat) Ltd. vs Their Workmen, [1961] II L.L.J. 130 (S.C.)The Management of Marina Hotel vs The Workmen, ; , Cinema Theatres vs The Workmen, and The Hindustan Times Ltd. vs Their Workmen, [1964] 1 S.C.R. 234, distinguished.
Since the competence of the reference to the Tribunal as a whole was challenged on the ground that it was barred by section 61 of the Andhra Act, the question whether a particular issue forming part of the reference was competently referred or not did not arise.
[219 F, G H]
