There was settlement entered into on December 23, 1964 between the Motor Industries Company Employees Association and the management of the company.
Under el.
5 of the agreement it was agreed inter alia that the workmen will not go on strike without at least four days ' notice.
How,ever on May 11, 1966 the workmen went on strike without notice as a protest against the suspension of one of the workmen.
Later in the day after discussions the workmen resumed work.
On May 18, 1966 the establishment officer submitted a complaint to the Chief Personnel Officer as a result of which charge sheets alleging stoppage of work, abandoning place of work and inciting clerks and officers to join the strike were served upon five of the workmen.
Against one of them the charge of disorderly conduct and intimidation was also made.
The enquiry officer held three of the charged workmen guilty of acts of misconduct under standing order 22(2), (3), (13) and (18).
The management passed orders of ,dismissal against the three workmen.
The industrial dispute thus arising was referred to, the Labour Court which held that the said enquiry was validly held and that the management were justified in passing the orders of dismissal.
In appeal by special leave the following contentions were raised on behalf of the workmen appellants : (i) that the said association not having given a call for the said strike the said charges were misconceived and the orders of dismissal were consequently not sustainable; (ii) that the said strike, which was spontaneously staged by the workmen, was not illegal under section 24 of the Industrial Disputes Act nor was it in contravention of any law as required by standing order 22(2) and (3); (iii) that the said disciplinary proceedings were in contravention of the agreement arrived at on May 11, 1966, and therefore, the dismissal following such disciplinary proceedings amounted to unfair labour practice; (iv) that the orders of dismissal were passed on charges including that of intimidation though the misconduct of intimidation was not found by the enquiry officer and hence the said orders were illegal; (v) that to punish only three workmen when a large number of workmen had taken part in staging the strike and in inciting others to join it constituted victimisation, (vi) that the finding of the enquiry officer were based on no evidence or were perverse in that no reasonable body of persons could have arrived at them on the evidence before him.
HELD : (i) Clause 5 of the settlement dated December 23, 1964 did not contemplate any dichotomy between the association and the workmen 305 as suggested on behalf of the appellants.
Such an interpretation is repugnant to the principle that a settlement once arrived at by the association must be regarded as one made by it in its representative character, and therefore binding on the workmen.
Therefore, although the settlement mentioned in cl. 5 the management, workmen and the association, the expression 'workmen ' therein was unnecessary, for without that expression also it would have been as efficaciously binding on the workmen as on the association.
This conclusion was strengthened by the fact that the settlement mentioned the management and the association on behalf of the workmen only as the parties thereto and the signatories thereto also were only the representatives of the two bodies.
[309 F H] Further, the appellants ' contention if accepted would lead to a surprising result, namely, that though a strike at the instance of the association required four days ' notice, a notice by the workmen without any call from the association would not require any such notice and that the settlement left complete liberty to the workmen to launch a sudden strike.
The first contention on behalf of the workmen had therefore to be rejected.
[309 D] (ii) Read in the context of the other provisions of Part I of the settlement of which it was part, cl. 5 was intended to prohibit (a) direct action without notice by or at the instance of the association and (b) strikes by workmen themselves without the approval of the association.
The words 'in no case ' used in the clause emphasized that direct action by either party without notice should not be resorted to 'for any reason whatsoever.
There could be no doubt that the settlement was one as defined by section 2(p) of the Industrial Disputes Act and was binding on the workmen under section 18(3) of the Act until it was validly terminated and was in force when the said strike took place.
The strike was a lightning one, was resorted to without notice and though it was not at the call of the association, it was in breach of cl. 5.
[311 A C] The strike was in the matter of suspension of one of the workmen pending a domestic enquiry against him, a matter which obviously was not one of the matters covered by the said settlement.
It was, therefore, not a strike illegal under section 24 read with section 23(c).
However being in con travention of cl. 5 of the said settlement and that settlement being binding on the workmen concerned and in, operation at the time was punishable under section 29 and therefore.
illegal under that section.
[312 F] The strike being illegal, standing order 22 would apply and participating in or inciting others to join such a strike would amount to misconduct for which the management was entitled to take disciplinary action.
The second contention on behalf of the workmen must also, therefore, fail.
[313 D] The Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co. Ltd. vs C. B. Mitter, C.A. No. 633/1963 dt.
2 4 1964, referred to.
(iii) The Labour Court on the evidence held that the association failed to prove that the management had agreed in order to end the strike on May 11, 1966, not to take action against any of the workmen in connection with the strike, though it may be that they might have agreed not to victimise any workmen for participating in the strike.
In fact the management did not impose any penalty against any workman for joining the strike, not even against the three concerned workmen.
This finding being purely one of fact and the Labour Court having given cogent reasons for it this Court would not interfere with it.
The contention alleging unfair labour practice must also therefore fail.
[313 G H] 306 (iv) Although in his report the enquiry officer did not use the expression 'intimidation ' the evidence which he accepted was that the workman in question thumped his hand on the table and used threatening words to .an officer of the company.
The Enquiry officer 's finding of disorderly behaviour must therefore be held to include acts of intimidation.
Accordingly the contention that the orders of dismissal were bad as they took to account the charge of intimidation of the company 's officers although the enquiry officer had found that charge was not proved, must be rejected.
13 14 B G] (V) The evidence showed that the three workmen concerned were in the forefront of the crowd which entered the premises of the company and committed and incited disorderly behaviour.
In taking action against them and not the rest of the workmen there was no discrimination and no victimisation.
[315 C] Burn & Co. Ltd. vs Workmen, , distinguished.
(vi) There was no substance in the contention that the findings of the enquiry officer were based on no evidence or were perverse.
