As there was omission to supply to the first respondent a copy of the recommendations of the Enquiry officer in the matter of punishment (although a copy of his report containing his findings on various charges was supplied) the first respondent filed a writ petition in the High Court challenging the order of the State Government removing him from its service.
The first respondent contended that the omission amounted to failure to provide reasonable opportunity of making representation against the penalty proposed within the meaning of article 311(2) of the Constitu tion.
The High Court held that proceedings were vitiated from the stage of the show cause notice relating to punishment, and set aside the order of removal, but liberty was given to the State Government to issue fresh show cause notice regarding the proposed punishment.
Dismissing the State 's appeal, this Court; HELD : The requirement of a reasonable opportunity could not be satisfied unless the entire report of the Enquiry Officer including his views in the matter of punishment were disclosed to the delinquent servant.
[254 E] The Enquiry Officer is under no obligation or duly to make any recommendations in the matter of punishment to be imposed on the servant against whom the departmental enquiry is held, and his function merely is to conduct the enquiry in accordance with law and to submit the record along with his findings or conclusions on the delinquent servant.
But if the Enquiry Officer has,, also made recommendations in the matter of punishment that is likely to, affect the mind of the punishing authority with regard to penalty or punishment to be imposed on such officer, it must be disclosed to the delinquent officer.
Since such recommendations form part of the record and constitute appropriate material for consideration of the Government it would be essential that that material should not be withheld from him so that he could, while showing cause against the proposed punishment, make, a proper representation.
The entire object of supplying a copy of the report of the Enquiry Officer is to enable the delinquent officer to satisfy the punishing authority that he is innocent of the charges framed against him and that even if the charges 'are held to have been proved the punishment proposed to be inflicted is unduly severe.
[253 H 254 D] Union of India vs H.C. Goel, ; , referred to.
