Against the order of an appellate court, the respondent filed a revision under section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
The Single Judge of the High Court dismissed the revision.
Thereupon the respondent moved a petition under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution challenging the same order of the appellate court.
The High Court held that in spite of the dismissal of the revision petition, it could interfere under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution on a proper case being made out; and after going into the merits of the case, it granted relief to the respondent.
In appeal to this Court, the appellant contended that the High Court could ,not interfere under articles 226 and 227.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD : Even on the assumption that the order of the appellate court .had not merged in the order of the Single Judge who had disposed of the revision petition a writ petition ought not to have been entertained by the High Court when the respondent had already chosen the remedy under section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
If there are two modes of invoking the jurisdiction of the High Court and one of those modes has been chosen and exhausted it would not be a proper and sound exercise of discretion to grant relief in the other set of proceedings in respect of the same order of the subordinate court.
The refusal to grant relief in such circumstances would be in consonance with the anxiety of the court to prevent abuse of process as also to respect and accord finality to its own 'decisions.
[327 H] When the aid of the High Court is invoked on the revisional side it is done because it is a superior court and it can interfere for the purpose of rectifying the error of the court below.
Section 115 of the Code of Civil 'Procedure circumscribes the limits of that jurisdiction but the jurisdiction which is being exercised is a part of the general appellate jurisdiction of the High Court as a superior court.
It is only one of the modes of exercising power conferred by the Statute; basically and fundamentally it is the appellate jurisdiction of the High Court which is being invoked and exercised in a wider and larger sense.
The principle of merger of orders of inferior courts in those superior courts would not be affected or would not become inapplicable by making a distinction between a petition for revision and an appeal.
[327 B] Madan Lal Rungta vs Secy.
to the Government of Orissa, [1962] 3 Supp.
S.C.R. 906, Nagendra Nath Dey vs Suresh Chandra Dey.
59 I.A. 283, 287; Raja of Ramnad vs Kamid Rowthen & Ors.
53 I.A. 74, P. P. P. Chidambara Nadar vs C.P.A. Rama Nadar & Ors.
A.I.R. 1937 Mad.
385, Secretary of State for India in Council vs British India Steam Navigation Co. 13 C.L.J. 90, Attorney General vs Sillem, ; , Chappan vs Moidin, , 80, U. J. section Chopra vs State 323 of Bombay; , and Chandi Prasad Chokhani vs state of Bihar; , , referred to.
K. B. Sipahimalani vs Fidahussein Yallibhoy, 58 B.L.R. 344, disapproved.
