The sixth respondent granted various Pattas of his lands to his wife, to the appellant and others in November, 1944.
After the coming into force of the Andhra Pradesh (Andhra Area) Estates Communal, Forest and Private Lands (Prohibition of Alienation) Act, 1947, section 4(1) of which declared alienation of Communal or Forest Lands after October, 1939, to be void, a petition was filed in the District Court by two ryots for a declaration that the alienations in the present case were void and did not confer any rights on the alienees.
The District Judge allowed the petition holding that the lands in question were forest lands and the alienations were void.
Revision petitions filed before a Single Judge of the High Court were dismissed but in a Letters Patent Appeal it was held that the petitioners as ryots had no right to maintain the petition, and a reasonable opportunity had to be given to the State to get itself transposed as the petitioner.
The State Government was then transposed as the petitioner but thereafter the District Judge held that the petition was not maintainable by reason of the repeal of the Act of 1947 upon the passing of a subsequent Act namely the Madras Estates (Abolition and Conversion into Ryotwari) Act, 1948.
However, a revision petition against this order was allowed by the High Court which remitted the matter to the District Judge.
By a judgement in November, 1960 the District Judge allowed the were forest lands and there transfers were void.
Further revision petitions filed by the appellant and others were dismissed by the High Court.
In appeal to this Court it was contended inter alia on behalf of the appellant that (1) the Act of 1947 was a temporary Act and all proceedings thereunder came to an end with the implied repeal of the Act by Act XXVI of 1948; (2) a notification by the State Government describing the land as forest land was an essential pre requisite to the application of the Act; and (3) the Act applied only to lands which were admittedly forest lands and the operation thereof could not be extended to lands in respect of which there was a dispute as to the nature thereof.
It was argued that any such dispute could only be decided by the Settlement Officer and not by the District Judge.
HELD: Dismissing the appeal, (1) The purpose of the Act of 1947 was to prohibit the alienation of communal, forest and private lands in estates in the Province of Madras and the preamble to the Act shows that it was enacted to prevent indiscriminate alienation of such lands pending the enactment of legislation for acquiring the interest of landholders in such estates and introducing ryotwari settlement therein.
No fixed duration of the Act was specified 330 and it was impossible to hold that merely because of the contents of the preamble, the Act became a temporary Act or that it stood repealed by the enactment of the later Act of 1948 unless there were express words to that effect or unless there was a necessary implication.
It is not reason able to hold that the alienation of large blocks of land which were rendered void under the Act of 1947 became good by reason of the passing of the later Act.
[332 B] (2) The definition of "forest lands" in section 2(b) of the Act is an inclusive one and shows that 'forest land ' would include not only waste land containing trees, shrubs and pasture lands but also any other class of lands declared by Government to be forest land.
This does not mean that before a piece of land could be said to be forest land there would have to be a notification by the Government and that otherwise the application of the Act would be excluded.
[334 C] (3) Section 20(1) of the Act of 1948 as originally enacted was substituted for another by section 9 of the Madras Estates (Abolition and Conversion into Ryotwari) (Amendment) Act, 1956, which was to.
be deemed to have come into force on April 19, 1949 being the date on which the Act of 1948 originally came into force.
The section as it now stands did not confer any jurisdiction on the Settlement Officer to determine any question as to whether any land was forest within the meaning of the Act and consequently the adjudication by the District Judge under sub.
section (4) of
