Section 8 of the Oudh Estates Act 1 of 1869 provided for the preparation of lists of taluqdars and grantees, and another list of taluqdars whose estates, according to the custom of the family on and before 13th February, 1856, ordinarily devolved upon a single heir.
The taluqdari estate of Tiloi was entered in the second list.
Upon the death of the taluqdar and in the absence of any brother or a male lineal descendant, the estate devolved, in accordance with the provisions of section 22(6) upon the widow of the deceased taluqdar for her life.
Thereafter she adopted a son.
The adopted son by a deed of trust executed in August, 1932, settled certain properties.
By judgment dated April 19, 1968, this Court declared that the deed of trust of August, 1932 did not operate to settle any property being part of the taluqdari estate and governed by the Oudh Estates Act of 1869.
In the present petition for review of the judgment it was contended that even if the settlor had no interest in the taluqdari estate under the ordinary Hindu law, on adoption, the non taluqdari property vested in him and he was competent under the deed of settlement to dispose of the property in the manner directed by that deed.
It was also contended that the widow of a taluqdar was not an "heir" within the definition of the expression in the Act.
HELD : That even in the non taluqdari estate left by the taluqdar which devolved upon the widow, her adopted son, the settlor, had so, long as the widow was alive no interest which he could transfer, alienate or settle.
[433G] it is well settled that where property devolves upon, a single heir of a taluqdar entered in the second list under section 8 of the Act, there is a rebuttable presumption that the non taluqdari estate also devolves upon him.
In the present case there was no reason to depart from that rule.
Prior to the enactment of the Oudh Estates Act 1869 there was no dis tinction between taluqdari and non taluqdari estate and the presumption merely gave effect to family custom.
[432E F] Rani Huzur Ara Begam and Anr.
vs Deputy Commissioner Gonda, L.R. 65 I.A. 397 followed.
Murtaza Husain Khan vs Mahomed Yasin Ali Khan L.R. 43 I.A. 269;Thakur Ishri Singh vs Baldeo Singh, L.R. 11 I.A. 135: referred to.
