The first respondent, who was the owner of certain premises situated within the cantonment area of Barrackpore filed a suit for the appellant 's eviction from the premises.
In the plaint it was claimed that the appellant was not entitled to the protection of the West Bengal Premises Tenancy Act 12 of 1956, the regulation of house accommodation including control of rents being a subject in Entry 3 of List I of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, the State Legislature could not competently enact a law on the same subject for Cantonment areas and the extension of the Act to the cantonment area was ultra vires and void.
Upon the Trial Court making a reference under section 113 C.P.C. to the High Court for a decision of the constitutional question, that court upheld the first respondents contention.
In appeal to this Court it was contended that the High Court was in error in holding that the field of legislation covered by the Act, which is primarily concerned with control of rents and eviction of tenants, is included in the expression "regulation of house accommodation in cantonment areas" used in Entry 3 List I, regulation of house accommodation will not include within it laws or rules on the subject of relationship of landlord and tenant of buildings situated in the cantonment areas.
On the other hand according to the appellant, legislation on this subject can be made either under entry 18 of List 11, or entries 6, 7 and 13 of List III, so that a State Legislature is competent to legislate and regulate relationship between landlord and tenant in the cantonment areas; that under Entry 3 List I Parliament is empowered to legislate in respect of house accommodation situated in cantonment areas only to the extent that house accommodation is needed for military purposes and laws are required for requisitioning or otherwise obtaining possession of that accommodation for such purposes.
The alternative submission made was that regulation of house accommodation by parliamentary law should be confined to houses acquired, requisitioned or allotted for military purposes.
Entry 3, List I, according to the appellant, should not be read as giving Parliament the power to legislate on the relationship of landlord and tenant in respect of houses situated in cantonment areas if such houses are let out privately by a private owner to his tenant and have nothing at all to do with the requirements of the military.
HELD : Dismissing the appeal, When power is granted to Parliament under Entry 3 List I to make laws for the regulation of house accommodation in cantonment areas, there are no qualifying words to indicate that the house accommodation, which is to be subject to such legislation, must be accommodation 444 required for military purposes, or must be accommodation that has already been acquired, requisitioned or allotted to the military.
[447B] When legislating in respect of local self government in cantonment areas, it is obvious that Parliament will have to legislate for the entire cantonment area including portions of it which may be in possession of civilians and not military authorities or military officers.
Similarly, the powers of the cantonment authorities, which could be granted by legislation by Parliament, cannot be confined to those areas or buildings which are in actual possession of military authorities or officers and must be in respect of the entire cantonment area including those buildings and lands which may be in actual ownership as well as occupation of civilians.
In these circumstances, there is no reason to narrow down the scope of legislation on regulation of house accommodation and confine it to houses which are required or are actually in possession of military authorities or military officers.
[447F H] The word "regulation" cannot be so narrowly interpreted as to be confined to allotment only and not to other incidents, such as termination of existing tenancies and eviction of persons in Possession of the house accommodation.
Entry 3 List I gives power to Parliament to pass legislation for the purpose of directing or controlling all house accommodation in cantonment areas.
[448 D] Prout vs Hunter, , Property Holding Co. Ltd. vs Clark, and Curl vs Angelo & Anr. , referred to.
In the Constitution, the effect of Entry 3 of List I is that Parliament has exclusive power to make laws with respect to the matters contained in that Entry, notwithstanding the fact that a similar power may also be found in any Entry in List 11 or List 111.
Article 246 of the Constitution confers exclusive power on Parliament to make laws with respect to and of the matters enumerated in List 1, notwithstanding the concurrent power of Parliament and the State Legislature, or the exclusive power of the State Legislature in Lists III and 11 respectively.
The general power of legislating in respect of relationship between landlord and tenant exercisable by a State Legislature either under Entry 18 of List 11 or Entries 6 and 7 of List 111 is subject to the overriding power of Parliament in respect of matters in List 1, so that the effect of Entry 3 of List I is that, on the subject of relationship between landlord and tenant insofar as it arises in respect of house accommodation situated in cantonment areas, Parliament alone can legislate and not the State Legislatures.
[454E G] A.C. Patel vs Vishwanath Chada, I.L.R. , F.E. Darukhanawalla vs Khemchand Lalchand, I.L.R. [1954] Bom.
544, Kewalchand vs Dashrathlal, I.L.R. and Babu Jagtanand vs Sri Satyanarayanji and Lakshmiji through the Sheba it and Manager Jamuna Das, I.L.R. 40 Pit.
625, disapproved.
Nawal Mal vs Nathu Lal, I.L.R. , approved.
