The first respondent was elected to the Madhya Pradesh Legislative Assembly in February 1967.
The appellant, a voter in the constituency, challenged his election by an election petition claiming that the nomination paper of one D was illegally rejected by the Returning Officer and that the respondent had committed several corrupt practices; it was also alleged that the Maharaja and Rajmata of Gwalior had helped the first respondent 's election in a number of ways and had in effect acted as his agents and had incurred considerable expenditure which exceeded the limits prescribed by the statute.
The High Court dismissed the petition and also dismissed an application made by the petitioner for amendment of the petition to include a new allegation on the ground that it was made after the expiry of the period prescribed for filing an election petition.
On appeal to this Court, HELD : Dismissing the appeal : (i) The High Court had rightly held that it could not exercise its power to permit amendment of a petition so as to allow new grounds or char es to be raised or the character of the petition to be so altered as to make it in substance a new petition, if a fresh petition on those allegations would be barred on the date of the proposed amendment.
Harish Chandra Bajpai vs Triloki Sinqh ; ; followed.
(ii) The mark made by the proposer on D 's nomination paper was not authenticated or attested by one of the designated officers as required under section 31(1) read with the definition of the expression "sign" in section 2(1) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, and the provisions of r. 2(2) of the Conduct of Election Rules.
It was therefore rightly rejected by the Returning. Officer.
The requirement of section 33(1) of the Act that the nomination shall be signed by the candidate and by the proposer is mandatory.
Signing, whenever signature is necessary, must be in strict accordance with the requirements of the Act and where the signature cannot be made it "must be authorised in the manner prescribed by the Rules.
" Attestation is not a mere technical or unsubstantial requirement within the meaning of section 36(4) of the Act and cannot be, dispensed with.
The attestation and the satisfaction must exist at the stage of presentation and omission of such an essential feature may not be subsequently validated at the stage of scrutiny any more than the omission of a candidate to sign at all could have been.
D F] 531 Rattan Anmol Singh and Another vs Atma Ram & Others ; ; referred to.
(iii) The High Court had rightly held on the evidence that none of the corrupt practices alleged was proved.
Unless it is established that expenditure was incurred in connection with the election by the candidate or by his election agent or was authorised by him it is not liable to be included under section 77 of the Representation of the People Act.
Expenses incurred by any other agent or person without anything more need not be included in the account or return, as such incurring of expenditure would be purely voluntary.
Assuming in the present case that expenditure was incurred by the Maharaja and the Rajmata of Gwalior for the purpose of canvassing votes against the principal candidate opposing the first respondent, in the absence of any evidence to show that the Maharaja and the Rajmata of Gwalior acted as election agents of the first respondent or the expenditure was authorised by him it was not liable to be included in the account of the election expenses.
[541 D F]
