The appellant married the respondent according to Hindu rites on April 20, 1955.
Thereafter the parties lived together for three years but the marriage was not consummated.
The appellant filed an application before the District Judge at Delhi on March 15, 1960 under section 12 of the , praying that the marriage between himself and his wife, the respondent, being voidable may be annulled by a decree of nullity.
He averred that his wife had an invincible and persistent repugnance to the act of consummation and that she was impotent.
The District Judge and later the High Court concurrently found that neither impotence nor invincible and persistent repugnance to the sexual act were proved against the respondent.
In further appeal to this Court, HELD : (i) Though it is not usual for this Court to interfere on questions of fact, nevertheless, if the Courts below ignore or misconstrue important pieces of evidence in arriving at a finding, such finding is liable to be interfered with by this Court.
[563 B] Earnest John White vs Kathleen Olive White, [1958] S.C.R. 1410, referred to.
However in the instant case the Courts below has neither ignored nor mis construed important pieces of evidence when they came to the conclusion that the appellant 's case, regarding the impotency of the respondent, could not be believed.
[563 C] (ii)The case of G.v.G. could not help the appellant in the face of the High Court 's finding that 'invincible repugnance to the sexual act ' on the part of the respondent was not proved.
[563 G 564 A] (iii)The case of G.v.G. also, could not help the appellant.
In that case the Court without going into the question which party was impotent was satisfied that the couple could not consummate their marriage in the present or in the future and should not be tied up together for their lives in misery.
The position in the present case was entirely different.
Neither of the Courts below had found that the marriage could not be consummated in future and they had not also accepted the appellant 's plea that the respondent had always resisted his attempts to consummate the marriage.
[564 B 564 E] The appeal must accordingly be dismissed.
