A complaint under section 7 read with section 16 of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1964 was filed against the respondent.
It was filed by the Municipal Prosecutor who had been authorised to file such complaints by a resolution passed by the appellant corporation under section 20 of the aforesaid Act.
On the respondent being acquitted the appellant corporation filed an application in the High Court for special leave to appeal under section 417 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
The application was allowed.
When the appeal came up for hearing a preliminary objection was raised by the respondent that the complaint having been filed by the Municipal Prosecutor the corporation was not a 'complainant ' within the meaning of section 417(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure and therefore special leave to appeal should not have been granted.
The High Court upheld the preliminary objection and dismissed the appeal.
By special leave the corporation appealed to this Court.
HELD : (i) Under section 476(1)(h) of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act the person competent to institute legal proceedings is the Commissioner.
However the present case was governed not by that provision but by section 20 of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1964 which provides that a prosecution under that Act may be instituted "by the Central Government or the State Government or a local authority or a person authorised in this behalf, by general or special order by the Central Government or the State Government or a local authority".
Section 2(vii) of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act defines a "local autho rity" to mean "in the case of a local area which is a municipality, the municipal board or municipal corporation".
The Delhi Municipal Corporation was a local authority within the meaning of section 20, [581 H; 582 C, G H; 584 A] (ii)The Municipal Prosecutor had filed the complaint against the respondent under authority given to him by the resolution of the Delhi Municipal Corporation under section 20 of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act.
in filing the complaint the said prosecutor was not acting on his own personal behalf but was acting as an agent authorised by the Delhi Municipal Corporation to file the complaint.
It must therefore be deemed in law that the Delhi Municipal Corporation was the 'complainant ' in the case, for according to the Latin maxim.
"One who does an act through another is deemed in law to do it himself." [583 H; 584 C D] Being thus the complainant in the case the appellant Corporation could properly file the application under section 417 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
[Case remanded to High Court for disposal according to law.] [584 E] 580 Ballavdas Agarwala vs J. C. Chakravarty, [1962] 3 S.C.R. 739 and Nazir Ahmad vs King Emperor, 63 I.A. 372 as 381, referred to.
