The Industrial Tribunal on a reference of the disputes between the appellant company and its workmen framed a gratuity scheme.
The gratuity payable to a workman on termination of employment was to be computed on the total wage packet of the workman including dearness allowance which he had last drawn.
The tribunal also awarded dearness allowance at a flat uniform rate for every 10 point rise in the cost of Consumer Price Index.
The Tribunal found that the financial position of the company was sound and it had the capacity to bear the additional burden.
In appeal, this Court HELD: (i) The usual pattern in fixing gratuity is to relate it to the basic wage or salary and not to consolidated wage.
A departure may be made from the normal rule, if there by some strong evidence or precedent in the industry, or conduct of the employer or other exceptional circumstances to justify that course.
In .the absence of such evidence, gratuity should be related to the basic wage and not to the consolidated wage packet.
[627 D] In the present case it was found that the financial position of the company was sound but there was no evidence that the company was "making abnormally high profits", nor was there any evidence that in its sister concern or in other engineering concerns in the region there was a practice of awarding gratuity related to consolidated wages.
M/s. British Paints (India) Ltd. vs Its Workmen, ; , May & Baker (India.) Ltd. vs Their Workmen, [1961] II L.L.J. 94, British India Corporation vs The Workmen, (1965) Vol.
10 Factory Law Reports 244, Hindustan Antibiotics Ltd. vs Their Workmen, [1967] I. L.L.J 114, The Remington Rand of India Ltd. vs The Workmen, , and Delhi Cloth & General Mills Co. Ltd. vs The Workmen & Ors. ; , referred to.
(ii) The rise in dearness allowance was not related to the quantum of basic wage or consolidated wage; it was a flat uniform rate applicable to every workman.
Therefore, the.
rise would not operate to give the workman, besides the additional dearness allowance, a percentage increase in dearness allowance already paid as part of the consolidated wage.
[625 E F] (iii) The Tribunal, on appreciation of evidence found that the financial position of the company was sound.
Assuming that the Tribunal was governed by the strict rules prescribed by the Evidence Act, Sitting in appeal with Special Leave this Court would not be justified in interfering 623 with the finding of the Tribunal even if it be open to the criticism that a part of the evidence relied upon was not in law relevant.
[624 F]
