Under section 32 of the , the liability of the drawee arises only when he accepts the bill.
There is no provision in the Act that the drawee is as such liable on the instrument, the only exception being under section 31 in the case of a, drawee of a cheque having sufficient funds of the customer in his hands; and even then, the liability is only towards the drawer and not the payee.
There is no substance in the contention that section 61 of the Act provides for presentment for acceptance only when the bill is payable after sight, and not when it is payable on demand.
In a bill payable after sight, there are two distinct stages, 504 firstly when it is presented for acceptance, and later when it is presented for payment.
Section 61 deals with the former, and section 64 with the latter.
Presentment for acceptance must always and in every case precede presentment for payment.
But when the bill is payable on demand both the stages synchronise and there is only one presentment, which is both for acceptance and for payment and therefore the person who is entitled to receive the payment under section 78 of the Act is the person who is entitled to present it for acceptance.
Section 7 of the , following the English Law, provides that the drawee becomes an acceptor when he has signed his assent on the bill.
Accordingly there cannot be, apart from any mercantile usage, an oral acceptance of the hundi, much lose an acceptance by conduct, where at least no question of estoppel arises.
What is requisite for fixing the drawees with liability under section 32 is the acceptance by them of the instrument and not an acknowledgment of liability.
As the law prescribes no particular form for acceptance, there should be no difficulty in construing an acknowledgment as an acceptance; but then, it must satisfy the requirements of section 7, and must appear on the bill and be signed by the drawee.
Seth Khandas Narandas vs Dahibai (I.L.R. , Ram Raviji Jambhekar vs Prahladdas Subhakaran (I.L.R. 20 Bom.1 33), Bank of England vs Archer ((1843) ; and Harvey vs Martin ( referred to.
