The deity Thakur Janki Ballabhji Maharaj installed in a temple at Brindaban brought in the court of Civil Judge Mathura a suit through its manager an authorised agent of the erstwhile Bharatpur State for a decree for possession of the temple and its properties as well as for accounts to be rendered by R the pujari of the temple.
It was alleged in the plaint that the temple had been built by the Ruler of Bharatpur who had dedicated it to the deity.
It was further alleged that R, the defendant who had succeeded the priest originally appointed by the Ruler of Bharatpur had mismanaged and misappropriated the temple properties and had failed to perform the seva puja of the deity.
R in his written statement denied these allegations and contested the suit.
After the merger of Bharatpur State in the State of Rajasthan the suit was prosecuted by the District Magistrate of Bharatpur.
The trial court dismissed the suit but the High Court decreed it.
By special leave the defendant came to this Court.
HELD: (i) The High Court rightly rejected the defendant 's plea based on section 92 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
It was common ground before the High Court that the property of the temple was not property of a public trust of a religious or charitable nature.
From the averments in the plaint it was clear that the suit was flied by the deity against the person in management and it was not a suit filed by the relators.
Section 92 of the Code of Civil Procedure had no application to.
the suit and the sanction of the Advocate General was not a condition of the initiation of the suit.
[636 F G] (ii) The evidence established that the defendant had committed several acts of mismanagement and misappropriation of the temple and its properties He had set up.
a personal title to the temple properties and had converted the properties to his own use.
He was therefore unfit to remain the pujari of the temple.
[637 B C] Granting that it was not proved that the Ruler of Bharatpur established the temple and installed the deity, there was abundant evidence that the State of Bharatpur had made from time to.
time large donations for the maintenance of the temple.
The Ruler of Bharatpur had therefore clearly a substantial interest 'to maintain the suit on behalf of the deity to protect the property.
There was No. merit in the defendant 's appeal and it must fall.
[637 C D] (iii) Since it would be difficult for the District Magistrate of Bharatpur or any.
other authority acting on behalf of the State of Rajasthan to look after the administration of the temple which was situate in the State of 635 U.P. it was an appropriate case for the exercise of the Court 's powers under O. 41 R. 33 of the Code of .Civil Procedure.
The Civil Courts have jurisdiction to frame a scheme for the management of a temple even though it is not a public trust.
[637 H 638 B] Pramatha Nath Mullick vs Pradyumna Kumar Mullick 52 I.A. 245, Asha Bibi & Ors.
vs Nabissa Sahib & Ors.
A.I.R. 1957 Mad.
583 and Shri Mahadeo Jew & Ant.
vs Balkrishna Vyas & Ant.
A.I.R. 1952 Cal. 763, relied on.
