To avoid the decision of this Court in A. B. Abdul Khadir vs The State of Kerala, , wherein rules framed for the issue of licences and payment of fee for storage of tobacco were 'held to be invalid, the appellant State promulgated Ordinance I of 1963 which was later replaced by Luxury Tax on Tobacco (Validation) Act 9 of 1964.
Consequently the appellant State made a demand on the respondent to repay the amount which had been refunded to the respondent in accordance with the aforesaid judgment.
Thereupon, the respondent filed a writ petition in the High Court.
The High Court relying upon the decision of this Court in Kalvani Stores vs State of Orissa, [1966] 1 S.C.R. 865, held that in the absence of any production of tobacco inside the appellant State it was not competent for the State Legislature to impose a tax on tobacco imported from outside the State and therefore, the provisions of the Act (9 of 1964) violated the guarantee contained in articles 301 and 304 of the Constitution.
HELD: The High Court had not correctly appreciated the import of the decision in Kalyani Stores ' case.
The decision was based on the assumption that the notifications therein enhancing duty on foreign liquor infringed the guarantee under article 301 and may be saved if it fell within the exceptions contained in Art 304 of the Constitution.
As no liquor was produced or manufactured within the State the protection of article 304 was not available.
This Court did not intend to lay down the proposition that the imposition of a duty or tax in every case would be tantamount per se to an infringement of article 301.
Only such restrictions or impediments which directly and immediately impede the free flow of trade, commerce and intercourse fall within the prohibition imposed by article 301.
A tax may in certain cases directly and immediately restrict or hamper the flow of trade, but every imposition of tax does not do so.
Every case must be judged on its own facts and in its own setting of time and circumstance.
In the present case the High Court had not gone into the question whether the provisions of the Act and the notifications constituted such restrictions or impediments as directly and immediately hamper the free 701 flow of trade, commerce and intercourse, and, therefore, fell within the prohibition.
imposed under article 301 of the Constitution.
Unless the High Court first comes to the finding whether or not there is the infringement of the guarantee under article 301 of the Constitution the further question as to whether the statute is saved under article 304(b) does not arise and the principle laid down in Kalyani Stores ' case cannot be invoked.
This case, therefore must go back to the High Court.
[709 E 710 E] Atiabari Tea Ca., Ltd. vs The State of Assam, ; , Automobile Transport (Rajasthan) Ltd. vs The State of Rajasthan, [1963] 1 S.C.R. 491, Andhra Sugars Ltd. vs State of Andhra Pradesh; , and State o/Madras vs K. Nataraja Mudaliar; , , referred to.
