On a report of the Public Analyst that the coloured sweets sold by the appellant were adulterated a complaint was filed before the Magistrate under section 7, read with section 16 of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act.
The trial court acquitted the appellant.
In appeal by the Municipal Board under section 417(3), Code of Criminal Procedure, the High Court convicted the appellant.
The appellant did not raise any objection as to the maintainability of the complaint or of the appeal, either in the trial court or in the High Court before the appeal was disposed of, on the ground that the Municipal Board was shown as the complainant and the complaint was signed by its Food Inspector.
In appeal to this Court, it was contended that: (i) the appeal filed by the Municipal Board in the High Court was not maintainable in law as the complaint had been instituted by the Food Inspector and not by the Municipal Board; (ii) a permission under section 20 of the Act was a condition precedent for validly instituting a complaint and the fulfilment of that condition had to be satisfactorily proved before the Court could exercise jurisdiction to try the case; and (iii) the appellant could not have been convicted on the strength of the certificate of the Public Analyst.
HELD: Dismissing the appeal, (i) Under section 20 of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, it was competent for the Municipal Board to authorise the Food Inspector to file the complaint.
If the complaint had been filed by the Food Inspector on the authority of the Board the complaint must be held to have been instituted by the Board itself.
The question whether the Food Inspector was so authorised is a question of fact.
This was never put into issue and both the courts below and the parties before them proceeded on the basis that the Municipal Board was the complainant and the Food Inspector filed the complaint on its behalf.
The appellant could not, therefore, be permitted to take up the contention for the first time after the appeal was disposed of in the High Court.
[741 A C] K.C. Aggarwal vs Delhi Administration, Cr. A. No. 100 of 1966, dt.
27 5 1969, referred to.
(ii) There is no analogy between the section and those provisions requiring sanction for the institution of certain criminal proceedings.
Under the section, no question of applying one 's mind to the facts of the case before the institution of complaint arises as the authority under the section can be conferred long before a particular offence has taken place.
It is a conferment of an authority to institute a particular case or even a class of cases.
[741 G] 737 Gokal Chand Dwarkadas vs The King, 75 I.A. 30 and Madan Mohan Singh vs State of U.P.A.I.R. , held inapplicable.
(iii) It is not necessary that the report of the Public Analyst should contain the mode or particulars of analysis or the test applied.
But it should contain the result of analysis, namely, data from which it can be inferred whether the article of food was of was not adulterated.
In the present case.
the report of analyst did contain the data on the basis of which the analyst came to his conclusion.
[742 C E]
