The assessee purchased a spinning mill in 1941 from a vendor claiming to be its sole proprietor.
In a suit filed by the vendor 's sons the trial court had held that the suit property including the aforesaid spinning mill was the vendor 's self acquired property.
When the assessee purchased the mill an appeal against the trial court 's judgment was pending in the High Court 'the High Court decided that the property was not the self acquired property of the vendor but was coparcenary property in which the sons had two thirds interest.
The vendor filed an appeal before the Privy Council.
During its pendency the assessee entered into a compromise with the vendor 's sons whereby they agreed to release their two thirds interest in the mill and its profits for a sum of Rs. 1.15,000.
The compromise was certified by the High Court.
In 1947 the Privy Council decided that the property including the spinning mill was the self acquired property of the vendor.
On receipt of this decision which finally determined the rights of the parties and assessee 's ownership of the mill, the Income tax Officer issued a notice under section 34 of the Indian income tax Act, 1922 for the assessment year 1944 45 and assessed the income from the mill for that year and for the two subsequent assessment years in the hands of the assessee.
The assessee 's objection that the decision of the Privy Council was not 'definite information ' within the meaning of section 34 was rejected as also the assessee 's claim that the sum of Rs. 1,15,000 paid to the vendor 's sons in pursuance of the compromise should be set off as an expense against the income from the mill for the year in question.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner and the Tribunal upheld the Income tax Officer 's order.
The High Court in reference held that the notice under section 34 was valid but that the payment of Rs. 1,15,000 was made partly towards acquisition of a capital asset and partly towards the discharge of the claim for profits and the part apportionable towards the profits was allowable as revenue expenditure.
The assessee as well as the Revenue appealed to this Court.
HELD: (i) In Maharaja Kumar Kamal Singh 's case this Court held that the word information section 34(1)(b) included information as to the true and correct state of the law, and so would cover information as to relevant judicial decisions.
It was further held that even in a case where a return had been submitted, if the Income tax Officer had erroneously failed to tax a part of the assessable income, it was a case when that part of the income had escaped assessment.
The decision of the Privy Council was therefore held to be information within the meaning of section 34(1)(b).
The principle laid down in Maharaja Kumar Kamal Singh 's case governed the present case and it must be held that the proceedings initiated under section 34 for the assessment year 1944 45 were legally valid.
[732 G 733 B] 727 Maharaja Kumar Kamal Singh vs Commissioner of Income tax, , followed and applied.
Kamakhya Narain Singh 's case, , referred to.
The contention that only two thirds of the income could be said to h,rye escaped assessment because the one third share of the vendor could have been validly assessed the Income tax Officer on the basis of the High Court 's judgment, could not be accepted.
When once valid proceedings are started under section 34(1)(b) read with section 22(2) the previous under assessment is set aside and the whole assessment proceedings start afresh.
The Income tax Officer then has not only the jurisdiction but the duty to levy tax on the entire income that has escaped assessment in that year.
[733 C E] It is well established that where money is paid to perfect a title or as consideration 'for getting rid of a defect in title or a threat of litigation the payment would be a capital payment and not a revenue payment.
Money paid in consideration of the acquisition of a source of profit or income is capital expenditure both on principle and authority.
[733 F G] Atherton vs British Insulated awl Helsby Cables Ltd. , 213 and Commissioner of Taxes vs Nchanga Consolidated Copper Mines Ltd. , referred to.
It was true that in the present case the High Court took into consideration income from the mill in testing whether the offer made by the purchaser of Rs. 1,15,000 for the release of the claim of the plaintiffs v, as a fair offer.
But that did not mean that the sons of the vendor were given as a result of the compromise a share in the profits of the assessee.
It was clear from the circumstances of the case that the payment was made by the assessee in order to perfect his title to a capital asset, and no portion of it could therefore could be set off against the profit.
[735 C]
