The workmen were appointed by the respondent company under the designation of copy holders and an order in July 1959, issued by the management, expressly described them as such.
It was alleged however, that despite this order, the management, both before and after the date of the order, had always given to the workmen the work of proofreaders.
A dispute arose whether the two workmen should be treated as proof readers and the executive committee of the Delhi Union of Journalists, at a meeting on December 1, 1966, after considering the representation made to it by the two employees, decided to take up their case and thereafter initiated conciliation proceedings.
Eventually, the Delhi Administration referred the dispute.
to the Industrial Tribunal.
It was contended by the management before the Tribunal that the dispute was an individual dispute and not an industrial dispute so that the Tribunal had no jurisdiction to adjudicate it.
The Tribunal accepted this contention.
Evidence was led before the Tribunal to show that the working Journalists employed by the respondent company numbered 131 out of whom 68 were employed in Delhi.
Out of these, 31 were members of the Delhi Union of Journalists which was an outside union and which they had joined after July 1959.
The Tribunal 's view was that the 31 working journalists having joined the Union *after the cause of action had arisen in July 1959, the resolution of the union 's executive committee would not constitute espousal of the workmen 's dispute as there would be no nexus between the dispute and the Union, and therefore, the resolution dated December 1, 1960 did not have the effect of convening the dispute into an industrial dispute.
In appeal to this Court by special leave, HELD: The Tribunal 's view that the dispute was not an industrial dispute, was incorrect.
Bombay Union of Journalists vs The Hindu, Bombay, ; , Central Provinces Transport Services Ltd. vs Raghunath Gopal Patwardhan; , , Newspapers Ltd. vs State Industrial Tribunal U.P., ; and Workmen vs M/s. Dharampal Premchand, [1965] 3 S.C.R. 394, referred to.
The espousal by the union could not be said to be beyond time as such espousal could only take place after and not before the dispute arose or the cause of action arose.
The test of an industrial dispute is whether at the date of the reference the dispute was taken up and supported by a union, or by an appreciable, number of workmen.
In the present case this test was clearly satisfied.
[917 C] If the number of working journalists in the respondent company were to be taken as 68, membership of the union by as many as 31 working journalists would certainly confer on the union a representative character.
Even if the number of working journalists were to be taken as 131, it 914 would not be unreasonable to say that 31, i.e. about 25% of them would, by becoming the members of the union, give a representative character to the union.
At the material time there was no union of working journalists employed by the respondent company.
Therefore, in accordance with the decision in the Workmen vs M/s. Dharampal Premchand the union could be said to have a representative character qua the working journalists employed in the respondent company.
The union had taken up the cause of the two workmen by its executive committee passing a resolution and its office bearers having followed up that resolution by taking the matter before the conciliation officer.
Though the grievance of the two workmen arose in July 1959, when the management declined to accept them as proof readers the union had sponsored their cause before the date of reference as laid down in the case of The Hindu, Bombay. 'That being the position it could not be gain said that the dispute was transformed into an industrial dispute as it was sponsored by a union which possessed a representative character vis a vis the working journalists in the employ of the respondent company.
[919 C G]
