The petitioner was arrested and detained by an order of the Commissioner of Police, Calcutta under section 3(2) of the .
According to the grounds of detention supplied to him his activities were prejudicial to the maintenance of 'public order '.
The petitioners ' case was placed before the Advisory Board and on obtaining its opinion the Governor confirmed the order of detention.
It was after this that the petitioner made representations to the State Government.
Then he filed the present petition under article 32 of the Constitution based on the following grounds: (i) that there was a breach of section 7 of the Act inasmuch as his representation 's were not considered by the Government; (ii) that the grounds furnished to him mentioned offences under the Indian Penal Code and these could not be used for the purpose of detention except in emergencies: (iii) that the grounds did not have any relation to 'public HELD: (i) It is obligatory on the Government to deal with the representations made by the detenu, but in the present case the detenu made his representations only after the Advisory Board had dealt with the matter.
The State Government was in the process of dealing with his representation.
In the circumstances it could not be said that there had been a breach of section 7 of the Act.
[765 E G] (ii) The contravention of any law always affects order but before it can be said to affect public order it must affect the community or the public at large.
[766 A] Pushkar Mukherjee & Ors.
vs The State of West Bengal, ; , applied.
The grounds of detention supplied to the detenu in the present case showed that on one occasion he took part in rioting along with associates armed with lathis, iron rods and acid bulbs.
On another occasion he took part in assaulting a constable on duty.
On a third occasion he and his associates were armed with deadly weapons which were actually used in indiscriminately endangering human lives in the locality.
[766 C D] From, these activities the object of the detenu seems to have been to terrorise the locality and bring the whole machinery of law and order to a halt.
The conclusion of the detaining authority that the detenu was likely to act in a manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order in the future and it was necessary to prevent him from doing so, was justified.
[766 E F] 763 The fact that public sector was affected by an act which was also an offence under the Indian Penal Code .was irrelevant.
[766 F]
