The respondent company was assessed to wealth tax for the assessment years 1957 58, 1958 59 and 1959 60.
In computing the net wealth of the respondent on the respective valuation dates the Wealth Tax Officer proceeded under section 7(2)(a) of the Act and included the full value of the fixed assets as shown by the respondent in the respective balance sheets without any adjustment, after rejecting` its contention that the fixed assets should be assessed at their written down value as computed for the purposes of income tax.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner confirmed the valuation but the Income tax Appellate Tribunal held that it would be fair in the circumstances of the case to adopt the written down value of the asset 's as value thereof for all the years under appeal.
On reference being made to it under section 27(1) of the Wealth Tax Act the High Court held in 'favour of the respondent.
The Revenue appealed, HELD: The rule of valuation on the basis of market value under section 7(1) of the Act may not yield a true estimate of the net value of the total assets in the case of a running business.
The legislature has therefore provided in sub section
(2)(a) that when the assessee is carrying on a business for which accounts are maintained by him 'regularly, the Wealth Tax Officer may determine the net value of the business as a whole, having regard to the balance sheet of such business as on the valuation date and make such adjustments therein as the circumstances of the case may require.
The power conferred upon the tax officer to make adjustments as the circumstances of the case may require is also for the purpose of arriving at the true value of the assets of the business.
It is of course open to the assessee in any particular case to establish after producing relevant materials that the value given of the fixed assets in the balance sheet is artificially inflated.
It is also open to the assessee to establish by acceptable reasons that the written down value of any particular asset represents the proper value of the asset on the relevant valuation date.
In the absence of any material produced by the assessee to demonstrate that the written down value is the real value the Wealth tax Officer would be justified in a normal case in taking the value given by the assessee itself to its fixed assets in the balance sheet for the relevant year as the real value of the assets for the purposes of the Wealth tax.
It is a question of fact in each case as to whether the depreciation has to be taken into account in ascertaining the true value of the assets.
The onus of proof is on the assessee who must produce reliable material to show that the written down value of the assets and not the balance sheet value is the true value.
[793 E 794 C] 790 If, therefore, the assessee merely claims that the written down of the assets should be adopted but fails to produce any material to show that written down value is the true value, the Wealth tax Officer is justified in rejecting the claims and adopting the values shown by the assessee himself in his balance sheet as the true value of his assets.
[794 C D] Kesoram Industries & Cotton Mills Ltd. vs Commissioner of Wealthtax (Central) Calcutta, ; , applied.
(ii) Section 27(6) of the Act requires the Tribunal on receiving a copy of the judgment of the Supreme Court or the High Court as the ease may be to pass such orders as are necessary to dispose of the case conformably to such judgment.
[794 E] If the Supreme Court agrees with the view of the Tribunal the appeal may be disposed of by a formal order.
But if the Supreme Court disagrees with the Tribunal on a question of law, the Tribunal must modify its order in the light of the order of the Supreme Court.
If the Supreme Court has held that the judgment of the Tribunal is vitiated because it is based on no evidence or because the judgment proceeds upon a misconstruction of the statute, the Tribunal would be under a duty to dispose of the case conformably with the opinion of the Supreme Court and on the merits of the dispute and re hear the appeal.
In all cases, however, opportunity must be afforded to the parties of being heard.
[794 F H] Income tax Appellate Tribunal, Bombay, vs S.C. Cambatta vs Commissioner of Income tax, , applied.
