In the elections to the Punjab Legislative Council from the local authorities constituency the appellant who was declared elected secured one vote more than the first respondent.
The first respondent challenged the election of the appellant on the ground that the vote of H should have been held to be void as his name was included in the electoral roll after the last date for the filing of nomination in defiance of the provisions of section 23(3) of the Act.
To this the appellant filed a recriminatory petition contending that the votes of two other persons B and S also were void as their names were included in the electoral roll after the last date for filing nominations.
He also alleged that the vote of another voter T was void as he had become a government servant by the time the polling took place and therefore was disqualified to be a member of any local board.
The High Court came to the conclusion that the votes of H, B and S were void and counting the validity cast votes declared the first respondent elected.
But when on scrutiny it was found that of B and S one of them had actually cast his first preference to the appellant he contended that as the first respondent had not challenged the validity of those votes the trial court could not have excluded from consideration the vote cast in his favour by one of those persons.
HELD: Section 23(3) takes away the power of the electoral registration officer or the chief electoral officer to correct the entries in the electoral rolls or to include new names in the electoral 'rolls of a constituency after the last date for making the nominations for election in that constituency.
It prohibits inclusion of any name in the electoral roll after the prescribed date whether the application for inclusion was made before or after that date.
[848 G] Baidyanath Panjiar vs Sita Ram Mahto, ; followed.
(ii) The election petition and the recriminatory petition are parts of one enquiry.
As the validity off the three votes had come up for consideration and as it was held that those votes were void it necessarily followed that the votes had to be excluded in determining the result of the election.
The fact that the first respondent did not challenge the validity of those votes was immaterial in the circumstances of the case.
[848 D] (iii) There is no provision in the Act which disqualified T from voting and the question whether a particular vote was a valid vote or not has to be decided solely on the basis of the provisions of the Act.
In view of section 30 of the 1950 Act the entries found in the electoral roll are final and civil courts have no jurisdiction to.
entertain or adjudicate upon any question whether any person is or is not entitled to register himself in the electoral roll.
[850 E] 846 B.M. Ramaswamy vs
B.M. Krishnamurthy, [1963] 3 S.C.R. 479, referred to.
