S, the owner of some land in a village in Punjab, died leaving a widow and the respondent, his daughter by another wife.
The widow sold a part of the land in February 1958 to the appellants, whereupon the respondent filed a suit for possession by pre emption of the land sold.
The trial court decreed the suit and a first appeal was dismissed.
A single bench of the High Court allowed the second appeal on the view that the respondent not being the widow 's daughter, had no right of pre emption under section 15(2) of the Punjab Pre emption Act, 1913, as amended by the Punjab Pre emption Amendment Act, 1960.
However, a division bench in a Letters Patent appeal, relying on an amendment made by the PUnjab Preemption Amendment Act, 1964 in section 15(2)(b), reversed the judgment of the single bench and decreed the suit.
It was contended in appeal to this Court that there is no indication in the Amendment Act of 1964 that it is to have retrospective operation and the amendment made by it should be deemed to be only prospective.
HELD: The Amendment Act of 1964 was merely of a clarificatory or declaratory nature.
Even in the absence of words which were inserted by the Amendment Act of 1964 under section 15(2)(b) the only possible interpretation and meaning of the words "in the son or daughter of such female" could have reference to and cover the son or daughter of the husband of the 'female.
The entire scheme of section 15(2) is that the right of pre emption has been confined to the issues of the last male holder from whom the property which has been sold came by inheritance.
[805 H] Under section 15(2)(b) the right of pre emption would vest firstly in the son or daughter of the husband of the female meaning thereby either her own off springs from the husband whom she had succeeded or the son or daughter of that husband even from another wife.
[806 G] In the present case the respondent was entitled to exercise her right of pre emption under paragraph First of clause (b) of section 15(2) even before the Amendment of 1964.
Whatever doubts existed they were removed by that Act which must be given retrospective operation.
[807 E F] Ram Sarup vs Munshi & Ors, ; and Mota Singh vs Prem Parkash Kaur & Ors., I.L.R. [1961] Punj.
614, 627; referred to.
