Prior to 1951 there were no rules or conditions of service prescribing the age of superannuation in the appellant Company.
In 1951, its Standing Orders were certified under the , and were brought into force.
Standing Order 32 provided 55 years as the age of superannuation.
The first three respondents were workmen employed in the Company in 1929, 1935 and 1937.
Relying on Standing Order 32 the Company served notices on these 3 workmen who had attained the ages of 58, 64 and 59 on the dates of the 'respective notices, and retired them.
The Labour Court, to which the dispute arising from such retirement was referred, held that the Standing Orders having been certified long after these workmen were employed and the conditions of their employment not having provided any age of retirement.the Company could not apply Standing Order 32 to them, that the orders of retirement on the ground of superannuation were bad and gave conse quential directions.
The Company appointed the 4th respondent in December 1965 as a cleaner.
The letter of appointment stated that he was to be a probationer for 6 months with discretion to the concerned officer to extend the period.
The letter also stated that during the probationary period his service was liable to.
termination without any notice and without assigning any reasons therefore.
His service was terminated in February 1966.
Before the Labour Court evidence was led on behalf of the Management that workman 's service was terminated because his work as probationer was unsatisfactory.
The Labour Court found on the evidence before it that the real reason for passing the impugned order of termination was not the alleged unsatisfactory work but his having unauthorisedly used a motorcycle belonging to an engineer of the Company and caused damage to it.
In that view, the Labour Court held that the exercise of the power to terminate was not bona fide and consequently set aside that order also.
In appeal to this Court, HELD: (1)(a) The Act provides that every employer of an indusTrial establishment must have his Standing Orders certified, that the Standing Orders should be submitted to the certifying authority along with particulars of all the workmen then employed as also the name of the union if any, to which they belong, That the certifying authority should give notice to the union, and in its absence, to the workmen to make Their objections and an opportunity to the employer and the representatives of The workmen for being heard, that the authority should thereafter adjudicate upon the fairness and reasonableness of the Standing Orders submit 809 ted, that the authority should certify the Standing Orders with modifications or additions if any, that any person aggrieved by such certification may appeal to the appellate authority, that the Standing Orders as finally certified come into operation on a particular day, that the employer should publish them on notice boards in such a manner that they become easily known to the workmen, and that, after the expiry of 6 months from the date on which the Standing orders or the last modification came into operation, either the employer or any of the workmen could apply for a modification.
These provisions show that once the Standing Orders as certified come into operation, they 'become binding on the employer as well as all the workmen presently employed and those employed thereafter in the establishment, as uniform conditions of service.
If the Standing Orders were to bind only those who are subsequently employed, the result would be that there would be different conditions of employment for different classes of workmen, depending on whether the workmen were employed before or after the certification of the Standing Orders or a modification of such Standing Orders, and would render the principle of collective bargaining ineffective.
Such a result would render the conditions of service of workmen as indefinite and diversified as before the enactment of the statute though it was to do away with such diversity that the Act was passed.
[812 D H; 813 A D; 814 A E] Salem Erode Electricity Distribution Co. Ltd. vs Salem Erode Electricity Distribution Co. Ltd. Employees Union, ; , follOwed.
Guest, Keen, Williams Pvt.
Ltd. vs
P.J. Sterling; , , explained.
(b) The decision of the same Labour Court in Ref.
No. 91 of 1964 between the appellant Company and its workmen, wherein it was held that the very same Standing Orders did not apply to workmen employed prior to their coming into force, did not prevent the Company from reagitating the same question, because: [816 F] (i) The rule that an award binds all the workmen employed in an establishment and even future entrants is not based on the principle of res judicata but.
is rounded on the condition for raising an industrial disputed.
[817 A B] The Newspapers L.td.
vs The State Industrial Tribunal, U.P. ; , 761, Workmen vs Balmer Lawrie & Co. ; and Shahdara (Delhi) Saharanpur Light Rly.
Co. Ltd. vs Shahdara Saharanpur Railway Workers ' Union , referred to.
(ii) The award in Ref.
91 of 1964 was based on the supposition that the Guest, Keen, Williams case, decided that Standing Orders were not binding on those who were employed prior to the certification and their coming into force.
But the Salem Erode Electricity Distribution Co. Ltd. cage has explained that case and shown that such a supposition was not correct.
Since the very basis of the award in Ref.
91 was wrong the distinction made therein between those who were previously appointed and those appointed subsequently is also wrong.
[817 E H] (iii) Further, the consequence of holding that the Company was barred by principles analogous to res judicata would be that there would be two sets of conditions of service, one for those previously employed and the other for those employed after the Standing Orders were certified, a consequence wholly incompatible with the object and policy of the Act.
[817 D E] 810 (2) It is.
a well settled principle of industrial adjudication that even if an impugned order is worded in the language of a simple termination of service, industrial tribunals can look into the facts and circumstances of the case to ascertain if it was passed in colourable exercise of the power of the management to terminate the service of an employee and find out whether it was in fact passed with a view to punish him.
In the present case, the letter of appointment states that the workman was appointed as a probationer for a period of 6.
months with power to extend the period of probation.
Standing Order 2(c) also provides that the normal period of probation shall be 6 months with discretion to extend the period, the maximum period of probation being 12 months.
That means that at tie end of the period of probation the Company would have to decide whether to confirm him or terminate his service and that the probationer 's service cannot be terminated during the probation period except for some misconduct.
The statement in the letter that workman 's service was liable to termination even during the probationary period only meant that the appointment was subject to the Management 's power of termination as provided in the Standing Orders.
Such a power is provided in Standing Order 14, but the termination of the workman was not for any of the grounds set out therein.
Therefore, the termination during probation was not in conformity with the power to terminate under the Standing Orders.
[819 A F] Further, the finding of the Labour Court is one of fact and meant that it rejected the evidence led by the Management that the work of the workman was found unsatisfactory.
Since the finding is not perverse and is based on evidence, it means the termination was punitive in nature.
Such an order could be passed only after a proper inquiry.
Therefore, order of the Labour Court setting aside the termination was right.
[819 G H]
