The petitioner was an applicant in one of the writ petitions which had been filed in the Supreme Court challenging the validity of U. P. Road Transport Act, 1951.
During the hearing of the writ petitions a leaflet printed in the Hindi language and intituled "Our Transport Department" purporting to be written by the petitioner was distributed in the Court premises.
The leaflet contained a graphic account of the harassment and indignity said to have been meted out to the writer by the State officers and the then State Minister of Transport in connection with the cancellation and eventual restoration of his license in respect of a passenger bus.
87 678 The second paragraph at page 15 of that leaflet contains a passage of which the following is the English translation : " The public has full and firm faith in the Supreme Court, but sources that are in the know say that the Government acts with, partiality in the matter of appointment of those Hon 'ble Judges as Ambassadors, Governors, High Commissioners, etc., who give judgments against Government but this has so far not made any difference in the firmness and justice of the Hon 'ble Judges.
" Held, (1) that the offending passage and the time and place of its distribution tended to hinder or obstruct the due administration of justice and was a contempt of Court.
(2)It was not fair comment on the proceedings but an attempt to prejudice the Court against the State and to stir up public feeling on the very question then pending for decision.
The manner in which the leaflets were distributed, the language used in them and the timing of their publication could only have had one object, namely, to try and influence the Judges in favour of the petitioner and the others who were in the same position as himself.
This again was clear contempt of the Supreme Court.
(3)It is not necessary that there should in fact be an actual interference with the course of administration of justice but it is enough if the offending publication is likely or if it tends in any way to interfere with the proper administration of law.
Such insinuations as were implicit in the passage in question were derogatory to the dignity of the Court and were calculated to undermine the confidence of the people in the integrity of the Judges.
Brahma Prakash Sharma and Others vs The State of Uttar Pradesh ([1953] S.C.R. 1 169) referred to.
