The assessee a dealer in shares and securities, purchased certain shares on which dividends relating to previous years were in arrears.
The shares were sold with the arrear dividends.
The assessee received the amount of arrear dividends and he first credited this sum to the profit and loss appropriation account and thereafter transferred the same to a reserve fund.
No adjustment was made in the share purchase account on account of the receipt of the dividend.
The value of the shares which represented the stock in trade of the assessee remained the same both in the opening and the closing stocks.
The assessee claimed that the amount of arrear dividends received was not income liable to income tax as it was merely a realisation of the capital.
The Income tax Officer rejected the contention and brought it to tax.
This decision was upheld in further appeals.
But, on reference, the High Court held that the amount was not liable to tax.
Dismissing the appeal by the Revenue, this Court, HELD: The consideration paid by the assessee was given not only for the shares but also for the share dividends.
As the dividend had been declared long ago there was no uncertainty as to the exact amount receivable in respect of them, and so, both the purchaser and the vendor knew exactly what sum would come to the vendor by way of such dividend.
The existence of a contract binding the vendors to make over to the purchaser the arrear dividends clearly implied that the price paid by the purchaser was not only for the value of the share scrips but also for the amount which was going to be realised in the form of arrear dividends by the purchaser.
Such an arrangement implied that the value of the per share settled into the broker 's bill was not the real value of the share scrips alone but also included the element of the arrear dividends agreed to be receivable by the purchaser.
The legal position, therefore, was that the arrear dividends were not claimable by the purchaser by virtue of his right as such purchaser and could not become his income from the shares.
He was to get the same because the vendor had contracted to pass the arrear dividends on to him.
They were the income of the vendors, i.e., the registered holders but they could not become the income of the purchaser.
What the assessee acquired in the form of share scrip represented its stock in trade which consisted of the shares and the dividends potential which had to be realised.
[770 D H] A receipt which in law cannot be regarded as income cannot become so merely because the assessee erroneously credited it to the profit and loss account.
[771 C] Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay City I vs M/s. Shoorji Vallabhdas & Co. , referred to.
