It was alleged in a complaint against the appellant, who held a wholesaler 's license, that he had stored and sold compounded asafoetida which was found to have been adulterated.
It was the appellant 's case that he had purchased the asafoetida from a distributor in enclosed packets and that the cash memo furnished to him by the distributor stated inter alia that "quality is upto the mark".
It was therefore contended on his behalf that the case fell within the proviso to Rule 12 A of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Rules, 1955, framed under Act 37 of 1954 in that no warranty in a prescribed form was necessary as the cash memo contained a warranty that the food contained in the package was the same in nature, substance and quality as demanded by the appellant.
Although the Trial Court upheld the appellant 's contention, the High Court on appeal held to the contrary.
In the appeal to this Court it was respondent 's contention that the warranty must state expressly that the food mentioned in the cash memo was the same in nature, substance and quality as demanded by the vendor and if these words did not exist in the cash memo, the proviso would not apply.
HELD: Allowing the appeal: The words "quality is upto the mark" in the cash memo meant that the quality of the article was upto the standard required by the Act and the vendee.
Quality in this context would include nature and substance because the name of the article was given in the cash memo.
The cash memo was the document using the language of a tradesman.
Any tradesman who was assured that the quality of the article was upto the mark would 'readily conclude that he was being assured the article was not adulterated.
[867 H] When the proviso to Rule 12 A expressly says that no warranty in the prescribed form shall be necessary in certain eventualities, it would be rewriting the rule to hold that nevertheless the same things must exist in the label or the cash memo.
If the words used in the warranty can reasonably be interpreted to have the same effect as certifying "the nature, substance and quality" of an article of food, the warranty wilt fail within the proviso.
[867 D]
