The appellant (Municipal Council) owned transport vehicles and used those vehicles for the maintenance of public health in the Municipality by transporting the night soil and refuse of the town, and by distributing water.
It employed 50 transport workers.
As it had not been registered as 'required under section 3(1) of the , a complaint was filed against it.
On receiving the summons, the Chief Municipal Officer appeared, and even before the particulars of the offence were stated to him, filed preliminary objections that the Municipal Council was not a 'motor transport undertaking ' and that the transport vehicles owned by the Council were exempt under section 38 of the Act.
The trial court dismissed the complaint and a revision to the Sessions Court was also dismissed.
A further revision to the High Court under section 439 Criminal Procedure Code, was allowed.
In appeal to this Court, it was contended that: (1) the case being a summons case the dismissal of the complaint was an order of acquittal and not one of discharge and hence, only an appeal lay under section 417, Cr.
P.C., and not a revision under section 439; (2) the appellant did not fail within the definition of the expression 'motor transport undertaking ' in section 2(g) of the Act; and (3) the transport vehicles owned by the appellant were exempt under section 38 of the Act, because, the transport vehicles were used for a purpose connected with the maintenance of 'public order '.
HELD: (i) Since the complaint was dismissed before anything was done it amounted to.
an order of discharge and not an acquittal, and so the revision was competent.
[917 C] (2) The expression 'motor transport undertaking ' in section 2(g) includes a 'private carrier ' as defined in the .
The: appellant fell within the definition of 'private carrier ' inasmuch as the appellant owned transport vehicles and used them solely for the carriage of goods.
It cannot be said that only an undertaking of a commercial nature was intended to be included within the definition of motor transport undertaking, because, (a) the is a beneficial Act and the Legislature intended to enlarge the meaning of the expression 'motor transport undertaking ' and so, the enactment should not be construed strictly; (b) the words of the definition are plain and are not susceptible of any limitation: and (e) section 38, which exempts certain transport vehicles proceeds on the basis that a private carrier carrying on activities which are not of a commercial character would also be included in the expression 'motor transport undertaking '.
[918 C F] 916 (3) The words 'public order ' in section 38 mean 'public peace and tranquility ' and do.
not include 'public health '.
Therefore, the exemption under section 38 is not attracted.
[920 A B] Ramesh Thappar vs State of Madras, ; , explained.
