By section 4 of the Madras Buildings (Lease & Rent Control) Act, 1960 the fair rent for any non residential building is to be fixed on the total cost of such building and under sub section
3(b) the total cost is to consist of three components: (i) the cost of construction as calculated "according to such rates for such classes of non residential building as may be prescribed, less depreciation at such rates as may be prescribed"; (ii) the market value of that portion of the site on which the non residential building is constructed, and (iii) such allowances not exceeding 25% of the cost of construction as may be made for locality features of architectural interest, accessibility to market, nearness to a railway station other amenities as may be prescribed.
The State Government framed rules prescribing rates for the calculation of the cost of construction of different classes of non residential buildings.
The appellant, a tenant of a non residential building applied to the High Court of Madras for a writ of prohibition against the Controller restraining him from proceeding with an application for fixation of fair rent.
He contended that the expression "cost of construction" section 4(3)(b)(i) meant the cost of the original construction and not the market value of the structure at the date of enactment of the Act and therefore the rules were inconsistent with the intention and ambit of the Act: The High Court dismissed the application.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: The expression "cost of construction" in sub section
3(b)(i) when used in juxtaposition with the expression "market value" in sub section
3(b)(ii) is used to denote not the market value but the cost of the original construction.
The Legislature could not have used two different expressions for providing that the market value of the building and the market value of the site shall form components of the total cost of a building.
If the expression "cost of construction" is equated with the market value it would necessarily include the special advantages of the situation of the building, its amenities and architectural features and there is no reason why these allowances should be included twice.
once as part of component (i) and again as part of component, (iii).
Again, if the meaning of the expression "cost of construction" were "market value" ' it would mean the market value having regard to the market conditions of real property which may go on changing year after year.
But the 'State had accepted by r. 12 that the cost of construction was a fixed quantity related to the date on which the Act was brought into force.
[912 B C, G H]
