The appellant entered into a contract with the respondent to supply some goods and deposited a certain amount as security for due performance of the contract.
It was stipulated that the amounts we 're to stand forfeited in case the appellant neglected to perform his part of the con tract.
When the appellant made defaults in the supply, the respondent rescinded the contract and forfeited the amount deposited.
The appellant filed a suit for recovery of the amount with interest.
The trial court decreed the suit, holding that the respondent was justified in rescinding the contracts, but could not 'forfeit the deposit, for, it had not suffered any loss in consequence of the default committed by the appellant.
The High Court modified the decree and awarded the 'respondent a major portion of the amount deposited as damages.
The High Court took the view that the forfeiture of a sum deposited by way of security for due performance of a contract, where the amount forfeited was not unreasonable section 74 of the Contract Act had No. application and that the deposits so made could be regarded as earnest money.
HELD: The High Court was., in error in disallowing the appellant 's claim.
(i) Earnest money is a deposit made by a purchaser to be applied towards part payment of the price when the contract is completed and till then as evidencing an intention on the part of the purchaser to buy property or goods.
Forfeiture of earnest money under a contract for sale of property, if the amount is reasonable, does not fall within section 74 of the Contract Act.
[933 D].
Kunwar Chiranjit Singh vs Har Swarup, A.I.R. 1926 P.C. 1, relied on.
(ii) Where under the terms of the contract the party in breach has undertaken to pay a sum of money or to forfeit a sum of money which he has already paid to the party complaining of a breach of contract, the undertaking is in the nature of a penalty and, section 74 applied thereto.
[933 E F] Fateh Chand vs Balkishan Dass, ; , relied on.
Contrary view in Natesa Aiyar vs Appavu Padayachi, (1913) LL.R. 38 Mad.
178, Singer Manufacturing Co. vs Raja Prosad, Cal.
960 and Manian Patter vs Madras Railway Company, Mad. 188, disapproved.
The expression "whether or not actual damage or loss is proved to have been caused thereby" in section 74 is intended to cover different classes of contracts which come before the courts.
In ease of breach of some contracts.
it may be impossible for the court to assess compensation arising from breach, while in other cases, compensation can be calculated in 929 accordance with established rules.
Where the court is unable to assess the compensation, the sum named by the parties, if it be regarded as a genuine preestimate, may be taken into consideration as the measure of reasonable compensation, but not if the sum named is in the nature of a penalty.
[934 A C] In the present case it was possible for the respondent Government to lead evidence to prove the loss suffered but it did not attempt to do so.
