Two brothers were in possession of ancestral properties consisting of a house and tenancy rights of an ordinary tenant in agricultural lands.
The eider brother died in 1930 leaving a widow, the first appellant.
The first appellant continued to live with the younger brother and had an illegitimate son by him, the respondent.
In March 1958, she adopted the second appellant, and some time later, the surviving brother died.
After his putative father died the respondent took possession of all the joint family properties.
The two appellants thereupon filed a suit for ejectment.
The trial court decreed the suit.
The first appellate court found that a will executed by the respondents father (the younger brother) was valid in so far as his half share in the house was concerned and therefore modified the decree by granting a half share of the house to the respondent.
In second appeal, the High Court held that the appellants were: not entitled to any relief and that there suit should be dismissed, on the grounds that: (1) the joint family properties ceased to have that character in the hands of the surviving brother when he became the sole surviving coparcener and (2) the second appellant did not become, on his adoption, a coparcener with his uncle in the joint family properties.
In appeal to this Court.
HELD: (1) The joint family properties continued to retain their character in the hands of the surviving brother, as the widow (the first appellant) of the eider brother was still alive and continued to enjoy the right of maintenance out of the joint family properties.
[5 B] Gowli Buddanna vs
C.I.T. Mysore, , followed.
A. G. of Ceylon vs
A.R. Arunachalam Chettiar , applied.
(2) The scheme of sections 11 and 12 of the , is that in the case of adoption by a widow the adopted child becomes absorbed in the adoptive family to which the widow belonged.
Though section 14 of the Act does not expressly state that the child adopted by a widow becomes the adopted son of her deceased husband, it is a necessary implication of sections 12 and 14 of the Act.
That is why, section 14(4) provides that when a widow adopts a child and subsequently marries, that husband becomes the step father of the adopted child.
There 2 fore, in the present case, when the the second appellant was adopted by the first appellant he became the adopted son of the first appellant and her deceased husband, namely, the elder brother, and ' hence became a coparcener with the surviving brother in the joint family properties; and, 'after the death of the surviving brother the second appellant became the sole surviving coparcener entitled to the possession of all the joint family properties except those bequeathed under the will, that is, except the half share of the house.
[7 D G; A B] Arukushi Narayan vs Janabai Sama Sawat, 67 B.L.R. 864, approved.
(3) Section 86 of the Madhya Bharat Land Revenue and Tenancy Act, 1950 'applies to the rights of an ordinary tenant in agricultural lands which were therefore heritable.
In the absence of any special statutory provision, the heritability is governed by the personal law of the tenants.
Therefore, the second appellant was entitled to the tenancy rights of his uncle on his death.
[8 G H; 9 C D]
