The appellants, motor transport operators, challenged the increase in surcharge of the fares and freights imposed by the Andhra Pradesh Motor Vehicles (Taxation of Passengers and Goods) Amendment and Validation Act, 1961.
They urged: (i) the Act was neither regulatory nor compensatory in nature and, it fell directly within the mischief of article 301 of the Constitution; (ii) the imposts exceeded the limits of permissible reasonableness, were not in the public interest and, therefore, violated articles 304(b) and 19(1)(g); and (iii) the Act violated article 14 (a) inasmuch as it had not been made applicable to the Telegana area although it was applicable to the Andhra area and (b) the vehicles on inter State routes on permits granted by other States had not been subjected to tax.
HELD: (i) It was not the contention of the State that the impugned Act imposed a tax by way 'of a regulatory or compensatory measure.
Therefore, it had to be been whether the restrictions imposed were reasonable and in the public interest within the meaning of article 304(b); these questions were open to examination by the court notwithstanding the fact that the sanction of the President was obtained in compliance with the Article.
[55 E F] Mathurai Pillay vs State of Madras, , Automobile Transport (Rajasthan) Ltd. vs State of Rajasthan vs State of Assam. ; and Atiabari Tea Co. Ltd. vs State of Assam, ; , referred to.
(ii) There was no material which would justify the view that the tax which had been imposed exceeded the limit of permissible reasonableness or was not in the public interest.
The argument that by raising the rate of tax the burden had been increased to such an extent that the business of the appellants had been virtually annihilated had no substance.
The operators had been permitted to enhance the freights and if the freights could be enhanced, obviously, the burden would not fall on them.
If the operators were not prepared to charge higher rates as a matter of policy or for the purpose of business competition that could not impinge on the reasonableness of the restrictions.
This disposed of the challenge under article
