The appellant and the respondent were carrying on three businesses at three different places Pipliya in Madhya Pradesh, Bombay and Nagpur.
Certain disputes relating to the partnership business were referred to an arbitrator.
Having not been able to complete the reference within four months, the arbitrator applied to the Subordinate Judge, Delhi for extension of time.
Overruling the objection as to his jurisdiction to entertain the application the Subordinate Judge, Delhi granted extension of time for making the award.
When the revision application against this order was pending before the High Court of Delhi, the respondent filed a suit in the court of the Additional District Judge in Madhya Pradesh for certain reliefs.
In the meantime the appellant applied under section 34 of the Arbitration Act for stay of the suit.
The Additional District Judge appointed a receiver of the properties.
In appeal the Madhya Pradesh High Court held that having regard to the proceedings pending in the High Court at Delhi it was a case in which, without adjudicating upon the jurisdiction of the Subordinate Judge at Delhi, the application for appointment of the receiver was maintainable.
In appeal to this Court it was contended that it was open to a Court to appoint a receiver of any other property in dispute or in relation to any proceedings before the arbitrator and by confirment of that power, the power of the Civil Court in a suit to appoint a receiver was excluded and, therefore, the only Court competent to entertain an application for appointment of a receiver was the Subordinate Judge at Delhi and not the court of Additional District Judge in Madhya Pradesh.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: Normally for the grant of interim relief in respect of the subject matter of the dispute before an arbitrator the parties would have to resort to that court to which the application for extension of time to make the award was made.
But as the jurisdiction of the Court of the Subordinate Judge, Delhi to entertain the application for extension of time was in dispute the Civil Court 777 which is seised of the suit was entitled to make appropriate orders for preserving the property which is the subject matter of the suit.
[780 C D] Therefore, the Civil Court in Madhya Pradesh was competent to appoint a receiver of the property until the question about the jurisdiction of the Delhi Court under section 31 (4) of the Arbitration Act to entertain applications arising out of the order of reference was finally determined.
After the High Court of Delhi determined that question, the receiver appointed, in order to comply with the requirements of the statute, may be made subject to the jurisdiction of the Delhi Court if it be held that the Delhi Court had jurisdiction to entertain the application.
[780 E]
