The assessee was a share holder of a company.
The Income tax Appellate Tribunal referred three questions to the High Court namely, (i) whether the amount distributed to the assessee out of the amount attributable to land acquisition compensation received by the company was, in the hands of the assessee, receipt of 'dividend ' within the meaning of section 2(6A) of the Income tax Act, 1922; (ii) whether the amount distributed to the assessee out of the amount attributable to salamis realised by the company for grant of long term leases was a receipt in the hands of the assessee taxable as income from 'other sources '; and (iii) whether the amount referred to in question (ii) was not, in the hands of the assessee, a receipt of 'dividend ' within the meaning of section 2(6A) of the Act.
The High Court, following its earlier judgment, answered the questions in the negative and observed that it was agreed between the parties that the answers were subject to the final decision in appeals against that earlier judgment, pending in the Supreme Court.
In appeal to this Court, HELD: The High Court erred in the manner in which it disposed of the reference.
(1) Even where there was consent of the parties the High Court had to record its answers to the questions referred and give its reasons; and such answers would be final and could not be modified by a judgment of this Court in some other case.
[34 G H] (2) The High Court had to decide on the facts of each case whether any amount of salami was capital gain.
[35 A] (3) The High Court had to decide on the facts of each case whether any part of the compensation received for compulsory acquisition of land was capital gain, because, the interest which is statutorily payable on compensation is income and not capital gain.
[35 B] Shamlal Narula vs
C.I.T. Punjab, Jammu and Kashmir, H.P. and Patiala , referred to.
(4) Further, the question whether the receipt from capital gains was income liable to tax from 'other sources ' (not being dividend) under section 12 of the Act, was not the subject matter of the appeal pending in this Court against the earlier judgment.
[35 E F]
