Defendant No. 1 was the Sthanee of Kavalappara estate which was an impartible estate governed by Marumakkathayam law.
The plaintiffs claimed maintenance based on a family custom entitling the members to maintenance out of the entire income of the Sthanam.
Past maintenance was claimed as also future maintenance from the date of the suit.
Defendant No. 1 denied that the plaintiffs had any right based on custom as claimed by them; according to him from older times two kalams of the Sthanam had been set apart for their maintenance.
He claimed that the Privy Council in suit No. 46 of 1934 had declared him absolute owner of the Sthanam properties but despite that, out of generosity only he had been paying to the junior members of the Swaroopam Rs. 17.000/ annually.
The trial court granted maintenance to the plaintiffs for the period claimed at the rate of Rs. 250/ per mensem for each of the plaintiffs.
Defendant No. 1 appealed to the High Court and the plaintiffs filed cross objections as the rate of maintenance allowed to them was lower than they had claimed.
The High Court partly allowed the appeal negativing the plaintiffs ' claim for arrears of maintenance, and dismissed the cross objections of the plaintiffs.
Both the parties appealed to this Court.
The questions that fell for consideration were: (i) whether the right to maintenance as claimed by the plaintiffs was based on custom; (ii) whether the High Court was right in disallowing the claim of the plaintiffs to arrears of maintenance; (iii) whether the rate of maintenance as ordered by the trial court and ' confirmed by the High Court was justified.
HELD: (i) An alleged custom, in order to be valid, must be proved by testimony to have been obeyed from consciousness of its obligatory character.
A mere convention between family members or an arrangement by mutual consent for peace and convenience cannot be recognised as custom.
In order that a custom should acquire the character of law the custom must be accompanied by the intellectual element, the opinion necessitatis.
the recognition that there is authority behind it.
[45 B C; D E] Rarnrao vs Yeshwantrao, I.L.R. , applied.
In the present case the evidence sufficiently proved a custom in Kavalappara estate by which the Sthanee was legally obliged to give maintenance to junior members of the family.
It was possible that the practice of paying maintenance to junior members originated as an act of generosity of the previous Sthanee.
But it had continued without interruption for such a length of time that it had acquired the character of a legal right.
[42] Kochuni vs Kuttanunnt, A.I.R. 1948 (P.C.) 47, 52, explained.
37 (ii) Although it had been alleged by the plaintiffs that they had not been paid any maintenance, the High Court had ' found that maintenance had been given to the plaintiffs ' mother with whom the plaintiffs had been living.
The High Court 's refusal to grant to the plaintiffs arrears of maintenance before the date of the, suit must, in the circumstances, be upheld.
[46 C] (iii) The High Court in fixing the amount of maintenance for each of the plaintiffs at Rs. 250./ per month had taken into account all the relevant factors.
It had further directed that it was open to the parties after two years to move the trial court for variation in the rate of maintenance fixed on the ground of altered circumstances of the Estate.
There was no reason for interfering with the judgment of the High Court in this matter.
[46. G]
