The Delhi Development Authority is constituted under section 3 of the Delhi Development Act, 1957.
Two. of the members of the Authority 'are to be representatives of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi, elected by the Councillors and Aldermen of the Corporation from among themselves.
Rule 3(1) of the Delhi Development Authority Rules, 1958, passed under the Act, prescribes various grounds of disqualification for being a member of the Authority.
Under r. 3 (1 )(e) a person is disqualified if he is interested directly or indirectly in any business of development of land in Delhi.
The appellant, first respondent, and another, filed nomination papers for being elected to the Delhi Development Authority as representatives of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi.
On an objection that the first respondent was disqualified because.
he was interested in the business of development of land in Delhi, the Mayor of Delhi, who presided at the meeting, rejected the nomination paper of the first respondent 'and declared the two remaining candidates elected.
The first respondent thereupon filed & writ petition in the High Court which was allowed.
In appeal to this Court, it was contended: (1 ) That under r. 2(5) of the Delhi Development Authority (Election of Representatives of Delhi Municipal Corporation) Rules, 1958, framed under the Delhi Development Act, when the number of validly nominated candidates is equal or less than the number of representatives to be elected the Mayor shall declare all such candidates to be duly elected, and if the number of validly nominated candidates is more, a roll shall be taken, that the expression 'validly nominated candidates ' implies that the Mayor has the power to determine whether a person is validly nominated, and for this purpose, the: Mayor could consider not only whether the requirements of nomination in cls.
(2) and (3) are complied with, but also, whether he is subject to any disqualification; and (2) That the objection about the first respondent amounted to raising a point of order and the decision of the Mayor on a point of order was final under reg. 33 of the Delhi Municipal Corporation (Procedure and Conduct of Business) Regulations, 1958.
HELD: (1) The Delhi Development Act and the various rules made thereunder contain no machinery for setting aside an election to the Delhi Development Authority nor do they contain an express provision authorising the Mayor to hold an inquiry and reject a nomination.
In the absence of such an express provision the Mayor could not, at a meeting of the Corporation, hold an inquiry to ascertain whether a candidate was subject to any of the disqualifications set out in r. 3 of the Delhi Development Authority Rules.
The expression validly nominated in r. 2(5) of the Election of Representatives Rules, implies only that a Mayor may determine whether the requirements of els.
(2) and (3) of r. 2 are satisfied and not to determine whether a candidate.
was under a disqualification at the date of nomination.
F G H; 63 A B, F] (2) A point of order is primarily intended to determine the interpretation of the rules and regulations governing a meeting and objections in relation to a meeting.
It does not include an objection to the competence of a member to stand for election to a Committee.
In fact, the objection to the nomination of the respondent was never raised as a point of order.
[64 C D, F] Even if it be assumed that the objection was raised and decided by the Mayor as a point of order, the Mayor could not do so by his mere fiat without calling for evidence and without discussion.
The finality contemplated by reg. 33 is only for the purpose of procedure and conduct of meetings.
[64 E] Therefore, whether the first respondent was at the date of nomination disqualified from being elected a member of the Delhi Development Authority could only be decided in an appropriate proceeding in a civil court after he was elected.
