By a deed of settlement, the settlor appointed besides himself, the father of the first plaintiff, the father of the second plaintiff, and defendants 1 to 3 and 10 and 11, as.
trustees of an Educational and Charitable Trust.
On the resignation of the fathers of the two plaintiffs, the remaining trustees appointed defendants 4 to 9 as trustees.
The plaintiffs flied a suit making allegations against defendants 1 to 9 and claimed that they should be appointed as trustees.
The High Court, in 'appeal, gave a declaration to the effect that the plaintiffs were; next in the line of succession, that they were entitled to claim appointment as trustees, but that such appointment could be made only in a properly framed suit after complying with the requirements of section 92, Civil Procedure Code.
The plaintiffs thereupon filed a fresh suit under section 92, C.P.C.
Meanwhile, the defendants in the ,earlier suit filed an appeal against the judgment of the High Court, to this Court.
HELD: The suit was for appointment of the plaintiffs as trustees and fell within the provisions of section 92, C.P.C.
Therefore, the judgment of the High Court giving the plaintiffs the right to be appointed as trustees, when the provisions of the section were not complied with, should be set aside.
[127 H; 128 E] (a) If the appointment fell within the vice of section 92 any decision giving the plaintiffs the right to be appointed will be prejudging the question and would be an impediment as far as the defendants are concerned, in questioning, in the second suit, the right of the plaintiffs to be appointed as trustees.
[128 A B] (b) If the right to be appointed as trustees were to be granted 10 the plaintiffs in the absence of compliance with the provisions of the section, it would amount to an indirect way of giving what was directly prohibited.
[128 B] (c) If the declaration were 'allowed to stand it would operate as res judicata and it would not be open to the defendants to question it in the subsequent proceedings.
flied for the same relief after compliance with the section.
[128 B C] (d) A hare declaration of the right without consequential relief will be within the mischief of section 42 of the or section 34 of the .
[128 D E]
