The respondent was arrested on the 21st of April, 1950, under the , and on the 29th of 168 April.
1950, he was supplied with the ground for his deten tion which was as follows: "That you are engaged and are likely to be engaged in promoting acts of sabotage on rail way and railway property in Greater Bombay.
" The respondent filed a habeas corpus petition contending that the ground supplied was vague as it did not mention the time, place or nature of the sabotage or how the respondent promoted it and that as the ground gave no particulars, his detention was illegal.
Pending the disposal of the petition, the Commis sioner of Police sent a communication to the respondent giving these further particulars, viz., that the activities mentioned in the grounds supplied to him were being carried on by him in Greater Bombay between January, 1950, and the date of his detention and that he will in all probability continue to do so.
The High Court of Bombay held that if these particulars had been furnished at the time when the grounds were furnished on the 29th of April, 1950, very likely they would have come to the conclusion that the grounds were such as would have led the detenue to know exactly what he was charged with and to make a proper repre sentation, but released the respondent holding that the only grounds which were furnished in the purported compliance of article 22 (5) were the grounds furnished on the 29th of April, 1950, and as these grounds were not such as to enable the detenue to make a proper representation, there was a viola tion of a fundamental right and a contravention of the statutory provisions and this violation cannot be set right by the detaining authority by amplifying or improving the grounds already given: Held by the Full Court (KANIA C.J., FAZL ALI, PATANJALI SASTRI, MUKHERJEA, DAS and CHANDRASEKHARA AIYAR JJ).
Under section 3 of the , it is the satis faction of the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, that is necessary, and if the grounds on which it is stated that the Central Government or the State Government are satisfied have a rational connection with the objects which were to be prevented from being attained, the question of satisfaction cannot be challenged in a court of law except on the ground of mala fides.
Held also per KANIA C.J., FAZL ALI, MUKHERJEA and CHANDRASEKHARA AIYAR JJ.
, (PATANJALI SASTRI and DAS JJ.
dissenting).
Clause (5)of article 22 confers two rights on the detenue, namely, first, a right to be informed of the grounds on which the order of detention has been made, and secondly, to be afforded the earliest opportunity to make a representation against the order; and though these rights are linked together, they are two distinct rights.
If grounds which have a rational connection with the objects mentioned in section 3 are supplied, the first condition is complied with.
But the ,right to make a representation implies that the detenue should have information so as to enable him to make a representation, and if the grounds 169 supplied are not sufficient to enable the detenue to make a representation, he can rely on the second right.
He may if he likes ask for further particulars which will enable him to make a representation.
On an infringement of either of these two rights the detained person has a right to approach the court, and even if an infringement of the second right under article 22 (S) is alone, established he is entitled to be released.
Per PATANJALI SASTRI and DAS JJ.
As the power to issue a detention order depends upon the existence of a state of mind in the detaining authority, that is, its satisfaction, which is purely a subjective condition and judicial enquiry into the sufficiency of the grounds to justify the detention is thus excluded, it would be wholly inconsistent with the scheme to hold that it is open to the court to examine the sufficiency of the same grounds to enable the person de tained to make a representation, for, the grounds to be communicated to the person detained are the grounds on which the order has been made.
There is further nothing in article 22, el.
(5), to warrant the view that the grounds on which the order of detention has been made must be such, that when communicated to the person they are found by a court of law to be sufficient to enable him to make what the court con siders to be an adequate representation, or that the latter part of cl.
(5) confers a distinct right on the detenue or an independent obligation on the detaining authority to furnish the detenue with sufficient particulars and details to enable him to make an effective representation.
Held by the Full Court (KANIA C.J., FAZL ALI, PATANJALI SASTRI, MUKHERJEA, DAS and CHANDRASEKHARA AIYAR JJ.) In any view, on the facts of the case there was no infringement of any fundamental right of the respondent or contravention of any constitutional provision as he had been supplied with sufficient particulars as soon as he raised the objection that the grounds supplied were vague and the respondent was not, therefore, entitled to be released.
Per KANIA C.J., FAZL ALI, MUKHERJEA and CHANDRASEKHARA AIYAR JJ.) The "grounds" for making the order which have to be communicated to the person detained as soon as may be are conclusions of facts and not a complete recital of all the facts.
These grounds must be in existence when the order is made.
No part of the 'grounds can be held back, and after they have been once conveyed there can be no addition to the grounds.
All facts leading to the conclusion constituting the ground need not, however, be conveyed at the same time.
If a second communication contains no further conclusion of fact but only furnishes some of the facts on which the first mentioned conclusion was rounded it does not amount to a fresh ground.
The test therefore is whether what is conveyed in the second communication is a statement of facts or events, which facts or 170 events were already taken into consideration in arriving at the conclusion constituting the ground already supplied.
So long as the later communications do not make out a new ground, their contents are no infringement of the two procedural rights of the detenue mentioned in article 22, cl.
They may consist of a narration of facts or particulars relating to the grounds already supplied.
But in doing so the time factor in respect of second duty, viz., to give the detained person the earliest opportunity to make a represen tation, cannot be overlooked.
If on reading the ground furnished it is capable of being intelligently understood and is sufficiently definite to furnish materials to enable the detained person to make a representation against the order it cannot be said to be "vague.
" The question whether the vagueness or indefinite nature of the statement furnished to the detained person is such that he was not given the earliest opportunity to make a representation is a matter within the jurisdiction of the court 's inquiry and subject to the court 's decision.
