Section 29 sub section (2) of the Madhya Pradesh General Sales Tax Act provides in part that all accounts relating to the stock in trade of any dealer shall be.
open to inspection by the Commissioner; and for this purpose sub section (4) empowers the Commissioner to search any place of business of the dealer.
The Sales Tax Inspector visited the shop of the appellant fox a surprise check and wanted to inspect his account books.
When the Inspector tried to prevent removal of the books in a clandestine manner by forcibly taking possession of them, the appellant used criminal force and was subsequently convicted under sections 353 and 506(1) I.P.C.
In appeal to this Court it was contended that the Act did not authorise forcible inspection of accounts and that the Inspector was exercising powers of seizure under section 29(3) of the Act which he did not have.
HELD: Dismissing the appeal, If the powers under sub section (2) 'and (4) are.
read together, it would mean that the Commissioner is entitled to search and take hold of the account books even if the assessee does not place the account books before him.
If the Commissioner does so, he cannot be said to seize the account books.
In the Act "seizure" means that the Commissioner should take into possession the account books and take, them outside the possession of the assessee.
[156 E G] In the present case the Sales Tax Inspector having seen the account books in the hands of the assessee was entitled to demand that the account books be shown to.
him and if he did forcibly try to take possession of them, he was only attempting to enforce his right of inspection.
He cannot be said to have attempted to seize the account books within the meaning of section 29(3), for, the object was not to dispossess the trader but to hold the books for a temporary period for the purpose of inspection.
[157 E F] The observation contra in Hazari Lal vs State of Bihar [1962] Supp. ?.
S.C.R. 419 at 425, held obiter, Commissioner of Commercial Taxes vs Ramkishan Shrikishan Jhovar , 671 and N.P. Sharma vs Satish Chandra ; ; 1096 referred ' to.
