The assessee inherited a vast estate consisting of agricultural and other land as also Government securities worth Rs. 40 lacs.
In 1937 he attained majority and control of the estate from the Court of Wards.
In the accounting year 1938 39 he sold some of these securities at a profit.
Thereafter he opened an account in the Imperial Bank of India in the name of his wife and called it "account of 48 lacs floating in the share market.
" In September 1939 he purchased shares worth Rs. 34.14 lacs out of the said fund but sold them, again at a profit in the Years 1939 ', 1940 ' and 1941.
The profits on the said sales of shares were subjected to tax by the Income tax Officer in the years 1939 40, 1940 41 and 1941 42.
The Tribunal however held that the asessee was not a dealer in shares anti ' held the profits not to be taxable.
Between June.
and November 1940 the assessee purchased gold for Rs. 28.47,380/ from out of the sale proceeds of the aforesaid shares.
This gold was sold 'at a profit in the accounting periods relevant t0 the 1945 46 and 1946 47 assessment years.
With the sale proceeds certain shares including 7,025 shares of Karanpura Development Co. Ltd. were purchased, most of which were sold at a profit.
Certain Victory Bonds were purchased and resold within two months.
The Income tax Officer subjected the profits from the sales of gold and Karanpur shares to tax in the assessment years 1945 46 and 1946 47.
The Tribunal on ,considering the whole pattern of transactions from 1938 onwards came to the conclusion that the said ' profits were rightly taxed.
The High Court upheld the view of the Tribunal holding inter alia, that the findings were of fact and not arrived at without evidence so that no interference was warranted in reference proceedings.
The assessee appealed.
HELD: (1) When a transaction is not in the ordinary lines of an assessee 's business the facts must be properly assessed to discover whether it was in the nature of trade.
The test often applied ' is has the assessee made his shares and securities the stock in trade of a business ? [171 G; 172 H] (ii) Since in the present case the Tribunal had the advantage of examining the assessee 's transactions during the whole period i.e. right from 1938 39 to 1944 45 and thus had more comprehensive picture of all the transactions, there would be no bar to its coming to a conclusion different from that arrived at in the earlier years.
if the acts and conduct of the assessee taken as a whole throughout the period pointed to a different conclusion.
[174 A B] (iii) On the facts and circumstances of the case, however the finding of the Tribunal, concurred in by the High Court, that the transactions in question were in the nature of trading transactions, was not justified.
[174 C D] 164 (a) It is a notorious fact that in 1940 the fortunes of the allies were none too bright.
The conversion by the assessee of his entire share holding into gold in that year was consistent with his case that he did so because of the nervousness engendered by the breaking out of the war, the initial German victories, and the fall of France.
The fact that the assessee did not invest all his cash would not mean, 'as the Tribunal thought, that his case about the purchases of go1d was not correct.
[174 D F] The Tribunal also failed to give due significance.
to the fact that the assessee who started with the plan of getting 'at least net 7% yield, put a very large part of his funds into gold, an altogether sterile security, and retained it for 4 years.
The price of gold began to rise in 1941 and was at its peak in 1943.
The fact that the assessee did not sell his gold then but only in October 1944 when the price had fallen showed that it was only after the: fortunes of war had turned in favour of the allies and confidence restored that he felt it safe to invest his money in income beating securities.
The further fact that he sold practically the whole of his stock of gold in October 1944 instead of reselling it bit by bit after the price was rising since 1942 was inconsistent with the hypothesis that the object with which the go1d was purchased was to trade in it.
[174 G H; 175 A D] (b) The fact that the account in the Imperial Bank opened in 1939 was called "Rs. 48 lacs floating in the share market" was given undue significance by the Tribunal.
Properly viewed it only meant that the assessee wanted to set apart this fund for transactions in shares and securities and not mix up his other capital and the income arising from his estate.
[175 D E] (c) The sale of the.
Victory Bonds within two months of their purchase would not invest the transaction with the stamp of trade or business they were only purchased to show to the authorities that his estate had made a contribution to the war effort.
[175] (d) The Karanpur shares were purchased by the assessee with a view to getting control over the company 's management by procuring 51% of its total shares.
When that plan failed he sold these shares.
In these circumstances the transaction could not be considered to be on revenue account.
[175 G H; 176 D] Kishan Prasad & Co. Ltd.
C.I.T., and C.I.T.v.
National Finance Ltd. , 'applied.
(e) The expression 'adventure in the nature of trade ' implies the existence of certain elements in the transactions which in law would invest them with the character of trade or business.
The question therefore whether a particular transaction is an adventure.
in the nature of trade is a mixed question of law and fact and the court can review the Tribunal 's finding thereon.
Therefore in the present case the High Court was wrong in treating the Tribunal 's decision as a finding of fact and refusing to interfere on that ground.
[171 A C] Venkataswami Naidu & Co.
C.I.T., , 603, 604 and Liquidators of Pursa Ltd. vs
C.I.T., , referred to.
