The claim for bonus of the Dock Board Workers employed at Vizakhapatnam was referred to the Industrial Tribunal.
The parties to the reference included the Vizagapatnam Dock Labour Board (the appellant), the Stevedores Association, and two Unions representing the workers.
The Industrial Tribunal after referring to the nature of the duties performed by the Board as well as the Stevedores Association and its members and their relationships with the Dock Labour Board held that it was the Board that was the employer of the dock workers and that the Board was liable for meeting the claim for bonus.
The Board in appeal to this Court, contended, that (i) it was not liable for the payment of bonus when the claim of the workers was against the Stevedores Association and its members; and (ii) having regard 10 the provisions of the Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act (9 of 1948), and the Vizagapatnam Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) Scheme, 1959 and the functions discharged by the Board there was no employer employee relationship between the Board and the workmen, and as such the Board could be made liable for the claim.
Accepting the contentions, this Court, HELD: (i) Having regard to the nature.
of the claim and the basis on which the tribunal itself proceeded, the claim for bonus was made by the unions specifically against the Stevedores Association and its members and.
as such, the tribunal was not justified in making the Board liable.
(ii) The Board cannot be considered to be the.
employer of the Dock Labour Workmen.
From the provisions of Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act and the Vizagapatnam Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) Scheme, it is evident that the Board is a statutory body charged with the duty of administering the scheme, the object of which is to ensure that greater regularity of employment for dock workers arc available for the efficient performance of dock work.
The Board is an autonomous body, competent 10 determine and prescribe the wages, allowances and other conditions of service of the dock workers.
The purport of the Scheme is that the entire body of workers should be under the Control and supervision of the Board.
The registered employers are allocated monthly workers by the Administrative Body and the Administrative Body supplies whenever necessary, the labour force to the Stevedores from the Reserve Pool.
The workmen who are allotted to the registered employers are to do the work under the control and supervision of the registered employers and to act under their directions.
The registered employers pay the wages due to the workers to the Administrative Body and the latter.
in turn, as agent of the registered employers, pay them 304 over to the concerned workmen.
The registered employer to whom the labour force is allotted by the Board is the employer whose work to them.
The functions of the Board such as recruitment and registration of the dock labour force, fixation of wages and dearness allowance, payment of workmen 's compensation, taking of disciplinary action and prohibition against employment of workers who were not registered with the.
Board do not establish a relationship of employer and employee between the Board and the dock labour.
Further, the Board functioning under the Act and the Scheme cannot be.
said to carry on any industry so as to attract the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act.
As a claim for any type of bonus can be met only from the actual employer in respect of any industry and as the Board is neither the employer nor carries on any industry the Tribunal was wrong in directing the Board to pay Bonus for the years in question.
[316 B E; G H; 320 C] Gymkhana Club Union vs Management, [1968] 1 S.C.R. 742. 752, applied.
A. C. Roy & Co. Ltd. vs Taslim, , referred to.
Kirlosker Oil Engines vs Hanmant Laxman Bihawej, , distinguished.
C.V.A.Hydross & Son vs Joseph Senjon, 11967] 1 L.L.J. 509 disapproved.
