The British Crown had leased a land for 99 ' years and the lease provided for resumption by the Government for public purpose.
The appellant had purchased the leasehold rights.
When the Deputy Commissioner on behalf of the respondent State served a notice of resumption on the appellant, he filed a petition under article 226 of the Constitution challenging the validity of the order of resumption on the grounds that the land did not vest in the State, the Deputy Commissioner had no right to issue the notice under the lease, and that the public purpose had not been mentioned in the notice, and so the notice was invalid.
The High Court dismissed the petition holding that the case involved disputed questions of title, that the remedy of the appellant was to file a suit and a petition under article 226 of the Constitution was not maintainable.
In appeal to this Court, the appellant contended that no disputed questions of title were involved as the title of the appellant as a grantee was not questioned by the State and the question at issue was whether the State was entitled to resume the land by virtue of the lease granted by the British Crown.
HELD: The judgment of the High Court had to be set aside.
The jurisdiction of the High Court under article 226 is an extraordinary jurisdiction vested not for the purpose of declaring private rights of the, parties but for the purpose of ensuring that the law of the land is implicitly obeyed and that the various tribunals and public authorities are kept within the limits of their jurisdiction.
The remedy provided under article 226 is a remedy 'against the violation of the rights of a citizen by the State or statutory authority.
In other words, it is a remedy in public law.
[202 C E] In the present case, the appellant was not merely attempting to enforce his contractual right but important constitutional issues were raised his behalf.
[203 B] State of Orissa vs Ramchandra, A.I.R. 1964 S.C. 865, distinguished.
Basappa vs Nagappa, , referred to. ,
