Respondent No. 1 retired from the service of the appellant bank on July 19, 19 '62 after 32 years of service.
Under the Bank 's bye laws Gratuity Fund Rules were sanctioned by the Board of Directors on August 17, 1957.
These rules were forwarded to the Registrar of Cooperative Societies for approval and they were 'approved with some modification except Rules 6, 10 and 15.
On his retirement Respondent No. 1 was paid a sum of Rs. 5,070/ as gratuity.
He instituted arbitration proceedings in the Court of the Registrar 's Nominee for a further sum of Rs. 7,605/as balance of gratuity payable to him with interest at 6 per cent.
The claim was disallowed and an appeal before the Maharashtra State Cooperative Tribunal 'also failed.
The High Court however in a petition under article 227 of the Constitution allowed the respondent 's claim.
The Bank appealed to this Court.
It was urged on behalf of the appellant (i) that Rule 6, the last sentence of which provides for the grant of gratuity and RuIe 10 which provides for contributions by the Bank to the Gratuity Fund not having been approved by the Registrar, there remained no basis for the claim of gratuity by respondent No. 1; (ii) that the old rules had neither been repealed nor altered and the effect of retrospective operation of the new rules was that the Registrar had withdrawn his approval to the old rules and enforced the new ones.
HELD: (i) The argument that r. 6 not having been approved there was no rule under Which the obligation to pay gratuity arose ignored the express language of r. 7 which, in unequivocal terms requires gratuity to be granted in case of retirement.
resignation or termination of services according to the rate specified therein.
Clause (a) of this rule contains a provision similar in effect to what the last sentence of r. 6 directs.
Rule 9 also imposes an imperative obligation for the payment of gratuity under these rules within one month from the retirement.
resignation, death or termination of service of the employee concerned.
[195 D F] (ii) The non approval of r. 10 by the Registrar also could not make the other rules ineffective and could not absolve the Bank of the obligation imposed on it by rr. 7, 8 and 9.
Once the Gratuity Fund Rules imposing an obligation on the Bank to pay gratuity to its employees are approved by the Registrar, then this obligation cannot be rendered nugatory merely because there is no separate Gratuity Fund.
[195] 193 It was conceded that the new rules could not detract from or prejudicially affect the vested rights created under the old ' rules.
Old Rule 16 expressly prohibits the retrospective operation of the new rules with the object of protecting the interests of the employees.
The effect of old r. 16 cannot be negatived by describing the process as mere withdrawal of the approval of the old rules and enforcement of the new ones.
[196 B D]
