The appellants were charged with offences punishable under section 147, 447 and 325 read with section 149 of the Indian Penal Code in connection with an incident in which they were alleged to have committed house trespass into the compound of a school and injured a teacher.
The Magistrate convicted them and sentenced them on various counts to imprisonment and fine.
The. sentences and fines were lower than the maximum that the Magistrate was empowered to impose under the Code of Criminal Procedure.
In appeal the Sessions Judge acquitted the appellants.
The State appealed to the High Court under section 417 Cr.
The High Court reversed the orders of the Sessions Judge and, considering the nature of the acts committed by the appellants imposed higher sentences and fines on them but they were still not higher than what the Magistrate could .himself have imposed.
In appeal to this Court against the High Court 's judgment it was contended that, the High COurt acting under section 423(1) (a) is not empowered to impose higher sentences than the lower court had passed and in any case not without a notice to show cause against enhancement.
It was also urged that the High Court could under section 423(1) (a) pass a sentence "according to law" and thus it did not enjoy the powers which it otherwise might have exercised under section 31(1) of the Code under which a High Court may pass "any sentence authorised by law".
HELD: (i) The difference in the wording of section 31 ( 1 ) and s.]23 ( 1 ) (a) is a matter of no moment.
The expression 'authorised by law means sanctioned by law while 'according to law ' means in conformity with law.
The question to be answered in either case remains the same i.e. what is the.
sentence the High Court is empowered to impose after it sets aside an order of acquittal when the same is preceded by a sentence of an inferior court.
[232 H] (ii) An appeal is a creature of statute and the power and jurisdiction of the appellate court must be circumscribed by the words of the statute.
At the same time a court of appeal is a 'court of error ' and its normal function is to correct the decision appealed from if necessary, and its jurisdiction should be co extensive with that of the trial court.
It cannot and ought not to do some.thing which the trial court was not competent to do.
There does.
not seem to.
be any fetter on its power to do.
what the trial court could do.
In this case the trial Magistrate was competent to pass a sentence of imprisonment up to two.
years and the High Court 's jurisdiction hearing an appeal would therefore be limited to a sentence up to that period, and no more.
[233 B] 228 (iii) Although the Sessions Judge, in hearing the appeal against the appellants ' conviction could not enhance the sentence the High Court in hearing appeal against the order of acquittal by the Sessions Judge could do so.
When the order of the Magistrate was set aside by the Sessions Judge the matter became one at large and the High Court hearing an appeal therefrom was empowered under section 423(1) (a) to pass a sentence according to law.
It could therefore pass any sentence which the Magistrate trying the case was empowered to pass and the High Court in the present case did not exceed that limit.
[238 A C] The. acceptance of the appellant 's contention would lead to the strange result that in an appeal against acquittal by the Magistrate the High Court could pass any sentence which the Magistrate was empowered to do but in an appeal against a judgment of a Sessions Judge setting.
aside a conviction by the Magistrate the High Court 's power would be limited to restoring the sentence which the Magistrate had actually passed.
Further the Sessions Judge would have been entitled to recommend enhancement of sentence to the High Court if he had maintained the conviction.
And the High Court could suo motu have issued notice for enhancement.
But on the appellant 's contention finality would be attached to the sentence given by the Magistrate.
Such .could not be attached to the sentence given by the Magistrate.
Such could not be the scheme of the Code.
[238 C E] (iv) When the accused is given notice of appeal under section 417 and actually takes part in the hearing before the High Court, it would be superfluous to give him notice to show cause why a sentence within the competence of the trial Magistrate should not be passed.
The accused knows or ought to know that the High Court was bound to form its own conclusions on the material before it and award a sentence which the merits of the case demanded within the limit of the trial court 's jurisdiction.
The absence of a show cause notice does not violate any known principle of natural justice.
[238 F G] On the above findings the 'appeal must be dismissed.
In re: Ramaswami Chetty & Anr.
[1902] 2 Weir 487, Muthiah vs Emperor, 29 Madras 190, Sita Ram vs Emperor, 11 Indian Cases 788.
Mahmudi Sheik vs Aji Sheik, 21 Calcutta 48, Parameswara Pillay vs Emperor, , Maung E. Maung vs The King, A.I.R. 1940 Rang.
118, Emperor vs Md. Yakub Ali.
45 Allahabad 594, Lakshminarayana vs Apparao, A.I.R. 1950 A,P. 530, Emperor
Abbas Ali, A.I.R. 1935 Nag.
139, Public Prosecutor vs Annamalai, A.I.R. 1955 Mad. 608, In the Tirumal Raju, A.I.R. 1947 Mad. 368, Jagat Bahadur Singh vs State of Madhya Pradesh, [1966]2 S.C.R. 822 and Emperor vs Abasali Yusufalli, 39 Calcutta 157, referred to.
