The appellants, among others applied to the Regional Transport Authority for permits to operate a direct bus service on.
a route in Meerut District, U.P., which had no direct passenger bus service.
After hearing the appellants and those who opposed them, the Regional Transport Authority was satisfied that there was no sufficient demand for such a direct service, and therefore, there was no justification for opening the proposed new route.
The. applications of "the appellants and other applicants were therefore rejected.
The Appellate Tribunal reversed the order of the Regional Transport Authority and granted permits to the three appellants.
The respondents therefore filed writ petitions in the High Court for quashing the order of the Tribunal contending that no appeal against the order of the Regional Transport Authority lay under section 64(a) of the and that consequently, the Tribunal had No. jurisdiction to entertain such appeals, and grant permits to the appellants.
A Single Bench dismissed the petitions but the Division Bench held that no appeal against the order of the Regional transport Authority lay under section 64(a) and accordingly, allowed the writ petitions and quashed the Tribunal 's order.
On appeal to this Court, HELD: The appeal must be dismissed.
The decisions of this Court clearly lay down that the R.T.A. has first to make "a general order" as stated in Abdul Mateen 's case under section 47 (3) as to the number of permits necessary for a new route and he cannot exceed that limit while he is at the next stage when he considers under section 48 read with, section 56(7) as to.
who among the applicants should be granted the permit or permits.
Such a 'general order ' limiting the number of permits presupposes that he has come to a decision that the new route either proposed by him or by an applicant or applicants is necessary in the public interest.
If the order 'as to the number of permits is a 'general order ' passed under section 47(3) with which the individual applications are not concerned and is anterior to the stage under section 48 when applications of the individual operators are taken into, consideration, and therefore is not appealable under section 64 (a) it must follow a fortiori that the decision as to whether the new route is necessary or not is equally 'a general order ' arrived at either earlier or contemporaneously with the decision as to the number of permits.
If the latter order is not appealable, it cannot be that the former i.e. the decision whether the new route is necessary or not, is not an equally 'general order ' with which individual applications are not concerned and can appeal against it under section 64 (a).
However, the powers of the R.T.A. in connection with the decision as to whether a proposed route should be opened or not are not un 244 limited and unbridled.
The power is subject to the revisional power of the State Government under section 64 A. [250 E 251 C] Abdul Mateen vs
R.K. Pandev ; ; M/s Java Ram Motor Service vs
section Rajarathinam C.A. 95 of 1965, dec.
on October 27, 1967; R. Obliswami Naidu vs The Addl.
State Transort Appellate Tribunal Madras C.A. 1426 of 19 '68, dec.
on Feb. 17, 1969, applied.
