The appellant company had a number of industrial establishments in Delhi.
These establishments were factories within the meaning of section 2Ira) of the .
The factories could be run only after registration and under a licence granted under the Act and the Rules on payment of a prescribed fee.
The licensee was renewable every year under R. 7 on payment of the same.
fee as for grant of the licence.
The company filed a writ petition under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution challenging the validity of the Rules under which the fee for renewal of the licence for each of its factories in Delhi was being levied and collected i.e.R. 7 read with R. 5 and its Schedule.
The petition being dismissed by the High Court, an appeal was filed in this Court with certificate.
The contention on behalf of the appellant was that there was no quid pro quo for the fee paid for renewal of the licence and that the maintenance of a team of Inspectors under the Act did not amount to such quid pro quo.
Reliance.
was placed on the Liberty Cinema case.
HELD: In each case when the question arises whether the levy is the nature of a fee, the entire scheme of the statutory provisions, the duties and obligations imposed on the inspecting staff 'and the nature of tire work done by them wilt have to be examined for the purpose of determining the rendering of the services which would make the levy of a fee.
In the Liberty Cinema case it was found that no service of any kind was being and could be rendered and for that reason the levy was held to.
be a tax and not a fee.
The present case however fell within the other class of cases in which contributions for the purpose of maintaining an authority and the staff for supervising and controlling public institutions were held to be fee and not tax.
[354 B C] A large number of provisions of the Act, particularly in the chapters dealing with safety, involve a good deal of technical knowledge and in the course of discharge of their duties and obligations the Inspectors are expected to give proper advice and guidance so that there may be due compliance with the provisions of the Act.
On certain occasions the factory owners are bound to receive a good deal of benefit by being saved from the consequences of the working of dangerous machines or employment of such processes as involve danger to human life by being warned at the proper time as to the defective nature of the machinery or of the taking of precautions which are enjoined under the Act.
Similarly if a building or a machinery or plant is in such a condition that it is dangerous to human life or safety the Inspector by serving a timely notice on the manager saves the factory owner from all the consequences of proper repairs not being done in time to the building.
or machinery.
349 The High Court found that 60% of the amount of licence fees which were being realized was actually spent on services rendered to the. factory owners.
The finding being one of fact must be considered final.
[355 H 356, D] .
It could therefore hardly be contended that the levy of the licence fee was wholly unrelated to the expenditure incurred out of the total realization.
The appeal must accordingly fail.
[356 D El Corporation of Calcutta & Anr.
vs Liberty Cinema, ; ,distinguished.
H.H. Sudhundra Thirtha Swamiar vs Commissioner for Hindu Religious & Charitable Endowments, Mysore, [1963] Supp. 2 S.C.R. 302, Mahant Sri Jagannath Ramanuj Das & Anr.
vs State of Orissa & Anr ; and Ratilal Panachand Gandhi vs State of Bombay & Ors, [1954] S.C.R. 1055, applied.
