Under sections 15 and 16 of the , which deal with rules regarding succession to the property of a female Hindu, where the property is that of her husband, the heirs would be those set out in 8 Under section 8, there arc two classes of heirs mentioned in the Schedule to the Act.
In Class 11 there are IX entries and only in entries 11, 111 and IV the heirs are mentioned as against arabic numerals. 'Brother ' and 'sister ' arc mentioned as items (3) and (4) in entry II of Class 11.
Section 9 lays down that among the heirs specified in the Schedule those in Class I shall take simultaneously and to the exclusion of all other heirs and those in the entry I in Class II shall be preferred to those in entry II and so on.
A Hindu widow, in possession of her deceased husband 's properties, died in 1964 .
She left no lineal descendants, but her husband had three brothers and a sister surviving.
On the. question whether .the three brothers were entitled to succeed to the property in preference to the sister, on the ground that 'brother ' is mentioned as item (3) of entry II of Class 11, whereas 'sister ' is mentioned as item (4), HELD: If the intention was to give preference among the heirs in Class 11 according to Arabic numerals treating such numerical item as a separate entry, some provision to that effect would have been made in section 11.
Section 11 states that the property of an intestate shall be divided among the heirs specified in any one entry in Class II so that they share equally, and the language in sections 9 and I 1 is not consistent with the view that Arabic numerals constitute entries within the meaning of section 11.
Further, the scheme of the Act is that male and female heirs should get equal treatment, and, in Class 1, male and female heirs have been treated as equal.
There is no reason why any distinction should have been made among the heirs in Class 11 on the ground of sex.
Therefore, it is not possible, in the absence of any indication in the sections or in the Schedule itself, to attribute such a radical departure from the general scheme of classification that, in case of three entries only in Class 11.
(entries II, III and IV), the Legislature intended to create an order of preference and lay down the same by the use of Arabic numerals.
[299 C D, H; 300 B H]
