The rules relating to succession to Stridhana, other than shulka, of a Hindu woman who was married in an approved form of marriage are stated in Yajnyawalkya 's text as: 'her kinsmen take it, if she die without issue '.
The order of succession was elaborated in the.
Mitakshara, which was translated by Colebrooke as: (i) unmarried daughter, (ii) married daughter who is unprovided for, (iii) married daughter who is provided for, (iv) daughter 's daughter, (v) daughter 's son, (vi) son, (vii) son 's son, and (viii) if there be none of these the srridhana then goes to her hugband, and if he is dead, to the husband 's heirs.
In the present case., a Hindu widow, who was married in an approved form of marriage died leaving stridhana which was not shulka.
She did not leave behind any of the heirs mentioned in items (i) to (vii) but there was a pre deceased son 's daughters.
On the question of preference between the son 's daughters and her husband 's brothers son (who was the husband 's nearest heir).
HELD: (i) Colebrooke 's translation has been accepted by the Judicial Committee and Hindu scholars as bringing out correctly the meaning of the relevant passages in the Mitakshara, and it is now well settled that the ' stridhana of a Hindu woman governed by Mitakshara passes in the order mentioned in the Mitakshara.
[496 H; 497 A C] Bhirnacharya Bin Venkappacharya vs Ramcharya Bin I.L.R. , referred to.
(2) The contention that the expression 'without issue ' in Yajnywalkya was elaborated as 'leaving no progeny ' by the Mitakshara and that therefore the heirs (i) to (vii) should be understood as only illustrations of the expression 'progeny ' and hence, son 's daughters are not excluded from the expression 'progeny ', is opposed to the commentaries of Narada, Gautama and other commentators, and to the decisions of the Judicial Committee and the High Courts rendered for over a century.
[497 E H] (3) In the matter of succession to stridhana propinquity is neither the sole nor a principal test as shown by the fact that daughter 's daughter and daughter 's son succeed in preference to the son.
[498 B C] 490 (4) The rule of interpretation that the masculine includes the feminine and therefore 'softs son ' includes 'softs daughter ', is inapplicable, because, 'daughter 's daughter ' is shown taking precedence over 'daughter 's son '.
[489 E] (5) The Hindu Women 's Rights tO Property Act, 1937, applies to the separate property left by a Hindu male and not to the property of a Hindu letoale.
[500 C D] Kumar Raghava Surendra Sahi vs Babui Lachmi Kuer, (1939) 1.
L.R. 18 Pat.
590 and Baj Kesserbai vs Huns Raj Morarji & Anr.
L.R. 33 I.A. 176, distinguished.
Annagouda Nathgouda Patil vs Court of Wards, ; , followed.
