The appellant agreed on July 4, 1956 to purchase certain lands from the respondents for Rs. 12,000.
A memorandum reciting that Rs. 2,000 were paid as advance by the appellant to the respondents was executed by both parties.
Three days later the respondents informed the plaintiff by a letter that only a sum of Rs. 350 was paid by the appellant and not Rs. 2,000 as 'recited in the memorandum and since the balance of Rs. 1,650 which was promised to be paid within three days was not paid, the agreement stood cancelled.
The appellant thereafter immediately instituted a suit for a decree for specific performance of the agreement and deposited in court a sum of Rs. 10,000 on account of the balance purchase price due from him.
In their written statement the respondents claimed that Rs. 1,650 out of Rs. 2,000 not having been so paid, the agreement was cancelled; and that in any event the agreement having been altered in material particulars after its.
execution by the addition of the words; "clear the debts and execute the sale deed free from encumbrances", the suit was not maintainable.
The Trial Court upheld the: appellant 's claim and decreed the suit.
The High Court in appeal, reversed the decree.
On appeal to this Court, HELD : Allowing the appeal: (i) On the evidence and in view of the express recital in the agreement that a sum of Rs. 2,000 was paid by the appellant and received by the respondents, the respondents" story that only Rs. 350 was in fact paid was untrue and had been put up as an excuse for resigning from the agreement.
(ii) Even assuming that the words in question were introduced in the memorandum after its execution since the respondents were liable to clear any encumbrances subsisting on the land before executing the sale deed, cannot be regarded as a material alteration for, it did not alter the rights or liabilities of the parties or the legal effect of the instrument [463 A] Nathu Lal and Ors.
vs Mussamat Gomti Kuar and Others, L.R. 67 I.A. 318; referred to.
