A Jagirdar executed a deed on August 5, 1949 in favour of the appellant for the sale of logs of a specified girth to be obtained from cutting the trees in his forests.
On February 19, 1951 the Forest Officer of the ' respondent State prevented the appellant and the Jagirdar from cutting the trees.
On the coming into force of the Madhya Pradesh Act 1 of 1951, the, interest of the Jagirdar in his estate vested in the respondent State.
The appellant instituted a suit in June 1954 against the respondent Stateand the Jagirdar for breach of contract and claimed compensation (i) for logs which were cut but which he could not remove; (ii) for logs which were cut but were stated to have 'been lost due to the negligence of the respondent; and (iii) logs from the standing timber which had not been cut or could not be cut by the appellant from the jagirdar 's villages.
The ' respondent State contested the suit on the ground inter alia that the deed could not be enforced against it because of the vesting of the Jagir under the Act in the State and that the contract created a mere personal liability against the Jagirdar.
The Trial Court granted the appellant a decree for compensation under all the heads claimed at a rate per log determined by the Court.
The High Court in appeal disallowed the appellant 's claim, under items (ii) and (iii).
In appeal to this Court by certificate it was contended on behalf of the appellant that the rate of compensation determined was inadequate; that the High Court erred in disallowing compensation four the logs which were cut *but were lost, and that it had wrongly disallowed the claim for value of logs of timber which the appellant was entitled to, but could not cut because of the restrictions imposed by the ' State.
HELD: Dismissing the appeal, (i) On the evidence, the High Court had rightly disallowed the claim in respect of logs cut but which were stated to have been lost.
(ii) Where a thing is attached to, or forms part of, land at the time of the contract and which is to be severed by the buyer, under section 18 of the the property in the thing passes in the absence of a contract to the contrary to the buyer on the severance of the thing from, the land.
Again under section 21 of the Act, even if there be: a contract for the sale of specific goods, but the seller is obliged under the terms of the contract to do something to the goods for the purpose of putting them into, a deliverable state, the property passes only when the thing agreed to be done is done and the buyer is informed thereof.
[453 D] In the present case the contract by its terms was for the sale of logs out of trees in the forest with a girth of two feet or more; but the timber had to be cut and had to be put in a deliverable state,.
Before the trees.
446 were cut and the logs appropriated to the contract, the estate of the Jagirdar vested in the State of Madhya Pradesh.
The, appellant 's claim to cut standing trees in the forests of the Jagir after they vested in the State was therefore rightly negatived.
[456 F G] Badische Anilin Fabrik vs Hickson, at p. 421; KurseH vs Timber Operators and Contractors Ltd., ; Chhotabhai Jethabhai Patel & Company vs The State of Madhya Pradesh, ; ; Shrimati Shantabat vs State of Bombay & Ors.
11959] S.C.R. 265; Mahadeo vs The State of Bombay, [1959] Supp.
(2) S.C.R. 339: .State of Madhya Pradesh vs Yakunuddin, [1963] S.C.R. 13; referred tO.
