K, a Hindu had no issue, but had a brother R who had 3 daughters.
K, and R jointly executed a will bequeting the assets of K to son or sons born in future to R, to the exclusion of the daughters, after the death of K and R. K died in 1947.
The appellants claiming to be the sons of R by his subsequent marriage, filed a suit for a declaration that R had only life interest in K 's properties with the remainder vested in them under the will.
The trial court decreed the suit holding that the second marriage of R was legal and the appellants were entitled to the properties subject to R 's life estate and that R 's daughter had no right in the properties.
R 's daughters filed an appeal to the High Court.
Soon after K 's death, another suit was filed by R 's daughters 'for administration of K 's estate in which the: appellants mother was a party.
This suit was dismissed on the ground that the plaintiffs had lost their right on the birth of appellants.
An appeal to the High Court was pending in this suit also.
The High Court by a common judgment held that the appellants, sons of R, were born after K 's death, so the devise in their favour was void, and that after the life estate of R, his daughters became entitled to the properties for their life time.
HELD: Although there is no authority in Hindu Law to justify the doctrine that a Hindu cannot make a gift or 'bequest for the benefit of an unborn person yet that doctrine has been engraved in Hindu Law by the decision of the Judicial Committee in Tagore vs Tagore.
I.A. (1872) Supp.
This doctrine was laid down for the first time in the case of Tagore.
This decision of the Judicial Committee has stood a great length of time and on the basis of that decision rights have been regulated, arrangements as to property have passed.
Therefore this was a proper case in which maxim communis error facit jus be applied.
The principle underlying the maxim is that "the law so favours the public good, that it will in some cases permit a common error to pass for right".
The bequests in favour of R 's sons were void and of no legal consequence.
[477 A; 478 F G] It is, therefore, not possible to accept the argument that the will was intended to operate or to come into effect after the death of both the testators.
In 'regard to K 's properties the life estate devised in favour of R must necessarily take effect and remain in force during the life of R and not after that; it is true that at the end of the will there is a clause that both the testators have the right to revoke the will during their lives and that the will take effect only sub:sequent to their death.
But the true intention of the testator has to be gathered not by attaching importance to isolated expressions but by reading the will as a whole with all its provisions and ignoring none of them as redundant or contradictory.
It must, therefore, be held that as the express devise to R for his life is a disposition intended to take effect after the death of K and before the death of R the last clause in the will could not be literally correct.
The daughters also could not take under the will as the bequest in their favour was subject to the defeasance clause.
[480 E H] 472 Tagore 's case, I.A. (1872) Supp.
47 and Charles Dalton vs Henry Angus & Co., , 812, referred to.
