The appellant filed writ petitions in the High Court of Rajasthan challenging the appointment of the Principals of three Medical Colleges affiliated to the University of Rajasthan on the ground that the persons appointed did not have the teaching experience necessary for ,these posts as laid down in Ordinance No.65 made by the Senate of the University under the University of Rajputana Act, 1946.
The appointments were defended on the basis of the proviso to sub r.
(4) of R 30 of the Rajasthan Medical Service (Collegiate Branch) Rules, 1962 made by the Governor of Rajasthan under article 309 of the Constitution.
Suh r.
(4) was added to R. 30 of the, Collegiate Branch Rules with retrospective effect during the pendency of the appellant 's writ petitions.
and provided that two years ' service rendered in lathe speciality would be reckoned as equivalent to one year 's teaching experience.
In view of this sub rule the High Court dismissed the appellant 's writ petitions.
In appeals to this Court by ocruficate it was contended on behalf of the appellants that (i) Ordinance No. 65 must prevail over R. 30(4) in the matter of teaching experience required; (ii) the retrospective amendment of R. 30 by the addition of Sub Jr.
(4) was mala fide; (iii) the provision in Ordinance 65 as regards teaching experience was mandatory.
HELD: Dismissing the appeals, The contention that the proviso to sub r.
(4) must yield to the Ordinance could not be accepted.
The Collegiate Branch Rules having been made pursuant to the power under article 309 of the Constitution must be given full effect subject to the provisions of any Act made by the appropriate Legislature regulating the recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to the Rajasthan Medical Service (Collegiate Branch).
Such Act need not specifically deal with the State Medical Service but it must be an Act as contemplated by article 309 by or under which provision is made regulating the recruitment and conditions of service taking within its fold the said Medical services.
[564 D E] Ordinance 65 made under the University of Rajputana Act and dealing inter alia with "emoluments and conditions of service of University teachers" was not a provision under an Act regulating the recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to Rajasthan Medical Service as contemplated by article 309 ' of the Constitution.
The University of Rajputana Act falls under Entry 11 List II which deal 's with the subject 560 education including universities ' and not under entry 41 List II dealing with 'State Public services '.
The field of operation of the Ordinance is restricted to the question of affiliation of the Colleges concerned with the Rajasthan University. ' If there is any violation of a provision of the Ordinance, then that may appropriately be taken into account by the Rajasthan University for the purpose of withdrawing or refusing to continue affiliation of the colleges in question.
No such action had been taken by the University in the present case.
The personsl appointed could not be said to be holding their posts without authority of law.
The appellant had no right to challenge their appointments.
[564 G, 565 D] (ii) The plea of mala fide was unsustainable.
There was noting to show that r. 30(4) was made for a collateral purpose in colourable exercise of the rule making power.
[565 F] [In view of the above findings no opinion was expressed on the question whether the powers of Ordinance No. 65 were mandatory].
