As the reversioner of a Hindu widow 's estate one 'R ' instituted suit No. 4 of 1950 in the court of the Civil Judge Jaunpur, for a declaration that he was the 'owner in possession ' of the said estate. 'B ' who claimed to be an heir of the widow was impleaded as a party defendant.
The suit was decreed ex parte. 'B ' then filed suit No. 14 of 1956 in the same court against the heirs of 'R ' who died after the, passing of the decree in his suit.
In suit No., 14 of 1956 'B ' claimed that as heir of the said widow he was entitled to her stridhuna properties.
He averred that in suit No. 4 of 1950 'R ' had arrived at an oral compromise with him promising him 5/16th share in the, whole estate.; that the oral compromise was later reduced into a memorandum; that 'R ' had represented to him that a compromise decree would be obtained in the suit; and that taking advantage of his ignorance 'R ' had obtained an ex parte decree against him.
On these allegations 'B ' prayed that he be declared the owner of all the properties left by the widow, and in the alternative he be declared owner of her stridhan properties, the decree in suit No. 4 of 1950 having no adverse effect on his rights.
On the footing that he had claimed a mere declaration 'B ' paid Rs. 18/12/ as court fees as in a claim under Sch.
II cl.
17(iii) of the Court Fees Act.
The Inspector of Stamps, however, reported to the Civil Judge that in his view the case fell within section 7(iv A) of the Act as incorporated therein by the U.P. State Legislature and court fee was payable on the value of the subject matter of the suit.
The Civil Judge ordered the plaintiff to amend the plaint and pay the court fee remaining due.
In appeal the High Court decided in favour of the respondent.
The State of U.P. appealed.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant: (i) that the plaintiff sought a declaration adjudging void the decree in suit No. 4 of 1950 which was a decree "for money or other property" within the meaning of section 7(iv A) since that expression must include a decree concerning or relating to money or other property, (ii) that in any case the decree in suit No. 4 was an 'instrument ' securing money or other property having market value and section 7(iv A) was therefore attracted; (iii) that the relief for declaration was a mere device intended to conceal the true purport of the claim.
HELD: The appeal must be dismissed.
(X) A decree for declaration of title to money or other property is not a decree for money or property.
The expression "decree for money or other property" means only a decree for recovery of money or other property.
It does not include a decree concerning title to money or other property.
[592 E F] (ii) A decree ad invitum is not an instrument securing money or other property: such a decree is a record of the formal adjudication of the 589 court relating to a right claimed by a party to the suit.
It does not by its own force secure money or property.
[592 G] (iii) The relief for declaration was not a mere device or subterfuge intended to conceal the true purport of the claim for the property in dispute was in the possession of the District Magistrate, and if the Civil Court declared the plaintiff 's title he would be entitled to secure recognition of his rights by the District Magistrate.
[593 A B]
