A Hindu executed a will directing his wife to sell, Sch.
C property and utilise the amount for celebrating the marriage of one Sitharathnam and for constructing a Ramamandiram in his name, and further devised that his wife shall enjoy Sch.
E property absolutely and after her life time whatever remained out it, it will pass to two named persons.
The wife predeceased the testator, and the marriage of Sitharathnam was celebrated in the testator 's life time and expenses in that behalf were defrayed by the testator.
The appellants who were the testator 's nearest heirs, claimed the properties contending that the disposition of the Sch.
C & E properties lapsed, because the wife who was the legatee of the properties died before the testator and that there was nothing in the will providing for the acceleration of Sch.
E property in case of the legatee 's dying in the testator 's life time.
HELD : (i) The wife had no beneficial interest in Sch.
C property.
She was merely appointed to sell the property and to, utilise the proceeds for the purposes specified in the will.
There was no "joint bequest" of Sch.
C properties.
In the absence of allocation of the amounts to be utilised for celebrating the marriage of Sitharathnam and for constructing a Ramamandiram, it must be presumed that the fund was to be utilised in equal moieties for the two purposes.
Failure of one of the purposes will result in a moiety of the amount devised falling into the residue.
Since no part of the fund was needed for the marriage of Sitharathnam the legacy failed pro tanto and fell into the residue.
Under the will the wife was made the owner of the residue, but by her death during the life time of testator the residuary bequest lapsed and vested as on intestacy in the nearest heirs of the testator.
The devise of a moiety of the fund to be applied for the construction of a Ramomandiram however stood good and the trust had to be carried out.
The wife died during the life time of the testator but on that account the charitable trust was not extinguished.
[31 E; 32 D] Jogeshwar Narain Deo vs Ram Chund Dutt and Others, L.R. 23 I.A. 37, 43, referred to.
(ii) The wife died during the life time of the testator : thereby the estate in Sch.
E properties granted to the named persons was accelerated.
The nearest heirs of the testators were therefore not entitled to any share in Sch.
E properties.
Section 105 of the , enacts that a legacy shall lapse and form part of the residue of the testator 's property if the legatee does not survive the testator except where it appears by the will that the testator intended that the legacy shall, on the legatee not surviving him, go to some other person.
It could not be said that the intention 29 of the testator that a legacy shall not lapse may be given effect to only if the testator expressly directs that if the legatee dies during his life time the legacy shall go to some other person, and that intention to exclude lapse cannot be inferred.
Section 105(1) does not say, nor does it imply, that the testator must have expressly envisaged the possibility of lapse in consequence of the legatee dying during his life time and must have made a provision for that contingency.
[33 F] Browne vs Hope, L.R. 14 Equity Cases 343; Lowman Devenish vs Pester, ; Dunstan, Dunstan vs Dunstan, , referred to.
