A highway has its origin, apart from statute, in dedication either express or implied, by the owner of land of a right of passage over it to the public and the acceptance thereof by the public.
Dedication is presumed by long and uninterrupted user of a way by the public.
The presumption in such cases is so strong as to dispense with all enquiry into the actual ownership of the land or the intention of the owner about its user.
All public streets and roads vest in the State, but the State holds them as trustees on behalf of the public.
The members of the public are entitled as beneficiaries to use them as a matter of right and this right is limited only by the similar rights possessed by every other citizen to use the pathways.
The State as trustees on behalf of the public is entitled to impose all such limitations on the character and extent of the user as may be requisite for protecting the rights of the public generally; but subject to such limitations the the right of a citizen to carry on business in transport vehicles on public pathways cannot be denied to him on the ground that the State owns the highways.
G. section section Motor Service vs State of Madras ([19521 referred to with approval.
Within the limits imposed by State regulations any member of the public can ply motor vehicles on a public road.
To that extent he can also carry on the business of transporting passengers with the aid of vehicles.
It is to this carrying on of the trade or business that the guarantee in article 19(1) (g) is attracted and a citizen can legitimately complain if any legislation takes away or curtails that right any more than is permissible under clause (6) of that article.
Article 19(6) as the result of the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, enables the State to carry on any trade or business either by itself or through corporations owned or controlled by the State to the exclusion of private citizens wholly or in part.
This provision of article 19(6), which was introduced by the amendment of the Constitution in 1951, was not in existence when the U. P. Road Transport Act, 1951 (U. P. Act II of 1951), was passed and therefore the validity of the impugned Act is not to be decided by applying the provisions of the now clause.
Amendment of the Constitution which came later cannot be invoked to validate an earlier legislation which must be regarded as unconstitutional when it was passed, because a statute void for unconstitutionality is dead and cannot be vitalised by a subsequent amendment of the Constitution removing the Constitutional objection but must be reenacted.
Although the normal use of the word "restriction" seems to be in the sense of limitation and not extinction but (without expressing any final opinion on the matter) if the word " I restriction" does not include total prohibition then the impugned Act cannot be justified under article 19(6) of the Constitution and it would 709 be void unless supported by article 31.
If however the word Is restriction" in article 19(6) be taken in certain circumstances to include prohibition as well then the prohibition of the right of all private citizens to carry on the business of motor transport on public roads within the State of Uttar Pradesh as laid down by the impugned Act, cannot be justified as reasonable restrictions imposed in the interests of the general public.
Whether the restrictions are reasonable or not would depend to a large extent on the nature of the trade and the conditions prevalent in it.
There is nothing wrong in the nature of the motor transport trade in the present case which is perfectly innocuous.
The U. P. Road Transport Act, (II of 1951) which violates the fundamental rights of the private citizens guaranteed under article 19(1) (g) of the Constitution and is not protected by clause (6) of article 19 as it stood at the time of enactment must be held to be void under article 13(2) of the Constitution.
The effect of the prohibition of the trade or business of the citizens by the impugned legislation amounts to deprivation of their property or interest in a commercial undertaking within the meaning of article 31(2) of the Constitution and therefore U. P. Road Transport Act, 1951, offends against the provision of that clause inasmuch as no provision for compensation has been made in the Act.
The impugned Act is not void on the ground that it offends against the equal protection rule embodied in article 14 of the Constitution.
The contention whether the impugned Act conflicts with the guarantee of freedom of inter State and intra state trade, commerce and intercourse provided for by article 301 of the Constitution discussed and the points that could be raised and the possible views that could be taken indicated without expressing any final opinion thereupon.
Cooverjee vs The Excise Commissioner, etc.
([1954] S.C.R. 873) distinguished.
West Bengal vs Subodh Go pal Bose and Others ([1954] S.C.R. 587) and Dwarkadas Shrinivas vs The Sholapur Spinning and Weaving Co. Ltd. ([1954] S.C.R. 674) followed.
Packard vs Banton (68 L.E. 596; ; , Frost vs Railroad Commission (70 L.E. 1101), Stephenson vs Binford (77 L.E. 288), Motilal vs Uttar Pradesh Government (I.L.R. 1951 All. 257), Municipal Corporation of the City of Toronto vs Virgo ([1896] A.C. 88), A. K. Gopalan vs The State ([1950] S.C.R. 88), Lokanath Misra vs The State of Orissa (A.I.R. 1952 Orissa 42), Commonwealth of Australia and Others vs Bank of New South Wales and Others ([1950] A.C. 235) and P. and 0.
Steam Navigation Co. vs The Secretary of State (1861 5 B.H.C.R.
Appendix 1) referred to.
91 710
