The predecessors in interest of the appellants were landlords owning an estate including agricultural land, trees, groves etc., in U.P., and were heavily indebted to the respondents.
Most of the debts were secured.
On the application of the landlords proceedings were taken under the U.P.
Encumbered Estates Act, 1934, and a decree was passed under section 14(7) of the Act in favour of the respondents in 1938.
The nature and extent of property liable to attachment and sale, as required by section 19(2)(b) of the Act, were furnished to the executing authority.
By virtue of a notification under the U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act.
1950, the estate vested in the State, and new rights, namely, bhumidhari rights in the lands in the estate, were created in 1952 in favour of the appellants who were the successors in interest of the landlords.
In 1959.
the respondents applied under section 24 of the Encumbered Estates Act to recover the amount decreed to them, by proceeding against the bhumidhari rights and trees belonging to the appellants.
On the question whether: (1 ) the bhumidhari rights, and (2) the trees, could be proceeded against, HELD: (1) Though the respondents were mortgagees their rights as such were extinguished under the Encumbered Estates Act and the decree in theft favour under the Act was only a simple money decree which was not executable except under the provisions of the Act.
Under section 24 execution can be levied from any property or rights, other than proprietary rights in land, which are reported under section 19 as liable to be attached and sold.
On the passing of the U.P. Abolition Act the proprietary rights of the landlords in the land vested in the State and thereafter, the appellants had no proprietary rights left in them.
The bhumidhari rights being new rights created for the first time in favour of the appellants under the Abolition Act, are not proprietary rights.
In the present case, the requirements of sections 19 and 24 have been complied with, even though the bhumidhari rights were not mentioned as being liable to attachment and sale because.
, (i) under section 19(2)(b) the requirement is only to report the nature and extent of the property liable to attachment and sale and not the interests or rights of the debtor in the property; and (ii) the decree under the Encumbered Estates Act was passed in 1938 while the bhumidhari rights were created only in 1952, and hence, could not be specifically mentioned in the decree.
When the Encumbered Estates Act permits the respondents to levy execution against the property of the debtor other than the proprietary rights in land, and when there is no prohibition in the Abolition Act against execution of a, decree obtained under the Encumbered Estates Act, against the bhumidhari rights, the respondents were entitled to proceed against such rights.
[575 A B; 577 B E; G; 578 A.F] 567 Rang Sheo Am,bar Singh vs Allahabad 'Bank Ltd. ; , followed.
(2) Unders; 6(a) of the Abolition Act and section 3.(6)of the U.P. Tenancy Act, 1939. ',the right title and interest of intermediaries in trees and grove land, but not in trees constituting a grove, cease, and vest in the State.
Since the trees constituting a grove have not vested in the State ,and could not have formed the subject of creation of bhumidhari rights they are the debtor 's property and, are liable to be proceeded against in execution under section 24 of the Encumbered Estates Act.
Even if the appellants got bhumidhari rights over the trees constituting the grove, they could be proceeded against; because, bhumidhari rights could be proceeded against in execution.
[580 B, C E]
