The first respondent was the owner of some buildings within the appellant Municipality.
The appellant was governed by the Madras District Municipalities Act,, 1920, till April 1, 1965, when the Mysore Municipalities Act, 1964 came into force and thereafter by the Mysore Act.
For the year 1966 67 the appellant issued notices of demand for payment of property tax under the Madras Act.
The tax was higher than under the Mysore Act.
The first respondent challenged the levy by a writ petition, and the appellant justified the levy under section 382(1) of the Mysore Act and its provisos.
The High Court quashed the demand notices.
In appeal to this Court, HELD : Under the second and third provisos to section 382(1) of the Mysore Act if a property tax has been imposed by the Madras Act, even though the rate of such tax is higher than that under the Mysore Act, the higher tax could be collected.
The provisions of Madras Act namely sections 78, 81, 82, 124 and r. 8 of 'Schedule IV of the Act, show that the municipal tax is an annual tax leviable for a particular official year and the assessment list on the basis of which the tax is assessed is for such official year.
Though, ordinarily, the Municipality would have to prepare a fresh assessment list every year, r. 8 of Schedule IV of the Madras Act which, by virtue of section 124 has to be read as part of Chapter VI of the Act dealing with Taxation and Finance permits the Municipal Council to continue the same assessment list for the next 4 succeeding years and to revise it once every 5 years.
But, in order to enable the Municipal Council to levy and collect a tax, under section 78 it has to pass a resolution determining to levy a tax, the rate at which such tax has to be levied as also the date from which it shall be levied.
In the present case, no such resolution was passed by the Municipal Council.
Therefore, by merely preparing the assessment registers under the Madras Act on April 1, 1964, which will have currency for a period of 5 years till March 31, 1969, it cannot be said that a tax or that a tax at a higher rate had been imposed.
No such tax having been imposed under the Madras Act, the provisos to section 382(1) of the Mysore Act do not apply and the demands for payment of the property tax were not justified.
[757 E H; 758 D H; 759 A] Municipal Corporation vs Hiralal, ; , followed.
