Sub section (2) of section 3 of the Madras Estates Land (Reduction of Rent) Act XXX of 1947 authorises the State Government to fix the rates of rent payable in respect of each class of ryoti land in each village in the estate after considering the recommendations of the special officer and the remarks of the Board of Revenue thereon and by virtue of section 8(1) no order under this subsection is liable to be questioned in a court of law.
The appellants filed a suit questioning the legality of the notification reducing the rates of rent in respect of the delta dry ryoti lands in a village.
They contended that the class of land had been determined to be delta dry land exclusively on the basis of the settlement register which did not contain any entry with respect to the village in question, that the settlement register could not be considered to be conclusive, and that proper factual inquiry was necessary, because, the determination affected the appellant 's proprietary rights.
The trial court decreed the suit.
The High Court held that the civil courts had no jurisdiction to entertain the suit.
Allowing the appeals, HELD : The Special Officer had an obligation, under section 2 of the Reduction of Rent Act, to determine in respect of a village the average rate of cash rent per acre for each class of ryoti land in existence at the time of the commencement of the Act, such as, wet, dry and garden.
had to be determined on the basis of relevant material.
The Special Officer, however, proceeded to found his determination only on the report of the Special Assistant which only took into account the entry in the settlement register with respect to the soil of another village.
This really meant that the determination of the Special Officer was solely based on the settlement register containing no entry in regard to the village in question.
This material is irrelevant and cannot constitute a rational basis for founding thereon the determination of the Special Officer.
His determination must, therefore, be held to be based on no evidence, with the result that it must be held to be in violation of the fundamental principles of judicial procedure.
A fortiori the order of the Government made under section 3(2) exclusively on the basis of the recommendation of the Special Officer must in consequence be held 10 be not in conformity with the provisions of the Reduction of Rent Act and.
therefore, Outside the purview of section 3(2) of that Act.
Section 8(1) would accordingly be inapplicable and the jurisdiction of civil courts cannot be excluded.
[724 F 725 C] Secretary of State vs Mask and Company, (1940) 67 I.A. 222 and O. K. Mitthuswamy Nudaliar & Ors.
vs State of Madras, C.A. Nos.
1011 1017 '65, dt. 31 7 68.
referred to.
Dhujabhai and Ors.
vs State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors.
; , followed.
