In 1955 the Government of Madras framed Rules under the Madras Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Act, 1951, as amended by Act 27 of 1954, prescribing a graduated scale of rates of contribution under section 76(1) of the Act.
The rules remained in force in the State of Mysore after reorganisation of the State of Madras and applied to the temples in the South Kanara district which was incorporated in the Mysore State.
On a petition by the respondents, trustees of a temple in the South Kanara district, the High Court of Mysore in Devraja Shenoy vs The State of Mysore declared invalid certain provisions of the amended Act imposing control upon the administration of temples governed by the Act.
Thereafter the Assistant Commissioner of Religious Endowments directed the respondents to pay the arrears of contribution and audit fee.
The respondents again moved the High Court challenging the validity of the demand.
The High Court upheld their plea on the ground that no rules had been framed under section 100 of the Act, and, therefore, the demand for recovery of contribution was premature.
The decision of the High Court was largely influenced by some observations made in the judgment in Devraja Shenoy 's case.
The court observed that since what was stated in that case on behalf of the State wag that the amount of contribution payable by the petitioner (respondent) temple had to be prescribed by a rule which 'remained to be made it meant that what was decided was that no contribution could be recovered from the temple until such a rule was made.
Regarding the demand for arrears of audit fee the court held that the Commissioner had not "determined" the cost of auditing the account of the respondent temple under section 76 (2) of the Act and the demand was "on that account without competence or authority of law.
" In appeal to this Court, HELD : (i) It is true that the High Court declared invalid certain provisions of the Act imposing control over the administration of temples governed by the Act.
But on that account the power to make rules was not restricted nor were the rules framed by the government rendered invalid.
The assumption made by the High Court that the Government had to make under section 100 rules applicable to each temple separately and prescribing the levy for determining contribution, finds no support in the provisions of the Act or its scheme.
Under the Act a fee though levied for rendering services of a particular type need not be co related to the services performed for each individual who is intended to obtain the benefit of the services.
The co relation must be between the expenses incurred by the authority levying the fee for generally providing the service and the aggregate of the levy from persons who are to be made subject thereto.
It is a necessary corollary that general rules prescribing the levy of fee from religious endowments have to be made and not rules governing individual endowments.
Such general rules were in fact framed and were in operation when the 918 demand was made.
The concession made by the Advocate General at the hearing in Devraja Shenoy 's case did not oblige the State to frame separate rules in respect of each individual religious institution.
Even if the respondent! temple did not need the services or did not obtain benefit of the services provided the contribution would still be recoverable.
Because the rules were framed at a time when several different kinds of services were intended to be rendered and the court later struck down certain provisions of the Act under which services were to be rendered, the rules framed in 1955 cannot be held to be inapplicable.
[921 A B, G; 922 E, G 923 B] H. H. Sudhindra Thirtha Swatniar vs Commissioner for Hindu Religious & Charitable Endowments, Mysore, [1963] Supp.
2 S.C.R. 302, referred to.
(ii) It was not the case of the respondents in their petition in the High Court that the Commissioner had a not "determined" the audit fee under section 76(2).
It was merely asserted that the fee demanded was excessive.
Since the High Court proceeded upon the ground of absence of determination by the Commissioner which was never pleaded and the High Court had not determined whether the audit fee demanded was for meeting the cost of auditing the accounts of the respondent temple, the order passed by the High Court must be set aside and the case remanded.
[924 C]
