In proceedings against the accused respondents the prosecution case was that on certain land belonging to one B where some of his men were gathering fruits, the respondents, armed with bhallas, lathis, etc., attacked these men killing two of them and injuring others.
The trial court convicted the respondents under section 302 read with section 149 I.P.C. of the murder of the two deceased persons and of offences for inflicting injuries on other persons.
The respondents ' appeal to the High Court was allowed and that Court set aside all the convictions and sentences.
The High Court found that the land in question was in the possession of one of the respondents and that on the date of occurrence, the members of the prosecution party including the murdered victims committed thefts of fruits on the land and that the respondents had the right of private defence of property against the theft; the theft of the fruits was committed under such circumstances as might reasonably cause apprehension that death or grievous bodily hurt would be the consequence if the right of private defence was not exercised.
Accordingly, the respondents ' right of private defence of property extended under section 103 I.P.C. to voluntarily causing death of the two murdered victims subject to the restrictions mentioned in section 99.
In appeal to this Court against the acquittal of the respondents, it was contended that they were members of an unlawful assembly prosecuting the common object of forcibly preventing the two deceased from collecting 'fruit from the land in question and if necessary in causing the murder of the said two persons for the purpose; that some of them caused the murder of the two victims and that thereby all of them committed offences under section 302 read with section 149.
HELD : The respondents could not be convicted under section 302 read with section 149 I.P.C., nor was it possible to convict them under section 302 read with section 34.
In order to attract the provisions of section 149 the prosecution must establish that there was an unlawful assembly and that the crime was committed in prosecution of the common object of the assembly.
Under the fourth clause of section 141 an assembly of five or more persons is an unlawful assembly if the common object of its members is to enforce any right or supposed right by means of criminal force or show of criminal force to any person.
Section 141 must be read with Ss. 96 to 106 dealing with the right of private defence.
Under section 96 nothing is an offence which is done in the exercise of the right of private defence.
The assertion of a right of private defence within the limits prescribed by law cannot fall within the expression "to enforce any right or supposed right" in the fourth clause of section 141.
[362 C] 359 As it had been found 'in the present case that the land in question was in the possession of one of the respondents, the object of the respondents ' party was to prevent the commission of theft of the fruits in exercise of their right of private defence of property.
This object was not un lawful.
Nor was it possible to say that their common object was to kill the two deceased victims.
Those who killed them exceeded the right of private defence and may be individually held responsible for the murders.
But the murders were not committed in prosecution of the common object of the assembly or were such as the members of the assembly knew to be likely to be committed in prosecution of the common object.
The accused respondents could not be made constructively responsible for the murders under section 302 read with section 149.
[363 B] Kapildeo Singh vs The King, ; Kishori Prsad & Ors.
vs State of Bihar Cr.
Appeal No. 191 of 1966 decd.
on 5 12 1968; and.
Gurudittamal vs State of U.P.
A.I.R. 1965 S.C. 257; referred.
