The appellant was appointed to the Indian Police Service in 1935.
in November 1956 he was posted in Andhra Pradesh as Inspector General of Police and in August 1967 he was posted as Special Inspector General of Police for revision of Police Standing Orders.
In that year the Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh ordered the Chief Secretary to make an enquiry with regard to certain allegations against the appellant.
The Chief Secretary recommended that the matter be referred to the Vigilance Commissioner who advised that the matter be investigated by the Central Bureau of Investigation.
Thereafter the said Bureau made an enquiry, considered the appellant 's explanations and made a report.
In July 1968 the Government of India, Ministry of Home Affairs placed the appellant under suspension.
The appellant filed a writ petition in the High Court at Delhi and failing there filed an appeal in this Court.
The appellant 's contentions that fell for consideration were (i) that under sub r.
(1) of R. 7 of the All India Service (Appeal and Discipline) Rules, 1955 the order of suspension could be made only if disciplinary proceeding was initiated and the Government was satisfied that there should be an order; in the present case the order did not satisfy this condition and was therefore bad; (ii) that the Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh was hostile to him and the investigation by the Central Bureau of Investigation was conducted by persons hostile to him; the Ministry of Home Affairs should not have relied on the report since the enquiry was initiated and conducted mala fide.
HELD, : (i) The order in question had no reference to sub r.
(1) of R. 7, but was an order under R. 7(3) which states that a member of the service in respect of or against whom an investigation inquiry or trial is pending may, at the discretion of the Government under which he is serving be placed under suspension until the termination of all proceedings relating to the charge.
The appellant, as appeared from the First Information Report against him stood charged with offences, under the Prevention of Corruption Act and the time of occurrence was the period 1960 to 967.
There was an investigation and the trial was awaiting relating to the criminal charge against the appellant.
The order of suspension had to be read in the context of the entire case and the combination of circumstances.
This order indicated that the Government applied its mind to the allegations, the enquiries and the circumstances of the case.
The appellant had failed to establish that the Government acted mala fide.
There was no allegation against any particular officer of the Government of India about being mala fide.
The order of suspension, thus made under sub r.
(3) did not suffer from any vice of infringement of R. 7(1).
[124 D 125 B] (ii)The affidavits of the parties in the present case suffered from the mischief of lack of verification with the result that the affidavits should C.I./70 9 122 not be admissible in evidence.
The importance of verification is to test the genuineness and authenticity of allegations and also to make the deponent responsible for allegations.
in essence verification is required to enable the court to find out as to whether it will be safe to act on such affidavit evidence.
[125 C E] The affidavit evidence assumed importance in the present case because of allegations of mala fide acts on the part of the respondents.
The appellant did not name any person of the Union of India who acted in that manner and did not implied the Chief Minister as a party.
In order to succeed on the proof of mala fides in relation to the order of suspension, the appellant had to prove either that the order of suspension was made mala fide or that the order was made for collateral purposes.
The appellant had neither alleged nor established either of these features.
[125 F G] The allegation of mala fide against the Central Bureau of Investigation did not arise for consideration because what was in question was not its report but the order of suspension which satisfied R. 7(3) and was in honest exercise of powers.
[125 H]
