The respondent agreed to sell and the appellant agreed to buy some aero scrap for Rs. 10,00,000.
The appellant paid Rs. 2,50,000 on the date of the contract and it was agreed between the parties that the balance should be paid in two instalments.
It was also agreed that the respondent 's terms of business were made part of the terms and conditions gov erning the contract.
According to cl. 9 of the respondent 's terms of business the buyer has to deposit with the respondent 25% of the total value and that deposit is to remain with the respondent as earnest money to be adjusted in the final bills and no interest shall be payable to buyer on the amount.
Under cl. 10 of the terms and conditions, if the buyer makes default in making payment according to the contract, the respondent has a right to cancel the, contract and forfeit unconditionally the earnest money without prejudice to any other Tights of the respondent in law.
The appellant committed breach of the contract by refusing to pay the rest of the money and to take delivery of the aero scrap.
The respondent thereupon cancelled the contract and forfeited the deposit of Rs. 2,50,000.
A suit by the appellant for recovery of the amount was dismissed.
In appeal to this Court, HELD : (1) For a deposit by a purchaser to be treated as earnest money the 'following conditions must be satisfied : (i) it must be given at the moment at which the contract is concluded; (ii) it represents a guarantee that the contract will be fulfilled or, in other words, 'earnest ' is given to bind the contract; (iii) it is part of the purchase price when the transaction is carried out; (iv) it is forfeited when the transaction falls through by reason of the default or failure of the purchaser; and (v) unless there is anything to the contrary in the terms of the contract, on default committed by the buyer, the seller is entitled to forfeit the earnest.
[139 D F] In the present case, the payment of Rs. 2,50,000 could not be treated merely as part payment towards the total price, because, the terms of business of the respondent applied to the contract, and under those terms, since the conditions regarding earnest money are satisfied, the amount deposited by the appellant was earnest money and the respondent was entitled to forfeit if.
[140; 141 F] Howe vs Smith , Soper vs Arnold, I.R. , Farr, Smith & Co. vs Messers, Ltd. L.R. [1928] 1 K.B.D. 397, Sumner and Leivesley vs John Brown & Co. and Chiranjit Singh vs Har Swarup, A.I.R. , applied.
128 Roland Burrows, Words and Phrases Vol.
11, Benjamin on Sale, Halsbury 's Laws of England (111 Edition) Vol. 34, p. 118, para.
189 and Jowitt 's Dictionary of English Law, referred to.
(2) In Fateh Chand vs Balkishan Das, ; , this Court recognised the principle that earnest money could be forfeited, and that section 74 of the Contract Act applied only to the amount paid by the buyer which was not earnest money.
In the present case, since the entire amount paid by the appellant was earnest money under the contract, this decision has no application.
[145 H; 146 A] (3) As the plea of misrepresentation was abandoned by the appellant and the breach off contract was admittedly committed by the appellant,s. 64 of the Contract Act could not be invoked by the appellant.
[146 D] Murlidhar Chatterjee vs International Film Co. L.R. 70 I.A. 35, not applicable.
[The question as to whether the element of unreasonableness can even be taken into account when considering the forfeiture of an amount deposited by way of earnest, and if so what factors should be taken into account left open.] [142 F G] Maula Bux vs Union of India, ; , explained.
