Sub section (6) of section 144 of the Code of Criminal Procedure provides that no order under s, 144 shall remain in force for more than two months from the making thereof, unless, in cases of danger to human life, health or safety, or a likelihood of a riot or an affray, the State Government, by notification in the Official Gazette otherwise directs.
The City Magistrate of Jamshedpur passed orders under section 144(1) against the respondents which were later extended by the State Government of Bihar in exercise of its powers under section 144(6).
In a writ petition filed by the respondents the High Court of Patna struck down the second part of sub s.(6) of section 144 as being violative of sub cls.
(b), (c) and (d) of cl.
(1) of article 19 of the Constitution.
The State appealed and contended that the only operative orders were those made by the Magistrate and the Government merely extended those orders.
Further, since the order of the Government got merged in the orders of the Magistrate, the extended order was open to review under sub section
(4) of section 144 and the same was also revisable under section 435 read with section 439 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
HELD : Per Shelat, Vaidialingam, Hedge and Ray, JJ. (i) The Magistrate 's order is no doubt the basic order.
But after the process in the first five sub sections of section 144 is completed he becomes functus officio.
The decision that the circumstances mentioned in sub section
(6) of section 144 Criminal Procedure Code continue to exist and the original order should be continued is that of the Government.
It is not a case of the Government order getting merged in the Magistrate 's order.
Rather the Magistrate 's order is adopted by the Government as its own order.
[194 A C] The order of the Government is made in the name of the Governor ,and signed by a Secretary to the Government.
It is published in the Official Gazette.
It is thus clearly an executive act of the Government coming within article 166 of the Constitution.
If the direction given under section 144(6) is intended to merely keep alive a judicial order, the legislature would have entrusted that function to a judicial authority as has been done in the case of an order under section 144(1).
[194 E F] Section 144(4) says in clearest possible terms that the Magistrate may rescind or alter any order made under that section by himself or any magistrate subordinate to him or by a predecessor in office.
It is not possible to bring within the scope of this section the order made by the State Government.
for if it was so intended it would have been mentioned in the section.
[194 G] From a plain reading of section 144(6) it is clear that the power conferred on the Government is an independent executive power, not expected to be exercised judicially.
It is open to be exercised arbitrarily.
The direc 182 tions given in the exercise of that power need not be of a temporary nature.
The ambit of that power is very large and is uncontrolled.
[195 B] (ii) The fact that the Legislature is expected to keep a check on governmental actions does not absolve this Court 's responsibility.
The fundamental rights constitute a protective shield to the citizen as against State actions and the Court cannot desert its duty on the assumption that the other organs of the State would safeguard the fundamental right of the citizens.
[195 C D] (iii) In order to be a reasonable restriction within the meaning of article 19 of the constitution the same must not be arbitrary or excessive and the procedure and the manner of its imposition must also be fair and just.
Any restriction which is opposed to the fundamental principles of liberty and justice cannot be considered reasonable.
One of the im portant tests to find out whether a restriction is reasonable is to see whether the aggrieved party has a right of representation against the restriction imposed or proposed to be imposed.
Further the courts have to see whether it is in excess of the requirement or imposed in an arbitrary manner.
Although the object of a restriction may be beyond reproach and may very well attract the protection of sub articles
1 to 6 or article 19, if the State fails to provide sufficient safeguards against its misuse the operative sections will be rendered invalid.
[196 C F] Since section 144(6) gives the power to impose the restrictions contemplated by it to the executive Government and not to a judicial authority and there is no right of representation, appeal or revision given to ,the aggrieved party against an order which may not be of a temporary nature, it must be held that the said impugned provision is violative of article 19 (1) (b) (c) and (d) and is not saved by articles 19(3) (4) or (5).
[196 G] Babulal Parate vs State of Maharashtra and Ors. ; , ,referred to.
State of Madras vs V. G. Rao, ; ; Dr. Khare V. State of Delhi, ; ; State of Madhya Pradesh vs Baldeo Prasad ; and Virendra vs State of Punjab; , , applied.
Per Shah, J. (dissenting).
Sub section
(6) of section 144 does not authorise the ,State Government to make the order of the Magistrate permanent.
It ,cannot direct it to continue after apprehension of danger or emergency ceases.
The validity of a statute conferring power is not open to challenge on the plea that the power may possibly be abused by the authority in which it is vested.
The order duration of which is extended by declaration of the State is and continues to remain that of the Magistrate.
The 'source of the authority of the order is derived not from the State Government, but from the Magistrate.
It cannot be said that the order of the Magistrate gets merged with that of the Government when its duration is extended.
Although no provision is made in the Code for a judicial review of the State Government 's order under section 144(6), the said order does not depend on the subjective satisfaction of the Government and is capable of being challenged in a petition under article 226 of the Constitution ' Further the Magistrate who passed the original order may in considera tion of the materials placed before him under section 144(4) rescind or alter the State Government 's order.
In the exercise of his judicial functions 183 the Magistrate is independent of the Government and not subordinate to it.
The principle applies even in the case of an Executive Magistrate who under the scheme of separation of powers may be responsible to the executive authorities.
The above remedies being available the provision in section 144(6) cannot be held to be unreasonable on the mere ground that there is no express provision in the Code for redress against the, State Government 's order.
Reasonableness of a statutory provision cannot 'be determined by the application of set formulas : it must be determined on a review of the procedural and substantive provisions of the statute keeping in mind the nature of the right intended to be infringed, underlying purpose of the restriction contemplated to be imposed, gravity of the evil intended to be remedied thereby, object intended to be achieved by the imposition of restriction, and other relevant circumstances.
B D] Case law referred to.
