The plaintiff as original owner of the suit properties sold the same to the 1st defendant who.
was husband of the 2nd defendant.
According to the plaintiff apart 'from the written sale deed there was an oral agreement between him and the 1st defendant whereunder the latter agrees to reconvey the properties sold at the same price whenever the plaintiff called upon him to do so.
The suit was filed for specific performance of the said oral agreement.
The 1st defendant died even before he filed his written statement.
Before his death he had gifted the suit properties to his wife, the 2nd defendant.
In her 'written statement the 2nd defendant denied the agreement pleaded in the point but stated that just before his death her husband had agreed to sell t6 plaintiff item No. 1 of the suit property less one acre of paddy field for a sum of Rs. 11,500 but due to his illness the sale could not be effected.
She reiterated the said offer in her written statement but the plaintiff did not accept it and the suit proceeded on the basis of the agreement pleaded in the plaint.
The trial court decreed the suit as prayed for.
In appeal the High Court did not accept the agreement pleaded by the plaintiff but still granted a decree directing the defendant to execute a sale deed in favour of the plaintiff in respect of item No. 1 of the plaint schedule properties less one acre of paddy field for a sum of Rs. 11,500.
Both the parties appealed to this HELD.
: (i) The burden of proving the oral agreement was on the plaintiff.
The sale deed on the face of it evidenced an outright sale.
The stipulation ha it that the purchaser would not mortgage or assign the properties to anyone else during the vendor 's lifetime went against the plaintiff 's case inasmuch as it only gave the vendor a right to preempt. ] 'here was no satisfactory explanation why such an important thing as the agreement to re convey was made orally and not reduced to writing.
[923 G,924B] It appeared likely in the present case that neither side had come forward with the true version.
But before a court can grant a decree for specific performance, the contract pleaded must be a specific one and the same must be: established by convincing evidence.
Rarely a decree for specific performance is granted on the basis of an agreement supported solely by oral evidence.
[925 D E] On the evidence adduced by him the plaintiff had failed to prove the agreement pleaded in the plaint.
[925 F] (ii) The High Court was wrong in passing the decree in respect of plaint item No. 1 on the basis of the admission of the 2nd defendant in her written statement.
The plaintiff did not at any stage accept the 922 agreement pleaded by the defendant as true.
The agreement pleaded by the plaintiff in his plaint and that pleaded by the defendant in her written statement were two totally different agreements.
The plaintiff did not plead at any stage that he was ready and willing to.
perform the agreement pleaded in the written statement of defendant.
A suit for specific performance has to conform to the requirements prescribed in Forms 47 and 48 of the 1st Schedule in the Civil Procedure Code.
Before a decree for specific performance can be given the plaintiff has to.
plead and satisfy the court about his willingness to perform his part of the contract.
[925 G926 B] Pt.
Prem Raj vs The D.L.F. Housing and Construction (P) Ltd. & Anr., ; , applied.
Srinivas Ram Kumar vs Mahabir Prasad & Ors., ; , distinguished.
(iii) Since the parties had not laid the true version before the court and the defendant had refiled from the offer made by her in her written statement it was a case in which it was appropriate to direct the parties to bear their own costs throughout.
[926 H]
