The appellant, which was doing the business of manufacturing enamelled ware, appointed a technical adviser and the Board of Directors resolved to pay him 15% of the gross annual profits as his remuneration.
.For the assessment years, 1951 52, 1952 53 and 1953 54, the appellant claimed the amounts paid to the technical adviser as admissible allowances under section 10(2)(xv) of the Income tax Act, 1922.
The Income tax Officer found, that the technical adviser was a doctor of medicine without any special qualification for the post, that he was not trained in the technique of enamelled ware, that he and his father in law, by the number of shares they held, were able to control the voting before the Board of Directors, that good technical experts in enamelling could have been secured for a smaller remuneration, that the remuneration agreed to be paid to the technical adviser was influenced by extra commercial considerations and therefore, disallowed a part of the amount, holding that it was expenditure not incurred wholly and exclusively for the purpose of the business.
The order was confirmed by the Appellant Assistant Commissioner, the Tribunal and the High Court.
In appeal to this Court.
HELD : The question whether an amount claimed as expenditure was laid out or expended wholly and exclusively for the purpose of the business must be decided on the facts and circumstances of each case, and the inference drawn from the facts found is one of law.
Ordinarily, an employer, in fixing the remuneration of his employee, is entitled to take into consideration the extent of his business, the nature of duties to be performed, the special aptitude of the employee, the future prospects of the business and other related circumstances, and the taxing authorities cannot substitute their own view as to the reasonable remuneration which should have, been agreed to be paid to the employee.
But, the taxing authority may disallow an expenditure claimed, on the ground that the payment is not real or is not incured by the assessee in the course of his business or that it is not laid out wholly and exclusively for the pur pose of the business.
In doing so, the authority does not substitute its own view of how the assessee 's business affairs should be managed, but proceeds to disallow the expenditure, because, the condition of its admissibility is absent.
[316 B, D; 317 F H ', 318 A, D] Swadeshi Cotton Mills Co. Ltd. vs C.I.T., U.P. , followed.
