The appellant applied to the executing court to reopen the execution proceedings in respect of certain properties and to implead him as the legal representative of the owner of the properties, claiming that as the adopted son he was entitled to delivery of possession.
The Court dismissed the application holding that his remedy was by way of a separate suit.
Thereupon he filed a suit for a declaration that he was entitled to be impleaded in the execution proceedings as the legal representative and proceed with the execution.
The purported cause of action for suit was the dismissal of the earlier application for impleading in the execution proceedings.
The suit was dismissed on the ground that it was hit by section 42 of the Specific Relief Act inasmuch as it was not one for possession of the concerned property.
Thereafter the appellant filed another suit on the basis of his title.
The trial court dismissed the suit on the ground that the relief in question was barred by Order 2 rule 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
The High Court affirmed.
On the question whether the plaintiff 's claim in respect of the properties was barred by Order 2 rule2 Code of Civil Procedure, HELD : The High Court and the trial court proceeded on the erroneous basis that the former suit was a suit for a declaration of the appellant 's title to the properties in question.
The requirements of Order 2 rule 2, Code of Civil Procedure is that every suit should include the whole of the claim which the plaintiff is entitled to make in respect of a "cause of action.
" 'Cause of action ' means the, 'cause of action for which the suit was brought '.
It cannot be said that the cause of action on which the present suit was brought is the same as that in the previous.
Cause of action is a cause of action which gives occasion for and forms the foundation of the suit.
If that cause of action enables a person to ask for a larger and wider relief than that to which he limits his claim, he cannot afterwards seek to recover the balance by independent proceedings.
[321 G, 322 A C] In the instant case the cause of action on the basis of which the previous Suit was brought does not form the foundation of the present suit.
The cause of action mentioned in the earlier suit, assuming the same afforded a basis for a valid claim, did not enable the plaintiff to ask for any relief other than those he prayed for in that suit.
In that suit he could not have claimed the relief which he seeks in this suit.
Hence the trial court and the High Court were not right in holding that the plaintiff 's suit was barred by Order 2, rule 2, Code of Civil Procedure.
[322 C D]
