The first respondent was appointed in 1958 as a skilled workman by the appellant Company.
He had executed a bond to serve the Company for five years in consideration of the Company having borne.the expenses of his training.
In accordance with the practice of the Company a verification report about him was called for as was done in the case of other workmen also.
On a report from the Police the Security Officer recommended that it was not desirable to retain the respondent in the company 's service any longer.
The respondent at the time was working as a fitter in the blast furnace of the works.
In December 1960 he was served with an order by which his service was terminated.
The Industrial Tribunal, on a reference of the dispute, rejected the Union 's allegation as to victimisation or unfair labour practice.
Nevertheless it held that it was improper on the part of the Company not to have disclosed the report to the respondent, that the order of termination was in fact punitive in nature and considering the action taken as disproportionate the order was illegal and unjustified.
The Tribunal therefore directed reinstatement with full back wages.
On a petition for a Writ of Certiorari the High Court upheld the Tribunal 's order.
It also held that the case was not one of those exceptions to the general rule of reinstatement and the Tribunal having exercised its discretion it could not interfere with the Tribunal 's order.
The appeal to this Court was limited only to the question whether the relief to the first respondent should have been reinstatement or compensation.
HELD : (1) In the circumstances of the case the Tribunal was not justified in directing reinstatement and the High Court erred in refusing to interfere with the order of the Tribunal merely on the ground that it could not do so as it was a case where the Tribunal had exercised its Discretion.
The Tribunal has the discretion to award compensation instead of reinstatement if the circumstances of a Particular case are unusual or exceptional so as to make reinstatement inexpedient or improper.
The Tribunal has to exercise its discretion judicially and in accordance with the well recognised principles in that regard and has to examine carefully the circumstances of each case and decide whether such a case is one of those exceptions to the general rule.
If the Tribunal were to exercise down by this Court it would be a case either of no exercise of discretion or of one not legally exercised.
In either case the High Court in exercise of its jurisdiction can interfere and cannot be content by simply saying, that since the Tribunal has exercised its discretion, it will not examine the circumstances of the case to ascertain whether or not such exercise 344 was properly and in accordance with settled principles made.
If the High Court were to do so, it would be a refusal on its part to exercise jurisdiction.
[351 B E] In the present case the termination of service was not on account of victimisation or unfair labour practice.
It is clear that the Company terminated the service of the workman only because it felt that it was not desirable for reason of security to continue the workman in its service.
Therefore what was relevant at the stage when the Tribunal came to decide what relief the workman was entitled to was the question whether the management genuinely apprehended as a result of the report that it would be risky to retain the workman in the company 's service.
If, on an examination, of the circumstances of the case the Tribunal came to the conclusion that the apprehensions of the employer were genuine and the employer truly felt that it was hazardous or prejudicial to the interests of the industry to retain the workman in his service on grounds of security the case would be properly one where , compensation would meet the ends of justice.
The present case is one such.
The Tribunal exercised its discretion mechanically without weighing, the circumstances of the case and the refusal by the High Court to interfere was equally mechanical and amounted to refusal to exercise jurisdiction.
A GI Western India ' Automobile Association vs Industrial Tribunal , 348; United Commercial Bank Ltd. vs U.P. Bank Employees Union, [19521 ; Punjab National Bank Ltd. vs Workmen, ; Assam Oil Co. Ltd. vs Workmen, ; ; Working of Charottar Gramodhar Sahakari Mandali Ltd. vs Charottar Gramodhar Sahakari Mandali Ltd., C.A. 382 of 1966, dec.
on August 14, 1967; Deomur Dulung Tea Estate vs Workmen, C.A. 516 of 1966, dec. on October 26, 1967; and Ruby General Insurance Co. Ltd. vs P.P. Chopra, C.A. 1735 of 1969, dec. on September 12, 1969, referred to.
(ii)In the circumstances of the case it would be proper for this Court to determine the amount of compensation.
Compensation for a period of two years at the rate of Rs. 160 per month, that being the last salary drawn by the concerned workman would meet the ends of justice.
[353 DI Assam Oil Co. Ltd. vs Workmen, [19601 3 S.C.R. 457 and Utkal Machinery Ltd. vs Workmen, ; , referred to.
