The appellant terminated the service of a workman in 1957.
At that time he was not a member of the respondent union.
The respondent however, espoused the cause of the workman and took up the matter before the Conciliation Officer.
Two of the union 's office bearers appeared before the Conciliation Officer but the Conciliation Officer did not recognise them as authorised agents of the union, because, there were some disputes regarding their election.
He therefore recorded that the conciliation proceedings could not be proceeded with on the ground that no authorised agent of the union appeared before him at the proceedings.
The State Government assumed, that though the union had espoused the workman 's cause, it had not cared to appear at the conciliation proceedings at all, and refused to refer the industrial dispute for adjudication.
In 1962, the workman became a member of the respondent union and the union again took up the matter with the Government.
After some correspondence, in which it was pointed out that in fact two officers of the union did appear at the conciliation proceedings, the State Government, in 1963, referred the dispute for adjudication.
On the question of the validity of reference, HELD : (1) Under section 4(k) of the U.P. , if the State Government is of opinion that an industrial dispute exists or is apprehended, it may, at any time, refer the dispute for adjudication.
The expression 'of any time ', does not confer an unfettered or arbitrary discretion on the Government.
At whatever time the Govern ment decides to refer a dispute for adjudication, there must, at that time, exist an industrial dispute or such a dispute must be apprehended.
[373 F; 377 F G] (2)Though a dispute may initially be an individual dispute, the other workmen may espouse it on the ground that they have a community of interest and that they are directly and substantially interested in the employment, non employment or conditions of employment of the concerned workman.
Therefore, when the existence of the industrial dispute is challenged, the test is whether the dispute referred to adjudication is one in which the workmen or a substantial section of them have a direct and substantial interest.
The espousal by the other workmen may be at the time when the cause of the dispute occurs or later, because, the workmen may not, at the time when the dispute occurs, be sufficiently organised to espouse his cause or there may not have been a union at that time.
Since no reference is contemplated by section 4(k) when the dispute is not an 371 industrial dispute, or, even if it is so, it no longer exists or is not apprehended, the existence of the community of interest, evidenced by the espousal converting an individual dispute into an industrial dispute, must be at the date when the reference is made and not necessarily at the date when the cause occurs.
Further, the community of interest does not depend on whether theconcerned workman was a member or not of the union at the date whenthe cause occurred.
The question of the work man 's membership has tobe kept apart from the right of the other Work men to espouse his cause and the power of the Government under section 4(k).
In the present case, the reference was competent because the fact that the workman was not a member of the union on the date when the cause of the dispute arose did not preclude or negative the existence of.
the community of interest, nor did it disable the other workmen, through their union, from making that dispute their own.
[375 B E, G H; 376 A B, D; 382 A B, D E) Workmen vs Management of Dimakuchi Tea Estate, [1958] S.C.R. 1156, Bombay Union of Journalists vs The Hindu, Bombay,.
; Workmen of Indian Express (P) Ltd. vs The Management, [1969] 1 S.C. Cases 228, and Workmen vs Dharampal Premchand. ; followed.
Muller & Phipps (India) (P) Ltd. vs Their Employees Union and Workmen vs Jamadoba Colliery of Tata, Tata Iron & Steel Co. Ltd. , referred to.
Padarthy Ratnam & Co. vs industrial Tribunal, , Shamsuddin vs State of Kerala, [1961] 1 L.L.J. 77 and Khadi Gramodyog Bhawan Workers ' Union vs E. Krishnamurthy, A.I.R. 1966 Punjab 173, overruled.
(3)The Government 's function is to refer a dispute for adjudication so thatindustrial relations may not continue to remain disturbed, and not todecide the merits of the dispute.
Therefore, it cannot be held that once the Government has refused to refer a dispute to adjudication, it cannot change its mind on a reconsideration of the matter, either because new facts have come to light or because it had misunderstood the existing facts or for any other relevant consideration, and decide to make the reference.
Where, however, it reconsiders its earlier decision and makes a reference it can do so only if the dispute is an industrial one and either exists at that stage or is apprehended, and the reference must be with regard to only that industrial dispute.
Further, though it does not affect the jurisdiction of the Government to make a reference, before doing so, the Government should take into account the lapse of time and any inconvenience to the employer, and should not allow itself to be stampeded into making References in cases of old or stale disputes or allow the revival of such disputes on the pressure of outside agencies.
[378 A C; 381 B E] In the present case, the Government 's refusal to make a reference at the earlier stage on the ground that the union had not cared to appear at the conciliation proceedings, was based on a misapprehension.
Therefore, if the Government subsequently found that its earlier decision was based on such a misapprehension, and on facts brought to its notice it reconsidered the matter and decided to make the reference since the dispute was 'still subsisting, it could not be said that the exercise of the discretion was improper, merely because, four years had elapsed since its earlier decision not to make the reference.
[381 F H; 382 B D] 372 State of Madras vs C. P. Sarathy, , 346 and Sindhu Resettlement Corporation Ltd. vs Industrial Tribunal, , 839, followed.
Gurumurthi vs Ramulu, , Vasudeva Rao vs State of Mysore , Rawalpindi Victory Transport Co. (P) Ltd. vs State of Punjab, [1964] 1 L.L.J. 644, Champion Cycle Industries vs State of U.P. , Goodyear (India) Ltd., Jaipur vs Industrial Tribunal, and Rewa Coal Fields Ltd. vs Industrial Tribunal, A.I.R. 1969 M.P. 174, approved.
