On the basis of a First Information Report regarding loss of a buffalo lodged at police station, Chhainsa, the Sub Inspector of that police station sought to search the house of the appellants situated in the jurisdiction of police station, Dankaur.
The appellants and several others resisted the search and caused injuries to the police party, for which they were prosecuted under various sections of the Indian Penal Code.
The appellants along with certain others were convicted by the trial court and their appeals were disallowed by the High Court.
By special leave they appealed to this Court, contending : (i) that the officer of a police station cannot carry out a search in the jurisdiction of another police station without the permission of the Station House Officer of that station; in the present case the reason given by the Sub Inspector for not taking such permission, namely, that the local police was in league with the appellants did not satisfy the terms of section 166(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure; (ii) that the search was also illegal for the reason that the Sub Inspector before attempting the search did not record his reasons as required by sections 165 & 166 of the Code; (iii) that being illegal the search was not bona fide. (iv) that the appellants were entitled to the right of private defence since they thought that the raiding party were decoits dressed as policemen.
HELD : (i) In the case of stolen cattle, time is of the essence, because once the animal is removed and mixed up with others, it is very difficult to spot it in the big herds common in these places.
Therefore if the police officer had reason to believe that the police officers at Dankaur would take their own time because they were mixed up with the accused party, he had full jurisdiction in taking recourse to sub section
(3) of section 166 and to carry out the search himself.
[493 G H] (ii) No questions were put to the Sub Inspector to elicit from him whether the reasons for the search were recorded or not.
Regard being had to the regularity of official acts it must be presumed that the Sub Inspector must have taken the precaution to ',record his reasons.
[494A] (iii) In the circumstances of the case the search was legal and bonafide.
[494 B] (iv) The accused were informed by the Sub Inspector that it was the police party which had come and they had no 'reason to attack the police party either as dacoits or in self defence in any other form.
[494 C]
