Prior to November 1, 1956 the appellants were holding permanent posts in the ministerial service of the Secretariats of the Part B State of Saurashtra and the Part C State of Kutch.
By virtue of section 8 of the States Reorganisation Act 37 of 1956 the new State of Bombay which included the territories of the States of Saurashtra and Kutch was formed.
Under section 115(1) of the Act the appellants were allotted to serve in connection with the affairs of the new State of Bombay.
BY the proviso to, section 115(7) it was provided that 'conditions of service applicable immediately before the appointed day to the case of any person allotted to another State shall not be varied to his disadvantage except with the previous approval of the Central Government '.
Section 116 provided for the continuance of officers in equivalent posts.
By section 117 power was conferred upon the Central Government to give directions to State Governments for the purposes of sections 114, 115 and 116.
The Act authorised the Central Government to establish one or more Advisory Committees to advise the Government on the division and integration of the services in the new States and for ensuring fair and equitable treatment to all persons affected by the provisions of section 115 and for proper consideration of any representation made by those persons.
A large majority of the members of the ministerial branch of the Secretariats of the State of Saurashtra and Kutch were unwilling to be posted in the Secretariat of the new State of Bombay.
A large majority out of them including the appellants were accordingly posted in the districts of the former States of Saurashtra and Kutch.
Under the Bombay Reorganisation Act 11 of 1960 the States of Gujarat and Maharashtra were carved out of the territory of the new State of Bombay.
Sections 81, 82 and 83 of the 1960 Act were substantially the same as Ss. 115, 116 and 117 of the 1956 Act.
The services of the appellants were under section 81 of the Act allotted to the newly constituted State of Gujarat.
The State of Gujarat transferred the appellants from the districts to the Secretariat.
After consulting the Public Service Commission it issued on August 19, 1966 an order "regularising" the services of the appellants and fixing their pay and seniority.
The officers of the Secretariat who before the, passing of the said order constituted the ministerial service filed a petition in the High Court challenging its validity.
The High Court allowed the petition mainly on two grounds, namely : (i) that the appellants were not absorbed in the ministerial services of the Secretariat within the meaning 516 of the Bombay Allocated Servants ' (Absorption, Seniority, Pay and Allowances) Rules, 1957; (ii) that r. 138 of the Bombay Civil Services Classification and Recruitment Rules, 1939 as amended in 1957 allowed recruitment to the Ministerial Staff of the Secretariat by nomination after an examination or by promotion from the Lower Division and it was not open to the Government to adopt any other method.
The High Court 's ,,decision was challenged in appeal before this Court.
The Court noted that no equivalence had been established between the ,posts in the Secretariats of the States of Saurashtra and Kutch and the posts in the new State of Bombay or later in Gujarat and that there had been no integration of the services by the Central Government.
It was conceded before the Court that the State had the authority to transfer, subject to the Constitution and the rules made under article 309, any public servant to render service which by his training and aptitude he was competent to do.
HELD : (i) The fact that the expression 'absorption ' had not been used in the impugned order would not justify the inference that there was no intention to absorb the former Saurashtra and Kutch State personnel in the Secretariat.
[521 F] In the absence of determination of equivalent posts under the orders of the Central Government, the State of Gujarat was competent, as a matter of provisional arrangement to absorb the former Saurashtra and Kutch States personnel in the ministerial establishment of the Gujarat State Secre tariat.
In terms the order said that the persons named therein "should be treated to have been regularly appointed in the posts shown against their names in column 4 of the statement" appended to the order.
That clearly amounted to absorption.
[521 G H] (ii) The High Court was wrong in holding that the impugned order was bad because it contravened r. 138 of the Recruitment Rules.
Assuming that r. 138 requires the State to follow a certain method for recruitment to the ministerial service, that rule made under article 309 of the Constitution cannot take away the statutory right vested in the personnel of the former Saurashtra and Kutch States which they acquired under section 115(7) of the to hold posts in the new State which we re equivalent and on terms which were not, unless previous approval of the Central Government was obtained, disadvantageous.
Since the arrangement which was made by the Gujarat Government must be regarded as provisional and to ensure so long as the Central Government did not make a final decision, it was not open to the officers of "the Secretariat to challenge the authority of the Government of Gujarat either to transfer officers from the Districts and to post and assign them duties in the Secretariat or to fix their pay and seniority among the officer of the Secretariat performing ministerial duties. ' [523 G 524 B] N. Raghavendra Rao vs Deputy Commissioner, South Kanara, Mangalore, ; and Union of India & Anr.
vs P. K. Roy & Ors.
; , applied.
