A draft scheme for the nationalisation of certain transport routes was prepared and published by the respondent State Government under Section 68(C) of the Motor Vehicles Act 4 of 1939.
The validity of the scheme was challenged by the appellants, who were private stage carriage operators, in a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution but the peti tion was dismissed by the High Court.
In appeal to this Court the validity of the scheme was mainly challenged on the ground that the opinion requisite under Section 68(C) was not formed by the State Government but by the Secretary to the Government acting pursuant to powers conferred on him under Rule 23 A of the Madras Government Business Rule.
It was further contended that the said rule was ultra vires, the provisions of the Constitution; Parliament has conferred powers under Section, 68 C to a designated authority and that power can be exercised only by the authority specified and no one else.
The authority concerned in the present case was the State Government and it could not have delegated is statutory 'functions to any one else.
By Government was meant the Governor aided and advised by his Ministers.
The requisite opinion should therefore have been formed by the Minister to whom the business had been allocated under the Rules.
HELD : The functions under the Motor Vehicles Act had been allocated by the Governor to the Transport Minister under the Rules and the Secretary of that Ministry had been validly authorised under Rule 23 A to take action under section 68(C) of the Act.
In the very nature of things, neither the Council of Ministers nor an individual Minister can attend to the numerous matters that come up before the Government.
Those matters have to be attended to and decisions taken by various officials at various levels.
When those officials discharge the functions allotted to them, they are doing so as limbs of the Government and not as persons to whom the power of the Government had been delegated.
[513 G] Under our Constitution, the Governor is essentially a constitutional head; the administration of the State is run by the Council of Ministers.
in order to obviate the difficulty that would arise if the Council of Ministers had to deal with every matter, the Constitution has authorised the Governor under sub article (3) of the Article 166 to make rules for the more convenient transaction of the business of the Government of the State and for the allocation amongst its Ministers of the business of Government.
All matters excepting those in which the Governor is required to act in his discretion have to be allocated to one or the other of the Ministers on 506 the advice of the Chief Minister.
Apart from allocating business among the Ministers, the Governor can also make rules on the advice of his Council of Ministers for more convenient transaction of business.
He can not only allocate the various subjects amongst the Ministers but may go further and on the advice of his Ministers, designate a particular official to discharge any particular function.
[511 F] The cabinet is responsible to the Legislature for every action taken in any of the Ministries.
This is the essence of joint responsibility.
That does not mean that each and every decision must be taken by the cabinet.
The political responsibility of the Council of Ministers does not and cannot predicate the personal responsibility of the Ministers to discharge all or any of the functions of the Government.
Similarly an individual Minister is responsible to, the Legislature, for every action taken or omitted to be taken in his ministry.
This again is a political responsibility and not personal responsibility.
In every well planned administration, most of the decisions are taken by the civil servants who are likely to be experts and not subject to political pressure.
The Minister is not expected to burden himself with the day to day administration.
His primary function is to lay down the policies and programmes of his ministry while the Council of Ministers settle the major policies and programmes of the, Government.
[512 A] Emperor vs Sibnath Banerjee & Ors.
L.R. 72 I.A. p. 241; Kalyan Singh vs State of U.P. [1962] Supp. 2 S.C.R. 76; Ishwarlal Girdharlal Joshi vs State of Gujarat and anr.
, , Capital Multipurpose Cooperative Society vs State of Madhya Pradesh and Ors.
Civil Appeal No. 2201/1966 decided on 30 3 1967; referred to.
