The revenue authorities in Ceylon levied estate duty in respect of the estate of A and his son in the hands of their three widows.
The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council set aside the levy and in 1957 the Government of Ceylon deposited in Court the duty which was levied, with interest.
On February 17, 1947, the joint family estate was parti tioned among the three widows and their adopted sons.
The Income tax Officer brought to tax one of the adopted son 's share of the interest received from the Ceylon Government on the estate duty.
The Tribunal reversed the assessment order holding that the amount of interest received by the assessee was of a capital nature and was on that account not liable ' to tax.
on a reference the High Court was of the opinion that the assessee 's share in the interest attributable to the period ending February 17, 1947 was not taxable but the share attributable to the period between that date and the date of payment by the Ceylon Government was taxable.
In the view of the High Court the amounts paid as estate duty had to be deemed in law to have come from the joint family estate and on severance of the joint family status in February 1947 each adopted son received his share in the estate then existing as capital.
The Commissioner appealed to this Court.
It was contended that the character of the receipt which was revenue when received by the joint family could not be altered when it was divided between the members of the joint family.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD : On the severance of the joint status the assessee became entitled to a 'share in the family estate.
The amount of interest on the state duty accrued as income to the joint family but it was income of the joint family and not of the individual members.
But when a share out of the estate which included the interest on estate duty was received by the assessee it had not the character of income.
Once the income was received by the joint family, the amount lost its character of income : it became merged in the joint family estate and became the capital of the amity.
The share received by the assessee was therefore a share in the capital of the family.
Therefore, the share in the joint family property which included interest on the estate duty which accrued prior to February 17, 1947 was rightly held by the High Court to be not of the nature of revenue and accordingly not taxable.
[310 C E] RM.
Ramananthan Chettiar vs Commissioner of Incometax Madras, , distinguished.
[The Court did not express any opinion on the correctness of the finding of the High Court that the interest accrued due after February 17, 1947 must be regarded as income to the extent of the share of each of the members of the family.]
