Under section 21 (1) (j) of the Mysore Rent Control Act, 1961 the court may on an application order the recovery of possession of any premises in favour of the landlord, if "the premises are reasonably and bona fide required by the landlord for the immediate purpose of demolishing them and such demolition is to be made for the purpose of enacting a new building in place of the premises sought to be demolished,".
The respondent landlord applied under section 21(1)(j) for eviction of the tenants appellants, claiming that the premises were reasonably and bona fide required by him for the immediate purpose of demolishing and erecting of a new building, that the premises were old and were not suitable for continued occupation.
The respondent claimed to have obtained the necessary licence and to have made all preparations for demolishing the existing., building and erecting new building.
The appellants tenants contested the claim.
The Rent Controller accepted the respondent landlord 's claim and ordered eviction, which in appeal, and further revision to the High Court was upheld.
In appeal to this Court for the appellant tenant, it was contended that unless the landlord was able to establish that the condition of the building was such that it required immediate demolition and reconstruction, no eviction of the tenant could be ordered under section 21 (1) (j).
Rejecting this contention and dismissing the appeal, HELD : The requirement contemplated under clause (j) of the proviso to sub section
(1) is that of the landlord and it does not have any reference to the condition of the building as such.
What is necessary under that clause is that the landlord must satisfy the Court that he reasonably and bona fide requires the premises for the immediate purpose of demolishing it and such demolition is for the purpose of erecting a new building in the place of the old one.
No doubt, whether the landlord 's requirement is reasonable and bona fide has to be judged in the light of the surrounding circumstances, which will include his means for reconstruction of the building, and other steps taken by him in that regard.
[737 G, H] In considering the reasonable and bona fide requirements of the landlord under this clause, the desire of the landlord to put the property to a more profitable use after demolition and reconstruction is also a factor that may be taken into account in favour of the landlord.
It is not necessary that the landlord should go further and establish under this clause that the condition of the building is such that it requires immediate demolition.
[738 D] Neta Ram vs Jiwan Lal, [1962] Supp.
2 S.C.R. 623, referred to.
Mehsin Bhai vs Hale & Company, (1964) II M.L.J. 147, contra observation disapproved.
