The appellant obtained lease of an open land for construction of buildings.
After the constructions, the appellant applied for determination of standard rent under the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947.
The application was rejected holding that the provi sions of the Act did not apply to open land let for construction.
This view was confirmed by the High Court.
Sometime thereafter in another case the High Court held that the question whether the provisions of the Act applied to any particular lease must be determined on its terms and a building lease in respect of an open plot was not excluded from the provisions of the Act solely because open land may be used from residence or educational purposes only after a structure is built thereon.
Relying upon this judgment, the appellant filed a fresh application for determining the standard rent.
The Trial Judge rejected the application holding that question of the applicability of the Act was res judicata since it had been finally decided by the High Court between the same parties in respect of the same land in the earlier proceeding for fixation of standard rent.
The order was confirmed by first appellate court and on further appeal by the High Court.
HELD:The judgment did not operate as res judicata.
A question relating.
to the jurisdiction of a Court cannot be deemed to have been finally determined by an erroneous decision of the Court.
If by an erroneous interpretation of the statute the court holds that it has no jurisdiction, the decision will not, operate as res judicata.
Similarly by an erroneous decision if the Court assumes jurisdiction which it does not possess under the statute, the decision will not operate as res judicata between the same parties, whether the cause of action in the subsequent litigation is the same or otherwise.
in determining the application of the rule of res judicata the court is not concerned with the correctness or otherwise of the earlier judgment.
The matter in issue, if it is one purely of fact, decided in the earlier proceeding by a competent court must in a subsequent litigation between the same parties be regarded as finally decided and cannot be reopened.
A mixed question of law and fact determined in the earlier proceeding between the same parties may not, for the same reason, be questioned in a subsequent proceeding between the same parties where the cause of action is the same, for the expression "the matter in issue" in section 11, Code of Civil Procedure means the right litigated between the parties, i.e., the facts on which the right is claimed or denied and the law applicable to the determination of that issue.
Where, however, the question is one purely of law and it relates to the jurisdiction of the Court or a decision of the Court sanctioning something which is illegal, by resort to the rule of res judicata a party affected by the decision will not be precluded_ from challenging the validity of that order because of the rule of res judicata, for a rule of procedure cannot supersede the law of the land.
83 1 if the decision in the previous proceeding be regarded as conclusive it will assume the status of a special rule of law applicable to the parties relating to the jurisdiction of_the Court, in derogation of the rule declared by the Legislature.
[835G 836 F] Parthasardhi Ayyangar vs Chinnakrishna Ayyangar, I.L.R. , Chamanlal vs Bapubhai, I.L.R. , Kanta Devi vs Kalawati, A.I.R. 1946 Lah.
419,, Tarini Charan Bhattacharjee vs Kedar Nath Haldar, I.L.R. , and Broken Hill Proprietary Company Ltd. vs Municipal Council of Broken Hill, , approved.
Chandi Prasad vs Maharaja Mahendra Mahendra Singh, I.L.R. 23 All.
,5, disapproved.
Bindeshwari Charan Singh vs Bageshwari, Charan Singh, L.R. 63 I.A. 53, doubted.
