A first information report was lodged in respect of a crime and the appellant, who was the Additional District Magistrate (Judicial) was named therein as principal accused.
The offences mentioned were cognizable and the Police after registering the case, started investigation.
The appellant applied to the Judicial Magistrate for invocation of the provisions of section 159 Cr.
P.C., and for conducting preliminary enquiry by the Court itself and for issuance of necessary directions to the Police to stop investigation alleging that a false report had been lodged at the instance of the local police.
The Magistrate directed the police to stop investigation and decided to hold the enquiry himself.
Thereupon an application was moved in the High Court under section 561 A Cr.
P.C. for quashing the order of the Magistrate as he had no jurisdiction to pass such an order under section 159 Cr.
The High Court accepted the application and set aside the Magistrate 's order.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD : Section 159 Cr.
P.C. does not empower a Magistrate to stop investigation by the police.
This section first mentions the power of the Magistrate to direct an investigation on receiving the report under section 157, and then states the alternative that, if he thinks fit, he may it once proceed, of depute any Magistrate subordinate to him to proceed, to hold a preliminary enquiry into, or otherwiseto dispose of, the case.
On the face of it, the first alternative of directing an investigation cannotarise in a case where the report itself shows that investigation by the police is going on in accordance with section 156.
It is to be noticed that the second alternative does not give the Magistrate an unqualified power to proceed himself or depute any Magistrate to hold the preliminary enquiry.
That power is preceded by the condition that he may do so, "if he thinks fit" The use of this expression makes it clear that section 159 is primarily meant to give to the Magistrate the power of directing an investigation in cases where the police decides not to investigate the case under the proviso to section 157(1), and it is in those cases that.
if he thinks fit, he can choose the second alternative.
Without the use of the expression "if he thinks fit" the second alternative could have been held to be independent of the first; but the use of this expression makes it plain that the power conferred by the_ second clause of this section is only ,in alternative to the Power given by the first clause and Fan, therefore.
he exercised only in those, cases in which the first clause is applicable.
Even in sub s.(3) of section 156, the only power given to the Magistrate, who can take cognisance of an offence under section 190, is to order an investigation, there is no mention of any power to stop an investigation by the police.
The scheme of these sections, thus, clearly is that the Dower of the Police to investigate any cognizable offence is uncontrolled by the Magistrate, and it is only in cases where the police 947 decide not, to investigate the case that the Magistrate can intervene and either direct an investigation, or, in the alternative, himself proceed or depute a Magistrate subordinate to him to proceed to enquire into the case.
[949 G 950 F] The Crown vs Mohammad Sadia Naiz, A.I.R. 1949, Lah.
204, Pancham Singh vs The State, A.I.R. 1967 Pat. 416 and King Emperor vs Khwaja Nazir Ahmad, 71 I.A. 203, referred to.
(2)The Code of Criminal Procedure gives to the police unfettered power to investigate all cases where they suspect a cognizable offence has been committed.
If the police engineer a false report of a cognizable offence against any person he can in appropriate cases always invoke the Power of the High Court under Act.
Therefore, the fact that the Code does not provide for.a power to a Magistrate to stop investigation by the Police cannot be a ground for holding that such a power must be read into section 159 of the Code.
[951 H]
