The appellant 's house was set on fire and burnt down.
As a result of a report filed by his son the police arrested Respondents 1 and 2 and submitted a charge sheet against them.
The appellant was dissatisfied that the police had not prosecuted Respondent No. 3 also and he filed a complaint against him, in the same Court.
The Magistrate inquired into the two cases together and committed separately the first two respondents and the third respondent separately to the Court of Sessions.
After the Sessions Judge had held all the three respondents not guilty and acquitted them, the appellant applied under section 417(3) Cr.
P.C., for special leave to appeal against the acquittal of the three respondents; but this petition was dismissed by the High Court on the ground that the petitioner had no locus standi to prefer an appeal when the State had pro secuted the respondents in the Sessions Court.
A revision application filed by the appellant was also rejected.
On appeal to this Court, HELD : The appellant was entitled to have a hearing of his petition for special leave under section 417(3) and the case must therefore be remitted to the High Court for this purpose.
The answer to the question whether the appellant had a right to move the High Court for special leave under section 417(3) depended upon whether there was a case instituted by him upon a complaint in which an acquittal was recorded, for this is the requirement of the special section and also the condition precedent to the right.
[4 B].
On the facts, there could be no doubt that one of the cases was instituted on the report of a police officer and the other on the complaint of the complainant.
There could be no question of merger because the identity of the two cases was maintained right upto the end of the Sessions Trial.
The case of the appellant proceeded on its own number and although evidence was led in both cases together, the acquittal was recorded separately in each of the two cases.
The appellant was therefore entitled to move the High Court for special leave in his own case.
[6 G] The fact that the appellant had also applied for revision which was rejected and had applied for special leave against that order which was refused by this Court, did not mean that that must conclude the matter.
The appellant 's statutory right to move the High Court could not be lost by reason of the revision and the result of the revision, had no bearing upon the matter.
