The respondent was a Pakistani national and was arrested on 8th May 1964, and immediately after his arrest he made a confession before a Magistrate.
The confession disclosed that he was involved in two different and separate conspiracies with various co accused.
But the customs authorities assumed that there was only one conspiracy and that the respondent had incorrectly shown two separate conspiracies.
Three cases were filed against him charging him with offences under the , and , and the offence of conspiracy and other offences under various enactments.
He was convicted on his plea of guilty and sentenced to various terms of imprisonment.
He was also detained under the .
After fuller investigation, the respondent was again put up for trial for the second conspiracy and for offences under other Acts.
The respondent moved the High Court for quashing the proceedings on the ground that he having been convicted for a conspiracy could not be retried for the same offence again.
He also pleaded various alternatives in the event of the Court not quashing the proceedings, and one of the pleas was that proceedings against him should be separated from other co accused and his plea of guilty be accepted.
The High Court quashed the proceedings.
In appeal to this Court, HELD : (1) Since the second trial was for a different and distinct conspiracy, the High Court 's order was not justified.
[117 D] (2) Since the offences for which the respondent was being tried were likely to have far reaching implications, it was not in the public interest that the trial should be given up merely because, he had already served various terms of imprisonment, or there has been delay in putting him up for trial for the second conspiracy, especially when there was no material to suggest that the prosecution deliberately prolonged the investigation or delayed bringing up the case before Court.
Further, the trial for the second conspiracy could not have been combined with the earlier one, because, the two are separate and distinct.
[117 D E] (3) In the circumstances however, his alternative plea of separating his case from the other co accused should be accepted and the prosecution allowed a period of not more than two months for producing the evidence so that the court could on a consideration of the evidence, either frame a charge or discharge the respondent.
The contention of the prosecution that he should be tried along with the others to enable the court to take his confession into consideration against the co accused is, not a ground 113 for joint trial especially when the respondent could be called as a witness against the other co accused.
1118 B)
