In 1931 the Madras Endowments Board framed a scheme for the better management of the appellant temple.
At that time the question arose whether the suit properties were the properties of the temple.
The respondent 's family put forward the claim that those properties had been granted to them as archakatwam service inam and consequently those properties were not temple properties.
That contention was accepted by the Board.
The Board 's decision was not challenged by the appellant by a suit under section 57(3) of the Act.
The suit under appeal was filed by the respondent praying for a declaration that the suit properties had been granted to his family as archakatwam service inam, and that the appellant had no right therein.
An injunction restraining the appellant from interferring with the respondent 's possession was also prayed for.
The appellant resisted the claim.
The lower courts as well as the High Court upheld the respondent 's claim on the ground that the appellant 's claim was barred by res judicata.
In this Court it was urged on behalf of the appellant that the Board 's decision could not be regarded as res judicata because (i) the proceeding before the Board was a summary proceeding, (ii) the question as to the title of the suit properties was not directly and substantially in issue in that proceeding since the essential purpose of the framing of a scheme for the management of a temple is to see that the administration is carried on properly and not to determine what properties the temple owns.
HELD: (i) It is not correct to say that the power conferred on the Board under section 57 is a summary power.
A decision rendered by the Board under that section is final subject to the result of the suit contemplated in the said section.
Section 57 provides for an exhaustive enquiry in the matter of framing scheme, firstly by the Board and then by the Court.
The trial before the Court has to be held in the same manner as any other suit that may be instituted under the provisions of the Civil Procedure Code.
[131 E F] (ii) (a) The doctrine of res judicata is not confined to a decision in a suit but it applies to decisions in other proceedings as well.
But how far a decision which is rendered in other proceedings will bind the parties depends upon other considerations one of which is whether the decision determines substantial rights of parties and the other is whether the 'parties are given adequate opportunities to establish the rights pleaded by them.
The doctrine of res judicata is not confined to the limits prescribed in section 11 Civil Procedure Code.
The underlying principle of that doctrine is that there should be finality in litigation and that a person should not be vexed twice over in respect of the same matter.
[132 B C] 129 (b) A scheme framed for the better management of a temple must necessarily show therein the properties of the temple.
Before deciding to frame a scheme the authority framing the scheme must know the nature and extent of the trust funds.
There can be no scheme of management of a temple in vacuum.
[131 A B] In the previous proceedings one of the important questions the Board had to decide was whether the properties in dispute were archakatwam service inam properties.
The Board 's decision which was adverse to the temple affected the rights of the temple in a substantial manner.
It was open to the temple to get its right established by means of a suit under section 57(3).
It failed to take that step.
Therefore, the decision of the Board in 1931 that the suit properties were not temple properties operated as res judicata, and the appeal must fail.
[132 D G] Chotalal Lakhmiram & Ors.
vs Manohar Ganesh Tambekar & Ors.
I.L.R. XXIV Bom.
p. 50, (Sri Mahant) Sitaram Dass Bavaji vs Madras Religious Endowment Board, Madras, A.I.R. 1937 Mad. 106, Arikapudi Balakotayya vs Yadlapalli Nagayya, A.I.R. (33) and State of Madras vs Kunnakudi Melamatam alias Annathana Matam, , applied.
