(1) The definition of industry in section 2(j) of the is in two parts.
But it must be read as a whole.
So read it denotes a collective enterprise in which employers and employees are associated.
It does not exist either by employers alone or by employees, alone.
It exists only when there is a relationship between employers and employees, the former engaged in business, trade, undertaking, manufacture or calling of employers and the latter engaged in any calling, service, employment handicraft or industrial occupation or avocation.
But every case of employment is not necessarily productive of an industry.
A workman is to be regarded as one employed in an industry only if he is following one of the vocations mentioned in conjunction with his employers engaged in the vocations mentioned in relation to the employers, namely, any business, trade, undertaking manufacture or calling of employers.
In the collocation of the terms and their definitions these terms have a definite economic content of a particular type and on the authorities of this Court have been uniformly accepted as excluding professions and are only concerned with the production, distribution and consumption of wealth and the production and availability of material services.
Industry has thus been accepted to mean only trade and business, manufacture, or undertaking analogous to trade or business for the production of material goods or wealth and material services.
Material services involve an activity carried on through co operation between employers and employees to provide the community with the use of something such as electric power, water, transportation, mail delivery, telephones and the like.
In providing these services there may be employment of trained men and even professional men, but the emphasis is not on what they do but upon the productivity of a service organised as an industry and commercially valuable, in which, something is brought into existence quite apart from the benefit to particular individuals; and it is the production of this something which is described as the production of material services.
Thus, the services of professional men involving benefit to individuals according to their needs, such as doctors, teachers, lawyers, solicitors, etc. are easily distinguishable from an activity such as transport service.
They are not engaged in an occu pation in which employers and employees cooperate in the production or sale of commodities or arrangement for the production or sale or distribution and their services cannot be described as material services and are outside the ambit of industry.
It, therefore, follows that before an industrial dispute can be raised between employers and employers or between employers and employees or between employees and employees in relation to the employment or non employment or the terms of employment or with the conditions of labour of any person, there must first 178 be established a relationship of employers and employees associating together, the former following a trade, business, manufacture, undertaking or calling of employers in the production of material goods and material services and the attack following any calling, service, employment, handicraft or industrial occupation or avocation of workmen in aid of the employers enterprise.
It is not necessary that there must be profit motive, but the enterprise must be analogous to trade or business in a commercial sense.
[183 H; 184 G H; 185 C, H; 186 H; 187 A B, E G; 188 F H] (2) The decision in State of Bombay vs Hospital Mazdoor Sabha, ; holding that a Government hospital was an industry took an extreme view of the matter and cannot be justified, because : (a) it was erroneously held that the second part of the definition of 'industry ' was an extension of the first part, whereas, they are only the two aspects of the occupation of employers and employees in an industry; (b) it was assumed that economic activity is always related to capital or profit making and since an enterprise could be an industry without capital or profit making it was held that even economic activity was not necessary; and (c) it was held that since a hospital could be run as a business proposition and for profit by private individuals or groups of individuals a hospital run by Government without profit must also bear the same character.
This test was wrongly evolved from the observations in Federated Municipal and Shire Council Employees of Australia vs Melbourne Corporation, ; , which only indicate that in those activities in which Government take to industrial ventures the motive of profit making and absence of capital are irrelevant.
The observations, on the contrary, show that industrial disputes occur only in operations in which employers and employees associate to provide what people want and desire, that is, in the production of material goods or services, and not the 'satisfaction of material human needs '.
If however a hospital, nursing home or dispensary is run as a business, in a commercial way there may be found elements of an industry there.
Then the hospital is more than a place where persons can get treated for their ailments and it becomes a business.
[189 D H; 190 E F] Hospital Case ; over ruled.
(3) Under section 2(n)(vi) any industry specified in the First Schedule to the Act could be notified by the appropriate Government as a public utility service.
But what could be declared had to be an industry in the first place.
The original entries in the Schedule were five and obviously only general headings were given.
For example 'coal ' is not an industry but certain aspects of dealing with coal would be 'industry ' and that is what is intended.
The dealing must be an industry in which.
there arc employers and employees cooperating in the production of material goods for material services.
Similarly, cotton, textiles or food stuffs or iron and steel, as the entries stand, are not industries.
Therefore, the heading of the First Schedule and the words of cl.
(vi) presuppose the existence of an industry which may be notified as a public utility service, for special protection under the Act.
[191 F H] When the list was expanded in the First Schedule and certain services were mentioned, the intention could not have been otherwise.
It could not have been intended by Parliament that the entire concept of 'industry ' in the Act could be ignored and anything could be brought in as industry.
Most of the new entries are items in which an industry proper involving trade, business.
manufacture or something analogous to business can be found% Therefore, to apply the notification.
the condition precedent of the existence of an industry has to be satisfied.
If there is an industry 179 which falls within the item named in the first Schedule, then alone can it be notified to be classed as a public utility service.
To hold otherwise would largely render useless all the definitions in the Act regarding industry, industrial disputes etc., in relation to the scheduled items.
It is hardly to be thought that notifications can issue in respect of enterprises which are not 'industry ' to start with.
Parliament could not have attempted to declare that notwithstanding the definitions of 'industry ', 'industrial dispute ', workman ' and 'employer ' every hospital is to be regarded as an industry, by including 'service in hospitals and dispensaries ' in the First Schedule.
[192 B C, F H] (4) The activities in the cases of Secretary Madras Gytmkhana Club Employees Union vs Management of the Gymkhana Club [1968] 1 S.C.R. 742, University of Delhi vs Ramnath, ; and National Union of Commercial Employees vs M. R. Meher, [1962] Supp. 3 S.C.R. 157 were rightly held not be industries, because, in the first the management was a non profit making members ' club not employed in trade or industry, and the other two were cases in which the services rendered by the employees were in aid of professional men and not productive of material wealth or services.
[188 C F] Hotel and Catering Industry Training Board and Automobile Proprietary Ltd. H.L.; S.C.; and [1968]3 All.
E.R. 399 C.A., referred to.
Therefore, the Safdarjung Hospital which is run as a department of the Government, the Tuberculosis Hospital which is a charitable and research institute.
and the Kurji Holi Family Hospital which is entirely charitable, are not industries within the meaning of the .
[193 C; 194 B E]
