The tenant of the appellant a Jagirdar, died without leaving any male issues.
His distant relations the respondents, took possession of his properties.
Thereupon the appellant brought a suit claiming possession.
of the properties as he was the owner.
The trial court dismissed the suit holding that the civil court has no jurisdiction to entertain the suit, and that in view of the Jagir Abolition Act, 1951 which was enacted during the pendency of the sit and with the vesting of the suit properties in the State, the appellant was not entitled to claim.
The first appellate court reversed these findings and held that though the suit properties had vested in the State, it was for the State to get itself impleaded, and as the State had not got itself impleaded, it was open to the appellant to press the suit.
In view of these conclusions, the appellate court demanded the suit to decide the other undecided issues.
After the remand, the trial court negatived the respondents defendants contention and decreed the suit.
In appeal that decree was affirmed.
In second appeal, the High Court agreed with the courts below on all issues except that relating to the effect of abolition of Jagirs.
It held that under the Jagir Abolition Act, the appellant lost his title to the suit properties.
In its view that issue was not concluded by the decision of the appellate court made before remand as the same had not been appealed against, since the court had inherent power to consider the correctness of that order.
In appeal, this Court: HELD : The case must be remanded for determination of the right of all the parties after impleading the State as a party.
The correctness of the remand order was not open to review by the High Court.
The order in question was made under rule 23, Order 41, Civil Procedure Code.
That order was appealable under Order 43 of that Code.
As the same was not appealed against, its correctness was no more open to examination in view of section 105 (2) of the Code which lays down that where any party aggrieved by an order of remand from which an appeal lies does not appeal therefrom he shall thereafter be precluded from disputing its correctness.
The High Court has misconceived the scope of its inherent powers.
Under the inherent power of courts recognised by section 151, Civil Procedure Code, a court has no power to do that which is prohibited by the Code.
Inherent jurisdiction of court must be exercised subject to the rule that if the Code does contain specific provisions which would meet the necessities of the case, such provisions should be followed and inherent jurisdiction should not be involved.
In other words the court cannot make use of the special provisions of section 151 of the Code where a party bad his remedy provided elsewhere in the Code and be neglected 208 to avail himself of the same.
Further the power under section 151 of the Code cannot be exercised as an appellate power.
The appellant Jagirdar had not lost all rights in the suit properties.
The suit properties vested in the State in view of the Jagir Abolition Act.
But it was conceded at the bar that if the appellant was proved to have been the owner of the suit properties on the day the Jagir Abolition Act came into force, he was entitled to the compensation provided in that Act.
Therefore the appellant was interested in establishing that on the date Jagir Abolition Act came into force, he was the full owner of the suit properties.
[210 C] Himatrao vs Jaikishandas and Ors. ; followed.
