The appellants, who were holders of a licence under the U.P. Sugar Dealers ' Licensing Order, 1962, to deal in sugar and were also licenced to deal in flour, were called upon by a letter dated June 5,1967 to explain certain irregularities detected on inspection of their shop.
The next day they were directed to hand over their stocks of sugar and flour to a Cooperative Marketing Society.
Their representations against this direction to the District Magistrate were not attended to, and they were therefore obliged to surrender their stocks.
By a letter dated June 28, 1967, the appellants were informed that the District Magistrate had cancelled their licences as dealers in sugar and flour but no reasons were given for this order.
An appeal under clause 8 of the Order of 1962 to the State Government was rejected but no reasons were communicated to the appellants for this rejection.
A writ petition challenging the orders of the District Magistrate and the State Government in appeal was dismissed by the High Court.
On appeal to this Court, HELD : The orders passed by the District Magistrate and the State Government cancelling the licences of the appellants must be quashed.
The authorities had disclosed by their conduct a reckless disregard of the rights of the appellants.
The order passed by the District Magistrate cancelling the licences was quasi judicial; it could be made only on a consideration of the charges and the explanation given by the appellants.
That necessarily implied that the District Magistrate had to give some reasons why he held the charges proved, and the explanation unacceptable.
The appellants had a right to carry on their business and they could be deprived of their right only by an order supported by good and adequate reasons ' Under the rules appellant had a right of appeal to the State Government.
Unless reasons were given in the District Magistrate 's Order the aggrieved party had no opportunity to convince the State Government that the order was erroneous.
, if the aggrieved party was not supplied the reasons the right of appeal was an empty formality.
[203 H 204 D] There was nothing on the record to show that the representations made by the appellants to the State Government were even considered.
The fact that cl. 7 of the Sugar Dealers ' Licensing Order to which the High Court had referred does not "require the State Government to pass a reasoned order" is wholly irrelevant.
The nature of the proceeding requires that the State Government must give adequate reasons which disclose that an attempt was made to reach a conclusion, which was according to law and just.
[205 H] Opportunity to a party interested in the dispute to present his case on questions of law as well as fact, ascertainment of facts from materials L 11 Sup.
C 1 14 20 2 before the Tribunal after disclosing the materials to the party against whom it is intended to use them, and adjudication by a reasoned judgment upon a finding of the facts found, are attributes of even a quasi judicial deter mination.
It must appear not merely that the authority entrusted with quasi judicial authority has reached a conclusion on the problem before him: it must appear that he has reached a conclusion which is according to law and just, and for ensuring that he must record the ultimate mental process leading from the dispute to its solution.
[204 H] Madhya Pradesh Industries Ltd. vs Union of India & Others (per Subba Rao, J.) ; ; Bhagat Raja vs Union of India and Ors. ; ; State of Madhya Pradesh and Anr.
vs Seth Narsinghdas Jankidas Mehta, C.A. No. 621 of 1966 decided on April 29, 1969.
The Slate of Gujrat vs Patel Raghav Natha and Ors., C.A. No. 723 of 1966 decided on April 21,1969 and Prag Das Umar Vaishya vs The Union of India and Ors., C.A. No. 657 of 1965 decided on Aug. 17, 1967; referred to.
