The first respondent was at the relevant time a Sub Inspector in the service of the State of Assam.
In regard to certain allegations a confidential enquiry was held against him by the Superintendent of Police Anti Corruption Branch who submitted his report to the Government in 1957.
A departmental enquiry was thereafter held.
On receipt of the enquiry officer 's report, the Superintendent of Police asked for the respondent 's explanation and thereafter in December 1958 ordered his dismissal.
The respondent 's appeal before the Deputy Inspector General of Police and his revisions before the Inspector General and the State Government failed.
Thereupon the respondent filed a writ petition before the High Court challenging the validity of the departmental enquiry and the order of dismissal.
The High Court allowed the petition on the ground that the enquiry officer had during the course of the enquiry consulted the Superintendent of Police Anti Corruption Branch and had taken into consideration the materials gathered from the records of the Anti Corruption Branch without making the report of that Branch and the said material available to the respondent.
The State appealed to this Court by special leave contending that : (i) the enquiry officer was not influenced by his consultations with the Superintendent of Police Anti Corruption Branch and (ii) in any event the Superintendent of Police before ordering the respondent 's dismissal had himself considered the entire evidence.
It was submitted that the appellate authority, i.e., the Deputy Inspector General of Police had also made a similar approach while considering the respondent 's appeal and therefore there had been no denial of natural justice.
On behalf of the respondent it was urged that the orders relating to the appointment of the respondent as permanent Sub Inspector had been passed by the Inspector General of Police and therefore the Superintendent of Police was not competent to order his dismissal.
HELD : (i) It is highly improper for an enquiry officer during the conduct of an enquiry to attempt to collect any materials from outside sources and not make that information so collected, available to the delinquent officer and further make use of the same in the enquiry proceedings.
There may also be cases where a very clever and astute enquiry officer may collect outside information behind the back of the delinquent officer and, without any apparent reference to the information so collected, may have been influenced in the conclusions recorded by him against the delinquent officer concerned.
If it is established that any material had been collected during the enquiry behind the back of the delinquent officer and such material had been relied on by the enquiry officer, without being disclosed to the delinquent officer, it can be stated that the enquiry proceedings are vitiated.
[96 F H] 88 In the present case however there was no warrant for the High Court 's view that the enquiry officer took into consideration the materials found by the Anti Corruption Branch.
On the other hand, a perusal of the report showed that each and every item of charge had been discussed with reference to the evidence bearing on the same and findings recorded on the basis of such evidence.
Therefore it could not be stated that the enquiry officer in this case had taken into account the materials if any that he may have collected from the Anti Corruption Branch.
Nor was there anything to show, in the discussion contained in his report that the enquiry officer was in any way influenced by the consultations that he had with the Anti Corruption Branch.
If so, it could not be held that the enquiry proceedings were violative of the principles of natural justice.[97 E G] The fact that a copy of the report, of the Anti Corruption Branch was not furnished to the respondent was of no consequence in relation to the actual enquiry conducted against the respondent inasmuch as he had a full opportunity to cross examine the witnesses for the prosecution and of adducing evidence in his favour.
Even assuming that there was some defect in the enquiry proceedings, there was no violation of principles of natural justice in the present case because the punishing authority, the Superintendent of Police, and the appellate authority, the Deputy Inspector General of Police had independently considered the matter and found the respondent guilty on the evidence on record.
[98 A E] State of Mysore vs section section Makapur, ; , The Collector of Central Excise and Land Customs vs Sanawarmal Purhoit, Civil Appeals Nos. 1362 1363 of 1967 decided on 16 2 1968, applied.
Executive Committee of U.P. State Warehousing Corporation vs Chandra Kiran Tyagi, Civil Appeal No. 559 of 1967, decided on 8 9 1969, distinguished.
(iii) In view of Rule 66 of Part 11 of the Assam Police Manual and in view of the evidence on record the contention of the respondent that the Superintendent of Police is not the appointing authority for a Sub Inspector, could not be accepted.
[99 F H; 100 C D]
