P was the owner of the suit properties.
He had no children.
He gifted some of his properties to his wife on June 14, 1943.
On April 29, 1946 the first 'respondent instituted a suit for a declaration that he was the adopted son of P and for partition and possession of his share in the family property.
The first respondent claimed to have been adopted on July 12, 1943, P denied the said adoption and alleged that in fact he had adopted the appellant on April 10, 1946.
In view of that allegation the appellant was added as a supplemental defendant in the said suit, but no relief was claimed against him.
During the pendency of that suit P died.
Thereafter the first respondent moved the court to withdraw the suit.
He was permitted to withdraw the 'same with liberty to file a fresh suit on the same cause of action on condition that he paid the defendants ' costs of that suit before instituting a fresh suit.
Thereafter P 's widow bequeathed her properties to the first respondent and died soon after.
On November 29, 1951 the first respondent brought a fresh suit without having paid the costs of the appellant in the earlier suit.
The appellant resisted the suit on several grounds.
However the trial court and the High Court decided in favour of the first respondent.
Thereupon by special leave the present appeal was filed by the appellant.
The main question that fell for consideration was whether the suit under appeal was maintainable when the condition precedent imposed by the court in the earlier suit namely, the payment of defendants ' costs by the plaintiff before bringing a fresh suit on the same cause of action had not been complied with.
HELD : (i) Rule 1, 0.
23, Code of Civil Procedure empowers the courts to permit a plaintiff to withdraw from the suit brought by him with liberty to institute a fresh suit in respect of the subject matter of that suit on such terms as it thinks fit.
The expression 'subject matter ' is not defined in the Code.
It does not mean property.
That expression has a reference to a right in the property which the plaintiff seeks to enforce.
That expression includes the cause of action and the relief claimed.
Unless the cause of action and the relief claimed in the second suit are the same as in the first suit it cannot be said that the subject matter of the second suit is the same as in the previous suit.
[213 G 214 B] (ii) The non fulfilment of the condition imposed by the Court at the time of withdrawal of the first suit did not bar the present suit because the subject matter of the two suits was not the same.
In the first suit the first respondent was seeking to enforce his right to partition and separate possession.
In the present suit he sought to get possession of the suit properties from a trespasser on the basis of his, title.
In the first suit the cause of action was the division of status between the first respondent and his adoptive father and the relief claimed was the conversion of joint possession into separate possession.
In the present suit the plaintiff was seeking possession of the suit properties from a trespasser 212 In the first case his cause of action arose on the day he got separated from his family.
In the present suit the cause of action, namely, the series of transactions which formed the basis of the title to the suit properties arose on the death of his adoptive father and mother.
[214 B D] Mere identity of some of the issues in the two suits did not bring about an identity of the subject matter in the two suits.
[214 D E] The appeal must accordingly be dismissed.
Rakhma Bai vs Mahadeo Narayan, I.L.R. and Singa Reddy vs Subba Reddy, I.L.R. , approved and applied.
