Shri Ganapathy Mills Co. Ltd., Distributed dividend to its shareholders out of its business profits earned in the years ending December 31, 1953 and December 31, 1954.
The company, however carried in its accounts a large balance of unabsorbed depreciation admissible under section 10(2) (vi) & 10(2) (vi a) of the Income tax Act, 1922 and on that account it had no taxable income in the relevant assessment years 1954 55 and 1955 56.
In assessing the income of the shareholders for the assessment years the Income tax Officer rejected the claim for exemption from tax Linder section 15 C(4) of the Income tax Act and brought the dividend to tax.
This order was confirmed by the Income tax Appellate Tribunal.
The High Court, in a reference, held in favour of the assessees.
With certificate the Revenue appealed.
The question that fell for consideration were : (i) Whether the High Court 's view that unabsorbed depreciation of previous years must be ignored in computing the profits under section 10 and the Implied assumption that unabsorbed depreciation was carried forward and set off under section 22(4) were correct; (ii) Whether, the claim under section 15 C(4) could be made even when there was no taxable profit for which exemption could be claimed Linder section 15 C(4).
HELD : (i) Under proviso (b) to section 10(2) (vi) the unabsorbed depreciation in an year is to be deemed the depreciation for the succeeding year into the accounts of which it is carried forward and the aggregate of depreciation in the year of assessment and the unabsorbed depreciation of the previous year is deemed to be depreciation allowance for the year of assessment.
The opinion of the High Court that in computing the profits of an industrial 'undertaking under section 10, unabsorbed depreciation for the previous years must be ignored is inconsistent with the plain terms of the proviso.
[438 D E; 439 D] The right to claim allowance of unabsorbed depreciation does not arise out of section 24(2) of the Act.
Under the scheme of section 15 C(4) profits and gains of an industrial undertaking must be determined under and in the manner provided by section 10 of the Income tax Act.
For that purpose all the allowances under sub section
(2) are taken into account and the resultant amount forms a component of the taxable profits, By proviso (b) to section 10 (2) (vi), the unabsorbed depreciation in the previous year is deemed depreciation for the subsequent year, and there is no room for making any distinction between the unabsorbed depreciation for the previous year and the depreciation for the current year.
The right to appropriate the profits towards the unabsorbed depreciation in the previous year does not arise under section 24(2); it arises by virtue of section 10(2) (vi) proviso (b).
[439 D F] 435 (ii)The right of the shareholders to obtain benefit of exemption under 15 C(4) depends upon the company obtaining the benefit of exemption under sub section
(1) of section 157C for the exemption from payment of tax on the dividend received by the share holders is admissible only on that part of the profits or gains on which the tax is not payable by the com pany under sub section
[439 HI On this view it must be held that the claim of shareholders in the present case rightly disallowed by the taxing authorities.
[435 H; 441 D] [Proviso (b) 'to section 24(2 held inapplicable, with the observation that it deals merely with priority and does not convert what is unabsorbed depreciation of the previous year which is deemed to be depreciation for the current year into loss "for the purpose of carry forward".[440 D] Commissioner of Income tax, Calcutta vs Jaipuria China Clay Mines (P) Ltd., , referred to.
