The first respondent, in 1938, obtained a decree against the appellants branch of a joint family, and in 1941, commenced proceedings for the execution of the decree in Allahabad.
Meanwhile, in 1939, a final decree had been passed in a suit for partitioning the family properties among the members of the joint family, and the matter was taken up in appeal to the High Court of Allahabad.
Certain orders were passed by the High Court which were construed by the executing court in the years 1941 and 1942 as stay orders of the execution proceedings commenced by the respondent.
The High Court passed a final decree in the partition suit in December 1949, but did not immediately discharge the Receivers who were appointed during the pendency of the suit.
The respondent revived the execution proceedings in May 1,950 and a mill belonging to the joint family was attached and sold 'but the sale was set 'aside in 1955 as the appellant 's branch applied for relief under the U.P. Encumbered Estates Act, 1934.
Thereafter, in ' 1956, the decree in favour of the respondent was transferred to Madras High Court for execution and on 13th August, 1956, the respondent filed an execution application, for attainment of certain properties which fell to the appellant 's share.
High Court of Madras in Letters Patent Appeal held that the execution application was in time.
On the question whether the execution application dated 13th August, 1956, was in time, or barred by limitation, HELD : (i) The respondent bonafide pursued execution against the mill and since his good faith was not questioned before the Appellate Court it was not open to the appellant to do so in this Court.
[370 A, C] (ii) It was not possible to spell out any order of partial stay on the facts and circumstances of the present case.
The facts that the Receivers were not finally discharged in 1949 when the final decree by the High Court was passed in the partition suit, and the understanding of the parties and the executing court that execution was stayed by the High Court, indicate that the stay was in unqualified terms.
Therefore, the respondent could not have applied earlier 'for execution with respect to other property of the joint family either at Allahabad or at Madras.
[369 A C, D G] (iii) Further, when the execution proceedings were revived in May 1950 the executing court held that execution proceedings had been stayed till December 1949 and the appellant did not challenge the order of attachment and sale of mill on the ground that the proceedings were barred by limitation.
Therefore, the appellant was barred by the principle of res judicata from questioning the order of May 1950 on the ground of limitation.
[371 D E] 365 (iv) Section 15 of the Limitation Act states that in computing the period of limitation prescribed the time of the continuance of the injunction staying execution shall be excluded.
The word "prescribed" would apply not only to Limitation Act but also to the limitation prescribed in general statutes like the Civil Procedure Code.
Section 48 of the Code, as it then stood, laid down 12 years as the maximum limit of the period of execution but it did not prescribe the period within which each application for execution was to be made.
Such an application was to be made within three years from the dates mentioned in third column of Article 182 of the Limitation Act, 1908.
Therefore, an application for execution of a decree must first satisfy Article 182 and it would then have to be found out as to whether section 48 of the Civil Procedure Code operated as a further bar.
[370 C H; 371 A B] (v) Since the execution proceedings were stayed in the present case, the 'respondent was entitled to claim its benefit of section 15 of the Limitation Act in respect of the period of stay of the execution of his decree, from June 194.1 till end of 1949; and since the execution application of 1950 was finally disposed of in 1955, the present application filed in 1956 was within time.
[372 E]
