The assessee company respondent herein carried on the business of ,manufacture and sale of yarn and cloth.
It started in 1914 a Provident Fund for the benefit of its monthly rated employees.
Subsequently, another fund was started.
These funds were not recognised under the pro visions of Chapter IXA of the Income tax Act, 1922.
The employees and the company made contributions to the two funds from time to time.
The Employees Provident Funds Act 19 of 1952 came into force on 31st October, 1952.
Under directions given by the Provident Fund Commissioner the assessee company transferred to the statutory Employees Pro vidend Fund all the accumulations in the two private funds maintained by it including its own contributions thereto made upto October 31, 1952.
The said contributions amounted to Rs. 3,01,772 1 7.
In income tax proceedings for the assessment year 1957 58, the company claimed deduction of the above amount of Rs. 3,01,772 1 7 from its income.
The Income tax Officer, the Appellate Assistant Commissioner as well as Income tax Appellate Tribunal disallowed the claim.
In reference how ever the High Court decided in favour of the Company.
The Commissioner of Income tax appealed to this Court.
The questions that fell for considerations were : (i) whether the payment in question by the assessee company was capital expenditure within the meaning of section 58K(1) of Income tax Act and (ii) whether the said payment could be allowed as a deduction under section 10(2) (xv) of the Income tax Act? HELD : (i) For the application of sub section
(1) of section 58K the following conditions must be satisfied : '(1) The employer should have maintained a Provident Fund for the benefit of his employees; (2) There should have been a transfer of such fund or operation thereof to trustees; (3) Such transfer should have been in trust for the employees participating in the fund.
[472 C D] In the present case the third condition was not satisfied.
The common statutory fund created under the Provident Funds Act was meant not for the employees of the assessee only but also for employees of hundreds of other employers who were covered by the Act.
It was not restricted to the employees of the assessee and it could never be said that they alone participated in that fund.
In such a situation section 58K was not applicable.
[412 E; H 473 A] (ii)The expenditure was incurred in the relevant accounting year.
It was something which had gone irretrievably.
The amount in question had been spent and paid out in the year of accounting, and was, therefore, 469 allowable as expenditure incurred exclusively for the purpose of, the business.
The conditions of section 10(2)(xv) had, therefore, been fully satisfied in the present case.
[473 B C]
