The appellant owned certain self acquired properties which by a deed dated December 9, 1957 he threw into the common stock of his Hindu Joint Family.
The Gift Tax Officer held that he had thereby made it gift taxable under the Gift Tax Act, 1958.
After proceedings before the authorities under the Act the question whether the appellant had made 'transfer ' of the property so as to attract the provisions of the Act was referred to the High Court of Andhra Pradesh.
Following its earlier decision in Satyanarayanamurthy 's case the High Court held that the act of ' the appellant amounted to a 'transfer ' within the terms of section 2(xxiv)(d) of the Act and therefore was a gift such as envisaged in section 2(xii) and section 4(a) of the Act.
In Satyanarayanamurthy 's case aforesaid, it had been held that an act similar to that of the appellant would amount to "a 'transaction ' entered into by any person with intent thereby to diminish directly or indirectly the value of his own property and to increase the value of the property of any other person".
With certificate appeal against the judgment of the High Court was filed in this Court.
HELD:The appeal must be allowed since the declaration by which the assessee had impressed the character of joint Hindu family property on the self acquired properties owned by him did not amount to a transfer ' so as to attract provisions of the Act, [529 F] A Hindu Joint Family is not a creature of contract.
The doctrine of throwing into common stock inevitably postulates that the owner of the separate property is a copartner who has an interest in the coparcenary property and desires to blend his separate property with the coparcenary property.
The separate property of a member of a joint Hindu Family may be impressed with the character of Joint Family property if it is voluntarily thrown by him into the common stock with the intention of abandoning his separate claim therein.
The act by which the coparcener throws his separate property to the common stock is a unilateral act.
By his individual volition he renounces his individual right in that property and treats it as a property of the family.
As soon as he declares his intention to treat his self acquired property as that of the Joint Family, the property assumes the character of Joint Family Property.
The doctrine of throwing into common stock is a doctrine peculiar to the Mitakshara School of Hindu Law.
When a coparcener throws his separate property into common stock he makes no gift under Ch.
VII of the Transfer of Property Act.
In such a case there is no donor or done.
Further no question of acceptance of the property thrown into the common stock arises.
[526 A F] 523 It was not necessary in the present case to consider whether the act of the assessee could be said to have "diminished directly or indirectly the ' value of his own property and increased the value of the property" of his joint family, because his act could not he considered as a "transaction entered into".
Clause (d) of section 2(xxiv) contemplates a "transaction entered into" by one person with another.
It cannot apply to a unilateral act.
it must be an act to which two or more persons are parties.
Even though under the Act the undivided 'family is a 'person ' the assessee did not enter into any transaction with his family.
Therefore, it was not possible to agree with the High Court that the act of the assessee fell within the scope of section 2(xxiv) (d) of the Act.
[528 A B] The assessee 's act could also not be considered as a 'disposition ' under the main part of section 2(xxiv).
The word 'disposition ' is not a term of law.
Further it has no precise meaning.
Its meaning has to be gathered from the context in which it is used.
In the context in which the term is used in section 2(xxiv), it cannot mean to "dispose of.
Otherwise, even if a man abandons or destroys his property it would become a "gift" under the Act.
That could not have been the intention of the Legislature.
In section 2(xxiv) the word 'disposition ' is used along with words "conveyance, assignment, settlement, delivery, payment or other alienation of property".
It is clear ' from the context that the word 'disposition ' therein refers to a bilateral or multilateral act.
It does not refer to a unilateral act.
[528 D F] Mallesappa Bandeppa Desai & Ors.
v, Desai Mallappa & Ors.
; , Grimwade & Ors.
vs Federal Commissioner of Taxation, ; , Commissioner of Income tax, Madras vs M. K. Stremann, and M. K. Stremann vs Commissioner of Income tax, , applied.
Commissioner of Gift Tax, Madras vs P. Rangaswami Naidu T.C. 272 of 1964 : R. section R. M. Ramaswami Chettiar vs The Commissioner of Gift Tax, Madras.
Tax Case No.10 of 1966, Dr. A. R. Shukla vs Commissioner of Gift Tax, Gujarati, and Smt.
Laxmibai Narayana Rao Nerlekar vs Commissioner of Gift tax, , approved.
Commissioner of income tax, Hyderabad vs C. Satyanarayanamurthy, , G. V. Krishna Rao, & Ors.
vs First Addl.
Gift Tax Officer, Guntur, and Commissioner of Gift Tax vs Jagdish Saran, 75 I.T.R. 529, disapproved.
