The appellant was a private limited company incorporated with the object of taking over the business carried on by another company.
By an agreement dated August 2, 1956, the appellant company agreed to purchase all the assets goodwill etc.
of the vendors.
By cl. 4 of the agreement it was provided that all assets of the vendors in respect of their business "shall be taken over at the book value standing in the books of accounts of the vendors" as on August 1, 1956.
The Income tax Officer in proceedings for the assessment year 1958 59 found that in the books of the vendors the 'value of stock ' as on August 1, 1956 was Rs. 1,77,285 but in the books of the appellant company the opening stock taken one was valued on the same day at Rs. 2,10,225.
The latter valuation also appeared in the Schedule annexed to the deed of transfer.
The Income tax Officer observed that the valuation by the appellant company of the opening stock was in "clear violation of the agreement between the vendors and the Company".
He accordingly added a sum of Rs. 33,000/ representing the difference between the value of the closing stock in the books of account of the vendors and the opening stock in the books of account of the Company.
The order was confirmed in appeal by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and by the Income tax Appellate Tribunal.
In reference the High Court of Patna upheld the view taken by these authorities.
A Division Bench of the High Court certified the case under section 66A(2) of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922, observing that the case fulfilled all the requirements of the said section and was a fit case for appeal to the Supreme Court.
The Revenue contended in this Court that the certificate was incompetent as the question of law which had to be decided was not set out and no question of public or private importance had been disclosed.
HELD : (i) In granting the certificate the High Court merely observed that is was 'a fit case for appeal to the Supreme Court ' : they did not indicate the grounds which persuaded them to hold that it was a fit case for appeal to this Court.
It would be conducive to better administration of justice if in certifying a case under section 66A(2) of the Indian Income tax Act as a fit case for appeal, the High Court sets out the question of law which they regard as of public or private importance which falls to be decided by this Court.
[543 G] (ii) It is true that under section 66(1) and (2) of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922 only a question of law may be referred to the High Court for opinion, but the right to obtain a certificate under section 66A(2) arises only when in the proposed appeal a question of great public and private importance arises.
It cannot be held that because a question of law alone may be referred to the High Court under section 66 of the Indian Income tax Act.
in the proposed appeal a question of law of great public or private importance necessarily arises.
Any other view, would make every opinion of the High Court in a reference under section 66 appealable to this Court.
[544 B C] 540 The practice followed in some of the High court of issuing certificates under section 66A(2) without recording reasons or grounds for certifying the case would not justify a departure in the present case from the practice laid down, many years ago by decision of the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council according to which a certificate under section 66A(2) which does not set out precisely the grounds or raise a question of great public or private importance does not comply with the requirements of the Act.[544 E] Commissioner of Income tax, Central Provinces of Berar vs Sir section M. Chitnavis, L.R. 59 I.A. 290, followed.
Delhi Cloth and General Mills Company Ltd. vs Income tax Commissioner, Delhi, L.R. 54 I.A. 421, Banarsi Parshad vs Kashi Krishna Narain & Anr., L.R. 28 I.A. II, Radha Krishn Das vs Rai Krishn Chand, L.R. 48 I.A. 31 and Radhakrishna Ayyar vs Swaminatha Ayyar, L.R. 48 I.A. 31, applied.
(iii)The appellant made no attempt to explain the discrepancy in the valuation of the stock transferred.
The Income tax Officer was of the view that the company had inflated the opening stock so as to reduce the ultimate profits.
That view was confirmed by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and by the Tribunal.
No question of law arose out of the order of the Tribunal.
The reference itself was incompetent.
[545 A B]
