On September 14, 1964 the Income tax Officer called upon the assessee to furnish within 10 days statements relating to four assessment years ending on March 31, 1960.
The assessee did not furnish the information by the 19th and on that date on the report of the Income tax Officer, the commissioner authorised the Income tax officer to search the premises of the.
On September 21st and 22nd the premises were searched and a large number of documents were seized and retained till May 1966, that is, for a period of 19 months.
In a writ petition field by the, assessee, the High Court, following its own.decision in Seth Bros. vs C.I.T., held that the search was 'indiscriminate and beyond the scope of section 132 of the Income tax Act.
In appeal to this Court, HELD : (i) The decision relied on by the High Court was overruled by,this Court in I.T.O. vs Seth Bros., 74 I.T.R. 836, but it was held that the power of search must be exercised strictly in accordance with the law and only for the purposes for which the law authorises it to be exer cised.
Whether the action of the Commissioner in a particular case amounted to indiscriminate search and beyond the scope of section 132 would depend on the evidence in the case [583 E; 584 E F] (2)In the present case, there was no order of the authorities recording reasons for retaining the documents seized beyond 180 days, nor was there any approval of the Commissioner for such retention.
Therefore the retention was contrary to the terms of section 132(8) of the Act as amended 'by the Income tax (Amendment) Act, 1965.
[585 C D] (3)Though failure to record reasons by the I.T.O. and want of approval by the Commissioner for retaining the documents beyond 180 days were not urged before the High Court as grounds for release of the documents, when it was found that the documents were retained for 19 months, the department should have tendered evidence of such record of reasons or approval by the Commissioner if it was the case of the department that the retention of the documents could be supported by such reasons or approval.
[585 E C]
