The appellant was tried for murder, on the allegation that he caused the death of B by firing five shots at him from his pistol.
The testimony against him consisted of a dying declaration made by B, the statements of three eyewitnesses and some circumstantial evidence.
The trial court convicted the appellant and sentenced him to death.
The conviction and sentence were affirmed by the High Court.
In appeal by special leave before this Court the appellant contended : (i) that the information relating to the occurrence given to the police by telephone regarding which, an entry was made in the daily dairy must be treated as the first information report; (ii) that the dying declaration of deceased was inadmissible because it was hit by section 162 of the code of Criminal Procedure; (iii) that the dying declaration was unreliable; (iv) that the evidence in the case was not sufficient to justify the conviction of the appellant; (v) that, among other omissions, the non examination of the ballistic expert created a lacuna in the prosecution case; and (vi) that in view of the alleged, motive the appellant 's suspicion that the deceased had illicit relations with his wife the sentence should be reduced.
HELD : (i) The telephonic message recorded in the daily diary of the police station was a cryptic and anonymous oral message which did not in terms clearly specify a cognizable offence and could not, therefore, be treated as first information report.
The mere fact that this information was the first in point of time could not by itself clothe it with the character of first information report.
The question whether or not a particular document constitutes a first information report, has to be determined on the relevant facts and circumstances of each case.
[605 B C] (ii)Section 162 Criminal Procedure Code in express terms excludes from its purview statements 'falling within the provisions of section 32(1) of the Indian Evidence Act.
indisputably, the dying declaration in the present case fell within section 3(1) of the Indian Evidence Act and as such it was both relevant and outside the prohibition contained in s.162(1) Cr. P. C. [605 D E] (iii)(a) In view of the evidence of the Judicial Magistrate who recorded the dying declaration the mere fact that the original dying declaration had been stolen from the file, could not destroy its value.
Nor could the fact that the investigating officer was allowed to make a copy 6 00 of the dying declaration be interpreted to mean that the Magistrate was subservient to the police.
A dying declaration is not a confidential document and can legitimately serve as a guide in further investigation.
[606 D G] (b) A dying declaration is not a deposition in Courtand it is neither made on oath nor in the presence of the accused.
Itis therefore not tested in cross examination on behalf of the accused.
But a dying declaration is admitted in evidence by way of an exceptionto the general rule against the admissibility of hearsay evidence on the principle of necessity.
The weak points of the dying declaration merely serve to put the court on its guard while testing its reliability by imposing on it an obligation to closely scrutinise all attendant circumstances.
So scrutinised.
the dying declaration in the present case must be accepted as true.
[607 D E] (iv)If the dying declaration is acceptable as true then even in the absence of other corroborative evidence it would be open to the court to act upon the dying declaration and convict the appellant stated therein to be the offender.
An accusation in a dying declaration comes from the victim and if it is accepted then in view of its sources the court can safely act on it.
In the present case not only the dying declaration but the other evidence including that of three eye witnesses justified the conviction of the appellant.
[609 E F] (v)When the eye witnesses have been believed minor points such as non production of the ballistic expert lose all importance.
[610 E F] (vi)In view of the manner in which five shots were fired at the deceased,the murder was deliberate and pre planned and the plea for reductionof the sentence could not be accepted.
[611 E] Sarup Singh vs State of Punjab, A.I.R. 1964 Punjab 508, Brahmin Ishwarlal Manilal vs State of Gujarat, Cr.
A. No. 120/63 dt.
10 8 1965.
Kushal Rao vs State of Bombay, at pp.
568 569 and Harbans Singh vs State of Punjab, [1962] Sup. 1 S.C.R. 104, referred to.
