Under section 3(2) of the Goa, Daman and Diu (Laws) Regulation, 1962.
November 1, 1963, was the date fixed for coming into force of the Indian Po" Code and the Indian Code of Criminal Procedure in Goa, Daman and Diu.
Under section 8 of the Regulation if any difficulty arises in giving effect in Goa, Daman and Diu, to any Act extended to that territory the Central Government may make provision for the removal of the difficulty.
As some difficulties were experienced regarding the law relating to criminal procedure the Lt. Governor, on November 6.
passed an Order, not under section 8 of the Regulation, but in Purported exercise of the powers conferred by the Goa, Daman and Diu (Administration) Removal of Difficulties Order, 1962, to the effect that all criminal proceedings in relation to offenses committed prior to the date of coming into force of the Indian Criminal Procedure Code shall be carried on under the law in force in the territory before that date.
On June 25, 1963, some bars of gold were seized from the residence of the appellant and a complaint was filed against him, in 1966.
On the question of the procedure to be followed, the Judicial Commissioner, in revision, held that the Order of November 6, 1963 was ultra vires the Goa, Daman and Diu (Administration) Removal of Difficulties Order, 1962, and held that the procedure laid down in the Indian Criminal Procedure Code should be followed.
in appeal this Court, HELD:(1) 'Me Goa, Daman and Diu (Administration) Removal of Difficulties Order, 1962, does not enable the Lt. Governor to Pass the Order dated November 6, 1963.
But section 8 of the 1962 Regulation autborised him to pass the Order.
If the power subsists, and the Lt. Governor could justify the order under any law, the parties are not debarred from relying on it.
[717 B D] (2) Section 8 of the Regulation authorises the Government to make provision for removal of difficulties.
The word 'difficulty ' is not to be construed in the narrow sense of a difficulty with respect to a concrete case.
[1717 F] Majority opinion in Jalan Trading Co. (P) Ltd. vs Mill Afazdoor Union, ; , 59, followed.
(3) Under the definition of 'Central Government ' in the General clause% Act, the Lt. Governor, as the Administrator of Goa, Daman and Diu is entitled to exercise the powers of the Central Government, [178 B C] 715 (4) Therefore, the procedure to be followed in the present case is the one laid down by the Portuguese Criminal Procedure Code and not by the Indian Code of Criminal Procedure.
[718 C]
