The, assesses who were dealers in food grains supplied to the Regional Food Controller diverse quantities of wheat in compliance with the provisions of the U.P. Wheat Procurement (Levy) Order, 1959.
The Sales tax Officer levied tax under the U.P. Sales tax Act on the aggregate of the price of wheat supplied by the assesses, rejecting the assesses ' contention that the wheat supplied was not sold to the Controller.
In appeal, the Assistant Commissioner (Judicial) Sales Tax held the supply was not taxable since there was no "sale" within the U.P. Sales tax Act.
This order was confirmed by the Additional Judge (Revision) Sales Tax.
On reference, the High Court answered the question against the assesses.
Allowing the assesses ' appeal by special leave, this Court.
HELD : The supply, pursuant to cf. 3 of the U.P. Wheat Procurement (Levy) Order, 1959 and acceptance thereof, does not result in a contract of sale.
Clause 3 of the order sets up a machinery for compulsory acquisition by the State Government of stocks of wheat belonging to the licensed dealers.
The Order contains a bald injunction to supply wheat of the specified quantity day after day, and enacts that in default of compliance the dealer is liable to be punished; it does not envisage any consensual arrangement.
To ensure, that the dealer carries out his obligation his premises are liable to be searched and his property sequestered.
The order does not require the State Government to enter into even an informal contract.
Sale of goods predicates a contract of sale between persons competentto contract for a price paid or promised : a transaction.
in which an obligation to supply goods is imposed, and which does not involve an obligation to enter into a contract, cannot be called a 'sale ', even if the person supplying goods is declared entitled to the value of goods, which is determined or determinable in the manner prescribed.
Assuming that between the licensed dealer and the Controller, there may be some arrangement about the place and manner of delivery of wheat, and the payment of "controlled price," the operation of cl. 3 does not on that account become contractual.
[675 H 676 D] Commissioner of Sales Tax, U.P. Lucknow vs Ram Bilas Ram Gopal, [1969] All.
L.J. 424; State of Madras vs Gannon Dunkerlev and Co.,(Madras) Ltd; [1959]S.C.R. 379 M/s.
New India Sugar Mills Ltd. vs
Commissioner of Sales Tax, Bihar, [1963] Suppl.
2 S.C.R. 459; Indian Steel & Wire Products Ltd., vs State of Madras, ; ;Andhra Sugars Ltd. &Anr.
vs State of Andhra Pradesh & Ors.
; ; State ofRajasthan & Anr.
vs M/s. Karan Chand Thappar & Bros. Ltd. [1969] IS.C.R. 861, Kirkness (inspector of Taxes) vs john Hudson & Co. Ltd., [1955] A.C. 696 referred to. 672
