The first respondent joined the post of Extra Assistant Superintendent in the Survey of India Service in 1938.
Later he was taken into the Class I Service of the Survey of India and rose to the post of Deputy Director.
He also officiated as Director.
On August 13, 1969 the President of India pleased by an order under Rule 56(j) of the Funda mental Rules to compulsorily retire the first respondent from Government service.
No reasons were given in the order.
The appellant challenged the order by a writ petition in the High Court.
The failure on the part of the concerned authority to give opportunity to the first respondent to show cause against his compulsory retirement was held by the High Court to have amounted to a contravention of the principles of natural justice.
Against the judgment of the High Court the Union of India appealed.
HELD : Rules of natural justice are not embodied rules nor can they be elevated to the position of fundamental rights.
As observed by this Court in Kralpak 's case these rules can operate only in areas not covered by any law validly made.
If a statutory provision can be read consistently with the principles of natural justice, the Courts should do so because it must be presumed that the legislatures and the statutory authorities intend to act in accordance with the principles of natural justice.
But on the other hand a statutory provision either specifically 'or by necessary implication excludes the application of any or all the principles of natural justice then the court cannot ignore the mandate of the legislature or the statutory authority and read with the concerned provision the principles of natural justice.
Whether the exercise of a power conferred should be made in accordance with any of the principles of natural justice or not depends upon the express words of the provision conferring the power, the nature of the power conferred, the purpose for which it is conferred and the effect of the exercise of the power.
[794 G 795 C] Fundamental Rule 56(i) does not in terms require that any opportunity should be given to the concerned Government servant to show cause against his compulsory requirement.
It says that the appropriate authority has the absolute right to retire a government servant if it is of the opinion that it is in the public interest to do so.
If that authority bona fide forms that opinion the correctness of that opinion cannot be challenged before courts, though it is open to an aggrieved party to contend that the requisite opinion has not been formed or the decision is based on collateral grounds or that it is an arbitrary decision.
The respondent had not challenged the impugned order on any of these grounds.
[795 D F] Compulsory retirement does not involve any civil consequence.
A person retired under Rule 56(i) does not lose any of the rights acquired 792 by him before retirement.
The rule is not intended for taking any penal action against government servants.
It merely embodies one of the facets of the pleasure doctrine embodied in article 310 of the Constitution.
The rule holds the balance between the, rights of the individual government servant and the interests of the public.
While a minimum service is guaranteed to the government servant, the government is given power to energise its machinery and make it more efficient by compulsorily retiring those who in its opinion should not be there in public interest.
Three months notice is provided to enable the retired employee to find out other suitable employment.
[795 G 796 B] On the above view of the law, namely, that no notice to show cause was required, the appeal must be allowed.
T. G. Shivacharana Singh vs State of Mysore, A.I.R. 1965 S.C. 280.
Kraipak and Ors.
vs Union of India, A.I.R. 1970, S.C. 150, State of Orissa vs Dr. (Miss) Binapani Dei and Ors., ; distinguished.
