A Hindu undivided family carrying on management of a company disrupted into 3 branches, one being that of the assessee, and the shares of the company were more in the names of his family members.
The consideration for all these subsequent acquisitions was from the Hindu undivided family funds.
All the shares the previous and subsequent acquisition were treated in the books and the balance slice of the assessee family as its property and its dividends were also credited to the account of the family.
As Managing Director of the company the assessee received certain remuneration.
On the question whether the managing director 's remuneration received by the assessee was assessable in his individual hands or in the hands of the assessee 's Hindu undivided family, this Court HELD : The remuneration was assessable as the assessee 's individual income and not as the income of his Hindu undivided family.
The broad principle that has, to be applied in such cases is whether the remuneration received by the coparcener in substance though not in form was but one investment of the family funds in the business or whether it was a compensation made for the services rendered by the individual coparcener.
If it is the former, it is an income of the Hindu undivided family but if it is the latter then it is the income of the individual coparcener.
If the income was essentially earned as a result of the funds in vested the fact that a coparcener has rendered some service would not change the character of the receipt.
But if on the other hand it is essentially a remuneration for the services rendered by a coparcener, the circumstances that his services were availed of because of the reason that he was a member of the family which had invested funds in that business or that he had obtained the qualification shares from out of the family funds would not make the receipt, the income of the Hindu undivided family.
[759 D] Applying the tests enumerated above to the facts found by the tribunal in the present case, there was hardly any room to doubt that the income in question was the individual income of assessee.
He did not become the managing director of the firm for the mere reason that his family had purchased considerable shares in the firm.
He was elected as a managing director by the board of directors.
The tribunal had found that he received his salary for his personal services.
There was no material to hold that be was elected managing director on behalf of the family.
In the past the salary received by him was assessed as hi , individual income.
The same was the case as regards the salary received by the other managing directors.
The tribunal had found that he was not appointed as managing director as a result of any outlay or expenditure of or detriment to the family property.
It had further found that the managing directorship was an employment of personal responsibility and ability.
[759 G] 749 Commissioner of Income, tax, West Bengal vs Kalu Babu Lal Chand, ; Mathura Prasad vs Commissioner of Income tax , Piyeare Lal Adhishwar Lal vs Commissioner of Income tax, ; V. D. Dhanwatey vs Commissioner of income tax M.P. ;M.D.Dhanwatey vs Commissioner of Income tax M.P. ;S.RM.CT.
Palaniappa Chettiar vs Commissioner of Income tax,Madras ; Commissioner of Income tax, Mysore vs Gurunath Dhakappa, P. N. Krishna Iyer vs Commissioner of Incometax Kerala, , and Commissioner of Income tax, Mysore v.
D. C. Shah, 73, I.T.R. 692, explained.
Principle laid down in Gokul Chand vs Hukum Chand Nath Mal, 48,I.A. 162; held no more valid.
