The appellant executed a usufructuary mortgage of his house and continued to reside in it as a tenant under a lease obtained from the mortgagee.
In 1949, the mortgagee left for Pakistan.
He was declared an evacuee and his mortgagee interest in the mortgaged property vested in the Custodian under section 8 of the .
Under section 12, the Custodian evicted the appellant and allotted it to others as tenants.
In spite of demands by the appellant and the appellant tendering the mortgage amount, the Custodian refused to hand over vacant possession of the house to the appellant.
The appellant applied to the Competent Officer under the .
The Officer determined the mortgage debt due from the appellant and the appellant claimed vacant possession against tender of payment by him of the amount.
The Officer rejected the claim and ordered the sale of the property under s.10(b)(ii) of the Separation Act, for satisfaction of the mortgage debt.
Thereafter, the appellant paid the entire mortgage debt and the Competent Officer accepted the amount.
On the question whether the appellant was entitled to vacant possession and have the order of sale set aside, HELD:(1) Section 4 of the gives to that Act an overriding effect in relation to any other law for the time being in force, and hence the law under the Transfer of Property set, is not applicable.
Though s.12 of the Act empowers the Custodian to cancel an allotment or a tenancy, created by him, under r.14(2) of the Administration of Evacuee Property (Central) Rules, 1950, the Custodian can evict a person only on a ground justifying eviction of a tenant under a law relating to rent control or for any violation of the conditions of the lease or allotment.
The Custodian could not, therefore, give vacant possession of the property to the appellant on his tender of payment of the mortgage amount.
[855 H; 856 A B, D F] (2) The , was passed on account of the difficulty of administering evacuee properties in which there were both evacuee and non evacuee interests and to resolve the hardship felt by non evacuees, who by reason of such properties being in the possession of the Possession were unable to obtain satisfaction of their claims in view of the prohibitive provisions of that Act.
But there is no provisions by which the Custodian is made subject to the power or control of the Competent Officer or which enables the Competent Officer 852 to pass an order which would curtail or otherwise affect the powers of the Custodian.
Though under s.10(b)(i) of the Separation Act, the Competent Officer can pay to the Custodian the mortgage debt and redeem the mortgaged property, his power is subject to the rules made under that Act.
[856 F G; 858 B C, G H] (3) Reading the relevant provisions namely, section 12 of the and r. 14 of the Rules made thereunder, and section 10 of the Separation Act and r. 11B of the rules made thereunder, together, the position is : (i) that though the Competent ' Officer must accept the mortgage amount when tendered by a mortgagor and the mortgage debt is thereupon satisfied, he cannot exercise the power to redeem the mortgaged property and order the Custodian to deliver up its vacant possession to the mortgagor in the absence of any agreement between the mortgagor and the Custodian; (ii) that the Competent Officer can order sale only for satisfaction of the mortgage debt and for distribution of the sale proceeds between the mortgagor and mortgagee.
Since in the present case, the mortgage amount had been paid by the appellant and accepted by the Competent officer, the order directing sale is unten able and should be set aside; and (iii) that in exercising his jurisdiction under section 10, the Competent Officer cannot direct the Custodian to cancel or vary the terms of the leases or allotments made or granted by him.
Therefore the Competent Officer can direct only symbolical possession of the mortgaged,property to be given to the appellant, however, harsh and unfair it may apparently be.
[860 D G; 861 B, E H; 862 A C] The All India Film Corporation vs Raja Gyan Nath, referred to.
