Suits were filed by the representatives of the mortgagors to redeem ,certain mortgages beyond 60 years from the dates of the mortgages.
In order to get over the bar of limitation the plaintiffs relied upon certain acknowledgments made by the mortgagors.
The acknowledgments were alleged to have been made more than 30 years ago in mutation proceedings and certified copies of the statements were produced.
With respect to .Some mortgages, applicants were made under section 4 of the Redemption of Mortgages (Punjab) Act, 1913, and they were dismissed under section 10.
It was contended that the suits filed with respect to those mortgages were within time under section 12 of that Act, because, they were filed within one year of the date of the dismissal of the applications.
HELD : (1) As the originals of the acknowledgments were not produced and no witness was examined to speak to the fact that the persons who we 're shown to have signed the originals have in fact signed them or that they were the mortgagors or their representatives, there was no proof of the signatures; and the Court cannot raise any presumption under section 90 of the Evidence Act.
[106 F G] Harihar Prasad Singh vs Mst.
of Munshi Nath Prasad ; , followed.
Section 114(e) of the Evidence Act does not apply because the identification of an executant or the genuineness of a signature in a statement filed before an official has nothing to do with the regularity of his act, unless he had a duty to take the signature in his presence and to identify the person who signed.
[107 B C] Section 44 of the Punjab Land Revenue Act deals with the presumption as regards entries in the record of rights, but this case is not concerned with any such entry.
[107 A] (2)Section 12 of the Redemption of Mortgages (Punjab) Act, 1913, merely provides that a summary order made under sections 6 to II of that Act becomes final unless a suit to establish the rights of the mortgagors is instituted within the prescribed period of one year.
From this provision it cannot be held that the period of limitation fixed for redemption of mortgages is enlarged.
[108 G H]
