The appellant, who was the Secretary of a Cooperative Society and was responsible for the cash and maintenance, of the accounts of the Society, was charged with the offenses of criminal breach of trust and falsification of accounts under sections 408 and 477 A, I.P.C. He was tried along with 5 others who were charged with the offence of abetment of the offenses.
The, trial court acquitted all of them, but the appellate court (the Court of Judicial Commissioner) convicted the appellant and acquitted the.
others.
The appellate Court held that the appellant had advanced money against the rules of the Society and also to various persons not entitled to it, that the appellant had thereby committed criminal breach of trust and either misappropriated or misapplied the funds of the Society dishonestly to benefit himself or his relations and friends.
The 'appellate Court certified that the case was a fit one for appeal to this Court under article 134(1) (c), but, the order granting the certificate did not disclose on its face what exactly was the difficulty of the appellate Court and what question of outstanding difficulty this Court was to settle.
In appeal to this Court, HELD : (1) The acquittal of the co accused was not based on the finding that there was no falsification of accounts or embezzlement.
Therefore, the appellant could not contend that no offence was committed because of the acquittal of the co accused.
[773 G D] (2) On the finding of the appellate court, it was not a mere civil liability of the appellant.
The appellant 's manner of dealing with the money entrusted to his custody constituted criminal breach of trust.
The Directors had no authority under the bye laws to give any directions contrary to the bye laws and so, could not ratify the violation of the bye laws.
Any resolution ratifying the use of trust money contrary to the directions contained in the bye laws would not validate the breach of the bye laws.
[775G; 776 A C] (3) There was no misjoinder of charges and no prejudice was caused to the appellant.
[776 F] (4) The appellate Court should not have granted the certificate, under article 134(1)(c) in the present case.
The word 'certify ' in the Article 771 postulates the exercise.
of judicial discretion by the appellate Court and the certificate should ordinarily show on the face of it that the discretion was invoked and properly exercised.
This Court should be in a position to know that the appellate Court has not acted mechanically but has applied its mind.
A certificate under this clause is impermissible on questions of fact.
When the case does not disclose a substantial question of law or principle the certificate.
granted by the appellate Court is liable to be revoked by this Court, though such_ prima facie non disclosure would not by itself automatically invalidate the certificate [777 A C]
