On March 1, 1964, the Chief Minister of the State received a petition containing allegations of corruption against the appellant (a Superintending Engineer) and the Chief Minister asked the Director of Vigilance and Anti Corruption to make enquiries.
On March 10, 1964, the Director submitted a note containing serious aspersions on the appellant and the Chief Minister ordered further investigation.
The Director of Vigilance registered an inquiry on 15th April, 1964, and a Deputy Superintendent of Police of the Vigilance Department was asked to make the inquiry.
The Deputy Superintendent of Police made a thorough and searching inquiry.
He examined a large number of persons including 18 public servants and even enquired into and took down statements of persons who were supposed to have provided the appellant with articles of food worth trifling sums of money, a long time before.
He recorded self incriminating statements of a number of persons and secured their signatures thereto.
With respect to two officers, who were the subordinates of the appellant, he even gave certificates of immunity from any action that might be taken against them for the part played by them in aiding the appellant.
On June 27, 1964, he lodged a first information report, with respect to offences under sections 161 and 165 I.P.C., and section 5(1)(a) and (d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947.
He investigated into the offences there after, and filed the charge sheet before the Special Judge.
The appellant made an application for discharge under section 251 A, Cr.
P.C., on the grounds of discrimination between him and other officers who were given pardon and, gross irregularities in the investigation.
The Special Judge held, that though there was no basis for charging the appellant under section 165, I.P.C., or under section 5(2), read with section 5(1)(b).
of the Prevention of Corruption Act, a charge could be framed against him under section 5(2) read with section 5(1)(d).
The appellant thereafter moved the High Court, The High Court held : (1) that the investigation started on 15th April 1964 when the Director of Vigilance registered an inquiry (2) that the taking of signed and self incriminating statements from various witnesses was in violation of sections 161 to 164 Cr.
P.C.; (3) that the Special Judge erred in directing the framing of the charge without excluding those statements from consideration; and (4) that the Special Judge should take up the matter once again after excluding from consideration those statements.
In appeal to this Court, HELD : (1) Though technically investigation did not commence on 15th April 1964 but started only after the formal first information report was lodged on,.
June 27, 1964, there were serious irregularities during the 93 2 inquiry and investigation which caused prejudice to the appellant.
The directions given by the High Court were, however, sufficient in the circumstances of the case.
[945 D] The Directorate of Vigilance and Anti Corruption became a police station for the purposes of the Criminal Procedure Code only by a notification dated 25th May 1964.
Therefore, the inquiry before that date was not an investigation under Ch.
XIV of the Code, but there was no warrant for the Vigilance Department, which was in the charge of a senior police officer, to disregard the provisions of sections 162 and 163 of the Code.
Under s.161(3) of the Code a police officer is empowered to reduce into writing any statement made to him in the course of investigation and section 162(1) lays down that such a statement is not to be signed by the maker thereof.
Section 163(1) lays an embargo on the investigating authority using any inducement, threat or promise to the maker.
The reason for these provisions is to secure a fair investigation into the facts and circumstances of the case and to see that an of calous police officer may not misuse his position by getting a statement signed by the maker in order to pin him down to it.
Also, immunity from prosecution and the grant of a pardon were not in the discretion of police authorities.
1940 A H; 941 A B, D, F] In the present case.
the officers who were given immunity must have made the self incriminating statements because an oral assurance of immunity was given before they made the statements, that is, the statements were given as a result of an inducement.
There can be no excuse for the Vigilance Department for proceeding in the manner adopted merely because the first information ',report had not been lodged.
As soon as it became clear to them on March 10, 1964, that the appellant appeared to be guilty of serious misconduct, it was their duty to lodge such a report and,proceed further in the investigation according to Ch.
XIV of the Code.
Their omission to do so cannot but prejudice the appellant and the State ought not to be allowed to take shelter behind the plea that although the, steps taken in the enquiry before the first information was lodged were.
grossly irregular and unfair, the appellant could not complain, because.
there was no infraction of the rules after lodging the first information report.
[942 D G; 943 C H] (2) If it be a fact that it was the appellant, who as the head of the department, was actively responsible for directing the commission of offences by his subordinates in a particular manner, he cannot be allowed to take the plea that the subordinates should also be joined as co accused with him.
[944D] (3) Under section 5 (1) (b), a public servant would be guilty of the offence of criminal misconduct if he habitually accepts any valuable thing for inadequate consideration not only from outsiders who are likely to be concerned in any proceeding or business, transacted or about to be transacted by the public officer but also from any subordinate or any other person who is connected with the official functions of the public servant.
Therefore, in this case, a charge could also be framed under section 5(1)(b), if there was material.
[945 A C]
