On July 29, 1945 the predecessor in interest of the appellant mortgaged his house in Ratlam to K for a sum of Rs. 3,100 with possession.
According to the deed of mortgage interest would run on the said sum at Rs. 0 10 0 per cent per annum till realisation.
The period of redemption was two years.
Simultaneously with the mortgage a rent note was executed by and between the parties under which the mortgagor was to continue to Occupy the premises, at a rental of Rs. 20/ per month.
The rent note provided inter alia that if the executant (i.e. mortgagor) made default in payment of two months ' rent the mortgagee would be entitled to get him evicted.
The mortgagee was also entitled to increase or decrease the rent and the executant was to vacate the.
house whenever asked to do so.
K filed a suit on his mortgage in 1954 and a preliminary decree was passed in his favour.
On his death his legal representatives were substituted in his place on record.
For some reason no application for a final decree for sale of the property was made within the period fixed under the Limitation Act.
The application for this purpose made by the executors to the estate of K was dismissed on July 29, 1960 as barred by limitation.
On December 27, 1960 the said executors filed a suit for ejectment of the appellant alleging that the 'rent for the premises had remained unpaid from September 19, 1957 till November 28, 1960.
The trial judge dismissed the suit.
In first appeal the plaintiffs claim was allowed in full.
The High Court in second appeal maintained the decree of the appellate court.
Appeal by special leave was filed in this Court against the High Court 's judgment.
It was contended by the appellants that : (i) The rent note executed simultaneously with the mortgage was a mere device to secure payment of interest and did not represent an independent transaction.
Further it did not create any relationship of landlord and tenant; (ii) The plaintiffs ' right as mortgagee merged in the decree and execution thereof being barred by the laws of limitation the plaintiffs had lost all their rights; (iii) The mortgage being extinguished the mortgagor could not bring a suit for redemption on account of section 28 of the Limitation Act, 1908.
HELD : The appeal must be dismissed.
(1) The contents of the documents executed by the parties showed that the relationship between the parties was not simply that of a mortgagee and mortgagor the creditor also had the rights of a landlord qua his tenant besides other rights conferred on him which were greater than those possessed by an ordinary landlord.
[728 F] In all such cases the leasing back of the property arises because of the mortgage with possession.
It cannot however be held that the mortgagee 724 does not secure to himself any rights under the deed of lease but must proceed on his mortgage in case the amount secured to him under the deed of lease is not paid.
If the security is good and considered to be sufficient by the mortgagee there is no reason why be should be driven to file a suit an his mortgage when be can file a suit for realisation of the moneys due under the rent note.
The position of the creditor is strengthened where as in the present case, the interest on the amount of the mortgagee is not the same as the rent fixed.
If during the continuance of, the security the mortgagee wanted to sue the mortgagor on the basis of the rent note and take possession himself or to induct some other tenant thereby securing to himself the amount which the mortgagor had covenanted to pay, there could be no legal objection to it.
Under the provisions of 0.34 r. 4 of the Code of Civil Procedure he could deprive the mortgagor of his right to redeem excepting by proceeding on his mortgage.
It may be (without a final opinion being expressed on the point) that a mortgagee who secured decree for payment of rent cannot put the property to sale for realisation of the amount decreed, but there cas be no objection to his suing for possession if the rent note entitles him to do so.
So long as the mortgagor has a right to redeem the mortgage fie can always pay off the mortgagee and get back possession.
This position would continue so long as the property is not sold under a final decree for sale under the provisions of 0.
34 C.P.C. [732 D G] Lalchand vs Nenuram, I.L.R. , approved.
Harilal Bhagwanji vs Hemshanker, A.I.R. 1958 Bombay 8, Ramnarain vs Sukhi, A.I.R. 1957 Patna 24, Umeshwar Prasad vs Dwarika Prasad, A.I.R. 1944 Patna 5, Ganpat Ruri vs Mad.
Asraf Ali, A.I.R. 1961 Patna 133 and Jankidas vs Laxminarain, I.L.R. , 'referred to.
(ii) Since the mortgagee had only lost his 'right to recover the money by sale of the mortgaged property, his security otherwise remaining intact, and the mortgagor also continued to have his right to redeem the property, the contention on behalf of the appellant that the rights of the mortgagee merged in the preliminary decree could not be accepted.
[732 H] (iii) If the mortgagee had an independent right on the strength of the rent note which continued to be in force notwithstanding that the period for a final decree for sale had expired, there could be no extinction of his right to sue for possession because of section 28 of the Limitation Act.
[733 C]
