By an election petition two electors of the constituency, the appellants, challenged the election of the first respondent to, the Mysore Legislative Assembly in 1967 from the Jamkhandi constituency.
It was alleged inter alia that the first 'respondent had ceased to be a person ordinarily resident within the constituency during the period relevant to the 1967 General Elections, and the validity of the entry of his name on the Electoral Roll was questioned; it was claimed that he was not therefore qualified to stand for election from the constituency.
The petition also contained allegations of corrupt practices including misuse by certain Police Officers of their position to prevent voters from voting freely, and malpractices by the Presiding Officer at the time of polling, etc.
After framing an issue on the question and taking the view that the Court had jurisdiction to determine the validity of the inclusion of the first respondent 's name as an elector on the Electoral Roll, the trial judge held on a consideration of the evidence, that the petitioners had failed to prove he first respondent was not an elector and was not qualified to stand for election from the constituency.
The High Court also rejected the allegations of corrupt practices and dismissed the petition On appeal to this Court, HELD : (i) Under section 30 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950, no civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain or adjudicate upon any question whether any person is or is not entitled for registration in an Electoral Roll for a constituency.
There are elaborate rides which have be en promulgated for preparation and revision of the Electoral Rolls, namely, Electors ' Rules 1960.
The conditions about being ordinarily resident in a constituency for the purpose of registration are meant for that purpose alone and have nothing to do with the disqualifications for registration which are prescribed by section 16 of the Act of 1950, which alone are relevant to the definition of an "elector" as given in section 2(1)(e) of the Act of 1951.
The entire scheme of the Act of 1950 and the amplitude of its provisions show that the entries made in an Electoral Roll of a constituency can only be challenged in accordance with the machinery provided by it and not in any other manner or before any other forum unless some question of violation of the provisions of the Constitution is involved.
The present case did not also involve any violation or infringement of Article 173 or any other provision of the Constitution.
[,615 H] The question whether respondent No. 1 was ordinarily resident in Jamkhandi constituency during the material period and was entitled to 612 be registered in the Electoral Roll could not therefore be the subject matter of enquiry except in accordance with the provisions of the Act of 1950.
Under section 100(1) (d) an election can be declared void only if the result of the election, in so far as it concerns a returned candidate, has been materially affected by any non compliance with the provisions of the Constitution or of the Act of 1951 or of any rules or orders made thereunder.
Nothing could be clearer than the ambit of this provision.
It does not entitle the court in an election petition to set aside any election on the ground of non compliance with the provisions of the Act of 1950 or of any rules made hereunder with the exception of section 16.
[617 E] Durga Shankar Mehta vs Thakur Raghurai Singh & Others, [1955] 1 S.C.R. 267; K. Sriramulu vs K. Deviah ; Roop Lal Mehta vs Dhan Singh and Others ; referred to.
On the evidence, no reasons were shown for this court to differ from the findings of the Trial Judge on the allegations of corrupt practices.
Meghraj Patodis vs R. K. Birla & Others, Civil Appeal No. 1094/69 dated 10 9 1970; referred to.
