The first respondents limited company issued a prospectus offering its shares to the public for subscription.
it was mentioned in the prospectus that the company was applying to the Bombay, Calcutta and Delhi Stock Exchanges (which were recognised exchanges within the meaning of section 2(39) of the ), for enlistment of its shares.
On June 3, 1956 the Company submitted the applications.
The subscription list was closed on June 21, 1965.
On June 22, 1965 the Bombay Exchange extended the time for consideration of the application till the expiry of seven weeks from the date of closing of the subscription list.
On August 6, 1965 the Exchange informed the company that the application was receiving further consideration.
On September 13, 1965 the Exchange informed the company that its application for enlisting its shares had been approved.
The Calcutta and Delhi Exchanges rejected the applications made to them.
The company Challenged the orders passed by the Calcutta and Delhi Exchanges in appeals to the Central Government under section 22 of the .
The Central Government dismissed the appeals.
The company filed writ petitions in the High Court.
The Single Judge held that the grant of permission by the Bombay Exchange was valid and that allotment of shares did not become void merely because one out of the three exchanges alone, gave the permission to enlist the company 's shakes.
He quashed the order of the Central Government and.
directed the issue of mandamus to the Calcutta and Delhi Exchanges requiring them to enlist the shares of the company.
The Union of India appealed to the Division Bench.
The Calcutta and Delhi Exchanges acquiesced in the orders passed against them.
The High Court confirmed the order of the Single Judge.
With certificate, the Union of India appealed to this Court.
The questions that fell for consideration were : (i) whether the permission granted by the Bombay Exchange after the expiry of seven weeks from the date of closing of the subscription list violated the provisions of section 73(1) of the and was on that account invalid; (ii) whether the grant of permission by one out of three Exchanges was sufficient to protect the allotment of shares from being invalid under section 73(1) of the ; (iii) whether a shareholder who buys shares on the 15 L436Sup.(P)/71 662 representation that the shares would be enlisted in an Exchange convenient to him is bound by the allotment even when the condition of securing quotation in an Exchange convenient to him has not been carried out; (iv) 'Whether in the circumstances of the case the High Court ought in exercise of its power under O.41 r. 33 of the Code of Civil Procedure, to have vacated the writ of Mandamus requiring the Calcutta & Delhi Exchanges to grant permission for quotation of the Company 's shares.
HELD : (i) It was not possible to accept the argument that permission for enlistment of shares can be given within the initial period of four weeks, or if time be extended,, within seven weeks from the date of closing of the subscription list, and if permission be not granted by the Exchange within those seven weeks, the allotment becomes void, even if the Stook Exchanges intimates that it is giving further consideration to the application.
[669 B] The intendment of sub sections
(1), (2) and (5) of section, 75 of the is plain.
If within four weeks from the date of the closing of the subscription list, the stock exchange sends no intimation either extending time or notifying that the application " 'though not at present granted will be given further consideration", the application is deemed to be refused.
If the Stock Exchange so desires it may intimate that the period is being extended to seven weeks.
The Exchange may say nothing more during the extended period, in which case, on the expiry of the extended period the allotment becomes void.
If however, within the four weeks, or within the extended period of seven weeks, the Exchange intimates that even though the application for permission is not at present granted, the application will be given further consideration the application is not deemed to be refused until it is finally granted.
[669 C D] Being a penal provision section 73(1) must be strictly construed.
Unless the statute in clear terms so provides, when the Exchange intimates its desire to consider the application further, an inference that the Exchange has still rejected the application cannot be made.
[669 F] The amendment made by Act 31 of 1965 in sub section
(5) by the substitution of the expression "permission shall not be deemed to be refused" by the expression "it shall not be deemed that permission has been granted" also gives a clue to the legislative intention that the inference of refusal shall not be made if the Exchange has intimated to the applicant that further consideration will be given to the application.
[668 H] (ii) It cannot be held that unless all the applications to different Exchanges were granted, the allotment of shares must, by virtue of sub section
(1) of section 73 be invalid.
The object of section 73(1) is that the subscribers to the shares must have facility to approach on Exchange for having their holding converted whenever they desire.
Even if out of several exchange I approached, one or more, but not all, have granted the application for enlistment, the facility of ensuring quick conversion is still available.
, It after representing in the prospectus that an application bag been made to a, recognised exchange for '*enlistment" or will be made within the prescribed period, the company is unable to obtain permission for "enlistment" from any Exchange, the allotment will be invalid.
But sub section
(1) is not intended to mean that it will be invalid even if permission is obtained but not from all the Exchanges to which applications have been made.
[670 A C] (iii) Section 73 (1) declares the entire allotment void : it does not take into consideration the right or convenience of individual shareholders.
663 An enquiry whether a shareholder or a class of shareholders was or were induced to subscribe for shares on the representation that the company was applying for enlistment to several exchanges one of which was convenient to him, is irrelevant in determining whether the allotment is tendered invalid for failure to secure compliance with a statutory condition.
[671 B] (iv) An appellate court may in appropriate case pass any decree and make any order appropriate to the ends of justice, even if a party has not appealed against an adverse decision.
The power may be exercised by the Court notwithstanding that the appeal is as to a part only of the decree and may be exercised in favour of all or any of the parties, even though they may not have filed an appeal or objection.
[671 E] [The Court did not give a final opinion on the question whether in the present case the discretion was correctly exercised by the High Court because the Calcutta and Delhi Exchanges had applied for certificates in the High Court of Delhi and the application was pending.] [671 G]
