Prior to January 18, 1944 six companies including M/s. Lakshmiratan.
Cotton Mills Co. Ltd. (the appellant company) and the Aluminium Corporation of India Ltd. (respondent corporation) were jointly managed by two groups known as the Singhania and Gupta groups.
As a result of disputes between the two groups there was a reference to arbitration.
After January 18, 1944, the date of the award, the aforesaid six concerns were brought under the management and control of one or the other of the two groups The Corporation came under the control and management of the Singhania group.
In cl. 9 of the award it was said that the award did not cover the advances which either party or their separate firms may have made to all or any of them or their moneys which may be in deposit with them and that they would be payable and paid in their usual course.
After the award the appellant Company sent a statement of account in respect of advances made to the respondent corporation, and expenditure incurred on its behalf.
The statement was objected to.
on the ground that the appellant company had not properly maintained its accounts during the period of joint management.
Efforts at reconciliation of accounts having faded the appellants filed two suits claiming Rs. 3,56,207.9.6 and Rs. 72,595.4.6 from the Corporation, being suits Nos. 63 and 65 of 1949.
In suit No. 63 of 1949 it was claimed that the suit was within time as after adjustment of several items in 1946 and 1947 a sum of Rs. 2,96,110. 11.6 was found due to the appellant company and that in any event the suit was saved from being barred by limitation by a letter (exhibit 1) dated April 16, 1946 addressed by s the Secretarycum Chief Accountant of the Corporation, thereby acknowledging the liability of the Corporation to pay the amount which would be found due and payable under the said accounts.
Similar averments were made in, Suit No. 65 of 1949.
The written statements filed on behalf of the Corporation inter alia pleaded that the said claim was barred by limitation, that the said letter didnot amount to an acknowledgement within the meaning of section 19 of theLimitation Act, 1908 which was then applicable to the suits, and lastly,that even if the said letter did amount to an acknowledgement, it wasnot binding on the Corporation.
The trial court decreed the suits but theHigh Court dismissed them as being time barred.
In appeals to this Courtthe questions that fell for consideration were (i) whether the letter in question amounted to an acknowledgment;(ii) whether it was an acknowledgement by the corporation, and if not (iii) whethe 'r the Secretary cum Chief Accountant had authority express or implied.
to acknowledge liability on behalf of the Corporation so as, to bind that corporation.
Allowing the appeals, HELD: (1) (a) From the provisions of section 19(1) of the Limitation Act, 1908 it is clear that the statement on which the plea of acknowledgement is founded must relate to a subsisting liability as the section requires 624 that it must be made before the expiration of the period prescribed by the Act.
It need not, however, amount to a promise to pay, for an acknowledgement does not create a new right of action but merely extends the period of limitation.
The statement need not indicate the exact nature or the specific character of the liability.
The words used in the statement in question, however, must relate to a present subsisting liability and indicate the existence of jural relationship between the partes such as, for instance, that of a debtor and a creditor and the intention to admit such a jural relationship Such an intention need not be in express terms and can be inferred by implication or the nature of the admission and the surrounding circumstances.
Generally speaking a liberal construction of the statement in question should be given.
That of course does not mean that where a statement is made without intending to admit the existence of a particular jural relationship, such an intention should be fastened on the person making the statement by an involved or a far fetched reasoning.
[629 C E] Khan Bchadur Shapoor Freedoom Mazda vs Durga Prosad Chamaria, , Tilak Ram vs Nathu, A.I.R. , 938, 939, Green vs Humphreva, [1884] 26 Ch. D. 474, 481, Tajpal Saraogi vs Lallanjee Jain, C.A. No. 766/62 dt.
8 2 1965 and Abdul Rahim Oosman & Co. vs Ojamshee Prushottamdas & Co., Cal.
6,39, referred to.
(b) From the correspondence between the parties and the surrounding circumstances it must follow that there was a subsisting account in the name of the appellannt company in the books of the Corporation in which interest on the balance shown therein from time to time was being credited and in which amounts in respect of items passed during the course of reconciliation were also duly credited.
The statement in the letter exhibit 1 that "after all the above adjustments the position will be as per statement attached", that is to say, that there 'was a balance of Rs. 107447/13/11 due and payable to the appellant company must clearly amount to acknowledgement within the meaning of section 19(1).
If the letter be looked at in the background of the controversy between the parties which controversy was limited to the question as to the correct ness of the amount claimed by the appellant company as also the correspondence which ensued in regard to it, it would be impossible to say that the letter and the statement of account enclosed therewith were merely explanatory and did not amount to an admission of the jural reship of debtor and creditor and of the liability to pay the amount found due at the foot of the account on finalisation.
[635 D F] The mere fact that letter called for confirmation of the amount of the balance mentioned therein and the fact that the appellant company failed to confirm it, could not lead to a conclusion that the admission of liability was conditional and therefore could not operate as an acknow ledgement.
The confirmation sought in the letter was not a condition to the admission as to the existence of a subsisting account and the liability to pay when accounts were finalised but to the specific amount which according to the corporation would be the amount payable by it according to its calculation. 'There was no condition subject to which the admission was to be made which remained unperformed.
[635 G; 636 F G; 637 B] Maniram vs Rupchand, L.R. 33 I.A. 165, Raja Kayali Arunachella Row Bahadur vs Sri Rajah Rangiah Appa Row Bahadur, Mad.
519 and Ballapragada Ramamurthy vs Thammana Gopayya, Mad. 701, distinguished.
625 LAXMIRATAN COTTON MILLS V. ALUMINIUM CORP. (Shelat, J.) In re River Steamer Co. vs Mitchell, , 828, referred to.
, (ii) The plea that the letter exhibit I should be regarded as an acknowledgement by the corporation itself was not included among the issues formulated before the courts below.
It could not be allowed to be raised for the first time in this Court.
[628 B] (iii) If the correspondence between the parties together with the statements of accounts enclosed therewith was closely examined it became clear that S was authorised to scrutinise the claim made by the appellant company, the various items for which the appellant _company claimed credit and to reject the same and, what is important, to allow others.
That he had such an authority was clear from the fact that in respect of such of the items which he allowed, credit was given to the appellant and necessary entries to the credit of the appellant company were posted in the account maintained by the Corporation in its books of account.
It was impossible to say that in the course of finalising the accounts, S accorded his assent to various items claimed by the appellant company without having been authorised so to do.
Nor was it possible to say that on his passing those items necessary entries were made in the books of accounts of the corporation without his having so authorised.
Further, he could not have sent to the appellant company statements of account showing the balance due to it "as per the ledger" unless he was authorised to finalise the accounts and arrive at the amount due and payable to, the company.
[637 E F; 638 B C] Uma Shankar vs Govind Narain, I.L.R. 46 All. 982, referred to.
