The South Indian Cinema Employees ' Association, a regis tered trade union whose members were the employees of the 24 cinema houses operating in the Madras City including some of the employees of the Prabhat Talkies, submitted to the Labour Commissioner a memorandum setting forth certain demands against their employers for increased wages etc.
and requesting him to settle the disputes.
The Labour Commissioner suggested certain, " minimum terms " which were accepted by some of the companies including the Prabhat Talkies and at a meeting of the employees of the Prabhat Talkies a resolution was passed to the effect that no action be taken about the demands of the Association.
The Association decided to go on strike.
The Labour Com missioner reported to the Government, and the Government made a reference to an Industrial Tribunal, the material portion of which " 'Whereas an industrial dispute has arisen between the workers was: and management of the Cinema Talkies in the Madras City in respect of certain matters and whereas in the opinion of His Excellency the Governor of Madras it is necessary, to refer the said industrial dispute for adjudication: now therefore etc.
" The Prabhat 335 Talkies contended before the tribunal that as there was no dispute between them and their employees they should not be included in the reference or award, but the Tribunal did not exclude them and an award was passed, and the managing director of the Prabhat Talkies was prosecuted for non compliance with the award: Held by the Full Court, (i) that the Labour Commissioner 's report clearly showed that an industrial dispute existed between the management and the employees of the cinema houses; (ii) that as some of the workers of the Prabhat Talkies were members of the Union, and a reference could be made even when a dispute was apprehended, the Government had jurisdiction to make a reference even in respect of the Prabhat Talkies and the reference and the award were binding on the Prabhat Talkies.
Held Per PATANJALI SASTRI C.J., MUKHERJEA, CHANDRA SEKHARA AIYAR and GHULAM HASAN JJ.
(BosE J. dubitante) that the reference to the Tribunal under section 10 (1) of the , cannot be held to be invalid merely because it did not specify the disputes or the parties between whom the disputes arose.
Per BOSE J.
The order of reference must be read with the documents which accompanied it and there was sufficient compliance with section 10 (1) (c) of the even if the words " the dispute " in the said clause require the Government to indicate the nature of the dispute which the Tribunal is required to settle.
Even if it is not legally necessary to indicate the nature of the dispute in a reference, it is desirable that that should be done.
Per PATANJALI SASTRI C. T., MUKHERJEA, CHANDRASEKHARA AIYAR and GHULAM HASAN JJ.
Though the Government will not be justified in making a reference under section 10 (1) without satisfying itself on the facts and circumstances brought to its notice that an industrial dispute exists or is apprehended in relation to an establishment or a definite group of establishments engaged in a particular industry and it is also desirable that the Government should, wherever possible, indicate the nature of the dispute in the order of reference, it must be remembered that in making a reference under section 10 (1) the Government is doing an administrative act and the fact that it has to form an opinion as to the factual existence of an industrial dispute as a preliminary step to the discharge of its function does not make it any the less administrative in character.
The Court cannot, therefore, canvass the order of reference closely to see if there was any material before the Government to support its conclusion, as if it was a judicial or quasi judicial determination.
No doubt, it will be open to a party seeking to impugn the resulting award to show that what, was referred by the Government, was not an industrial dispute within the meaning of the Act, and that, therefore, the Tri bunal had no jurisdiction to make the award But, if the dispute 336 was an industrial dispute as defined in the Act, its factual existence and the expediency of making a reference in the circumstances of a particular case are matters entirely for the Government to decide upon, and it will not be competent for the Court to hold the reference bad and quash the proceedings for want of jurisdiction merely because there was, in its opinion, no material before the Government on which it could have come to an affirmative conclusion on those matters.
The Government must have sufficient knowledge of the nature of the dispute to be satisfied that it is an industrial dispute within the meaning of the Act, as, for instance, that it relates to retrenchment or reinstatement.
But, beyond this no obligation can be held to lie on the Government to ascertain particulars of the disputes before making a reference under section 10 (1) or to specify them in the order.
The adjudication by the Tribunal is only an alternative form of settlement of the disputes on a fair and just basis having regard to the prevailing conditions in the industry and is by no means analogous to what an arbitrator has to do in determining ordinary civil disputes according to the legal rights of the parties.
Ramayya Pantulu vs Kuttti and Rao (Engineers) Ltd. [(1949) , India Paper Pulp Co. Ltd. vs India Paper Pulp Workers ' Union ([1949 50] F.C.R. 348), Kandan Textiles Ltd. vs Industrial Tribunal, Madras [(1949) and Western India Automobile Association 's case ([1949 50] 1 F.C.R. 321) referred to.
Judgment of the High Court of Madras reversed.
