While the first respondent was travelling by a U.P. Government Road.
ways bus from Bhowali to Nainital in May 1967, toll tax was demanded from him at the appellant 's municipal toll barrier but he declined to pay.
The Executive Officer, Municipal Board, Nainital, thereupon filed a complaint against him under section 190(1) (c) la.
P.C., for breach of rule 1 of the Rules made under section 153(a) of the U.P. Municipalities Act, 1916.
The first respondent 's contention was that the levy of toll tax by the Municipal Board on passengers was ultra viruses the taxing pow& of the Board.
During the pendency of these proceedings, on an application made,,, by the first respondent under section 561A, Cr.
P.C., the High Court quashed those proceedings holding that clause (vii) of section 128(1) of the Municipalities Act did not authorise the levy of toll tax on passengers and that a connected notification also levied tax only on vehicles and not on passengers.
The Rule imposing an obligation on the passengers to pay the toll was therefore struck down as ultra vires.
In appeal to this Court it was contended inter alia that toll imposed on the vehicle entering the Municipality could legally be realised from the passengers carried by it because of their nexus with the entry of the vehicle.
HELD:Dismissing the appeal, The toll imposed on the laden vehicles is expressly made payable by the person in charge of such vehicles.
No liability has been fixed on the passengers for payment of the tax imposed on the vehicles carrying them and entering the Nainital Municipality.
There was no precedent or any principle in support of the submission that merely because the passengers were carried by the vehicles the toll tax imposed on the entry of the vehicles into the municipal limits could be demanded from them [704 D G] When the impugned levy was outside the Act, section 164 of the Act could not operate to bar the jurisdiction of the High Court to quash the proceedings relating to the levy which was ultra virus the taxing power of the Board.
[704 H]
