The Appellant was searched on alighting from a plane at the H.A.L. Aerodrome, Bangalore, on November 16, 1963 and a quantity of Gold was found on and seized from him.
After obtaining sanction from the Collector under section 137(1) of the Customs Act and under Rule 126 Q of Defence of India Rules, 1962, the Superintendent of Central Excise filed a complaint against the Appellant.
The Trial Court did not find any evidence establishing that the Gold had been smuggled and the Appellant was therefore acquitted of the offence under section 135 of the Customs Act.
As regards the case against the Appellant under Rule 126 P(2) the Trial Court held that according to the Notification issued by the Government of India on November 5, 1963 in modification of the Notification dated January 10, 1963 issued under Rule 126 J read with Rule 126 X, either the Assistant Collector of Central Excise or the Collector of Central Excise could institute the prosecution; these officers were not authorised to delegate powers to institute prosecution.
The Court, therefore, acquitted the Appellant on the view that the complaint was not filed by an Officer competently authorised.
The High Court in appeal disagreed with this view holding that the Collector was lawfully empowered to authorise the Superintendent of Central Excise to prosecute the appellant.
The Court convicted the appellant and sentenced him to rigorous imprisonment for six months.
Dismissing an appeal to this Court, HELD : The plain reading of the relevant entries in the Notification of January 10, 1963 as amended by the Notification of November 5, 1963 clearly shows that it authorises the Collector to exercise the power and function in relation to the institution of prosecution for any offence punishable under Part XII A of the Rules referred to in r. 126Q.
Keeping in view the multifarious activities of the higher officers of the Central Excise Department it seems clear that after the responsible officers of this Department not inferior in rank to the Assistant Collector had applied their mind and come to a decision as to the desirability of starting the prosecution in a given case, further steps in the mitt& of actual prosecution including the drafting and presentation of the complaint could be lawfully carried out by others.
To hold otherwise would not only mean unduly straining the unambiguous statutory language but would also tend to thwart, instead of effectuating, their real purpose.
[915 C F] There was no force in the contention that the charge levelled against the appellant was vague or in any way different from the one for which 909 he was convicted.
In fact the appellant had admitted all the relevant facts alleged by the prosecution.
The facts alleged and proved clearly brought the appellant 's case within the mischief of rule 126H(2)(d) and 126 P(2).
Although under the new Gold (Control) Act 18 of 1965, which had repealed Part XII A of the Rules, there is no minimum sentence of imprisonment prescribed, the present case must be governed by the law in force at the time and therefore the minimum sentence of 6, months under rule 126 P(2) (ii) must apply.
[916 D, G]
