The respondent company holding leasehold rights in the appellant land went into liquidation.
Accepting the.
official liquidator 's report the company Judge (Rajasthan High Court) without hearing anyone or issuing notice to the appellant ordered auction of the lease hold right of the respondent company.
The appellant sent a letter to the Official Liquidator revoking the licence granted to the company and calling upon him to, deliver possession of the land.
The Official Liquidator claimed that the company was entitled to a further period of lease under the agreement.
Notice was issued in respect of the proposed auction sale.
The appellant filed an appeal before the High Court.
The High Court held that since the appellant had not appeared before the company Judge, she was not entitled to maintain the appeal, and further that the only remedy of the appellant was by way of a suit after obtaining leave of the Company Judge under section 446 of the Indian Companies Act.
In appeal to this Court, HELD : The High Court was in error in not entertaining and deciding the appeal preferred by the appellant who was the owner of the land in which lease hold rights said to have been created by her in favour of the company in liquidation were sought to be sold.
An appeal lies under section 483 of the Act from any order made or decision given in the matter of winding up of a company by the Court and it lies to the same, court to which, in the same manner in which, and subject to the same conditions under which appeals lie from any order or decision of the Court in cases within its ordinary jurisdiction.
Therefore an appeal was corn tent against the order of the company Judge.
[249 D] It is implicit in Rule 103 of the Company Court Rules that if the directions which have to be given by the Court would affect any person prejudicially he must be served with a notice of the summons under the general rule of natural justice and that no order should be made affecting the rights of a party without affording a proper opportunity to it to represent its case.
A] Further, the Official Liquidator as well as the, learned company Judge were bound by the rules of natural justice to issue a notice to the appellant and hear her before making the order appealed against.
If there was default on their part in not following the correct procedure the appellant could not be deprived of her right to get her grievance redressed by filing an appeal.
[250 C] 248
