Non specification of any definite period in a detention order made under section 3 of the Preventive Detention Act, IV of 1950, is not a material omission rendering the order invalid in view of the provisions contained in clauses (4) (a) and (7) (a) of article 22 the Constitution and section 12 of the Act.
An order of detention which expressly states that the Government of the State concerned was satisfied of the necessity of 757 making such an order and that it was made by the order of the Governor is not defective merely because it is signed by Home Secretary.
Communication of the grounds of the order need not be made directly by the authority making the order but may be made through recognized channels prescribed by the adminis trative rules of business.
The past conduct or antecedent history of a person can be taken into account in making a detention order, and as a matter of fact, it is largely from prior events showing tendencies or inclinations of a man that an inference could be drawn whether he is likely even in the future to act in a manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order.
If the authority making an order is satisfied that the ground on which the detenue was detained on a former occasion is still available and that there was need for detention on its basis no mala fides can be attributed to the authority from the fact that the ground alleged for the second detention is the same as that of the first detention.
Whether grounds have been communicated "as soon as may be" must depend on the facts of each case.
No arbitrary time limit can be laid down.
The recent rulings of the Supreme Court establish (a) that mere vagueness of grounds standing by itself and with out leading to an inference of mala fides or lack of good faith is not a justiciable issue in a court of law for the necessity of making the order, inasmuch as the ground or grounds on which the order of detention was made is a matter for the subjective satisfaction of the Government or of the detaining authority; (b) that there is nothing in the Act to prevent particulars of the grounds being furnished to the detenu within a reasonable time so that he may have the earliest opportunity of making a representation against the detention order what is reasonable time being dependent on the facts of each case; (c) that failure to furnish grounds with the speedy addition of such particulars as would enable the detenu to make a representation at the earliest opportu nity against the detention order can be considered by a court of law as an invasion of a fundamental right or safe guard guaranteed by the Constitution, viz. being given the earliest opportunity to make a representation; and (d) that no new grounds could be supplied to strengthen or fortify the original order of detention.
Where the petitioners against whom detention orders were made were given only vague grounds and there was inex cusable delay of nearly 4 months in acquainting them of the particulars, held that their detention was illegal and they should be released.
