The term bonus is applied to a cash payment made in addition to wages.
it generally represents the cash incentive given conditionally on certain standards of attendance and efficiency being attained.
992 There are two conditions, which have to be satisfied before a demand for bonus can be justified and they are, (1) when wages fall short of the living standard and (2) the industry makes huge profits part of which are due to the contribution which the workmen make in increasing production.
The demand for bonus becomes an industrial claim when either or both these conditions are satisfied.
The formula for the grant of bonus is as follows: As both labour and capital contribute to the earnings of the industrial concern, it is fair that labour should derive some benefit, if there is a surplus after meeting prior or necessary charges, The first charges on gross profits are (1) provision for depreciation.
(2) reserves for rehabilitation, (3) a return at 6 per cent.
on the paid up capital and (4) a return on the working capital at a lesser rate than the return on paid up capital.
The surplus that remained after meeting the aforesaid deductions would be available for distribution as bonus.
The claim for bonus can be made by the employees only if as a result of the joint contribution of capital and labour the industrial concern has earned profits.
If in any particular year the working of the industrial concern has resulted in loss there is no basis nor justification for a demand for bonus.
Bonus is not a deferred wage.
If it were so, it would necessarily rank for precedence before dividends.
The dividends can only be paid out of profits and unless and until profits are made no occasion or question can arise for distribution of any sum as bonus amongst the employees.
Social justice is a very vague and indeterminate expression and no clear cut definition can be laid down which will cover all the situations.
The concept of social justice does not emanate from the fanciful notions of any particular adjudicator but must be founded on a more solid foundation.
Industrial Tribunals are Tribunals within the meaning of article 136 and article 136 has vested in the Supreme Court exceptional and overriding power to interfere where it reaches the conclusion that a person has been dealt with arbitrarily or that a Court or Tribunal within the territory of India has not given a fair deal to a litigant.
In re Eddystone Marine Insurance Co. , Sutton vs Attorney General ([19231 , National Association of Local Government Officers vs Bolton Corporation , Kenicott vs Supervisor of Wayne County ([1873] ; , Great 'Western Garment Co. Ltd. vs Minister of National Revenue ([1948] 1 D.L.R. 225), Millowners ' Association, Bombay vs Bashtreya Mills Mazdoor Sangh, Bombay '[1950] 2 L.L.J. 1247), Nizam Sugar Factory Ltd., Hyderabad vs Their Workmen ([1952], , Textile Mills, Madhya Pradesh vs Their Workmen ([1952] , Famous Cine Laboratory vs Their Workmen ([1953] and Bharat Bank Ltd., Delhi 993 vs Employees of the Bharat Bank Ltd., Delhi, ([1960] S.C.R. 469), referred to.
