The appellant, who was an income tax Officer, was, dismissed from service and against the order of dismissal he filed an appeal to the President of India.
Meanwhile, he was charged under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947, with the offence of habitually accepting bribes.
Five instances were offered by the prosecution in evidence against him to prove the charge.
The trial court accepted the evidence regarding two instances, and convicted the appellant under section 5(2) read with sections 5(1)(d) and 5(3) of the Act drawing the presumption under section 5.(3) (before its amendment in 1964) against him on the ground that he was in possession of assets disproportionate to his known sources of income.
He was sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for three years and to pay a fine of Rs. 1,25,000/ , to be recovered from the properties siezed from him.
The High Court accepted the evidence regarding one more instance and confirmed the conviction and sentence.
In appeal to this Court, HELD : (1) The trial is not bad for lack of santcion under section 6 of the Act.
The appellant ceased to be a public servant when the order of dismissal was passed.
The fact that an appeal was pending would not make him a public servant.
Sanction is necessary only when the person is employed in connection with the affairs of the Union and not when he was employed.
[241 D F] (2)Since the charge was one of habitually accepting bribes it was not necessary that specific instances of taking bribe should be given in the charge.
[241 G] Biswabhusan Naik vs State of Orissa, ; , followed.
(3) The appellant had property disproportionate to his known sources of income and the presumption under section 5(3) of the Act was rightly drawn against him.
Failure to establish any of the offences in section 5(1) (a) to (d) is irrelevant for sustaining a conviction based on the presumption.
Biswabhusan Naik vs State of Orissa, ; and C. S.D. Swamy vs State, ; , followed.
Surajmal Singh vs State of Uttar Pradesh, [1961] 2 S.C.R. 971 and R. section Pandit vs State of Bihar, [1963] Supp.
2 S.C.R., 652, referred to and explained.
[245 C] (4) In view of the fact that the appellant had undergone the sentence for about four months and a large fine was imposed on him, the ends of justice would be met if the sentence is reduced to one already undergone while maintaining the sentence of fine.
[246 B C] 237
