Under the Chanda Patent and the terms recorded in the Wajibul Arz the Dhanora Zamindari was impartible and on the death of the holder it devolved upon his eldest son and in the absence of a legitimate or an adopted son it devolved upon the nearest male relative.
The succession to the Zamindari was subject to the power of the Governor to dispossess a person found unfit to observe the conditions of loyalty, good police administration and improvement of the estate.
The respondent instituted an action for possession of certain immovable properties including the zamandari and for recovery of compensation, in respect of malguzari lands, paid to the appellants in consequence of the enactment of the Madhya Pradesh Abolition of Proprietary Rights (Estate, Mahals, Alienated Lands) Act, 1951.
They claimed the Zamindari relying upon the rule of primogeniture and other estates as devisees under a Will.
The trial court decreed the suit and the High Court affirmed the decree with slight modifications.
in the appeal to this Court the appellants urged that (1) the Zamindari devolved on the death of the holder on the male relative who is senior most in age and not the eldest member in the senior line; (2) by the order of the Governor the Zamindari was conferred upon the first appellant as he was found suitable to hold the zamindari and since the Government had the power to determine inheritance and the right to remove a person, the holder of the zamindari had merely a life interest; and (3) the compensation officer had decided by his order under section 14 of the Act that compensation in respect of malqutari land was payable to the first appellant and since no suit was filed by the plaintiffs for setting aside that decision within the period specified, the order of the compensation officer became final and conclusive.
HELD : (1) By the use of the expression "the nearest male relative" the test of propinquity alone may be applied and when there are two or more claimants equally removed from the common ancestor the eldest male member in the senior most line will be preferred.
The contest between the parties had to be adjudged in the light of the rules of lineal primogeniture governing an impartible estate.
In determining a single their according to the rules of primogeniture the class of heirs who would 325 be entitled to succeed the property if it were partible must be ascertained first, and then the single heir applying the special rule must be selected.
By the expression "nearest male relative" it was not intended to confer be estate upon the eldest male relative of the Zamindar.
The High Court was, therefore, right in holding that the Zamindari devolved upon the first respondent to ' the exclusion of the first appellant.
[333 C F] (2) The power vested in the Governor to take extraordinary steps to protect the interest of the zamindari by the removal of the holder did not restrict the title of the zamindar to a mere life interest.
The power had to be exercised in accordance with the custom of the family and an order by the Governor purporting to exercise powers under the Chanda Patent contemplated a quasi judicial inquiry.
The order does not show that any inquiry was made for determining the rights of the contesting claimants.
[334 G] (3) Section 14 of Act 1 of 1951 does not invest the compensation officer with jurisdiction to determine competing claims of persons claiming proprietary rights to the property vested in the Government by the operation of section 3 of the Act.
Section 14 is intended to determine only the proprietary rights in the land qua the State.
[339 D E]
