On October 5, 1960 the appellant agreed to do certain construction work for the respondents company registered under the Indian Companies Act and having its principal place of business at Bombay On the terms and conditions of a written tender.
Clause 12 of the tender provided for arbitration in case of dispute.
Clause 13 provided that notwithstanding the place where the work under the contract was to be executed the contract shall be deemed to have been entered into by the parties at Bombay and the court in Bombay alone shall have jurisdiction to adjudicate thereon.
On disputes arising between the parties the appellant submitted a petition to the Court at Varanasi for an order under section 20 of the that the agreement be filed and an order of reference be made to an arbitrator or arbitrators appointed by the court.
The respondent contended that in view% of cl. 13 of the arbitration agreement only the courts at Bombay had jurisdiction.
The trial court held that the entire cause of action had arisen at Varanasi and the parties could not by agreement confer jurisdiction on the courts of Bombay which they did not otherwise possess.
The High Court at Allahabad in exercise of its revisional jurisdiction held that the courts at Bombay had jurisdiction under the general law and hence could entertain the petition.
It further held that in view of cl. 13 of the arbitration agreement the petition could not be entertained at Varanasi.
Against the order of the High Court directing the petition to be returned for presentation to the proper court, the appellant appealed to this Court by special leave.
The question that fell for consideration were : (i) whether the courts at Bombay alone had jurisdiction over the dispute; (ii) whether Explanation 11 to section 20(a) of the Code of Civil Procedure refers only to Government corporations and not to companies registered under the.
Indian Companies Act.
HELD : (i) The Code of Civil Procedure in its entirety applies to proceedings under the by virtue of section 41 of the latter Act.
The jurisdiction of the courts under the to entertain a proceeding for filing an award is accordingly governed by the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure.
By the terms of section 20(a) of the Code .of
Civil Procedure read with Exp.
11th thereto, the respondent company which had its principal place of business at Bombay, was liable to be sued at Bombay.
[316 G] It is not open to the par ties by agreement to confer jurisdiction on any Court which it did not otherwise possess under the Code.
But where two courts have under the Code of Civil Procedure jurisdiction to try a suit of proceeding an agreement between the parties that the dispute between 315 them shall be tried in one of such courts is not contrary to Public Policy Such an agreement does not contravene section 28 of the Contract Act.
[316 H] Since in the present case the courts at Bombay had jurisdiction under the Code of Civil Procedure the agreement between ,the parties that the courts in Bombay alone shall have jurisdiction to try the proceedings relating to arbitration was binding between them.
[318 A] (ii) Order 29 of the Code of Civil Procedure deals with suits by or against a corporation and there is nothing in the Code to support the contention that a Corporation referred to under section 20 means only a statutory corporation and not a company registered under the Indian Companies Act.
[317 G H]
