The appellant was a leaseholder in respect of tolls of a public ferry crossing the river Damodar.
The respondent filed a complaint against him alleging that the appellant used to realise illegally 20 np per cart from the cultivators who used to drive their carts across the dry bed of the river.
After hearing of the respondent 's complaint on November 29, 1964 the appellant realised double the amount of toll from the respondent.
The appellant was, thereafter convicted for offences under sections 23 and 24 of the Bengal Ferries Act, 1885.
In revision, the Additional Sessions Judge recommended acquittal of the appellant in respect of his conviction under both the provisions.
As to the conviction under section 24, according to the Additional Sessions Judge, the collection of money from the people using the river bed and not the ferry might amount to extortion under the Indian Penal Code but it would not attract the provisions of section 24.
Although the High Court accepted the recommendation with respect to the acquittal under section 23, it rejected the reference in respect of the conviction under section 24.
In the appeal to this Court by special leave, it was contended that the realisation of 40 np per cart from those who did not use the ferry could not as a matter of law fall within the mischief of s, 24.
HELD: dismissing the appeal.
Section 24 of the Bengal Ferries Act does not speak of taking toll in excess of the lawful limit only from those persons who use the ferry.
This Act was enacted for regulating ferries but that does not mean that an illegal demand under the pretext of claim by way of toll under this Act, when it is not legally claimable, was not intended by the legislature to be prohibited and made punishable by the language of section 24.
Demanding or receiving more than lawful dues and unduly delaying persons, animals, vehicles or things in crossing the river are both rendered penal and punishable.
Whether the person from whom the amount is demanded or received is under no obligation to pay anything by way of toll while crossing the river bed or is bound by law only to pay 20 ps per cart as toll would thus be immaterial when payment is demanded or received on the pretext that it is due as toll when it is legally not so due.
[181 C F] To exclude cases like the present from the operation of section 24 would unduly restrict its effectiveness and would indeed facilitate illegal recoveries prohibited by it.
To that extent it would defeat the object and purpose which this section is intended to achieve.
[182 A]
