An enquiry under the provisions of the Travancore Public Servants (Inquiries) Act, (Act XI of 1132) was held against the petitioner in pursuance of a resolution passed by the Council of Ministers.
The petitioner took part in the proceedings, denied the charges and raised legal objection to the competence of the Enquiry Commission to hold the enquiry.
Some of the charges were held proved.
The petitioner was asked by the Chief Secretary to show cause why be should not be removed from service.
The petitioner 's request for extension of time to show cause was granted twice but refused a third time.
On his failure to avail himself of the opportunity to show cause against the action proposed to be taken against him, the report of the Enquiry Commissioner was submitted to the Public Services Commission and the latter approved of the action proposed to be taken against the petitioner.
The proceedings relating to the enquiry were submitted to the Rajpramukh and thereupon an order in proper form for the removal of the petitioner from service was made by the Rajpramukh and authenticated by the Chief Secretary to Government.
Held, (i) that under the provisions of article 311 of the Constitution a civil servant is entitled to have a reasonable opportunity to defend himself and show cause, both at the time of enquiry into the charges brought against him and at the stage when definite conclusions have been come to on the charges and the actual punishment to follow is provisionally determined upon.
The position cannot be characterised as anomalous if the statute contemplates a reasonable opportunity at more than one stage.
In the present case the petitioner had reasonable opportunity to enter upon his defence at both the stages.
He fully availed himself of the first opportunity, but refused to avail himself of the second opportunity which was offered to him.
All the rules of natural justice were observed in the case.
(ii) The provisions of article 166(1) and (2) are directory, not mandatory; and, in order to determine whether there has been compliance with the said provisions, all that is necessary to see is that the requirements of the sub sections are met in substance.
(iii) After the integration of the two States of Travancore and Cochin, the expression " Our Government" means "The Council of Ministers" under the new set up of democratic Government in the United State.
The Rajpramukh as the head of the State is merely at constitutional head and is bound to accept the advice of his Ministers.
(iv) The consultation envisaged by article 320(3) does not extend to review petitions which the petitioner may choose to file as many times as he likes.
(v) The sanction of the Rajpramukli under article 20 of the Covenant of the United State of Travancore Cochin is necessary only before the institution of civil or criminal proceedings.
Departmental proceedings do not fall within the ambit of the said Article.
1013 Dattatreya Moreshwar Pangarkar vs The State of Bombay ([1952] S.C.R. 612), referred to.
