Two groups known as the Singhania group and the Gupta Group were partners in M/s. India Supplies.
Both were also interested in the business of Lakshmi Ratan Cotton Mills.
In the present litigation the Gupta group was represented by the appellants and the Singhania group by the respondent.
In the year 1942 Lakshmi Rattan Cotton Mills was the creditor of M/s. India Supplies for the approximate sum of Rs. 4,00,000.
Lakshmi Ratan Cotton Mills was a debtor to the respondent for the approximate sum of Rs. 400,000.
Lakshmi Ratan Cotton Mills demanded the sum of Rs. 4,00,000 from India Supplies.
India Supplies could not repay Lakshmi Ratan Cotton Mills.
Thereafter India Supplies proposed that the respondent should deposit a sum of Rs. 4,00,000 with India Supplies to wipe out the indebtedness of the India Supplies to Lakshmi Ratan Cotton Mills.
The respondent accepted the 'said proposal and thereafter a letter dated 29, September 1942 was written by the head of the Gupta group on behalf of India Supplies to the respondent recording the agreement that "a sum of Rs. 4,00,000 should be debited to India Supplies as deposit at the usual rate of interest as agreed upon.
" The respondent was to place to the credit of Lakshmi Ratan Cotton Mills a sum of Rs. 4,00,000 in its account with the respondent thus reducing the indebtedness of Lakshmi Ratan Cotton Mills from Rs. 9,00,000 to Rs. 5,00,000.
Disputes and differences arose between the two groups thereafter.
In 1944 there was an arbitration award.
The Sing Hanias went out of both India Supplies and Lakshmi Ratan Cotton Mills, and the Gupta group carried on both the businesses.
The present suit was, filed by the respondent in 1953.
The claim was based on the aforesaid deposit of Rs. 4,00,000.
The suit though originally filed in the court of the Civil Judge, Kanpur was tried by the Allahabad High Court in its original jurisdiction.
The suit was decreed in favour of the respondent.
With certificate appeal was filed in this Court.
The questions for consideration were : (i) whether the money was deposited under an agreement and payable on demand so that limitation would commence from the date of demand within three years of which it was filed, or whether it was a loan made on 30th December 1942 in respect of which the suit was barred under article 59 by limitation, the same not having been filed within three years from the date of the loan; (ii) whether there was a demand for a part of the amount in 1943 and therefore limitation would start from that date.
HELD: (i) The amount was a deposit and not a loan.
The case of a deposit is something more than a mere loan of money.
It will depend on the facts of each case whether the transaction is clothed with the character of a deposit of money.
The surrounding circumstances, the relationship and character of the transaction and the manner in which the parties treated the transaction will throw light on the true form of the transaction.
[577 H] 574 V.E, A. Annamalai Chettiar & Anr.
vs section V. V. section Veerappa Chettiar, and Nawab Major Sir Mohammad Akbar Khan vs Attar Singh & Ors., 63 I.A. 279, referred to.
Some of the partners of the appellant and the respondent in the year 1942 were common.
It would be more explicable and natural course of events that monies would be kept in deposit with the appellant in order to enable them to have financial accommodation without immediate worry of repayment.
The mere fact that money in specie was not paid would not be destructive of the case of deposit.
The respondent acted as bankers.
The way in which the respondent made entries in the pass book of the appellant was consistent with the roznamcha, khata and nakalbahi books.
It was not a case of the respondent giving loan to the appellant for the obvious reason that the history of the transaction between the appellant and Lakshmi Cotton Mills showed that the appellant had to be put on a footing of financial stability by giving the appellant the use of the sum of Rs. 4,00,000 for a long time.
The absence of any negotiable instrument was significant.
A hundi or a promissory note would have been consistent with the case of a loan.
The relationship between the parties the surrounding circumstances at the time of the transaction, the pecuniary position of the appellant were all overwhelming features to corroborate the oral as well as the documentary evidence of the respondent that the amount was deposited with the appellant.
[580 E H] The arbitration award in the dispute between the parties gave directions on the basis that there were advances between the parties which were in the nature of deposit and were not covered by the award.
, [581 A B] In contemporarious documents the appellant never said that it was a case of advancing loan.
The non production of the appellant 's accounts coupled with the appellant 's staying away from the witness box indicated the inherent infirmities of the appellant 's case.
[581 D] (ii)There is a consensus among the High Courts that there must be an unqualified demand for the whole sum before the limitation can start in case of demand for return of the amount deposited.
Further, a demand in the year 1943 for a part of the amount would not be effective because there were common partners in the firms of respondent and the appellant.
1581 E G] Jogendranath Chakerbutty vs Dinkar Ram, A.I.R. 1921 Cal.
644, Motigauri vs Naranji, A.I.R. 1927 Bom.
362 and Subbaih Chetty & Ors.
The appeal must accordingly be dismissed.
