The appellant was the tenant of the respondents shop.
As the latter wanted to make some constructions they entered into ail agreement in 1962, according to which, the appellant was to vacate the shop but reoccupy it on the same rent as soon as the construction was completed.
It was also agreed that all the sections of the U.P. (Temporary) Control of Rent and Eviction Act, 1947, shall be fully applicable to the new tenancy.
After the construction was completed the appellant resumed possession and offered rent.
The respondent refused the rent and filed a suit for ejectment.
In appeal, the High Court held that the appellant was not entitled to the protection of the Act, because, the res pondent was entitled to rely on section IA according to which nothing in the Act shall apply to a building constructed on or after 1st January, 1951, and that the agreement was unlawful within the meaning of section 23 of the .
In appeal to this Court, HELD : The general principle is that every one has a right to waive the advantage of a law, made for his benefit in his private capacity, when a public right or public policy is not infringed thereby.
Section 1A was meant for the benefit of owners of buildings constructed after January 1, 1951.
But there is no prohibition in the section against a land lord and his tenant entering into an agreement, that they would not be governed by that section.
If a particular owner did not want to avail himself of the benefit of the section, there was no bar created by it to his waiving or giving up or abandoning the advantage and no question of policy, or public policy is involved.
Therefore, the performance of the agreement in the present case would not entail the transgression of any law and the agreement was not void under section 23 of the .
[696 C; 69 7 D E; 698 A C] Neminath Appayya Hanumannavar vs
Jamboorao Sateppa Kochteri, A.I.R. (1966) Mys.
154, approved.
Vita Food Products Incorporated vs Unus Co. Ltd. (in Liquidation), at 291, referred to.
