Serious allegations of corruption and malpractices had been made against the respondent, a member of the Indian Police Service, serving in the State of Bihar.
Inquiries made by the State Government revealed that there was a prima facie case made out against him.
He was suspended by an order which stated that disciplinary proceedings were contemplated against the respondent.
On the question whether the suspension of a member of the service can only be ordered after definite charges have been communicated to him in terms of r. 5(2) of the All India Services (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1955, or whether the Government is entitled to place him under suspension even before that stage has been reached after a preliminary investigation, HELD : (1) The fact that in other rules of service there is specific provision for an order of suspension even when disciplinary proceedings were contemplated, does not mean that a member of the All India Service should be dealt with differently.
It would not be proper to interpret the Rules, which from a self contained Code, by reference to the provisions of other rules even if they were made by or under the authority of the President of India.
[718 F G] (2) Rule 7 expressly provides for suspension of a member of the service, having regard to the nature of the charges, for the purpose of disciplinary proceedings.
The word 'charges ' in the rule means accusations or amputations against a member of the service.
If the disciplinary authority takes note of the allegation and is of the opinion after preli minary inquiries that the circumstances of the case justify further investigation to be made before definite charges can be framed it would not be improper to remove the officer from the sphere of his activity either by transfer or suspension inasmuch as it may be necessary to find out facts from people working under him or look into papers which are in his custody.
Ordinarily when serious imputations are made against the conduct of an officer, the disciplinary authorities cannot immediately draw up the charges and in some cases a considerable time may elapse before the superior authority can come to a conclusion that definite charges can be levelled against the officer.
Merely because the order mentions that the disciplinary proceedings were contemplated it cannot be held that the situation in the present case had not reached the stage which called for an order of suspension.
In substance, disciplinary proceedings can be said to have been started when complaints about the integrity of an officer are entertained, followed by a preliminary inquiry into them culminating 716 in the satisfaction of the Government that a prima facie case has been made out against him for the framing of charges.
When the order of suspension itself shows that the Government was of the view that such a prima facie case for launching departmental proceedings has been made out the fact that the order also mentions that such proceedings were contemplated makes no difference.
1721 B F; 723 G; 724 G H; 725 B C] section Govinda Menon vs Union of India, ; , followed.
