The Hindi Sahitya Sammelan (hereinafter referred to as the Society) was a registered society founded for the development and propagation of Hindi.
After a number of years of its successful working differences arose between its members and this resulted in litigation.
in 1956 the Uttar Pradesh legislature passed the U.P. Sahitya Sammelan Act, under which a statutory body was created under the name of Hindi Sahitya Sammelan.
This act was declared void by the Allahabad High Court as violating the freedom of association guaranteed under article 19(1)(c) of the Constitution.
Thereafter, Parliament enacted the Hindi Sahitya Sammelan Act, 1962legislating under entry 63, list I of the Seventh Schedule declaringthat "the institution known as the Hindi Sahitya Sammelan is an institution of national importance".
By the Act a statutory sammelan was constituted as a body corporate by the name of the Hindi Sahitya Sammelan.
Under section 4(1) of the Act the Sammelan was to consist of the first members of the Society and all persons who might become members thereafter in accordance with the rules made in that behalf by the first Governing Body to be constituted by the Central Government by notification.
The Act provided, for vesting in the Sammelan of all property movable or immovable, of or belonging to the society.
Petitions under Article 226 in the High Court and under Article 32 in this Court were filed challenging the constitutionality of the Act mainly on the ground that the Act interfered with the right of the petitioners to form association under Article 19(1) (c) of the Constitution.
The High Court held that since all the members of the society had also become members of the Sammelan under the Act, there was no infringement of the right to form association.
In the appeal and in the petition under Article 32, the respondent contended that having declared the old Hindi Sabitya Sammelan, which was a society registered under the as an institution of national importance, Parliament has proceeded to legislate in respect of it under entry 63 of List I of the Seventh Schedule in order that its administration may not suffer as a result of the quarrels that were going inter be between the members of the society; it was for this purpose that a first Governing Body was constituted to take over the management temporarily; the Act was designed to reconstitute the Sammelan in such a manner that it could worm successfully and without difficulties; and in making provisions for this purpose all members of the old society were included as members of the Sammelan 8 4 1 so that their right to form association may not be taken away from them Alternatively the respondent took up the position that the Act no where specifically laid down that the society shall stand dissolved while it constituted a new Sammelan and therefore, it should be inferred that while the society still continued to exist in its original form the law has brought into existence a new Sammelan to which all the functions and the properties etc. of the society have been passed.
Allowing the petition and the appeal.
HELD : Under section 12(1) (a) very wide powers are given to the first governing body to make rules in respect of matters relating to membership including qualifications and disqualifications for membership of the Sammelan.
Under this power the rules framed could make provisions for admission of persons as members whom the original members of society may never have liked to admit in their Society.
The number of such new members could even be so large as to leave the original members in a small minority with the result that those members.
could become totally ineffective in the society.
Thus the Sammelan which has come into existence, is not identical with the Sammelan which was a registered society under the ., This is clear interference with the right to form a society which has been exercised by the members of the Society by forming the Society with its constitution under which they were members.
The Act does not merely regulate the admi nistration of the affairs of the Society; what it does is to alter the composition of the society itself.
The result of this change in composition is that the members, who voluntarily formed the society are now compelled to act in that Association with other members who have been imposed as members by the Act and in whose admission to membership they had no say.
The right to form association necessarily implies that the persons forming the society have also the right to continue to be associated with only those whom they voluntarily admit in the association.
Any law by which members are introduced in the voluntary association without any option being given to the members to keep them out or any law which takes away the membership of those who have voluntarily joined.
it will be a law violating the right to form association.
[847 H; 849 C E] The right guaranteed by Article 19(1)(c) cannot be confined to the initial stage of forming an association.
if it were to be so confined, the right would be meaningless because as soon as an association is formed, a law may be passed interfering with its composition so that the association formed may not be able to function at all.
The right can be effective only if it is held to include within, it the right to continue the association with its composition as voluntarily agreed upon by the persons forming the association.
And, Article 19(4), on the face of it, cannot be called in aid to claim lidity for the Act.
Therefore the provisioncontained in the Act for reconstituting the society into the Sammelan is void.
The whole Act becomes ineffective in as much as the formation of the new Sammelan is the very basis for all the other provisions in the Act.
[849 F H; 851 E] O.K. Ghosh and Another vs E. X. Joseph, [1963] SUppl.
3 S.C.R. 789; State of Madras vs V. G. Row, ; and V. G. Row vs The State of Madras, A.I.R. 1951 Mad.
147, referred to.
The alternative submission cannot be accepted as ensuring the validity of the Act.
First, the specific case taken by the respondent has been, that the Actreconstitutes the Society and does not create a separate and independent body in the form of a new Sammelan.
Secondly, even if it be acceptedthat a new Sammelan has been constituted, the question of 842 legislative competence of Parliament to pass such a law will arise.
The Sammelan is itself a body corporate and that Sammelan has never been declared as an institution of national importance.
The only institution that was so declared was the society which, of course, earlier carried the same name as the new Sammelan.
Parliament was, therefore, not competent to legislate in respect of this newly constituted Sammelan which at no stage has been declared as an institution of national importance.
Thirdly, if it were to be held that Parliament passed this Act so as to transfer all the properties and assets of the Society to the Sammelan, the Act would contravene Article 19(1)(f) of the Constitution.
The Sammelan is a new, separate and distinct legal entity from the Society.
The Society is thus deprived of all its properties by the Act and such a law depriving the Society of its properties altogether cannot be held to be a reasonable restriction in the public interest on the right of the society to hold the property.
The applicability of Article 19(1(f) is on the assumption that the old Society still exists as it was and yet its properties have been transferred to the Sammelan.
If the Society still exists, so does its Governing Body in whom the property of the Society vested.
The Act thus deprives the members of the Governing Body of the property which still continued to vest in them in spite of the passing of the Act.
This total deprivation of property instead of regulating the management of the affairs of the Society of its property cannot clearly be justified as a reasonable restriction in public interest.
If the law is passed not merely for ensuring proper management and administration of the property, but for totally depriving the persons, in whom the property vested, of their right to hold the property, the law cannot be justified as reasonable restriction under Article 19(5).
[852 B H; 853 E 854 A] The Board of Trustees, Ayurvedic and Unani Tibia College, Delhi vs The State of Delhi & Anr.
[1962] Suppl.
I S.C.R. 156; referred to.
