In order to deal with extensive damage to property and to clear the debris and refuse caused by communal riots in 1947 in Punjab, statutes we 're enacted, giving suitable powers the last of which is the Punjab Development of Damaged Areas Act, 1951.
Under section 2(d) of the Act the State Government declared by a Notification that the entire area within the walled city of Amritsar to be damaged area.
The Improvement Trust formulated certain schemes which were sanctioned by the State Government.
Thereafter, notice was issued to the first petitioner to vacate the shop in his possession and to the second and third petitioners to appear before the Land Acquisition Collector and explain the interest which they had in the, premises in their occupation sought to be acquired.
In a petition under article 32, on the questions whether (1) the Act is violative of article 14, because (a) the power to declare an area as damaged is arbitrary, and (b) the property can be acquired at the discretion of the Trust either under the Punjab Town Improvement Act, 1922, or under the Act, compensation payable under the form& Act being more advantageous; (2) the restrictions imposed by the Act are unreasonable and violative of article 19(1 ) (f) and (g); and (3) the acquisition and compensation provisions of the Act violate article 31(2).
HELD : (1) There is no violation of article 14.
(a) The purpose of the Act is for framing and executing schemes of improvement in urban areas where damage has been caused to buildings by wholesale and serious rioting and hence, the power conferred on the State Government to declare an area damaged area is not arbitrary, unguided or uncanalised.
If the whole of the walled city of Amritsar is a damaged area and part thereof is equally a damaged area.
Therefore, it is not difficult to determine what is damaged area and the Notification in the present case is not vague.
[773 A D] (b) No option is given to acquire the area either under the 1951 Act or Punjab Town Improvement Act according to the discretion of the Improvement Trust.
The 1951 Act only provides that the Trust in framing a scheme may provide for all or any of the matters mentioned in section 28 of the Punjab Town Improvement Act, and that any scheme already framed under the latter Act is deemed to have been framed under 1951 Act.
[771 A B] (2) The provisions of the Act are reasonable and are designed to serve the interest of the general public by executing schemes in a planned manner for the improvement of the damaged areas of the city and the restrictions imposed are protected by article 19(5) and (6) of the Constitution.
[769 G H] 763 (a) Persons who are affected by a scheme are given an opportunity to file their objections which have to be given due consideration by the Improvement Trust before finalising the scheme, and by State Government before sanctioning the scheme.
They have also the right to take part in, the proceedings before the Collector in the inquiry into claims for compensation.
They are given notice of the award and are given a right to have their objections to the award fixing the compensation or the are ' I demarcated and other matters specified in section 20 referred to a Tribunal.
The award, or any order passed by the Tribunal, is deemed to be a judgment 'and decree under the Civil Procedure Code, and affected persons have a right of appeal to the High Court and to this Court.
[770 B F] (b) The fact that there are some newly built buildings which are not damaged would not make the provisions of the Act unreasonable nor justify an impediment being placed to a scheme which is designed to achieve a social purpose and is for the public good [770 G H] (c) The persons in occupation of shops have been assured in writing by the Improvement Trust of alternative accommodation and allotment of pucca shops as soon as possible.
[771 H] (3) The compensation payable is neither inadequate nor illusory but on the other hand it is not less than the market value and may even be more.
There is thus no violation of article 31(2) of the Constitution.
[770 G 772 B] (a) The compensation payable to persons interested under the Act is more in the nature of a profit sharing scheme in that the minimum that they would be entitled for payment is the market value of the property which has come under the scheme and may even be more depending upon the income of the scheme and the expenditure incurred therefore.
The com pensation is determined on principles similar to those under the Land Acquisition Act or the Punjab Town Improvement Act.
[770 B C, H] (b) It cannot be contended that compensation is not payable for the buildings but only for the land, because, the definition of land under the Act is similar to that in section 3 (a) of the Land Acquisition Act and is comprehensive enough to include buildings also.
[771 D] (c) The finalisation of the scheme will take time but under section 12(2) the submission of the scheme by the Trust is not to be later than three years.
Therefore, it cannot be urged that the final compensation is not immediately payable and that it may take several years without any payment of interest during that time.
In any case, the scheme is for the benefit of all those who have properties in the areas which are covered by the scheme and is on a profit sharing basis.
There is thus no hardship or disadvantage.
[771 E G]
