In March 1969, the respondent State issued a notification under section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, as amended by the Punjab Legislature, for acquisition of the appellants ' land.
The notification stated that the land was likely to be required to be taken by Government, at public expense, for a public purpose, namely,.
the setting up of a factory for the starting of an industry and, further that action under section 17(2)(c) would be taken on the, ground of urgency and provisions of section 5A will not apply in regard to the said acquisition.
The appellants filed a writ petition in the High Court questioning the validity of the acquisition on the ground, inter alia, that there was no urgency in the mattelr, of requiring the land ', therefore recourse to section 17 was not justified.
The state government pleaded that since the Government of India had extended the time for completion of the project till April 30, 1969, it, had become necessary to take immediate steps to acquire the land.
The High Court dismissed the petition.
In the appeal to this Court it was contended that (i) the acquisition in question being one for the benefit of a Company, proceedings should have been taken under sections 38 to 44B of the Act,, and that there was no public purpose involved in the case; (ii) there was no urgency and hence recourse could not be had to section 17 of the Act; and (iii) section 17(2) (c) was inapplicable to the facts of the case, because, though section 17(2)(c) read by itself covered a very large field, applying the ejusdem generis Rule that provision had to be given a narrower meaning because of the provisions of section 17(2)(a) and (b).
Dismissing the appeal, HELD : (i) On the facts of the case the purpose for which land was acquired was a public purpose.
The question whether the starting of an industry is in public interest or not is essentially a question that has to be decided by the Government.
So long as it is not established that the acquisition is sought to be made for some collateral purpose or that there is a colourable exercise of power the declaration of the government that it is made for a public purpose is not open to challenge.
[874 E G] Smt; Somavanti and Ors vs State of Punjab, [1963] 2 S.C.R. 774 and Raja Anand Brahma Shah vs State of U.P., ; , referred to.
In view of the fact that the State Government had contributed towards the cost of acquisition it was not necessary to proceed with the acquisition under Part VII of the Act.
[875 A] 8 7 2 (ii) On the facts of the case there was urgency.
The conclusion of the Government in a given case that there was urgency is entitled to weight, if not conclusive.
(iii) In interpreting cl.
(c) of section 17(2) the rule of ejusdem generis, ,cannot be applied.
If a given provision is plain and unambiguous and the legislative intent is clear there is no occasion to call into aid that rule.
Under cls.
(a), (b) and (c) of sub section
(2) of section 17 the decision to acquire, land has not to be made by the same authority but by different authorities.
Further, the conditions under which the acquisition has to be made differ from clause to clause.
Therefore, there is no basis to say that the general words in cl.
(c) follow the particular and specific words in cls.
(b) and (c).
[877 E; 879 H] State of Bomby vs Ali Gulshan, , Lilavati Bai vs Stat of Bombay, ; , K, K. Kochuni vs State of Madras, A.I.R. 1960 S.C. 1050, referred to.
