The appellant was appointed in 1942 as Labour Supervisor, Army Ordnance Corps.
In 1951, pending inquiry into certain charges against him his service was terminated by giving him one month 's notice under rule 5 of the Civilians in Defence Services (Temporary Service) Rules, 1949.
He challenged the legality of the order of termination on the grounds that it had been passed by an officer subordinate to the authority who appointed him and that no adequate opportunity had been afforded to him of defending himself.
He also alleged that the Order was vitiated by mala fides.
In the appellant 's appeal against the dismissal of his suit the High Court held that Article 311 of the Constitution was inapplicable, that breach of the Rules did not give an aggrieved party a right to go to the Court and that the Order was not vitiated by mala fides.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court.
HELD : The appellant, holding a post connected with Defence cannot claim the protection of Article 311 of the Constitution.
Jugatrai Mahinchand Ajwani vs Union of India C.A. 1185 of 1965 dt. 6 2 67 and section P. Bahl vs Union of India C.A. 1918 of 1966 dt. 8 3 68: followed.
(ii)The view of the High Court that the rules are not justifiable cannot be sustained.
Breach of statutory rules in relation to conditions ,of service would entitle the aggrieved government servant to have recourse to the court for redress.
R. Venkataro vs Secretary of State, A.I.R. 1937 P.C. 31, The State ,of Uttar Pradesh & Others vs Ajodhya Prasad, and State of Mysore vs M. H. Bellary, ; , referred to.
In the present case the order of discharge has been passed by the ,appointing authority as required by rule 5.
(iii)In the appeal before this Court the finding on the point of mala fides must be accepted as final and the appellant cannot be allowed to re agitate that matters.
(iv)As regards the applicability of the rule of natural justice it has not been shown how under the general law of master and servant, in the absence of any protection conferred by Article 311 of the Constitution such a rule can be invoked.
