Shah Abdul Rahim was Sajjadanasheen of a Dargah and Khankah in Hyderabad.
He had four sons and two daughters.
After his death in 1905 he was succeeded as Sajjadanasheen by his eldest son Abdul Hai Shah Abdur Rahim left Matrooka property apart from the properties appertaining to the Dargah and Khankah.
The matter of the partition of Matrooka properties was referred to arbitrators.
The appellant who was Abdur Rahim 's youngest son was a minor at the time and was represented in the arbitration proceeding by his brother Nooruddin.
The properties Exhibits B 1 to B 10 were acknowledged by the parties before arbitrators to be in the possession of Abdul Hai as Dargah and Khankah properties and any right or claim to them was renounced by Abdul Hai 's brothers and sisters.
The arbitrators gave their award on August 1, 1908 partitioning the properties.
On August 13, 1908 there was a decree in the Darul Khaza Court confirming the aforesaid award.
The properties B 1 to B 10 thereafter remained in the possession of Abdul Hai.
In 1927 Abdul Hai got an adjudication from the Nizam 's Government that the Dargah and Khankah properties consisted only of two villages and that properties B 1 to B 10 were not Dargah and Khankah properties.
In 1938 Abdul Hai wrote a letter to the Nizam 's government again asserting that properties B 1 to B 10 were his personal properties.
The appellant filed a suit on 24th July 1941 for setting aside the decree dated.
August 13, 1908, passed by the Darul Khaza Court and for partition of the Matrooka properties left by his father including properties B 1 to B 10.
He impeached the award and the decree on the ground that he was not represented by 1 lawful guardian.
He claimed that the award and decree should be avoided because they were based on the wrongful representation of Abdul Hai that they were Dargah and Khankah properties.
The trial court decreed the suit holding : (1) that the award and decree in question were obtained by fraud; (2) that the letter written by Abdul Hai in 1938 showed that he was aware of the Matrooka character of the properties but kept this fact from his brothers and sisters; (3) that the appellant 73 5 came to know the facts from the said letter of 1938 and the suit was not therefore barred by limitation.
The High Court in appeal held (1) that the appellant was a minor and therefore reference to the arbitration and the award thereon were void; (2) that the decree passed by the Damlkhaza Court was not a nullity since the appellant did not file his suit within three years after attaining majority; (3) that the decree was not obtained by fraud; (4) that Abdul Hai asserted in 1927 that the properties in question were his personal properties and this assertion of title adverse to the appellant and his brothers and sisters became known to them in 1927 and for this reason also the suit was barred by limitation.
in ' appeal by certificate to this Court, HELD: The appeal must be allowed, (i) The minority of the appellant was a fact found by the trial court and the High Court.
The appellant 's brother who represented him in the arbitration and court proceedings was not a legal guardian, nor was he appointed by the Court.
The relinquishment of property by Nooruddin on behalf of the minor was not binding on the minor whose interests were not protected.
The arbitration proceedings, the award and the decree of the Darul Khaza Court on the award were therefore void.
[740 D, 741 E F] Mohd. Amin & Ors.
vs Vakil Ahmed & Ors, ; and Imambandi vs Mutsaddi, 45 I.A. 73, referred to. ' (ii) The estate ' of a deceased Mohammedan devolves on his heirs at the moment of his death.
The heirs succeed to the estate as tenants in common in specific shares.
When the heirs continue to hold the estate as tenants in common without dividing it and one of them subsequently brings a suit for recovery of the share the period of limitation for the suit does not run against him from the date of the death of the deceased but from the date of express ouster or denial of title and article 114 of Sch. 1 to the Limitation Act 1908 would be the relevant Article.
[741 H, 742 A] (iii) The cause of action for partition of properties is a perpetually recurring one '.
In Mohammedan Law the doctrine of partial partition is not applicable because the heirs are tenants in common and the heirs of the deceased Muslim succeed to the definite fraction of every part of his estate.
In the present case the suit was for partition of properties which were by consent of parties treated as Dargah and Khankah but which were later discovered to be Matrooka properties in fact and therefore the declaration in the award and the decree on the award that those were Dargah and Khankah properties could not stand and the entire partition had to be reopened by reason of fraud in the earlier proceedings.
[746 G 747 B] Monsharam Chakravarty & Ors.
vs Gonesh Chandra Chakravarty & Ors., , referred to.
(iv) The decree of the Darul Khaza Court could not be an obstacle to, the claim of the appellant for partition of the properties, because the properties were admittedly not Dargah and Khankah properties but Matrooka Properties.
If all parties proceeded upon a basis that these , were Dargah and Khankah properties and that basis is wiped out by the adjudication by the Government of the Nizam, the parties are restored to their position as heirs to the Matrooka property.
The award and the decree by reason of evidence of facts discovered since the judgment and the decree of the Darul Khaza Court could not be allowed to stand because the effect of the discovery of the facts was to make it "reason ably probable that the action will succeed".
[744 H 745 B] 1100Sup CI/72 73 6 Birch vs Birch, [1902] Probate Division 131, referred to.
(v) When a plaintiff has been kept from knowledge by the dependent of the circumstances constituting the fraud, the plaintiff can rely upon section 18 of the Limitation Act to escape from the bar of limitation.
When Abdul Hai got the properties released by reason of the decision of the Government of the Nizam in the year 1927 the properties became divisible among the appellant and his brothers and sisters.
The existence of the right of the appellant was kept concealed by Abdul Hai.
The appellant was not aware of the right nor could he have with reasonable diligence discovered it.
There was active concealment by Abdul Hai of the fact that the properties were not Dargah and Khankah having full knowledge of the fact.
It was only in 1941 that the appellant came to know of the Matrooka character of the properties.
[745 E, 746 E] Rolfe vs Gregory, ; , Boman Chandra Datta vs Promotha Nath Ghose, L.L.R. and Rahimboy vs Turner, 20 I.A. 1. referred to.
(vi) On the facts of the case it was established that the fraud committed by Abdul Hai relates "to matters which prima facie would be a reason for setting the judgment aside".
[747 E F] Halsbury 's Laws of England, Third Edition, Vol. 22, para 1669 at p. 790.
referred to.
(vii) The plea of adverse possession must also fail.
It was apparent that until the year 1927 the appellant and the other parties were already kept out of the knowledge of the true character of the properties.
Even after 1927 it could not be said on the evidence On record that the appellant had any knowledge of the true character of the properties or of ouster or adverse possession of Abdul Hai.
Possession by one co owner is not by itself adverse to other co owners.
On the contrary possession by one co owner is presumed to be the possession of all the co owners unless it is established that the possession of the co owner is in denial of title of co oweners and the possession is in hostility to co owners by exclusion of them.
In the present case there was no evidence to support this conclusion.
Ouster is an unequivocal act of assertion of title.
There has to be open denial of title to the parties who are entitled to it by excluding and ousting them.
[745 F H]
