The appellant, who was working as the Headmistress in the respondent school was reduced to the position of an Assistant Teacher.
Her appeal to the District Educational Officer under.
13(2)(vi) of Part 11 of the rules published by the State Government in the Gazette on August 29 1939, was rejected, but on a further appeal by her to the Divisional Inspector of Schools, the management of the school was directed to restore her to the position of Headmistress.
As the management did not do so, she filed a suit for the issue of a mandatory injunction to the respondent and for damages.
On the question whether the rules under which the appeal was filed and the order was made were only administrative instructions by the Government to its educational officers and not statutory rules which would give rise to a remedy enforceable at law at the instance of an employee of a school aggrieved against the management, HELD: (1) Section 56 of the Madras Elementary Education Act, 1920, authorized the Government to make rules to 'carry out all or any of the purposes of this Act ', and under sub section 2(h) for declaring the conditions subject to which schools may be admitted to recognition or aid, and rules were framed in 1922.
The Act was amended by Amendment Act of 1939, by which Chs. 11, IV, VI and section 55 were deleted.
The existing rules therefore could not be continued as they could not be regarded as rules for 'carrying out the purposes of the Act. ' Hence they were reframed and published in the Gazette in 1939 in two parts.
[13F, H; 14D].
(a) The first part contained rules dealing with matters provided for in the various sections.
The rules in Part II could not refer to any section because, they related to matters such as recognition and aid dealt with in sections and Chapters which were repealed by the 1939 amendment, and hence, Part II rules did not set out or refer to any section of the Act.
[14E].
(b) The rules in Part I were headed 'Rules framed under the Madras Elementary Education Act, 1920 ', but the Rules in Part 11 were not given any such heading or title.
[14F].
(c) There was no previous publication of the rules in Part 11 as required by section 56(1).
[14F G].
(d) The rules in Part 11 could not be claimed to have been made under section 56(2) (h) dealing with the conditions subject to which schools may be admitted to recognition or aid, because they did not satisfy the condition precedent for such rule making, namely, that they could be made only 'to carry out all or any of the purposes of the Act ', [16D F].
7 Therefore, the rules in Part 11 could not be said to be statutory rules framed under section 56.
[16F] (2) But the Government had the power de hors the Act to lay down conditions under which it could recognise and grant aid.
To achieve uniformity and certainty in the exercise of such executive power and to avoid discrimination, Government could frame rules which would however only be administrative instructions to its officers.
[17B D] The rules in the present case, relating to recognition and aid, thus governed the terms on which Government would grant recognition and aid and Government could enforce the rules on the management by the denial or withdrawal of such recognition or aid, if there was a breach or noncompliance of the conditions laid down in the rules.
But the enforcement of such rules was a matter between the Government and the management, and a third party, such as a teacher aggrieved by same order of the management, could not derive from the rules any enforceable right against the management on the grounds of a breach of or non compliance with any of the rules.
[17D E; 19B C] (3) The relation between the management of the elementary school and the teachers employed in it would be governed by the terms of the contract of employment and the law of master and servant in the absence of any statute or statutory rules controlling or abrogating such a contract and providing to the contrary.
[16F G] The result is that the relations between the managements and the teachers even in a recognised elementary school have to be regarded as being governed by the contracts of employment and the terms and conditions contained therein.
Part II Rules, which cannot be regarded ,is having the status of statutory rules made under section 56 cannot be said to have the effect of controlling the relations between the management of a school and its teachers.
[16H; 17A B] Therefore, the appellant could not be said to have had a cause of action for enforcing the directions given by the Divisional Inspector to restore her as the Headmistress in the appeal filed by her.
Appeals against orders passed by the management against a teacher are provided for under r. 13 so as to enforce the satisfaction of conditions under which recognition and aid would be granted or withdrawn, and not for regulating as between the teacher and the management, the relations of master and servant arising under the contract of employment.
[18B C] Chandrasekharan Nair vs Secretary to Government of Kerala, , A. Ramaswami Ayyangar vs State of Madras, , and Moss.
vs The Management, , approved.
Govindaswami vs Andhra, , overruled
