The appellant was a constable in the police force ' of Haryana State.
At the relevant time he was posted to do duty at the police lines, Karnal.
It was reported by the Lines Officer that he was not present at the roll call on the evening of November 25, 1963.
The Judicial Magistrate gave him a notice in January 1966 asking him to explain why he should not he held guilty under section 29 of the police 'Act 1891 being absent on the aforesaid date.
The appellant explained that he was mentally upset on account of the death of two near relatives and was himself ill.
The, Magistrate held that the appellant was technically guilty, even though his case required sympathetic consideration.
In this view he sentenced the appellant to pay a fine of Rs. 51 and in default to undergo simple imprisonment for seven days.
Appeals before the Sessions Judge and the High Court failed.
In appeal to this Court by special leave it was contended on behalf of the appellant, that since more than three months, had intervened between the commission of the alleged offence and the commencement of the prosecution, the trial was time barred by limitation under section 42 of the .
This point was raised in this Court for the first time but had been stated in the statement of propositions of law to be advanced before the Court, and a copy of the same had been supplied to the counsel for the State.
Allowing the appeal, HELD : (i) The question of limitation being purely one of law requiring no fresh investigation into facts the appellant could be permitted to raise it for the first time in this Court.
[973 H] (ii)The appellant 's prosecution was initiated against him for something done under the provisions of the Act, namely non compliance with the requirement to be on duty as required under the .
Therefore under section 42 of the Act the prosecution should have been commenced against the appellant within three months of the commission of the act complained of.
The act complained of was alleged to have been committed on November 25, 1963.
Even treating the notice issued by the judicial magistrate as amounting to commencement of prosecution, it took place only on January 10, 1966, long after the expiry of three months from the date of the commission of the offence.
Therefore the prosecution commenced against the appellant was barred by limitation under section 42 of the Act.
[974 D E] Maulud Ahmad vs State of Uttar Pradesh, [1961] Supp. 2 S.C.R. 38, distinguished.
