Certain sugar was pledged with the plaintiff bank (appellant herein) by Defendant No. 2 under a cash credit agreement.
Part of the said sugar was seized under the Public Demands Recovery Act in connection with a demand of sugar cess by the Cane Commissioner.
The sugar was sold and the sale proceeds were attached towards the payment of cess.
No payment was made to the plaintiff bank, which thereupon filed the present suit to enforce its claim.
The trial court granted a decree against the State of Bihar for the price of the sugar.
The High Court however held that no decree could be granted against the State as the seizure was lawful.
HELD:The pawnee had special property and a lien which was not of ordinary nature on the goods and so long as his claim was not satisfied no other creditor of the pawnor had any right to take away the goods or its price.
After the, goods had been seized by the Government it was bound to pay the amount due to the plaintiff and the balance could have been made available to satisfy the claim of other creditor of the pawnor.
But by a mere act of lawful seizure the Government could not deprive the plaintiff of the amount which was secured by the pledge of the goods to it.
As the act of the Government resulted in deprivation of the amount to which the plaintiff was entitled it was bound to reimburse the plaintiff for such amount which the plaintiff in ordinary course would have realized by sale of the goods pledged with it on the pawnor making a default in the payment of debt.
[303E G] The trial court was right in holding that the plaintiff 's right as a pawnee could not be extinguished by the seizure of the goods in its possession inasmuch as the pledge of the goods was not meant to replace the liability under the cash credit agreement.
It was intended to give the plaintiff a primary right to sell the goods in satisfaction of the liability of the pawnor.
The Cane Commissioner who was an unsecured creditor could not have any higher rights than the pawnor and was entitled only to the surplus money after satisfaction of the plaintiffs dues.
[303G 304B]
