The ruler of the erstwhile State of Jhabua granted jagirs to N and R. The Jagirs were forfeited in 1943.
On March.
30, 1948 the Ruler made an order purporting to declare a large number of immovable properties, including certain houses in the occupation of N and R as his private proper.
On April 1, 1948 the Ruler made another order purporting to grant to N and R the right to continue to occupy the said houses during their life time without any right to sell, mortgage or create any charge thereon.
On June 29, 1948 the State of Jhabua merged in the State of Madhya Bharat.
The Government of the State of Madhya Bharat did not recognise the claim of the erstwhile Ruler of Jhabua to all the properties claimed by him as his private properties.
The properties in the occupation of N and R were among those not recognised as the Ruler 's private property.
The possession of N on the properties in her occupation was not disturbed in her lifetime.
On April 30, 1962 the Executive Engineer District Dhar, submitted an application under section 3 read with section 4 of the Madhya Pradesh Government Premises (Eviction) Act, 1952 for the eviction of R and the successor in interest of N from the properties respectively occupied by them.
Orders of eviction made by the Sub Divisional Officer were upheld by the Collector in the appeals filed before him.
The high Court however allowed the writ petitions filed by N 's successors in interest and by R and quashed the orders of eviction against them.
The State of Madhya Pradesh appealed.
HELD: The appeal must be dismissed, The evidence showed that some only of the properties set forth the declaration of April, 1, 1948 and claimed by the Ruler as private property "were accepted as such by the Government of Madhya Bharat: there was no finding with regard to the others that they appertained to the Ruler as distinct from his private properties.
In order to succeed the, appellant had to show that the properties had been confiscated by the Ex ruler and had ceased to belong to N and R. [410E G].
As the properties originally belonged to N and R there must be some evidence of the displacement of their title before the Eviction Act could be made applicable to them.
The order of April 1, 1948 passed by the Ruler could not be interpreted as an order of confiscation.
It was not proved that the ownership of the properties had passed to the Ruler and thereafter first to the State of Madhya Bharat and then to the State of Madhya Pradesh [410G H] 408 In order to enable Government to take Proceedings successfully under either section 3 or 4 of the Act, it must satisfy the Court that the premises in respect whereof action was taken was Government premises.
As the State 'ailed to establish this fact the question of eviction under the Act could never arise.
[411E].
