The appellants carried on the business of Commission Agents in Jaggery in Andhra Pradesh.
They arranged for the sale of jaggery charging a small commission for their service and rendering an account to their Principals in respect of those sales.
Every buyer was fully apprised of the fact that he was purchasing jaggery of specified agriculturist Principals and not that of the appellants.
Till about 1963 under section II of the Andhra Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, 1957, commission agents were required to obtain and were being issued licences and if they conformed to the conditions of those licences, they were not subjected to tax.
In 1963 the principal Act was amended by Andhra Pradesh General Sales Tax Amendment Act 16of 1963.
By the new section I I introduced by the Amending Act the Agentsof resident Principals were made liable for assessment and collection of tax though the liability of the Agent was made co extensive with that of the principal.
The High Court held that in assessing the Agent the turnover of those Principals whose turnover was below the taxable limit of Rs. 10,000 could not be taken into account.
As a consequence of this decision the Andhra Pradesh General Sales Tax Amendment Act 5 of 1968 was enacted and a new section I 1 substituted for the existing section.
This section II was given retrospective effect from 1st August 1963.
The object of this amendment was to enable the taxing authorities to assess levy and collect tax or penalty under the Sales Tax Act from the Agent irrespective of the fact that the Principal was not liable to tax.
This new section was also struck down by the High Court, on the ground that it was violative of article 14 of the Constitution.
In view of this judgment which restored the legal position to that prevailing before the Amendment, large sums of money which bad been collected as tax from the Agents became refundable.
To meet this situation the Andhra Pradesh Legislature enacted the Andhra Pradesh General gales Tax Amendment Act 9 of 1970, Section 8 of which validated the assessments already made.
Under section 9 Agents who had not collected the tax from their Principals were exempted from tax.
Under section I I Agents who had collected the tax were made liable to pay the same.
In writ petitions under article 226 filed by Agents it was contended that section II as amended and section 9 of the Amending Act were violative of article 14.
The High Court held that section 1 1 was valid but section 9 violated article 14.
In appeal filed against the High Court 's judgment by certificate, HELD:(i) The appeals filed by the agents were not maintainable.
What was sought to be recovered from the appellants was in respect of a tax collected on past dealings and not with respect to the future transactions.
The tax had already been collected, no doubt at first illegally, but 368 due to the Amendment Act, that collection had become legal and as dealers, the appellants were liable to pay that amount to the State.
As there was nothing to show that what was sought to be recovered from the dealer was more than what he had collected he had not suffered any loss nor any disadvantage which would entitle him to seek a remedy under article 226 of the Constitution [373B C] (ii) Section 9 had been wrongly struck down by the High Court as invalid.
This section was enacted by the legislature with the object of removing shortcomings in the principal Act which were found wanting by judicial interpretation.
The interregnum between the declaration by the High Court of certain provisions of the Act as being unconstitutional and the attempt of the legislature to remedy the defects and to give retrospective effect thereto created two distinct categories between the same class of dealers namely those who had collected the tax whether they were assessed or not and those who had not collected the tax.
This classification was certainly reasonable and was related to the object which the Amendment Act sought to achieve.
The dealers who had not collected the tax could not have collected it as the law stood and therefore the legislature thought it just or proper to collect the tax from those who were not liable.
Even this exemption was given to those who could establish that they had not in fact collected it, the burden of which was upon those who claimed the exemption.
[374D E],
