The appellants were dismissed from the service of the Government of Assam by two separate orders passed by the Governor on April 1, 1965.
The orders recited that the appellants were unfit to be retained in the public service, that they ought to be dismissed from service and that the Governor was satisfied in terms of article 311(2) (c) of the Constitution that it was not expedient to give them opportunity to show cause against the action proposed to be taken in regard to them as stated above.
The appellants challenged the orders of dismissal in writ petitions under article 226 of the Constitution which were dismissed by the High Court.
In appeals by certificate the contentions of the appellants were: (i) that the impugned orders were not in compliance with the terms of article 311(2) as amended by the Constitution Fifteenth Amendment Act which had come into force on October 6, 1963; (ii) that the orders were bad because they were passed without consulting the Public Service Commission ; (iii) that the orders were passed mala fide at the instance of the Chief Secretary and the Finance Minister who were annoyed with the appellants.
HELD: (i) Per Shelat and Dua, JJ.
According to the decisions of this Court the expression "reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken" in the unamended article 311(2) included an opportunity to show cause against the guilt of the government servant concerned.
This opportunity to show cause against the guilt seems to correspond to the reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of the charges in the course of the inquiry contemplated by the amended sub article.
The amendment in 1963 was made principally to put in clearer language the result of the judicial decisions construing section 240(3) of the Government of India Act, 1935 and unamended article 311(2) of the Con stitution.
It could not be doubted that the Governor in the present case was fully alive to the interest of the security of the State when he expressed his satisfaction about the inexpediency of giving an opportunity to the appellants to show cause against their guilt as contemplated by cl.
(2) of article 311 and intended that this clause shall not apply to their cases.
Merely because the form of the order was expressed in the language used in the unamended article 311(2) it did not detract from its effectiveness as operating to exclude the applicability of the amended cl.
(2) of article 311 as a whole.
The use of the words in conformity with the unamended article served to convey the same intention as was contemplated by the 478 amended article and the difference in the language which seemed to be inconsequential did not have the effect of nullifying the impugned orders.
The words 'as stated above ' in the orders did not have the effect of restricting the ambit of the show cause notice to the question of penalty which may be imposed after the inquiry into the unfitness of the appellants to be retained in the public service.
[482C H; 483E G] Khem Chand vs Union of India & Ors.
[1958] S.C.R. I Secretary of State for India vs I.M. Lal, and High Commissioner for India vs I.M. Lall, L.R. (1948) 75 I.A. 225, referred to.
Per Bhargava, J. (dissenting) The "action proposed as stated above" in the impugned orders clearly was the order imposing the penalty of dismissal from service.
In the order itself preceding the recording of the satisfaction there was no other action proposed, except the action of dismissal from service.
The satisfaction recorded by the Governor, therefore, related to the third step to be taken under cl.
(2) of article 311 of the Constitution.
The Governor confirmed his satisfaction to the inexpediency of giving opportunity to the appellants to show cause against the penalty proposed.
No satisfaction was recorded that it was inexpedient to hold the inquiry required by cl.
(2) of article 311 as amended.
Under sub cl.
(c) of the proviso, what was needed was a satisfaction that it was inexpedient to hold the inquiry.
No such satisfaction having been recorded it was necessary that the provisions of the principal cl.
(2) of article 311 should have been complied with before passing an order of dismissal.
The order of dismissal was therefore void and liable to be struck down.
[489C E] Case law referred to.
(ii) Consultation with the Public Service Commission is not compulsory under r. 10 of the Assam Services Discipline and Appeal Rules, 1964 and regulation 6 of the Assam Public Service Commission (Limitation of Functions) Regulations 1951.
The consultation with the Commission is not prescribed either by the Rules or by the Regulations.
The consultation is only under article 320 (3) (c) of the Constitution.
So far as that consultation is concerned this Court has held that it is not mandatory.
Nonconsultation with the Public Service Commission could not therefore be held to vitiate the orders impugned.
[492C 493D] State of U.P. vs Manbodhan Lal Srivastava, ; and State of Bombay vs D. A. Korgaonkar, C.A. No. 289/1968 dt.
6 5 1960, relied on.
(iii) There was no charge that the Governor had any extraneous reasons for Passing the orders of dismissal.
There was nothing on record to show that either the Chief Secretary or the Finance Minister took any Part in the proceedings which led to the orders of dismissal, or that they advised the Governor.
The orders were no doubt authenticated by the Chief Secretary in the name of the Governor, but that did not mean that the Governor was in any way influenced by any advice tendered to him by the Chief Secretary.
In the circumstances, the plea of mala fide must be rejected.
[493E F] The appeals.
had accordingly to be dismissed:
