The respondent company had a cold storage.
It filed a suit against the Government of Uttar Pradesh and three of its officials claming rent or damages on the allegation that under an agreement negotiated by Defendant No. 3 under instructions from Defendants Nos. 2 and 4 on behalf of the State Government (defendant No. (1) space had been reserved in its cold storage by the company for the storage of Government potatoes but no potatoes had been sent for storage.
On behalf of the State Government it was pleaded that no contract was entered into in accordance with article 299(1) of the Constitution.
The trial court upheld the objection of the State and dismissed the suit against it, but it held the other defendants liable for the storage charges.
The High Court on appeal by the defendants set aside the decree against defendants Nos. 2 and 4 but maintained it against defendant No. 3.
According to the High Court the entire transaction had been entered into by the defendant No. 3 on behalf of the Government and since the State Government was not liable by virtue of article 299 of the Constitution the said defendant would be liable under section 230(3) of the Contract Act.
In appeal to this Court by certificate, HELD : Except in Chatturbhuj 's case which lent some support to the High Court 's view, this Court has taken the view that the provisions of article 299(1) are mandatory and contain a prohibition against a contract being entered into otherwise than in the manner prescribed by the aforesaid provisions.
The observations in Chaturbhuj 's case have been regarded in subsequent decisions as either not laying down the law correctly or as being confined to the facts of that case.
The consensus of opinion is that a contract entered into without complying, with the conditions laid down in article 299(1) is void.
If there is no contract in the eye of the law it is difficult to see how section 230(3) of the, Contract Act would become applicable.
(5 D] The appeal must accordingly be allowed.
Chatturbhuj Vithaldas Jasani vs Moreshwar Parashram & Ors, ; , not followed.
State of West Bengal vs M/s. B. K. Mondal & Sons.
[1962] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 876, and Mulamchand vs State o/ Madhya Pradesh; , , applied.
[For the reasons stated in the judgment the court did not give any final opinion on the question of applicability of section 235 of the Contract 2 Act to cases when the contract Suffers from the infirmity that the requirements of article 299(1) of the Constitution have not been complied with]
