In the assessment year 1948 49, the assessee, a public limited company revalued its assets and enhanced the book value by Rs. 145,00,000 and continued to show the inflated valuation in the balance sheets for subsequent years.
For the assessment year 1957 58, the Department took the valuation of the assets as shown in the balance sheets.
The assessee, however, claimed that the said Rs. 45,00,000 should be deducted in the computation of the net value.
Before the Tribunal, it was stated that the reason for the inflation was that the assessee contemplated issuing bonus shares for that amount, but it did not do so because the necessary consent of the Central Government was not grant ed.
The Tribunal decided in favour of the assessee but the High 'Court, on reference, held that there was a motive for the revaluation ,of the assets and therefore the valuation in the balance sheet could not be accepted as a correct basis and that the net value would have to be ascertained by the Wealth tax Officer under section 7 of the Wealth tax Act.
Both the assessee and the Revenue appealed to this Court.
HELD: (1) Under section 211 of the Indian , every balance sheet must give a true and fair figure of the state of its affairs as at the end of the financial year.
Under section 7 of the Wealth tax Act the Wealth Tax Officer may determine the net value of the assets of the business having regard to the balance sheet of the business as on the valuation date it is open to the Wealth tax Officer to accept the figure given by the assessee or to arrive at another figure if he was satisfied for good reasons that the valuation given in the balance sheets was wrong.
Equally it is open to the assessee to satisfy the authorities that .the said figure had been enhanced, for "acceptable reasons".
[107 E H] (2) The main idea underlying the issue of bonus shares is to bring the nominal amount of the issued share capital of the company into line 'with the true excess of assets over liabilities.
But the taking of this ,step would involve a genuine and correct valuation of assets and not their under valuation or inflation, especially when the power of the Company to issue bonus shares is of fiduciary nature and must be ,exercised bonafide for the general advantage of the company.
[108G H., 109A] (3) In the present case, no evidence was placed before the Wealth Tax Officer for demonstrating how it became necessary to inflate the valuation by Rs. 1,45,00,000 for the purpose of issuing bonus 105 shares, nor was it shown that it was so done under expert acturial suggestion under some misapprehension or mistake.
The Wealth Tax Officer was therefore fully justified in accepting the figure which the assessee had himself given in the balance sheet as the correct figure and making the assessment in accordance with that figure.
[109B E] Kesoram Industries and Cotton Mills Ltd., vs Commissioner of Wealth Tax (Central) Calcutta, ; referred to.
