In August 1958, the State Government sanctioned a final town planning scheme The Bombay Town Planning Scheme, Santa Cruz, No. VI and directed that the scheme should come into force from 1st January 1959.
As part of the scheme there was a Redistribution and Valuation Statement and to the Statement some Notes were appended.
Note 11 provided that 'all huts, sheds, stables and Such other temporary structures including those which do not conform to the regulations of the scheme are required to be removed within one year from the date the final scheme comes into force. ' In pursuance of the scheme plots were allotted, Ind the respondents became the owners of certain plots.
Huts, sheds and stables had been built on those plots by slum dwellers.
, Since the appellant Corporation took no action for implementing the scheme, the respondents, from whom betterment charges were being recovered by the appellant, called upon the appellant to implement it by removing the Slums, etc., and to provide roads and drains as directed in the scheme.
The appellant however, remained inactive, and the respondents filed a petition for the issue of a mandamus to the appellant and the High Court allowed the petition.
In appeal to this Court, on the questions : (1) Whether the appellant was bound in law to remove the structures out the private plots of the respondents in so far as they contravened the Town Planning Scheme, and (2)whether a writ of mandamus could issue at the instance of the respondents when they had collected rents from the Occupants of the hut ments, etc.
HELD : (1) Under section 51(3) of the Town Planning Act, 1954, the final scheme as sanctioned by the Government has the same effect as if it were enacted in the Act.
The scheme and its regulations must, therefore.
be read as supplemental to the Act.
, Under section 53, all rights in the original plots of the private owners would determine, and if, in the scheme, reconstituted or final plots are allotted to them, they shall become subject to the rights settled by the Town Planning Officer in the final Scheme.
The fact that the final plots coincided with the original plots of the) private owners would not make any difference.
Under section 54 the local authority has to see whether any person is occupying any land in disregard of the rights determined under the scheme, and if he does so, he is to be summarily evicted by the local authority.
Under section 55(1)(a) every building ,or work which is in contravention of the town planning scheme, wherever it may be in the area under the scheme, Could be removed, Pulled down ,or altered by the local authority which alone is named as the authority for that purpose.
[414 D E; 415 A B, C D. H; 416 F F; 417 G] 409 In the present case, note 11 refers not merely to huts, sheds, stables which do not conform to the regulations of the scheme, but also to all huts, sheds, stables and such other temporary structures; and whosoever the owner or occupant may be, he is required to remove it within one year from the date the final scheme came into force.
Hence, if the owner or occupant did not so remove he would be contravening the provisions of the scheme and thereupon the local authority will have the power under s.55 (1) (a) to remove or pull them down.
The note takes note of the fact that the occupants of the hutments will be dishoused and makes provision for allotment of land to such dishoused persons.
B C] Therefore, it is the primary duty of the Corporation as the local authority to remove all offending huts, etc., in the whole area under the scheme and not merely from those areas which are allotted to the Corporation.
That the respondent could, by having recourse to law, eject the slum dwellers and remove their huts would not be a relevant consideration since the duty is imposed by the Act on the appellant.
Further, there is no provision in the Act which requires owners of the plots to, take action against the hutment dwellers.
[419 D E; 421 F G] The Maharashtra Regional and Town Planning Act.
1966, which came in to force during the pendency of the petition in the High Court has provisions corresponding to the 1954 Act which are practically of the same content.
Hence the position is the same under the 1966 Act also.
[419 E F, G H; 420 C D] (2) Since development and planning is primarily for the benefit of public, the Corporation is under an obligation to perform its duty in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
A mandamus may hence be, issued to the appellant ordering that to be done which the statute requires to be done.
[420 E F] In the present case, the High Court exercised its discretion in directing the issue of the writ and this Court, in appeal by special leave, will not ordinarily question that discretion.
The mere fact that the owners of the plots received some amounts from the hutment dwellers by way of compensation or rent would not import any disqualification for issuing a mandamus at their instance.
[421 A, F] Queen vs The Church Wardens of All Saints, Wigan, and Queen vs Garland, , referred to.
