While a reference was pending before the Labour Court the respondent workmen went on strike because some workmen were suspended.
The Labour Officer as well as the management tried to persuade the workers to rejoin duty, but the respondents, made it a condition of their joining duty that the suspended workmen should also be taken back.
The management thereafter gave the respondents notices on different dates asking them to join duty by a date specified in the notices and subsequently, by another letter, called upon them to justify their absence, failing which.
the respondents were informed, that their names would be struck off from the muster roll.
Notwithstanding those notices and the willingness of management to take them back the respondents gave no reply but continued the strike and they were informed by letters that their names were removed from the muster roll.
No domestic inquiry however, was held into the misconduct of the respondents.
The Labour Court, to which the dispute was referred directed reinstatement of the respondents.
In appeal to this Court, on the: question whether the termination of the employment of the respondents, in the circumstances of the case, without an inquiry, was justified.
HELD : (1) It is an accepted principle of industrial adjudication that workmen can resort to strike in order to press for their demands without snapping the relationship of employer and employee.
, Equally, the management have the right to carry on work, in furtherance of which, they could employ other workmen and justify their action on merits in any adjudication of the dispute arising therefrom.
[497 C E] (2) Merely because workmen go on strike, even where the strike is illegal, it does not justify the management in terminating their services without a domestic inquiry.
[497 C] (3) In the case of a domestic inquiry where misconduct is held to he proved, the industrial tribunal or labour court can only interfere with that order if there is mala fide, or want of good faith or there was victimisation or unfair labour practice or the management has been guilty of basic errors or violation of principles of natural justice or if on the materials, the finding is completely baseless or perverse.
If, however, the management does not hold an inquiry, or the inquiry is, due to some omission or defi ciency, not valid, the management can nonetheless support the order of discharge, termination or dismissal when the matter is referred for industrial adjudication by producing satisfactory evidence and proving misconduct of the concerned workmen.
The evidence to substantiate and justify the action taken against the workmen is not as stringent as that 491 which is required in a court of law, but should be such as would satisfy the tribunal that the order of termination was proper.
In such a case, there is no difference between a reference under section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act and a dispute raised under section 33A of the Act, and, no distinction can be made between cases where the domestic inquiry is invalid and those where no inquiry has, in fact, been ,held.
That is, the management can justify and substantiate its action on evidence duty place before the Tribunal.
[498 E G; 499 E F; 500 C D; 501 A B] (4) In the present case, there were no Standing Orders applicable to the appellant company.
A domestic inquiry should have been held in order to entitle the management to dispense with the services of its workmen on the ground of misconduct.
[498 A B] (5) But the management had proved before the Labour Court that there was persistent and obdurate refusal by the workmen to join duty notwithstanding the fact that the management had done everything possible to persuade them and gave them opportunities to come back to work; and that the respondents had, without any sufficient cause refused to do.
The strike was illegal and it was not necessary for the management to prove that the respondents were guilty of overt acts of intimidation, incitement or violence.
There, is nothing to justify the allegation that the management wanted to terminate to their services under some pretext with a view to recruit them afresh and deprive them of accrued benefits.
, The notices clearly mentioned that the workmen would be free to join duty by a certain date, and it was only after that date the management was willing to entertain them only as new entrants.
Therefore, though no domestic, inquiry was held, the management had proved the misconduct of the respondents before the Labour Court and hence the termination of their services was not improper, and there was no justification for directing their reinstatement.
[501 C G] Express Newspapers (P) Ltd. vs Michael Mark & Anr., , India General Navigation & Railway Co. Ltd. vs Their Workmen; , , Punjab National Bank Ltd. vs Its Workmen ; , Workmen of Motipur Sugar Factory (P) .
Ltd. vs Motipur Sugar Factory, ; and Hindustan General Electrical Corporation Ltd. vs Bishwanath Prasad & Anr.
C.A. No. 2167/66 dt.
17 8 71, followed.
