The appeallant was convicted of the offence of murder by shooting and the High Court confirmed the ' conviction and the sentence of death.
In appeal to this Court, HELD : The conviction and the sentence should be set aside.
(1)The substantive evidence of a witness is his evidence in the trial court.
But then the accused person is not previously known to a witness when the identification of the accused by the witness soon after the former 's arrest is of vital importance because it furnishes to the investigating agency an assurance that the investigation is proceeding on right lines, in addition to furnishing corroboration of his own evidence in court.
[631 A C] In the.
present case, the evidence of the witness who gave the F.I.Rshowed that he did not give any description of the person who was alleged :to have fired the shots.
Nor did he state in the F.I.R. that he knew the appellant previously.
There was no evidence to show that the witness had identified the accused in the Committing Magistrate 's Court.
Therefore, his identification in the Sessions Court of the accused without any previous identification at a test parade, and without any description in the F.L.R. to corroborate it, is far too slender a piece of evidence to support the ' appellant 's conviction.
B E; 635 D, F] (2)Some of.the witnesses had stated in their evidence that they had heard the name of the accused being called but neither this fact nor the name of the accused was mentioned in the F.I.R.
The High Court was in error in taking into consideration the contents of the statements recorded under section 161, Cr.
P '.C., of the various witnesses, during the course of .investigation, km the purpose of finding corroboration of their statements.
in court that the name of the accused was disclosed to the police.
the accused 's name was really disclosed soon after the occurrence steps would have been taken by the investigating authorities to arrest him immediately but no such action was in fact taken.
[634 D; 636 C D]
