Disputes having arisen between the appellant and the respondent, they were referred to arbitration in accordance with an arbitration agreement.
The arbitrators entered upon the reference and also appointed an umpire.
After the time for making the award had expired the appellant took the stand that one of the arbitrators would be biased in favour of the respondents.
The respondents therefore called upon the arbitrators to refer the matter to the umpire and also wrote to the umpire and the umpire entered upon the reference.
Thereafter, the appellants filed applications under section 33 of the .
The High Court held that the umpire rightly entered upon the reference, and extended the time to enable the umpire to make an award.
In appeal to this Court it was contended that : (1) the appointment of the umpire was not valid because the consent of the appointee was not obtained,; and (2) under cl. 6 of the Arbitration agreement the operation of para 4 Sch.
I of the was excluded, and the umpire could enter upon the reference only in the event of a difference arising between the arbitrators and the arbitrators referred the matter to the umpire.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD : (1) There is a distinction between appointment and acceptance of an office.
The question of effectiveness or perfection is ordinarily subsequent to appointment.
The scheme of arbitration proceedings indicates that the appointment of an umpire and the acceptance of office are two separate matters arising at different stages in the proceedings.
[699 H; 700 A: 704 E] When the arbitrators are required to appoint an umpire it only means that the arbitrators are to concur in appointing the umpire.
There is no particular method of appointment of an umpire though the usual method is by writing.
Arbitrators who are required to appoint an umpire are under no obligation to obtain the approval of the choice of the person by the parties who appointed the arbitrators.
If any party is dissatisfied with the choice it will not affect the validity of the appointment; nor is the appointment conditional upon the acceptance of appointment by the umpire.
The necessity for communication of appointment to the parties as well as to the appointee depends on the language of the arbitration clause.
The does not say that the appointment of umpire by the arbitrators is to be made only after obtaining the consent of the appointee.
[700 D E; 701 D F; 704 D E] When the umpire assumes his office he accepts the appointment.
Acceptance may be express or implied.
It need not be in writing; it may be evidenced by conduct.
It may also be evidenced by proceeding with 696 the arbitration.
When the umpire is called upon to proceed in terms of the appointment he will either assent expressly or by conduct to act, or he will decline to act.
[704 A B, D, E F] Mirza Sadik Husain vs Mussamat Kaniz Zohra Begam, L.R. 38 I.A. 181, applied.
Ringland vs Lowndes, ; ; and Tradax Export S.A. vs Vokswagenwerk A.G. , explained and distinguished.
(2) (a) Paragraph 4 of the first schedule provides that if the arbitra delivered to any party to the arbitration agreement or to the umpire a notice in writing stating that they cannot agree, the umpire shall forthwith enter on the reference in lieu of the arbitrators. 'Mere is no intention in cl. 6 of the agreement to exclude the operation of this paragraph.
On the contrary the agreement shows that the intention of the parties was that when the arbitrators allowed time to expire without making the award the umpire should enter on the reference in lieu of the arbitrators.
[704 H; 705 A C] (b) In the present case, the arbitrators, by reason of the attitude of one of the parties could not agree to proceed with the matter.
Where one of the arbitrators declines to act and the other is left alone in a case of this type, it will amount to disagreement between the arbitrators.
[705 F G] (c) Failure to make an award in time where the agreement prescribed time does in.
certain circumstances, amount to disagreement.
[705 D E] Iossifoglu vs Counmantaros, and Russel on Arbitration, 18th Ed. pp. 205, 208, referred to.
