The assessee is a private limited company and was the Managing Agent of two other companies.
All the shares held by the assessee company as its investments were the shares of those two companies.
The Income tax authorities held that the assessee company was an 'investment company ' within the scope of section 23A of the Act and ordered the company to pay super tax as provided under section 23A(1).
The High Court in reference held in favour of the assessee.
Dismissing the appeals, HELD : (1) In the facts and circumstances of the present case, the assessee company cannot be said to be an 'investment company ' coming within the scope of section 23A of the Act.
The meaning of the expression "in the case of a company whose business consists wholly or mainly in the dealing in or holding of investments" both in the main section 23A and in the Explanation concerns itself with a company whose business consists "wholly or mainly in the dealing in or holding of investments".
The word "mainly" must necessarily take its colour from the word "wholly" preceding that word.
, In other words the company which comes within the scope of those provisions must be a company whose primary business is in the dealing in or holding of investments and only in such cases, section 23A applies.
And the expression 'business of holding of investments ' in the said section refers to a real, substantial and systematic or organised course of activity of investment carried on by an assesses for a set purpose such as earning profits.
[730 H, 731 D] All the shares held by the assessee company as its investments were the shares of the two companies of which it was the Managing Agent.
These investments were made for a collateral purpose viz., to have a firm grip over its Managing Agency business.
The investments made by the assessee company in the shares of the managed companies are essentially linked with its Managing Agencies and not with the dealing of that company in shares of other companies.
The company 's total income from dividend income of the shares of the managed companies and the Managing Agency commission together is much more than the income earned by the company from its share dealings.
Further the assets of the company used in its share dealings are not more that its other assets.
Therefore, it cannot be said that the assessee company 's business consisted wholly or mainly in the dealing in investments.
[7.33 F] Bengal Assam Investors Ltd. vs C.I.T., West Bengal, and Narain Swadesh.
Weaving Mills vs Commissioner of Excess Profits Tax, , referred to.
