Under section 11 of the Poona University Act, 1948, the Vice Chancellor shall be elected by the Court of the University, from among three persons recommended by the Executive Council, and the election shall be made by the system of proportional representation by means of a single transferable vote by ballot.
In the present case, the result of the ballot papers was that one candidate secured 58 first preference votes, the second secured 53 first preference votes, and the third candidate secured 37 first preference votes.
The third candidate was eliminated on the first count on the basis of his securing the lowest number of first preference votes, and his second preference votes were distributed between the other two.
This resulted in both of them securing an equal number of votes on the second count.
and the candidate who had the majority in the first count was declared elected.
The election was set aside by the High Court.
On the questions: (1) Whether the tie should have been resolved by drawing of lots; and (2) Whether the principals of four colleges voted wrongly at the election because those colleges had not been duly affiliated at the date of election.
HELD: (1) It is an established principle in the system of proportional representation by means of a single transferable vote by ballot, that where for one vacancy there are three candidates and one of them is excluded at the first count and the other two candidates continue and secure in the second count an equal number of votes, then the one who had the lower number of votes in the first count shall be excluded.
Determination by lot in case of equality of votes is neither a principle of universal application nor is it a common law principle.
It is only permissible when there is a specific statutory provision to that effect.
In the absence of such a statutory provision the method of decision by lot is not resorted to when there is another rational method.
The principle of decision by lot is de pendent on chance and accident whereas the principle of exclusion with reference to difference of votes on the original count is based on reason and legislative principles.
The principles of exclusion are not to be found in any statutory enactment in the present case.
On the other hand there is the support of legislative measures embodying the principle of exclusion by reference to original count.
[605D, H; 606A C] (a) Rule 75(4) of the Conduct of Election Rules indicates that when two or more candidates have been credited with the same value and stand lowest on the poll the candidate for whom the lowest number of original 598 votes are recorded shall be excluded.
The rule applies when there are two or more candidates and not only when there are more than two candidates.
The words 'stand lowest on the poll ' qualify 'two or more candidates who have been credited with the same value '.
The High Court overlooked the rational of the principle embodied in this rule that in the case of two continuing candidates each having the same value of votes to fill in one vacancy the tie between the two would be resolved by having regard to their original votes in the first count.
[604B, F] (b) Rule 6 in the Schedule to the Presidential and Vice Presidential Election Rules, 1952, and Statute No. 158 framed under the Poona University Act, though it does not in terms apply to the election of a Vice Chancellor, also embody this principle.
[603B] (c) The High Court 's reliance on r. 81(13) of the Conduct of Election Rule, 1961, in support of the conclusion that the only system of exclusion in a case of the present type should be by lot is erroneous.
The principle in r. 81(3), applies only where more than one seat is to be filled and only one vacancy remains unfilled with only two continuing candidates and each of them has the same value of votes at that count.
[605C] (d) The defeated candidate himself made a petition to the Chancellor under section 60 of the Act, which provides that if any question arises as to whether a person has been duly elected the matter may be referred to the Chancellor whose decision shall be final, not to confirm the election.
The Court of the University has thus laid down its own procedure for correction.
When there is discretion to choose between two principles of exclusion, this Court would not command the University to exercise the discretion in a specific way.
[606E] (2) The four colleges were in fact affiliated before the date of election but there was delay in the publication of the notification.
Such delay would not detract from the sanction previously granted.
[607A]
