The respondent, who was the landlord under whom the appellant was a tenant, obtained a decree for eviction and damages against the appellant.
The respondent filed an execution application on July 19, 1960.
In answer to it the appellant flied objections by initiating proceedings under O. 21, r. 2(2) C.P.C. on September 3, 1960.
In that application, the appellant alleged that there was a compromise between the parties on July 25, 1957 that in pursuance of the compromise he made various payments and that the last of the payments was made on June 16, 1960, and prayed for recording an adjustment of the decree.
The trial court, however, held that as the compromise was entered into on July 25, 1957 the period of limitation for filing the application would start from that date, and since the application was filed beyond 90 days from that date, it was barred by limitation.
The trial court dismissed the application on that sole ground, without investigating into the truth of the compromise or the payments.
On appeal, the appellate court accepted the contention of the appellant that if he was able to establish that be bad made the last payment on June 16, 1960 the period of limitation of three months for filing an application under O. 21, r. 2 would begin to run only from that date and that his application would be in time.
The appellate court therefore set aside the order of the trial court and remanded the proceedings for investigation into facts, namely, whether the compromise and the payments alleged to have been made by the appellant on the basis of the compromise and particularly the payment said to have been made on June 16, 1960, were true.
After remand, the trial court accepted the plea of the appellant regarding the truth of the compromise as well as the payments said to have been made by him, including the payment of June 16, 1960, held that the application filed was within time, and ordered 'full adjustment and satisfaction of the decree.
On appeal, the findings of the trial court were confirmed and the anneal was dismissed, in second appeal, the High Court accepted the findings on the questions of compromise and payments but held that as the appellant had not claimed to have made the payments in compliance with O. 21, r. 1, C.P.C., as amended and in force in Allahabad, it was not open to the appellant to ask for recording adjustment of the decree, and dismissed the application of the appellant filed under O. 21, r. 2.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, HELD: In view of the decision of the appellate court when remanding the matter, it was not open to the respondent to raise the objection ,either of limitation or that the payments had not been made as per O. 21, T. 1, C.P.C. The parties and the courts had proceeded an the basis that 837 the entire question related to a controversy in respect of execution, discharge or satisfaction of the decree.
Under section 47(2) C.P.C., the Court has power to treat the said proceeding as a suit.
Under O. 41, r. 23, an appellant court has power to remand a proceeding when a suit has been disposed of on a preliminary point; and under O. 43, r. 1 (u) C.P.C. an appeal lies against an order remanding the case where an appeal would lie against the decree of the appellate court.
The respondent should have filed an appeal against the order of the remand, and the consequence of his omission to file such an appeal is that under section 105(2), C.P.C., the decision of the appellate court, while remanding the matter, regarding the date from which the period of limitation is to commence, namely June 16, 1960, if payment on that date was established by the appellant, was final and binding on the parties.
The High Court when dealing with the matter should have given due effect to the decision given in the order of remand and should have held that the respondent was precluded from raising either the plea of limitation or that it was not open to the appellant to rely upon the payments not made in accordance with O. 21, r. 1, C.P.C., as in force in Allahabad.
The High Court had not differed on the concurrent findings recorded on facts in favour of the appellant and therefore, interference with the decision of the two subordinate courts was erroneous in law.
[843 F G. 844 C H; 845 A E]
