Section 12(1) of the Madhya Bharat Sales Tax Act, Samv.
2007 prohibits the Commissioner of Sales tax from revising an order of assessment which had been made more than two years previously, while section 39(2), of the Madhya Pradesh, Sales Tax Act, 1959, which came into force on April 1, 1959 and which repealed the Madhya Bharat Act, permits the Commissioner to revise an order till the expiry of three years from the date of the order sought to be revised.
The assessee was a registered dealer under the Madhya Bharat Act.
For the period from July 1, 1957 to 31st March, 1958 he submitted returns.
The Assistant Commissioner of Sales Tax passed an assessment order on November 28, 1961.
On October 30, 1964, the Commissioner of Sales Tax initiated proceedings tinder section 39(2) of the Madhya Pradesh Act for revising the assessment made.
The assessee contended that as the assessment related to the period when the Madhya Bharat Act was in force the revision of the assessment was governed by section 12(1) of that Act, and therefore, the Commissioner could not have revised the order of assessment after the expiry of two years after the assessment was made.
The High Court, in reference, held that, in view of section 52 of the Madhya Pradesh Act, the governing provision was section 12(1) of the Madhya Bharat Act.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court, HELD:(1) The proviso to section 52(1) of the Madhya Pradesh Act, provides that the repeal of the Madhya Bharat Act shall not affect any right already acquired or accrued there.
The effect of section 12 ( 1 ) of the Madhya Bharat Act is that after the time prescribed in that provision the Commissioner could not revise the order of assessment either to the prejudice of the assessee or of the Revenue. 'Me section thus conferred a right both on the assessee as well as on the Department to see that an order of assessment is not revised to their prejudice after two years from the date of the assessment order.
Therefore, the effect of section 52(1) of the Madhya Pradesh At, is that all assessments which include reassessments, should be in accordance with the repealed Act.
[835 B E] Sales Tax Officer Circle I, Jabalpur vs Hanuman Prasad 19 S.T.C. 87 and Swastik Oil Mills Ltd. vs H. B. Munshi, Dy, Commissioner of Sales Tax, Bombay, 21 S.T.C. 383, followed.
(2)The second part of the proviso no doubt provides that any action taken under the repealed Act shall, in so 'far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of the latter Act, be deemed to have been done under the latter Act.
But there is undoubtedly a conflict between section 12(1) of the Madhya Bharat Act and section 39(2) of ' the Madhya Pradesh Act.
Therefore, the Revenue cannot call in aid the second part of the proviso.
[835 E H] 829
