The assessee was the sole proprietor of a business in timber and timber products.
He converted the proprietary business into a partnership business by means of a deed of partnership dated August 1, 1963.
The partnership consisted of the assessee and his two daughters.
The capital of the partnership was to be Rs. 4,00 000.
The assessee contributed Rs. 3,50,000 and each of his two daughters, one married and the other unmarried contributed Rs. 25,000.
The contribution of the capital by the daughters was effected by transfer of Rs. 25,000 from the assessee 's account to the account of each of the daughters.
All the assets of the proprietary business were transferred to the partnership.
In these assets the assessee and his daughters were entitled to shares in the proportion of their share capital i.e. the assessee was entitled to a 7/8 share and each of his daughters to 1/16 share.
The profits and losses of the partnership business were to be divided in equal shares between all the three partners.
The assessee was the managing partner of the firm.
The assessee filed a return of gift tax for the assessment year 1964 65 in respect of the gift of Rs. 50,000 in favour of his daughters representing the share capital contributed by his daughters.
The Gift Tax Officer however took the view that in addition to the gift of the aforesaid amount the assessee had gifted 1/3rd portion of the goodwill of his proprietary business to each of his daughters.
Accordingly he added a sum equal to 2/3rd of the goodwill as estimated by him to the gift of Rs. 50,000 admitted by the assessee.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner dismissed the assessee 's appeal.
The Appellate Tribunal held that only 1/8 of the goodwill was gifted to each of the daughters but the gift was exempt under section 5 (1) (xiv) of the Gift Tax Act.
The High Court in reference held in favour of the assessee.
In appeal by special leave, HELD : The goodwill was a part of the assets which had been transferred to the partnership.
Under section 14 of the Partnership Act, subject to the contract between the partners the property of the firm includes all property and rights and interests in property originally brought into the stock of the firm or acquired by purchase or otherwise by or for the firm and includes also the goodwill of the business.
The departmental authorities in the present case never treated as all the assets and property of the assessee which were transferred to the partnership pertaining to his pro prietary business as a gift nor was it suggested that the property and assets valued at Rs. 4,00,000 were the subject matter of the gift.
The departmental authorities only picked up one of the assets of the assessee 's L3Sup.
C.I./72 818 proprietary business namely its goodwill and regarded that as the subject of gift having been made to the daughters.
There was no justification, for this approach.
Accordingly no gift tax was payable by the assessee on the goodwill of the assessee 's business.
[823A D] (ii)To be exempt under section 5(1)(xiv) a gift should be proved to have been made not only in the course of carrying & the business, profession or vocation but also for the purpose of such business, profession or vocation.
The expression 'in the course of carrying on of business etc. ' means that the gift should have some relationship with the carrying on of the business.
If a donor makes a gift only while he is running the business that may not be sufficient to bring the gift within the first part of el.
(xiv) of section 5(1) of the Act.
It must further be established to bring the gift within that provision, that there was some integral connec tion or relation between the making of the gift and the carrying on of the business.
The meaning of the word 'purpose ' is that which one sets before himself as an object to be obtained; the end or aim to be kept in view in any plan, measures, exertion or operation, design, intention.
Therefore on the plain meaning of the word 'purpose ' as employed in el.
(xiv) the Object, plan or design must have connection or relationship with the business.
[824 A G] In the present case, considering the terms of the partnership dead there was no cogent material to come to the conclusion that the gift of Rs. 25,000 to each of the daughters by the assessee was in the course of carrying on the business of the assessee and was for the purpose of the business.
The real object of the assessee was to benefit the daughters for the natural reason that the father wanted to look to the advancement of his daughters.
Accordingly the assessee who had himself shown the amount of Rs. 50,000 in his return of gift tax could not claim exemption for that amount under section 5 (7) (xiv).
[826 C G] State of Travancore Cochin & Ors.
vs Chanmugha Vilas Cashew Nut Factory & Ors. ; , B. W. Noble Ltd. vs Mitchell ; , Morgan vs Tate & Lyle Ltd. 35 T.C. 367, 378, C.I.T., West Bengal T. Birla Cotton Spinning & Weaving Mills Ltd. dt.
17 8 71 and Commissioner of Gift Tax vs Dr. Grorge Kuruvilla, , applied.
Commissioner of Gift Tax, Kerala vs Dr. George Kuruvilla, , referred to.
