In exercise of the power conferred by section 96(1)(b) of the , to "Prescribe by rule the procedure to be followed in proceedings" before the Insurance Court, the State Government made r. 17 prescribing a period of limitation of twelve months for every application to the Court.
The Employees ' State Insurance Corporation filed an application before the Court claiming payment of the contribution due from the appellant.
The appellant took the plea that the application was barred as it was not presented within the period prescribed.
The High Court, on a reference, held that section 96(1) (b) did not grant power to Government to make a rule prescribing a period of limitation on claims enumerated in section 75(2) and, therefore, r. 17 was ultra vires the rule making power under section 96(1).
On the question whether the power to prescribe a period of limitation 'for initiating proceedings before the court is a part of, and is included in, the power to prescribe "the procedure to be followed in proceedings" before such courts, HELD : The power under section 96(1) (b) does not empower the government to prescribe by rule a period of limitation for claims under section 75.
(i) The law of limitation to remedies because, the rule is that claims in respect of rights cannot be entertained if not commenced within the time prescribed by the statute in respect of that right.
The object of the statutes of limitation is to compel a person to exercise his right to take action within a reasonable time, as also, to discourage and suppress stale, fake and, fraudulent claims.
While this is so, there are two aspects of the statutes of limitation, the one concerns the extinguishment of the right if a claim or action is not commenced within a particular time; the other merely bars the claim without affecting the right which either remains merely a moral obligation or can be availed of to furnish the consideration for fresh enforceable obligation.
Where a statute prescribing limitation extinguishes the right it affects substantive rights, while, that which purely pertains to the commencement of action without touching the right is procedural.
The statement that substantive law determines rights and procedural law deals with remedies is not wholly valid, for, neither the entire law of remedies belongs to procedure, because, rights are hidden even in the "interstices of procedure".
There is, therefore, no clear cut division between the two.
[872 G, 873 C E, 874 B] (ii)There is difference between the manner in which jurisprudential lawyersconsider the question and the way in which judges view the matter.
Where a question of limitation arises, the present tendency is towards the view that statutes of limitation may not prove to be a deter mining factor.
But, what has to be considered is whether the statute 868 extinguishes merely the remedy, or extinguishes the substantive right as well as the remedy.
The safest course would be to examine each case on its own facts and circumstances and determine, for in stance, whether it affects substantive 'rights and extinguishes them, whether it merely concerns a procedural rule only dealing with remedies, whether the intendment to Prescribe limitation is discernible in the scheme of the Act, or whether it is inconsistent with the rule making power.
, [876 H] (iii) Apart from the implications inherent in the term "Procedure" appearing in section 96(1) the word in furnishes a clue, to the controversy, that the procedure must be in relation to the proceedings in court after it has taken seisin of the matter.
Therefore, the application by which the court is asked to adjudicate a matter covered by section 75(2) is outside the scope of the rule making power.
[877 D] (iv)The provisions of the Act clearly indicate that the whole scheme is dependent upon the contributions made by the employer not only in respect of the amounts payable by him but also in respect of those payable by the employee.
No limitation has been fixed for the recovery of these amounts by the Corporation from the employer; on the other hand section 68 empowers the Corporation to resort to coercive process.
If any such steps are proposed to be taken by the Corporation and the employee is aggrieved he has a right to file and apply to the Insurance Court and have his claim adjudicated by it in the same way as the Corporation can prefer a claim in a case where the liability to pay is disputed.
Section 75(2) (d) clearly envisages this course when it provides that the claim against a principal employer under section 68 shall be decided by the Insurance Court.
The fact that neither section 75(2) (d) nor section 68, nor section 77 which deals with the commencement of the proceedings, prescribe any period of limitation, while a period of limitation is provided in the case of a claim by an employee for the payment of any benefit under the regulations, clearly shows that the legislatures did not intend to fetter the claim under section 75 (2) (d).
Where the legislature clearly intends to provide specifically the period of limitation in 'respect of claims arising thereunder, it cannot be considered to have left such matters in respect of claim under some similar provisions to be provided for by the rules to be made by, government under its delegated powers to prescribe the procedure to be followed in proceedings before such court.
[878 H 879 C, 880 F] (v)Nor does section 78(2) delegate any power to the government to make rules.
The section only requires the Insurance Court to follow "such procedure as may be prescribed by rules made by the State Government".
And these rules can only be made under section 96 of the Act.
[882 D] (vi)Further, the nature of the rule bars the claim itself and extinguishes the right which is not in the pale of procedure.
A provision by which an employee loses his right to 'receive payment of any benefit conferred 'by the Act, if he does not file an application within 12 months after the claim has become due, affects substantive rights, and must, therefore.
be dealt with by the legislature itself and is not to be inferred from the rule making power conferred for regulating the procedure unless that is specifically provided for.
The legislature does not part with the power to prescribe limitation which it jealously retains to itself unless it intends to do so in clear and unambiguous terms or by necessary intendment.
[881 B F] Employees ' State insurance Corporation V. Madhya Pradesh Government & Ors., A.I.R. 1964 (51) M.P. 75, M/s. Solar Works, Madras vs Employees ' State Insurance Corporation, Madras A.I.R. 1964 (51) Mad.
869 376, United India Timber Works, Yamunagar & Anr.
vs Employees ' State Insurance Corporation, Amritsar A.I.R. 1967 (54) Punjab, 166 (FB) and E.S.L.C. Hyderabad vs A.P. State Electricity Board, Hyderabad, 1970 Labour & Industrial cases 921, approved.
View contra in M/s. A. K. Brothers vs Employees ' State Insurance Corporation, A.I.R. 1965 (52) All. 410, disapproved.
Roshan Industries Pvt. Ltd., Yamunagar vs Employees ' State Insurance Corporation, Manoel Francisco Lonez A Ors.
vs Lieut.
Godoluhin James Burslem, (1843) IV M.I.A. 300, Ruckmaboye vs Lulloobhoy Mottichund, (1849 54) V M.I.A. 234, Sennimalai Goundan vs Palani Gonndan & Anr.
A.I.R. 1917 Madras 957, Krishna mzchariar vs Srirangammal & Ors., I.L.R. 47 Madras 824, Bendredas vs Thakurdev, I.L.R. , Velu Pillai vs Sevuga Perumal Pillai, A.I.R. 1958 Madras 392, Narsingh Sahai vs Sheo Prasad, All 1(FB), Chunilal Jethabhai vs Dhyabhai Amulakh, Bom. 14(FB).
Union of India vs Ram Kanwar & Ors. ; , Punjab Cooperative Bank Ltd. vs Official Liquidators Punjab Cotton Press Company Ltd. (in Liquidation), A.I.R. 1941 Lah.
57 (FB), and East & West Steamship Company, George Town, Madras vs section K. Ramalingam Chettiar, , referred to.
