Section 7(3) of the , by a fiction deems that the Sthanam property stands divided amongst the sthani and the :members of his tarwad, a split second before the death of the sthani.
The members of the tarwad took the property as co owners and not as heirs ,of the deceased sthani.
The purpose of the fiction was to gradually abolish the sthanams and to provide for the devolution of the sthanam properties on the members of sthani 's tarwad except as regards one per capita share which the personal heirs of the sthani are to inherit as the heirs of the sthani.
On May 2, 1958, the Zamorin of Calicut died.
In respect of the agricultural income tax under the Kerala Agricultural Income tax Act, 1950, which he was liable to pay for the period November 1, 1956 to March 31, 1958, the person who took possession of the sthanam property claiming to be the succeeding sthani was assessed to tax as the sursthani After his death, the Agricultural Income tax Officer attempted to collect the tax from the successive senior most members of the Zamorin 's family.
The validity of the assessment was challenged and the High Court held that the liability to pay the tax and penalty imposed was only that of the personal heirs of the person who took possession of the properties immediately after the death of the Zamorin, and that, only to the extent of the assets of that person which had come into their possession.
Thereafter, it was ordered by the Department that, as the entire Sthanam property bad devolved on the 693 members of the tarwad all those persons were liable to pay the tax and penalty, but the order was made without notice to the parties.
When the authorities threatened to proceed against the properties in the hands of the Receivers, who were appointed in the par tition suit in the Zamorin 's family, the Receivers filed a writ petition challenging the right of the Agricultural Income tax Officer to collect the arrears of tax and penalty from out of the properties in their hands.
The High Court quashed the demand holding that the only persons who were liable to pay the tax were the personal heirs of the Zamorin as it was they who had received the income.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court, HELD:Under the law relating to sthanams the sthani was alone entitled to the income of the sthanam properties.
Therefore the income of the sthanam property in the present case, during November 1, 1956 to March 31, 1958 was the exclusive property of the Zamorin who has the sthani.
Hence, he alone was liable to pay the tax.
Under the Agricultural Income tax Act, no charge is created on property in respect of the arrears of agricultural income tax.
Under section 24(1) of the Act the liability to pay 935 the arrears of tax due from the deceased sthani fell on his personal heirs and that, only to the extent they received any of his assets.
The assessment made of the person who took possession of the properties after the Zamorin 's death as the successor sthani was an invalid assessment, because, legally he never became the sthani.
On the death of the Zamorin the sthanam came to an end and the only persons who could have represented the estate of the Zamorin were his personal heirs who, however, were not made parties to the assessment.
[938 F H; 939 A B] Income tax Officer, Kozhikode vs Mrs. Susheela Sadananda, , K. K. Kochuni vs State of Madras, and M. K. B. Menon vs Asstt.
Controller of Estate Duty, C.A. No. 1137/1969 dt. 5 10 1971, referred to.
