The assessee was a Hindu undivided family of which the appellant was the Kamavan.
It possessed agricultural properties.
There was a family settlement among all the members of the family then living.
The settlement allotted some properties to some of the male members but did not provide for their devolution.
Also the joint status of the members was not disrupted and the properties allotted for the enjoyment of the various members of the family continued to be the properties of the family.
The liability to maintain the other male members and the responsibility of performing the marriages of the female members continued to be that of the Karnavan.
He was also responsible for the payment of land revenue in respect of the family properties excepting some items.
On the question whether the income of the properties put in possession of the male members under the settlement continued to be the income of the family and therefore liable to tax under the Kerala Agricultural Income tax Act, 1950, the department, Tribunal and the High Court on reference, held against the assessee.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court, HELD : Section 9(1) of the Act is similar to section 16(1) (c) of the Income tax Act, 1922.
Under the latter section the test is that if the income in dispute is considered as having been applied to discharge an obligation of the assessee, the same is liable to be included in the assessable income of the assessee, but if on the other hand the same bad been diverted by an overriding charge then it is not liable to be so included as it ceases to be the assessee 's income.
[1006 A B) In the present case, the arrangement only provided for maintenance and did not give any absolute right in any portion of the family properties to any one.
It thus conferred benefit on the family inasmuch as it was absolved of the responsibility of maintaining its members.
[106 5 G H] Further, it was not even a permanent arrangement and was revocable if there was any substantial change in the circumstances of the family.
The properties would 'go back to the possession of the Karnavan on the death of the member to whom the property was allotted.
[1005 C, D, E] The members of the family received the income of the various properties allotted to them on behalf of the family, and applied the same in discharge of an obligation of the family.
Therefore, the income reached the hands of the family as soon as it reached the hands of any of its members.
[1008 F H] 1001 Hence, under section 9(1) of the Act, the income should be deemed to be that of the assessee.
[1005 F G] Raja Bejoy Singh Dudhuria vs C.I.T., Bengal, and Mullick vs C.I.T. Bengal, , explained and applied.
C.I.T., Bombay City vs Sitaldas Tirathdas, , followed.
C.I.T., Bombay vs Makanji Lalji, and C.I.T., Bombay City vs Ratilal Nathalal, 25 l.
T.R. 426, referred to.
