The appellant was a resident in India and was carrying on business in Ceylon.
His entire assessable income for the years 1959 60 and 1960 61 was what he earned in Ceylon.
He was liable to be assessed :as a non resident, but, in view of section 45(2) of the Ceylon Income tax Ordinance, 1932, and of the Agreement for 'Assessment for Relief or for Avoidance of Double Taxation in India and Ceylon ' as provided in section 49A of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922, he was taxed as if he was a resident in Ceylon and assessed to pay a smaller sum as tax.
The Income tax authorities in India computed the tax under the Indian law :and gave as abatement, the tax payable by him in Ceylon as per the Agreement, and called upon him to pay the balance.
On the questions: (1) whether he was not liable to be taxed at all in India, and (2) if he was liable to be taxed in India, what should have been the proper abatement, the High Court confirmed the order of the Income tax authorities.
In appeal to this Court, HELD: (1) Article 3 of the Agreement begins with the words 'Each ,country shall make an assessment in the ordinary way under its own laws. ' Therefore, the appellant was liable to be taxed in India.
[91E F] (2) The Article read with item 8 of the Schedule to the Agreement shows that from out of the amount ascertained under the first part of the Article the tax payable by the assessee in the other country in respect of the whole or part of the amount brought to tax under the first part of the Article, should be deducted.
The word 'attributable ' in the Article means 'payable '.
In considering what taxes are attributable to the tax laws of a particular country, one has to take into consideration all the provisions of the statutes levying tax, that is, for determining the tax ,due from an assessee, one has not merely to look to the charging section, but also to the provisions providing exemptions and allowances.
So read, the amount of tax attributable to the Ceylonese law is that which ,was ultimately actually levied on the assessee and not the leviable in Ceylon on a non resident.
[92B G] Ramesh B. Saraiya vs C.I.T. Bombay applied. 89
