The appellant who was the ruler of an erstwhile princely state, challenged the assessments made against him for the assessment years 1946 47 and 1947 48 in respect of his personal income earned in British India, on the ground that he being a Ruler was immune from taxation on every source of income.
On the question whether the appellant could claim immunity from tax under the Indian Income tax Act, 1922 in respect of the income earned in British India, HELD: The appellant was not entitled to any immunity and, therefore was liable to tax.
(a) In International law the head of a State representing the State as such enjoys certain extra territorial privileges in other States.
Some of these privileges and immunities are political and are generally the subject of executive and administrative instructions.
There are others in relation to the applicability of the municipal laws, the immunity from which are either recognised by the common law and which courts will not enforce, as in England, or are dealt with by those laws themselves by affording the necessary exemption; yet others are regulated by treaties and international conventions.
Whatever might be the various aspects of the privileges and immunities enjoyed by the Heads of State, the rulers of the erstwhile princely states did not enjoy the same or similar privileges as those of the Heads of States recognised as members of the family of Nations in international law.
From the very nature of these princely states it was clear that they were subject to the sovereignty and protection of the British Crown.
While their relations with the Crown were governed by treaties, though initially on terms of equality, when the British Crown in India became paramount, the re lationship between it and the rulers became unequal with the result that these treaties became subject to the reservation that they could be disregarded where the interests of the British Empire or those of the subjects of the princely states were involved.
The status of these States as inter national personalities was negatived by the British Government even towards the end of the 19th century and it had been maintained that the principles of International law had no bearing upon the relations between the Government of India as representing the Queen Empress on the one hand and the native states under the suzerainty of Her Majesty on the other.
Again, though the status of these rulers in England was recognised as being on par with other rulers in the matter of personal immunity from legal proceedings in so far as British India was concerned, these were the subject matter of legislation under which the ruling princes in India, notwithstanding that they were not recognised as international personalities, were accorded this immunity.
Therefore, any exemption the Rulers could claim had to be under the relevant taxing acts.
There is no such exemption under the Income tax Act.
Besides, the fact that the income of the 17 rulers derived from Central Government securities was specifically exempted by section 60 implied that the rulers were not exempted from other provisions of law.
The provisions in certain statutes specifically making every Ruler of an Indian State liable to tax only militate against the assumption of immunity from taxation of the property of the Rulers at any rates provisions might have been ex abundant ceutela.
[21D 22B, 24G].
H. H. Maharajadhiraja 'Madhav Rao Jivaji Rao Rahadur of Gwalior etc.
vs Union of India; , , referred to.
(b) Further it is now concluded by a decision of this Court in Commissioner of Income tax, Andhra Pradesh vs H. E. H. Mir Osman Ali Bahadur; , that the ruler of a princely state did not acquire international personality and so could not rely upon International law for claiming immunity from taxation of his personal properties.
