Under a circular issued in 1962 by the Central Board of Revenue under section 5(8) of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922 the assessing authorities were directed to permit British Shipping Companies to elect to be assessed on the basis of a ratio certificate granted by the U.K. authorities regarding the income or loss and the wear and tear allowance.
In 1964 the Board instructed the taxing authorities to take into consideration the investment allowance granted by U.K. authorities in computing the taxable income of the British Shipping companies.
The appellant was a non resident British ' Shipping company whose ships plied all over the world including Indian waters.
For the years 1960 61 and 1961 62 the Income tax Officer computed it,, total income under the Indian Income tax Act, 1922 by taking into account the ratio certificates issued by the Chief Inspector of Taxes U.K. which were based on the assessments made on the appellant in U.K.
In making assessment the Income tax Officer purported to.proceed on the basis of r. 33 of the Indian Income tax Rules, 1922.
One of the points considered by the Income tax Officer and the Appellate Assistant Commissioner was whether the investment allowance was to be taken into account in assessing the Indian income.
Both of them rejected the contention of the appellant that it should be taken into account.
The tribunal decided in favour of the appellant but the High Court in reference took the oppo site view.
In appeal to this Court by special leave.
HELD : (i) The authorities under the Act proceeded on the basis that the computation of the income of the assessee had to be made on the second of the three bases mentioned in r. 33.
Admittedly the profits of the assessee were not computed in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
That being so, the second basis mentioned in r. 33 could not be applied.
This aspect was brought to the notice of the High Court.
But the High Court refused to consider the same on the ground that both the Revenue as well as the assessee had proceeded before the authorities under the Act on the assumption that the second basis mentioned r. 33 was the relevant basis.
The High Court erred in adopting this approach.
The fact that the authorities under the Act as well as the parties were under a mistaken impression could not alter the true position in law.
[174 H 175 B] (ii) The computation of appellant 's income had to be made either under the first basis viz. the calculation of the profits and gains on such percentage of the turnover accruing or arising as the income tax Officer may consider to, be reasonable, or on the third basis i.e. 'in such other manner as the Income tax Officer may deem suitable '.
[175 C] 169 From the assessment orders it did not appear that the first basis was adopted.
The most appropriate basis under which the income could have been computed was the last basis viz. "in such other manner as the Income tax Officer may deem suitable".
While adopting that basis the Income tax Officer is not required to rigidly apply the various conditions prescribed in the Act in the matter of granting one or the other of the permissible allowances.
He may adopt any equitable basis as long as the basis does not conflict either with r. 33 or with the instructions or directions given by the Board of Revenue.
The power given to the Income tax Officer on that basis is a very wide power.
That power is available not only to the Income tax Officer but also to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and the Tribunal.
[175 D F] As the Tribunal had determined the tax due from the appellant on the basis of the ratio certificate given by the U.K. authorities, it could not be said that the decision reached by the Tribunal was an unreasonable one.
The Tribunal 's decision was in accord with the instructions of the Board of Revenue.
[175 F] The fact that the proviso to section 10(2) (vib) was incorporated into the Act after the Board issued its instructions could not affect either the validity of r. 33 or the force of the instructions issued by the Board of Revenue because neither r. 33 nor the instructions issued by the Board were strictly in accordance with section 10(2).
[175 G H] Navnit Lal C. Javeri V. K. K. Sen, Appellate Asstt.
Commissioner, Bombay, , applied.
