The Inspector of trade marks wrote a letter to the Magistrate and requested him to take necessary action under law against the respondents on the allegations that the respondents were producing coins and pieces of gold and were applying to them a trade mark which was deceptively similar to the registered trade mark of a bank, and which was in force when the respondents produced the coins.
The Magistrate directed the police to register a case under the , and investigate it.
On receipt of the police report the Magistrate followed the procedure prescribed by section 251A of the Criminal Procedure Code, and framed charges under sections 78 and 79 of the Act on being satisfied that there was a prima facie case.
After one of the prosecution witnesses was examined the respondents raised the question that the evidence disclosed that the bank had discontinued the use of the trade mark and a question of abandonment which could be more suitably dealt with by the civil court, had arisen.
The High Court on reference by the Sessions Court held that : (1) the prosecution could not be initiated by the Inspector of Trade Marks in view of section 28 of the Act, (2) whether the question of the abandonment of the trade mark amounted to an express or implied consent for use by the respondent was a matter for the civil court and not for a criminal prosecution and (3) the prosecution for offenses under sections 78 and 79 was not valid because the Bank was declared to be a foreign bank by the Reserve Bank of India in 1960 and hence had no rights as a citizen of India.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, HELD : (1) Merely because section 89(1) of the refers to the manner of taking cognizance in respect of certain offenses specified therein, it does not preclude the cognizance of other offenses specified in Chapter X of the from being taken under the procedure prescribed by the Criminal Procedure Code.
The offenses with which the respondents were charged are punishable with imprisonment of two years and hence, being non cognizable, the procedure followed, in the present case, by the Magistrate, is unexceptionable.
Section 28 of the Act which is in Chapter IV relating to the effect of registration has no hearing on the question [578 C H; 579 A D] (2) An offence under sections 78 and 79 relates to a trade mark whether it is registered or unregistered.
The application of a trade mark signifies a particular type of goods and involves deception.
Therefore, the fact that the Bank discontinued the use of the trade mark would not absolve the respondents, from criminal liability.
Even if the trade mark was abandoned by the Bank it could only furnish a ground for a person to make 573 an application under section 46 of the to have the trade mark removed from the register of trade marks, but it does not entitle anyone to use the trade mark.
[577 A; 578 A C] (3) The question whether the Bank, being a foreign bank, is not a citizen and had no Tight in the trade mark is, therefore, irrelevant and does not affect the validity of the proceedings against the accused.
[577 A B]
