The respondents were committed to trial before the Sessions Court for offences of forgery, cheating, etc.
They challenged the committal order but the High Court held that there was a prima facie case.
Thereafter, the trial judge split up the charges and this was again questioned but the High Court held that there was no illegality.
The Public Prosecutor then applied under section 494, Cr.
P.C., under instructions from the Government, for permission to withdraw from the prosecution, on the grounds, that the transaction relating to the offence arose out of a contract and was of a civil nature, that there had been enormous delay in proceeding with the trial, and that the securing the evidence of witnesses would involve heavy expense for the State as the witnesses were in far off places. 'Material judge gave the permission and the order was confirmed by the High Court.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, HELD : (1) Section 494 of the Code is not in pari materia with section 333 under which the Advocate General may enter a nolle prosequi at any stage of a trial.
It only gives power to the Public Prosecutor to withdraw from the prosecution subject to the consent of the Court.
Though the section is in general terms and does not circumscribe the powers of the Public Prosecutor the essential consideration which is implicit in the grant of the power is that it should be exercised in the interests of justice which may be, either that it may not be possible to produce sufficient evidence to sustain the charge, or that subsequent information before the prosecuting agency falsifies the prosecution evidence, or other similar circumstances depending on the facts and circumstances of each case.
The power is subject to the permission of the Court and it is the duty of the Court to see that the permission is not sought on grounds extraneous to the interests of justice or that offences against the State do not go unpunished merely because the Government as a matter of general policy or expediency unconnected with its duty to prosecute offenders directs a Public Prosecutor to withdraw from the Prosecution and the Public Prosecutor merely does so at its behest.
The court, while considering the request to grant permission, should not do so as a formality for the mere a .king.
it may grant permission only if it is satisfied on the materials placed before it that the grant of it subserves the administration of justice and that the permission was not sought covertly with an ulterior purpose unconnected with the vindication of the law.
[603 E H; 604 A D; 606 E] State of Bihar vs Ram Naresh Pandey, , followed.
Devendra Kumar Roy vs Syed Yar Bakht Chaudhury & Ors.
A.I.R. 1939 Cul. 220, The King vs Parmanand & Ors., A.I.R. 1949 Pat. 222 and Dy.
Accountant General (Admn.) Office of Accountant General, Kerala Trivandrum vs State of Kerala & Ors., , referred to.
(2) In the present case none of the grounds alleged or even their cumulative effect would justify, the withdrawal from the prosecution.
[906 G] 600 (a) It may be that the acts of the respondents may make them both liable under the civil as well as the criminal laws.
But that does not justify either the seeking of the permission to withdraw from the prosecution or the granting of it unless the matter before the criminal court is of a purely civil nature.
The committal order and the judgments of the High Court at the prior two stages show that there was a prima facie case against the accused with respect to the charges framed against them.
[906 G H; 907 G H] (b) Neither the ground of delay nor the question of expenditure involved by themselves, could be a proper ground for granting permission to the Public Prosecutor for withdrawing from the case [608 B C, F G]
