In 1944 the Ruler of the erstwhile Indian State of Korea granted to D a mining lease in respect of an area of 5.25 sq. miles in the State.
According to the terms of the lease the rates of royalty varied from 5% 0 25% according to the price of the coal per tons extracted from the eased area, that is to say, from 4 as.
per ton if the price was Rs. 51 per .on to 25% of the price per ton at the pit 's head if that price was Rs. 20/or more.
On the merger of the Korea State with Madhya Pradesh the leased area became subject to the provisions of the Mines & Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act 53 of 1948 and the Mineral Concorde Rules, 1949.
, In 1952 D assigned the lease and its benefits to the respondent company.
The State of Madhya Pradesh granted its consent to the assignment for the unexpired period of the lease in consideration of the respondent company agreeing to comply with the terms and conditions of the lease including payment of royalties ' On December 28, 1967 Parliament passed the Mines & Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act 67 of 1957 under its power under Entry 54 of List I of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution.
The Act as amended by Act 15 of 1958 was brought into force by a notification of the Central Government with effect from June 1, 1958.
Under section 9(1) of the Act a lessee under a mining lease granted before the commencement of the Act was liable to pay royalty at the rate for the time being specified in the Second Schedule.
Under item (1) of the Second Schedule royalty payable in respect of coal was the same as under r. 41 of the Mineral Concession Rules, 1949, that is, 5% of the f.o.r. price, subject to.
a minimum of fifty naye paise per ,on.
Under section 30A which had been inserted by Act 15 of 1958 with re trospective effect, the provisions of section 9(1) and section 16(1) were not applicable to mining leases granted before 25th October 1949 in respect of coal, but the Central Government bad power if satisfied that it was expedient to do so, to direct by notification in the Official Gazette, that all or any of the said provisions (including rules made under sections 13 and 18) shall apply to or in relation to such leases "subject to such exceptions and modifications, if any, as may be specified in that or in any subsequent notification".
On December 29.
1961 the Central Government issued a notification in exercise of its power under the second part of section 30A by which it directed application of section 9(1) with immediate effect to or in relation to the pre 1949 coal mining leases "subject to the modification that the lessee shall pay royalty at the rate specified in any agreement between the lessee and the lessor or at 2 1/2% of f.o.r. price, whichever is higher, in lieu of the rate of royalty specified in respect of coal in the Second Schedule to the said Act.
" The Collector served upon the respondent company demand notices to pay the arrears of royalty for the period December 29, 1961 to December 31, 1965 at the rates specified in the lease.
The com 610 pany in a writ petition before the High Court urged that the exception; and modifications under section 30A had to be and were intended to cushion of soften the burden which would otherwise fall on the lessees under section 9(1) and the Second Schedule and therefore any modification or exception which would be specified in such notification was intended to reduce rather than increase the rate of royalty payable under section 9(1).
The State Government contended that the respondent company was bound to pay royalty at the rates provided in its lease, that being higher than the minimum.or 2 1/2% provided in the notification.
The High Court rejected the contention raised by the State as being inconsistent with the purpose for which section 30A was introduced.
The State appealed.
HELD : The notification was issued in exercise of the powers con feared by section 30A.
That power was to apply by issuing a notification there% under, sections 9(1) and 16(1) and the rules made under sections 13 and 18.
The notification in terms directed the application of section 9(1) which meant that on and from December 29, 1961 the company would have to pay royalty as prescribed under that sub section read with the Second Schedule, that is, at 5%.
The notification however applied section 9(1) subject to one modification, namely.
that the lessees under the pre 1949 leases were to pay royalty at the rate provided in their leases or at 21% whichever was higher.
The modification was to the rate applicable under section, 9(1) and the Second Schedule, that is, to the rate of 5%.
Considering the object with which section 30A was enacted viz. to phase the rate of 5% and not to impose it at one stroke, the modification could not mean recovery at a rate inconsistent with section 9(1) and the Second Schedule.
that is, at the rate higher than 5% provided thereunder.
[620 D F] Such a modification, if it were to be construed as meaning payment at a rate higher than 5% would be in excess of the power under section 30A and also in contravention of the language of section 9(1) and the Second Schedule.
A lateral meaning which the State canvassed for could therefore be accepted only at the cost of invalidating the notification.
Where two constructions are possible the one which sustains the validity of the law must be preferred.
[620 G H; 621 A] On a plain reading of the notification it was clear that what it meant was that instead of the rate flowing from the application of section 9(1) and the Second Schedule, a modified rate should be applied, that is, 'in lieu of the rate of royalty ' specified in the Second Schedule, royalty at the agreed rate should be charged if it was lower than 5% or at 21% minimum, whichever was higher.
The notification thus did not empower the State Government to recover royalty at a rate higher than 5% in lieu of the rate chargeable under section 9(1) and the Second Schedule which provided 5% only.
[621 B C] The High Court was therefore justified in quashing the impugned orders also the demand notices issued in pursuance of that order.
