A textile mill in Madhya Pradesh employed about a thousand workers.
The mill was owned by a firm, the appellant in the Second Appeal.
A fire broke out in the Mill doing appreciable damage to some of the machines.
From a letter of the Insurance company, the extent of the damage caused, was ascertained to be about Rs. 37,420/ .
In terms of the last notice given by the employers the mills did not commence work but instead, the management transferred the mills to the company which had been incorporated on 8th December 1959.
From the facts it was clear, that the damage to the machinery was insignificant as against the total assets transferred to the company and the damage was not such that it was not possible to run the mills at all.
Respondents 2 to 346 in the Second Appeal applied under section 33C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act to the Labour Court claiming lay off compensation for the period they remained idle.
The Labour Court held that there had been a lay off within the meaning of section 2(K KK) of Industrial Disputes Act and except 'badli ' workers the employees were entitled to compensation for the full period of 18 months.
The appellants in both the appeals, filed writ petitions before the High Court for quashing the order of the Labour Court and the High Court raised several issues and ultimately remanded the matters back to the Labour Court for recording fresh evidence as to whether the applicants presented themselves for work at the appointed time at least once a day within the meaning of section 25E(ii).
On the application of the appellants the High Court granted certificates under article 133 (1) (a) of the Constitution.
The point urged by the appellants was that if a claim is made on the basis of a lay off and the employer contends that there was no lay off but closure it is open to a labour court to entertain an application under section 33C(2).
It is more so when the dispute was not between a solitary workman on the one hand and the employer on the other but a whole body of workmen ranged against their employer who was faced with numerous applications before the labour court for computation of benefit in terms of money.
Dismissing the appeals, HELD : (i) From the facts and circumstances of the Case, it was clear that the business of the company was continuing.
They, in fact, continued to employ several employees and their notices say that some portion of the mills would continue to work.
The Labour Court 's jurisdiction could not be ousted by a mere plea denying the workmen 's claim to the computation of benefit in terms of money.
The Labour Court must go into the matter and come to a decision as to whether there was really a closure or a lay off.
If it took the view that there was a lay off, it would be acting within its jurisdiction if it awarded compensation in terms of the provisions in Ch.
The High Court is right in upholding the decision of the Court.
[591 E H] 581 (ii) Section 33C(2) takes within the purview, rases of workmen who claim that the benefits to which they were entitled should be computed in terms of money, even though the right to the benefit on which their claim is based, is disputed by their employers.
In other words, the Labour Court may enquire into all such acts or disputes which are incidental to the main dispute, [588 C D] (iii) Section 25C provides for the measure of compensation to be awarded in cases of lay off of workers.
The claim to compensation of every workman who is laid off is one which arises under the statute itself and section 25C, provides for a benefit to the workman which is capable of being computed in terms of money under section 33C(2), of the Act.
The scheme of the Act is that an individual workman can approach a labour court for computation of compensation in terms of section 25C of the Act and he is not concerned to see whether other co workers will adopt the same course or not.
The fact that a number of workers make claims of identical nature cannot make any difference to the individual workman who prefers the claim, The mere fact that a large number of persons makes a claim, of the same nature against the employer does not change the nature of the dispute so as to take it out of the pale of section 7 of the Act and render the dispute one which can only be dealt with by an industrial tribunal.
[588 E H] Central Bank of India Ltd. vs P. section Rajagopalan, ; , followed.
, Mining Engineer vs Rameshwar, [1968] 1 S.C.R. 140, U.P. Electric Supply Co. vs R. K. Shukla, ; , Ramkrishna Ramnath vs Presiding Officer, Nagpur, and Sawatram Mills vs Baliram, [1966] 1 S.C.R. 764, referred to and distinguished.
