Under section 5(c) of the Madhya Bharat Abolition of Jagirs Act Samvat 2008 (Act 28 of 1951) all tanks, trees etc.
in or on 'occupied lands ' belonging to or held by the Jagirdar or any other person were excluded from vesting in the State by virtue of section 4.
The respondent filed a writ petition in the High Court claiming that certain tanks built by himself and his predecessor in title were on 'occupied land ' and therefore came within the protection of section 5(c).
The original order passed by the High Court in the writ petition was set aside, by this Court and the High Court was directed to decide afresh the claim made by the writ petitioners under section 5(c) of the Act.
After considering the evidence before it on this question the High Court held that the ' tanks in question were saved under section 5(c) and they had not vested in the State under the Abolition Act.
In appeal by the State to this Court, HELD: 'Occupied land ' as defined in section 2(1) (ix) of the Act comprises broadly two types of lands : (1) four categories of land held under the tenures enumerated in sub clauses (a) to (d); and (2) comprised in Khud Kasht and 'homestead '.
To attract cl.
(c) of section 5 the tank must be shown in the first instance to be on occupied land that is on land comprised under the tenures enumerated in sub clauses (a) to (d) or in the land held as Khud kasht and homestead.
It is not necessary that the entire tank should be exclusively situated in the land held as khud kasht and land comprised in homestead.
The requirement of "he tanks in question being an occupied land will be satisfied even if part of the tank is situated in one or the other of the tenures mentioned in sub clause,,; (a) to (d) of cl.
(ix) of section 2(1) and the rest or it is included in the land held as khud kasht and the land comprised in a homestead.
That is, the ,entire area of the tank must be comprised in either the tenures or the khud kasht or homestead or in both.
Therefore it was not possible to accept the contention advanced on behalf of the appellant State that only those tanks which are on khud kasht land of the Jagirdar are saved to him.
Acceptance of such a contention will be ignoring the clear working of cl.
(ix) of section 2(1) which takes in also lands held on the various tenures referred to therein.
[871 D G] Therefore in the present case the mere fact that a part of the tanks was in the occupation of the tenants as tenure holders did not detract from the operation of the saving cl.
(c) of section 5.
The expression 'any other person ' is comprehensive enough to take in the persons who were holding the land on one or the other of the tenures enumerated in subclauses (a) to (d) of section 2(1)(ix) of the Abolition Act.
Whatever may be the extent of the tanks in the possession of the respondent, as his khud kasht or homestead and in the possession of the tenure holders the position ultimately was that the entire extent of the tanks was in :occupied land ' belonging to or held by the Jagirdar or any other person.
[872 H,873 B] 865 The judgment of the High Court must accordingly be upheld.
