In order to provide for the seniority of Central Government servants displaced from Pakistan the Home Ministry by Office Memorandum dated June 22, 1949 laid down that the seniority of all Central Government servants in the same grade shall be governed by the length of their service in that grade.
By 1959 the object underlying that memorandum had been achieved.
Accordingly by another memorandum dated December 20, 1959 the Home Ministry decided that in respect of persons appointed after that date the general rules annexed to the memorandum shall apply, one of those being that seniority shall be governed by the date of confirmation and not length of service.
In 1957 the Central Board of Revenue issued a circular whereby seniority in the offices under it was to be determined on the basis of date of confirmation.
In 1962 a revised seniority list of employees under the Central Board of Revenue was prepared on the basis of date of confirma tion.
As a result respondents G and R who were Inspectors of Central Excise lost several positions in the seniority.
These respondents had been appointed in 1947 and confirmed in 1956.
They filed writ petitions in the High Court of Mysore.
The High Court held that the memorandum of 1949 applied to their case and their senority must be decided on the basis of length of service and not the date of confirmation.
S and T were employees under the Directorate General of Health Services, Government of India.
They had joined service in 1950 and 1951 respectively.
In the seniority list, which had been prepared on the basis of length of service in accordance with the Office Memorandum ,of 1949 their positions were 32 and 34.
Subsquently Memorandum dated June 19 1963 was issued by the Directorate General of Health Services in which it was stated that Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes candidates who were confirmed in reserved vacancies would rank senior to temporary, including quasi permanent persons respective of their positions in the seniority list.
As a result of the,application of this principle S and T lost seniority by several positions.
They filed writ Petitions in the High Court of Punjab and Haryana.
The Single Judge dismissed their petitions but the Division Bench allowed them on the ground that the Memorandum dated June 19, 1963 issued by the Directorate of Health Services was not in consonance with the Home Ministry 's Memoranda 1949 and 1959.
Against the judgments of the High Courts the Union of India and others appealed to this Court.
Dismissing the appeals, 993 HELD: (1) The office Memorandum dated December 22, 1959 expressly made it clear that the general principles embodied in the annexure thereto were not to have retrospective effect.
In order to put the matter beyond any pale of controversy, it was mentioned that "hereafter the seniority of all persons appointed in the various Central Services.
after the date of these instructions should be determined in accordance with the General principles annexed hereto".
It was therefore, manifest.
that except in certain cases with which the present appeals were not concerned laid down in the Annexure thereto could not apply to persons ap sions laid down in the Annexure thereto could not apply to persons appointed to the various central services before the date of that Memorandum.
[1000 6] There was thus no escape from the conclusion that the seniority of G and respondents who were appointed prior to December 22, 1959 would have to be determined on the basis of their length of service in accordance with the Office Memorandum dated June 22, 1949 and not on the.
basis of date of their confirmation.
This position was confirmed by the Central Board of Revenue in its letter dated August 27, 1971 addressed, to all Collectors of Central Excise.
[1002 D; 1001 E] Mervyn Coutindo & Ors.
vs Collector of Customs, Bombay & Ors.
; , referred to.
(ii) It was no doubt true that a direction was given in the Memoran and R respondents who were appointed prior to December 22, 1959 would and Scheduled Tribe candidates confirmed in reserved vacancies should be ranked senior to temporary, including quasi permanent persons irrespective of their position in the seniority list but such direction went beyond the rule of seniority contained in the office Memorandum dated.
December 22, 1959 issued by the Ministry of Home Affairs in respect of employees appointed before the date.
It was not disputed that according to the Government of India allocation of Business Rules, 1961 general questions relating to recruitment promotion and seniority in Central ' services had to be dealt with by the Ministry of Home Affairs.
As S and.
T respondents were appointed prior to December 22, 1959 their seniority was governed by the rule of length of service as contained in the Annexure to the Memorandum dated December 22, 1959.
[1003 E H]
