A dispute for Bonus was raised by the workers of the Appellant company before the Tribunal for the Bonus year 1962 63, as the appellant company which made profit during the year, did not pay any bonus to the workers; but only a gratuity of one month was paid to them.
According to revised returns filed by the workers, there was an available surplus of Rs. 5.34 lakhs; but according to the management, there was a deficit.
There were two main points of dispute : (1) the workers challenged the deduction of Rs. 4.1 lakh received as dividend by the company as extraneous income.
According to the management however, as the company invested part of the paid up capital in hares which earned an income of Rs. 4.1 lakh, the company was entitled to claim this amount as an extraneous income because the workers had made no contribution in its earning and so this amount should be deducted from the gross profit.
(2) The workers also disputed Rs. 75.89 lakhs shown by the management as the annual share required for rehabilitation.
The management divided the plant and machinery of the company into two blocks.
The original cost of the plant and machinery for firdt block was 133.00 lakhs and Rs. 15.0 lakhs for the second block.
The appellant company claimed the `multiplier ' (which is the probable increase in the price of assets at the time of rehabilation over the original cost) for each of the two blocks as 6 and the `deviser ' (number of years after which the asset require s replacement) for the first block as 10 and for the second block as 11.
The Tribunal decided the first point against the management because even though there was share capital available to the appellant, instead of utilising it as working capital, it had borrowed amounts to work the Nylon factory for which it bad to pay an interest of over Rs. 5 lakhs.
In these circumstances, it disallowed the claim for deduction on the ground that it would be unfair to allow the management to treat the income from investments as extraneous income and still reduce the profits by raising loans and pay interests resulting in diminution of the surplus.
On the second point the Tribunal admitted only a fraction of the total amount as annual share required for 'rehabilitation.
It held the 'Multipliee as 4 for the first block and 2 for the second block and the 'deviser ' as 13 and 14 respectively.
After deducting the prior charges from the gross profits, the tribunal computed the available surplus to be Rs. 3.25 lakhs and of this, 60 per cent payable as bonus would come to Rs. 2,11,000/ .
As the company bad already distributed Rs. 90,000 the tribunal directed payment of the balance of Rs. 1,21,000/ a# bonus.
In appeal by special leave, a further point was agitated before the Court as to whether the Respondent can challenge a finding by the Tribunal in the absence of an appeal by it.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD, : (i) Since the dividend in the present case is the return from investment , of part of the paid up capital of the company which is invested for the purpose of earning an income, it cannot be construed as 652 ,extraneous income and the Tribunal is justified in disallowing tile dividend on shares as a valid deduction.
The return on paid up capital is one of the prior charges admissible as a valid deduction and if any amount is .earned from the employment of capital unconnected with the business of the company, the labour cannot claim the right to participate in its returns.
Further if any reserve is utilised for working capital, whether this .reserve is depreciation reserve or any reserve, a return in respect of they are also allowed as prior charges, at a reduced rate.
The company has the discretion to invest its capital in various activities; but it cannot deprive the workmen of the benefits of the returns derived therefrom unless the investments in such activity is extraneous to the activities of the company, in the earning of which the workers had not made any contribution.
In the present case, the return from the investments is a return on a part ,of the paid up capital which is invested for the purpose of earning an income and therefore, it is not extraneous income as claimed by the management.
[656 G B] (ii) The elements which are important for the computation of annual rehabilitation is the price of the asset at original cost, the period for which these assets can be used before requiring rehabilitation due to rise in prices, devaluation etc.
In other words, for computation of annual rehabilitation, the 'multiplier ' and the 'deviser ' is to he found out.
In the present case, the management failed to place satisfactory evidence before the Tribunal to arrive at a proper 'multiplier ' and 'deviser ' and in absence of any proof as to how and on what basis the Tribunal had arrived at its own 'multiplier ' and 'deviser ' on a pure conjecture and guess work, the appeal cannot be sustained.
Further, the Tribunal is not justified in including the trading investments to be available for the purpose of re habilitation as these investments were made prior to 1960 when the company was an investment company and as such these investments were not connected with the activities of the present company, which was floated only in 1960.
[666 G] (iii)In appeal, the respondents are entitled to challenge or support the judgmentin his favour given before the High Court even upon grounds which are negatived in the judgment.
Workmen of M/s. Hindustan Motors Ltd. vs M/s. Hindustan Motors Ltd. & Anr. ; , M/s. Gannon Dunkerley & Co. vs Their Workmen, , Management of Northern Railway Cooperative Society Ltd. vs Industrial Tribunal, Rajasthan; , , Ramabhal Ashabhai Patel vs Dabhai Ajit Kumar Fulshingji ; , Associated Cement Co. Ltd. vs Its Workmen, , Khandesh spinning & Wvg.
Mills Co. Ltd. vs Rashtriya Gir Kamgar Samiti Jalgoan, ; , Bengal Kagazkar Mazdoor Union vs Titaghar Paper Mills Co. Ltd., , National Engineering Indnstries Ltd. vs Its Workmen, ; and Honorary Secretary, Coimbatore District Textile Workers Union [1962] Supp. 2 S.C.R. 926, referred to.
