The respondent company was running the business of a hotelier and was registered as a dealer under the Punjab General Sales Tax Act, 1948.
It applied for a declaration that it was not liable to sales tax in respect of meals served to the guests staying in the hotel on the grounds that : (1) the hotel receives guests primarily for the purpose of lodging; (2) when so received the management provides him with a number of amenities including meals at fixed hours, incidental to such lodging and with a view to render hi , stay comfortable; (3) the transaction between the respondent and the guests is one for the latter to stay and not one of sale of food stuffs supplied; (4) the bill given by the respondent and paid by the guest is one and indivisible, being a fixed amount per day during his stay in the hotel and does not consist of separate items in respect of the several amenities furnished to him, and (5) the transaction does not envisage any sale of food since the guest cannot demand a rebate or deduction if he were to miss a meal or meals nor is he entitled to carry away or deal with, in any manner, the food served on his table if a part of it is not consumed.
The department rejected the company 's application but the High Court allowed its writ petition.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court, HELD : The transaction is one essentially of service in the performance of which and as part of the amenities incidental to that service, the hotelier serves meals at stated hours.
The Revenue, therefore, was not entitled to split up the transaction into two parts one of service and the other of sale of food stuffs and to split up the bill charged as consisting of charges for lodging and charges for food stuffs served with a view to bring the latter under the Act.
[947 F G] The distinction between a contract of sale and a contract of work and service is fine especially when the contract is a composite one involving both.
In considering whether a transaction is a sale falling within the purview of sales tax it is necessary to determine the nature of the contract involved on the facts of each case.
A contract of sale is one whose main object is the transfer of property and delivery of possession of a chattel to the buyer; but the mere passing of property in an article or commodity during the course of the performance of a transaction does not render it a transaction of sale when there is no intention to sell and purchase.
When the principal object of work undertaken by the payee of the price is not the transfer of a chattel qua chattel the contract is one of work and labour.
The test is whether or not the work or labour bestowed ends in anything that can properly become the subject of sale; neither the ownership of the materials nor the value of the skill 938 and labour as compared with the value of materials is conclusive, although such matters may be taken into consideration.
In every case the court would have to find out what is the primary object of the transaction and the intention of the parties while entering into it.
[942 D G: 944 F G. H] The transaction in the present case is one and indivisible, namely, one of receiving a customer in the hotel to stay.
The bill is not capable of being split up into one for residence and another for sale of meals.
Amenities including meals, are part and parcel of the service which, in reality, is the transaction between the parties.
Even if it was to be disintegrated the supply of meals during such stay does not constitute a separate contract of sale, since no intention on the part of the parties to sell and purchase the food stuffs supplied during meal time can be spelt out.
[945 G H; 946 A C] Madras vs Gannon Dunkerley & Co. Ltd., ; , Mohanlal Jogani Rice & Atta Mills.
vs Assam [1953] 4 S.T.C. 129, Masanda & Co. vs Commissioner of Sales tax, [1957] 8 S.T.C. 370, United Bleachers Ltd. vs Madras, (1960) 9 S.T.C. 278, Krishna & Co. Ltd. vs Andhra Pradesh, [1956] 7 S.T.C. 26, Patnaik & Co. vs Orissa, [1965] 16 S.T.C. 364, Andhra Pradesh vs Guntur Tobaccos Ltd. ; and English Law and United States Law, referred to.
