Three aspects have to be borne in mind in connection with the question of succession to the office of a mohunt : (i) if the rounder or endower has laid down any particular rule of succession, that is to be given effect to; (ii) in the absence of the above the usage of the particular institution, is to be followed; and (iii) the party who lays claim to the, office on the strength of any such usage must establish it affirmatively.
The fact that the defendant is a trespasser would not entitle the plaintiff to succeed, un less he succeeds in proving the particular usage under which he claims.
[1 009 E G] In a Mourasi mutt the office of the mohunt is hereditary and devolves upon a disciple of the existing mohunt who usually nominates him as the successor.
Though generally the senior disciple succeeds, a junior disciple may succeed if he is found more capable and if he is selected by the last mohunt as his successor.
The appointment or nomination is done by the reigning mohunt during his life time or shortly before his death and it is possible for the mohunt to make over the endowment during his lifer time to the successor.
[1010 B D, F] In the present case, the mutt was a Mouriasi mutt and the second respondent was its mohunt.
He nominated the first respondent as his successor by a deed.
and by a second deed, surrendered to him his right to, the office of mohunt.
The appellant claimed the office as the senior disciple on the contention that the devolution to the office was to the senior disciple according to the tenets and customs of the sect which established the mutt.
The trial court decreed the suit but the High Court set aside the decree Dismissing the appeal to this Court, HELD : The appellant had not discharged the onus which lay on him to substantiate the custom pleaded by him.
The documentary evidence, which was ante litern motam did not support the appellant 's case that invariably only the senior disciple was selected.
On the contrary, the entire evidence in the case led to the conclusion that in the matter of nomination of a successor to the office of mohunt seniority was not the decisive factor, but that ability and efficiency in management coupled with a good moral character, adherence to the religious rites practised at the.
mutt and a spirit of service to the sadhus etc.
entered into consideration in the selection of a successor.
[1012 A D]
