After negotiations in 1953 with the concerned Department of the Government of India and the Reserve Bank, a Company, incorporated in U.K. advanced large sums by way of loans to its subsidiary in India, namely the assessee, for subscribing for shares in some Indian Companies.
The correspondence showed that the U.K. Company had the right to acquire at any time the shares at par, in satisfaction of the loans.
In 1961, the assessee transferred the shares when called upon by the U.K. Company to do so.
The Income tax Officer applied section 52 of the Income tax Act, 1961, and assessed the assessee to capital gains tax, which was not in existence in 1953 but was Reintroduced in the Finance Bill of 1959.
The Income tax Officer held that the object of the transfer was to avoid or reduce the assessee 's liability to capital gains tax.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner however, held that the assessee was not liable to capital gains tax, and the Appellate Tribunal, after an elaborate discussion of the correspondence, confirmed the order, holding that the transfer was not effected with that object.
The Department applied to the Tribunal to refer the questions, (i) whether certain documents were not properly construed, (ii) whether the Tribunal ignored evidence on essential matters, (iii) whether the finding of the Tribunal was perverse, and (iv) whether section 52 was not applicable, as arising out the Tribunal 's order.
The Tribunal rejected the application.
The Department then moved the High Court and the High Court directed the Tribunal to state a case in relation to the four questions, but the High Court did not give any reasons for doing so.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, HELD : The High Court can exercise its jurisdiction in the matter of reference, (a) when the point for determination is a pure question of law, such as, the construction of a statute or a document of title; (b) when the point for determination is a mixed question of law and fact (While the findings of the Tribunal on the facts are final, its decision as to the legal effect of the findings is a question of law.
Where, however, the finding is one of fact, the fact that it is an inference from other basic facts will not alter its character as one of fact); and (c) when a finding on a question of fact is perverse.
[147C E] The necessary ingredients of section 52 are : (i) there should be a direct or indirect connection between the person who acquires a capital asset and the assesee; (ii) the income tax officer should have reason to believe that the transfer was effected with the object of avoidance or reduction of the liability of the assessee to capital gains; and (iii) if the first two conditions 139 are satisfied then the full value of consideration for the transfer may be taken to be the fair market value of the capital asset on the date of the transfer.
The intention with which a particular transfer is made and the object which is to be achieved by such transfer are essentially questions of fact, the conclusion relating to which, are to be arrived at on a consideration of relevant material; that is, before the income tax officer can have any reason to believe that a transfer was effected with the object mentioned in the section facts, must exist showing that the object was to avoid or reduce the liability to capital gains.
[141 H; 142 A D] In the present ease, the orders of the Tribunal show that there was no dispute as to the construction of any expression in any letter or document, that no relevant evidence was overlooked, that the inference was drawn from other facts and, that no question was raised on the construction of section 52.
When the Tribunal found, as a fact, that before there was any proposal to reimpose the capital gains tax which had remained abolished for some time, the scheme between the assessee and the U.K. Company bad been fully evolved, the applicability of section 52 could not be attracted.
The findings of the Tribunal that the object mentioned in the section could not be held to be established from the mere absence of a formal agreement between the assessee and the U.K. Company, is not perverse, but is supported by evidence and is eminently reasonable.
in view of the clear, cogent and precise findings and conclusions of the Tribunal, the High Court, should at least have recorded a speaking order showing how the questions of law of the nature sought to be referred arose from the order of the Tribunal.
[146 B D; 141 A C, F; 148 C.D] Shree Meenakshi Mills Ltd. vs C.I.T., Madras, , followed.
