In the appeal against the order of the High Court dismissing the appellant 's petition for a writ of habeas corpus the appellant urged that he was not produced before a magistrate within 24 hours after his arrest as required by section 167 of the Code of Criminal Procedure or even later; that he was never informed of the grounds for his arrest; that no custody warrant was ever issued warranting the jail authorities to keep the appeal]ant in jail custody; that the remand orders passed by the magistrate were tinder section 167 and not under section 344 of the Code, as the latter section did not apply at the stage of investigation and that even if section 344 applied the magistrate could not order detention for more than 15 days in the whole.
He also urged that the Jail Superintendent did not produce before the High Court the jail records but only produced his report, thus disabling the appellant from establishing his case.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD : (1) The order sheet produced before the High Court showed that the appellant was produced before the magistrate within 24 hours after his arrest and that the magistrate remanded him to jail custody.
Though the order sheet had entries showing that on subsequent occasions when remand orders were made the appellant was produced before the magistrate, the High Court has found that the Magistrate had wrongly recorded that the appellant was produced before him on those occasions.
However, the wrong entries made by him do not mean that the remand orders were not in fact passed by him though he did so in the absence of the appellant.
Such orders can be lawfully passed if an accused person cannot for some reason or the other be brought before the magistrate.
[134 E F] Rai Narain vs Superintendent, Central Jail, New Delhi, Writ Petition No. 330 of 1970, decided on Sept. 1, 1970, referred to.
(ii) The facts negative the suggestion of the appellant being kept in ignorance of the reasons for his arrest.
[135 F] (iii) There is no reason to think that the magistrate ordered the appellant to lie taken into jail custody without custody warrant.
[136 A] (iv) section 167 operates at a stage when a person is arrested and either an investigation has started or is yet to start, but is such that it cannot be completed within 24 hours.
Section 344, on the other hand, shows that investigation has already begun and sufficient evidence has been obtained raising a suspicion that the accused person may have committed the offence 130 and further evidence may be obtained, to enable the police to do which a remand to jail custody is necessary.
The fact that section 344 occurs in the Chapter dealing with inquiries and trials does not mean that it does not apply to cases in which the process of investigation and collection of evidence is still going on.
Therefore, it is not as if the stage at which the Magistrate passed the remand orders was still the stage when section 167 applied and not section 334.
The Magistrate, provided he complied with the condition to the Explanation, was competent to pass remand orders from time to time subject to each order being not for a period exceeding 15 days.
The Magistrate had satisfied that Condition.
[136 G] View contra in Artatran vs ATR 1956 Orissa 129 disapproved.
A Lakshamanrao vs Judicial Magistrate, ; , Chanaraatn vs State, and Ajit Singh vs State, (1970) 76 Crl.
L.H. 1075, referred to The appellant was content with the production of the superintendent 's report.
No prejudice was caused to the appellant 's case since the jail record could not have proved anything more than what the jail superintendent 's report proved.
