Admission to the integrated M.B.B.S. Course in the government medical colleges in Andhra Pradesh was from two sources, namely, those who had passed the pre University Course and those who had passed the Higher Secondary Course (Multi purpose) and a student from either course had to appear at a competitive test.
By G.O. No. 1648/Health dated July 23, 1970 40% of the seats were reserved for those candidates who had passed the Higher Secondary Course (Multi purpose).
Seats.
were also reserved for Scheduled Tribes and Scheduled Caste candidates.
Apart from these there was a reservation of 25% in favour of Backward Classes as enumerated by the Andhra Pradesh Backward Classes Com mission.
This reservation was provided by G.O. No. 1793/Education.
dated September 23, 1970.
The respondents who were candidates at the entrance examination for admission to these colleges were not selected on account of these reservations.
They filed writ petitions in the High Court challenging rule 9 under which 40% reservation had been made in favour of those passing Higher Secondary Course (Multi purpose) and the aforesaid G.O. making 25% reservation in favour of the Backward Classes.
The High Court by its judgment allowed the writ petitions and directed the State to give admission to the writ petitioners in the lst year, Integrated M.B.B.S. Course.
The High Court held that the only basis for selection for the first year course is the marks obtained by a candidate ,at the entrance test.
The selection thereafter should only be on the basis of highest number of marks irrespective of the fact as to whether the candidate was from the pore university course or the higher secondary course.
Rule 9 providing for the reservation of the 40%, in favour of ' HSC (M.P.) candidates was, therefore, struck down as offending Article, 14 of the Constitution.
Regarding the 25% seats in the colleges reserved for the Backward Classes the High Court held that the government order concerned was violative of Article 15(1) of the Constitution read with Article 29 and that it was not saved by Article 15(4) of the Constitution.
In appeal by the State of Andhra Pradesh, HELD : (1) It is no doubt open to the State to prescribe the source from which the candidates are declared eligible for applying for admission to the medical colleges; but when once a common entrance test has been prescribed for all the candidates on the basis of which the selection has to be made the rule providing further that 40% of the, seats will have to be reserved for H.S.C. candidates is arbitrary.
In the first place after 248 common test has been Prescribed there cannot be a valid classification ,,of PUC and Hsc candidates.
Even assuming that such classification is valid, the said classification has no reasonable relation to the object sought to be achieved, namely, selecting best candidate for the admission to the Medical Colleges.
The reservation of 40% to the H.S.C. candidates has no reasonable relation to the said object.
Hence the High Court was right when it struck down this reservation under rule 9 contained in G.O. No. 1648 of 1970 as violative of Article 14.
[266 C E] (ii) (a) Though prima facie the list of Backward Classes which was under attack may be considered to be on the basis of caste, a closer examination would clearly show that it is only a description of the group following the particular occupations or professions, exhaustively referred to by the Commission.
Even on the assumption that the list is based exclusively on caste, it was clear from the materials before the Commission and the reasons given by it in its report that the entire caste is socially and educationally backward and therefore the inclusion of subcaste in the list of Backward Classes is warranted by article 15(4).
The groups mentioned therein have been included in the list of Backward Classes as they satisfy the various tests which have been laid down by this Court for ascertaining social and educationally backward classes.
The list of Backward Classes as well as reservation of 25% of seats in Pro fessional Colleges for the persons mentioned in the said list was valid and was saved by article 15(4) of the Constitution and the High Court was wrong balding to the contrary.
[285 C D; 287 F G] (b) The actual living conditions of habitation of the classes under investigation can be satisfactorily judged and found out only on a personal visit to the areas which will give a more accurate Picture of their living conditions and their surroundings.
If the personal impression gathered 'by the members of the commission had also been utilised to augment the various other materials gathered as a result of detailed investigation it could not be said that the report of the Commission suffered from any vice merely on the ground that they imported personal knowledge.
[285 H286 A] (c) The criticism that the Commission had divided classes into more 'backward and less backward was not well founded.
on the other hand what the Commission had recommended was the distribution of seats amongst the reserved classes in proportion to their population.
This was not a division of the Backward Classes as more backward and less backward.
[286 D] (d) If a situation arises wherein the candidates belonging to the group included in the list of backward classes are able to obtain more seats on the basis of their own, merit it is the duty of the government to review the question of further reservation of seats for such groups If once a class appears to have reached a stage of progress from which it could be safely inferred that no further protection is necessary the State will do well to review such instances and suitably revise the list of Backward Classes.
[286 H] (e) In the present case under G.O. No. 1793 of 1970 the total reservation was only 43%.
The break up of that percentage is 25%, 4% and 14% for the Backward Classes, Scheduled Tribes and Scheduled Castes respectively.
The quantum of reservation was thus well within limit mentioned in Balaji 's case.
[287 E] State of Andhra Pradesh and another vs Lavu Narendra Nath and ,Others, , Gullapalli Nageswara Rao and Others vs 249 Principal Medical College, Guntur and Others, A.I.R. 1962 A.P. 212.
P. Sagar and Others vs State of Andhra Pradesh, represented by Health Department, Hyderabad and ' Others, A.I.R. 1968 A.P. 165, State Of Andhra Pradesh and Another vs P. Sagar, , Chitra Ghosh and Another vs Union of India and Others, ; , Minor P. Rajendra vs State of Madras, ; , Ganga Ram and Others vs Union of India and Others, A.I.R. 1970 S.C. 2178, D. N. Chanchala etc.
vs State of Mysore and Others ; , State of Maharashtra and Another vs Lok Shikshan Sanasatha and Ors., ; , Minor A. Periakaruppan and Anr.
vs State of Tamil Nadu and Ors.
; , P. Sukhadev vs The Government of Andhra Pradesh, , Triloki Nath Tiku and Anr.
vs State of Jammu & Kashmir and Ors.
[1967] 2 S.C.R. 265, M. R. Balaji and Ors.
vs State of Mysore, [1963] Supp.
I S.C.R. 438, R. Chitralekha and Anr.
vs State of Mysore and Ors.
, ; , State of Madras vs Shrimati Champakam Dorairajan, ; and Triloki Nath and Anr.
vs State of Jammu & Kashmir and Ors., [1969] I S.C.R.103, referred to.
