The appellant, who was less than 20 years was convicted for an offence under section 7(1) of the , and was ordered to furnish a bond under section 4 of the .
The High Court revised the sentence, because section 16 of the Prescribed a minimum sentence of imprisonment for 6 months and a fine of Rs. 1000.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, HELD : Section 4(1) of the contains the non obstante clause notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, and hence the section would have overriding effect and shall prevail if its other conditions are fulfilled; especially when the was enacted in 1958 subsequent to the enactment in 1954 of the .
[317 A C; 318 D E] According to section 18 of the , that Act shall not affect section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act which also prescribes a minimum sentence of imprisonment.
The fact that only one offence for which a minimum sentence of imprisonment is prescribed, has been specified shows that in the case of other such offenses, the provisions of the can be invoked [317H; 318 A C] Assuming there is some ambiguity, the principle to be applied in construing a penal statute is that such doubt should be resolved in favour of the person who would be liable to the penalty.
[318 D] Adulteration of food is a menace to public health and the has been enacted to eradicate the evil.
Therefore, courts should not lightly resort to the provisions of the probation of Offenders Act in the case of persons above 21 years of age; but the Act makes a distinction between offenders below 21 years and those above that age.
As regards person under 21 years, the policy of the law is that such a person, even in the case of conviction under the , should not be deprived of the advantage of the which is a beneficent measure and reflects and incorporates the modern approach and latest trend in penology.
[318 G H; 319 A C] As the object of the is to avoid imprisonment of a person covered by its provision, ,, that object cannot be set at naught by imposing a sentence of fine which would entail imprisonment in case of default.
[319 D] Rattan Lal vs State of Punjab ; and Ramji Missir vs State of Bihar [1962] Supp. 2 S.C.R. 745, referred to. 313
