The appellant was holding a temporary post of Editor in the Publications Division of the Department of Information and Broadcasting.
The temporary post was sanctioned upto 28 2 1957.
On 16 2 1959, the President of India, in exercise of the powers conferred by the proviso to article 309 of the Constitution, promulgated the Central Information Service Rules, 1959.
These Rules were meant for the creation of a Central Information Service with prescribed grades and strengths, and entry into the service was open to departmental candidates according to r. 5 for the initial constitution of the service.
The appellant was chosen by the Selection Committee and was posted as an Assistant Editor.
He challenged the order.
A single Judge of the High Court allowed the petition.
On appeal, in the course of arguments, the question arose whether the post of Editor was abolished or had ceased to exist and the respondent was allowed to file an affidavit stating that the post of Editor had ceased to exist.
The Division Bench then held that there was no question of demotion or reduction in rank and hence that article 31 1 was not applicable.
In appeal to this Court, it was held (1) The additional affidavit filed by the respondent did not introduce anything new but only clarified the position.
[455 E] (a) There was nothing to show that the temporary post of Editor in which the appellant was initially appointed had been continued beyond 28 2 1957 for any period.
[455 C] (b) The question whether the constitution of the Central Information Service involved fresh appointments to new posts or its effect was merely to transfer existing employees to corresponding posts with new designations was already before the court.
[455 D E] (c) The appellant himself never asked for any opportunity to meet any allegation in the additional affidavit.
[454 F G] (2) There is nothing to indicate that on the face of the impugned order, that the appellant had been demoted as a measure of punishment.
[455 F G] (3) it could not be held that the order, which had the effect of terminating an officiating appointment in which the appellant had no right to continue and which gave him a fresh appointment with a different designation, 'out permanent tenure and prospects, constituted a 450 violation of either article 14 or 16, simply because the process which resulted in such an order did not have a similar effect upon the position or rights of any other person in the Department; especially when, after taking into account the appellant 's individual case, the Selection Com mittee recommended the maximum pay in the class and grade of the post given to him.
[456 A C] (4) (a) The new rules had the effect of constituting a new service with a fair and reasonable procedure for entry into it.
, Such a procedure could not be characterized as a device to defeat the provisions of article 311 or a fraud upon the Constitution simply because the result of subjection to the process of appraisement of the merits of each candidate may not meet the expectations of some candidates.
[457 F G] (b) Article 311 afford , a reasonable opportunity to defend against threatened punishment to those already in Government service.
Rule 5 of the Central Information Service Rules provides a method of recruitment or entry into a new service of persons who, even though they may have been serving the Government had no right to enter the newly constituted service before going through the procedure prescribed by the rule.
The fields of operation of article 311 and r. 5 are quite different and distinct.
[457 G H; 458 A B] (c) The definition of 'departmental candidates ' in r. 2(b) was meant only as an aid in interpreting r. 5 and was not intended to operate as a fetter on the functions and powers of the Selection Committee.
It does not require that all persons falling within the definition of 'departmental candidate ' should be placed in a single class, Under r. 5 the Selection Committee could assign different grades to the departmental candidates.
The post actually held by the appellant before his selection for appointment to the newly constituted service did not automatically or wholly determine the position of a departmental candidate who offered himself to the process of appraisement of his merits by the Selection Committee to be made on the totality of relevant facts.
That Committee was presided over by the Chairman or a Member of the Union Public Service Cornmission and had officials of the Department on it who were in a position to correctly evaluate the appellant 's merit 's and the weight to be attached to his confidential records.
[459 B H] (5) The appellant 's allegations of mala fides and that he was the victim of the prejudice and machinations of an (unnamed) officer in the Transport Ministry, could not properly be tried in writ proceedings and without impleading that official.
[460 F G]
