By the Constitution (Application to Jammu & Kashmir) Order, 1954, one of the entries on which Parliament could make laws was Entry 80 of List I of the Seventh Schedule, dealing With 'Extension of the powers and jurisdiction of members of a police force belonging to any State to any area outside that State '.
The , (Extension Act) received the President 's assent on September 25, 1956.
Section 1(2) provides that it shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 'in the Official Gazette appoint.
By a notification dated October 10, 1956, November 1, 1956 was appointed as the date for the coming into force of the Extension Act in the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
The effect of the notification and section 2 of the Act was that the , (the impugned Act) which was one of the Acts mentioned in the Schedule to the Extension Act, came into force in the State from November 1, 1956.
On the same day the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, came into force and Delhi ceased to be a part C State and became Union Territory.
On the question whether the impugned Act was not validly extended to the State of Jammu and Kashmir, because, Delhi ceased to be a Part C State on November 1, 1956, HELD : (1) When the Extension Act was passed, Parliament had the competence to extend the impugned Art to the State of Jammu and Kashmir, because, the Delhi Special Police establishment was a police force belonging to a Part C State.
Assuming Parliament ceased to have the power as from November 1, 1956, the Central Government could validly issue the notification under section 1(2) appointing the date from which the Extension Act would come into force, and as soon as this was done, by virtue of section 2, the impugned Act came into force in the State.
[414 B E] State of Assam vs Brhvian Kurkalang, A.I.R. 1972 S.C. 223, followed.
(2) The general principle that the executive power corresponds to the legislative power, in article 73, of the Constitution is subject to exceptions.
The executive power to execute a valid law does not crease if power to make that law has ceased to exist.
[415 B D] (3) In so far as the impugned legislation is a law with respect to Entry 80, even if there was repugnancy it must override any laws repugnant thereto in Jammu and Kashmir.
[415 D E] 412 (4) There is nothing in section 1(2) of the Extension Act which makes it obligatory that the notification should issue simultaneously with the ,date of the coming into force of the Act.
On the contrary, the notification must ordinarily issue earlier than the date of the coming into force of the law.
The notification could have been issued any time after the President had given his assent to the Act, and as soon as the notification was issued, section 2 came into effect and all the Acts and Ordinances mentioned in the Schedule stood automatically extended and came into force in the State [416 A C]
