The respondent, who was a Tamil by birth and Christian by religion, had married a member of the Munda Schedule Tribe in the State of Bihar.
On the death of her husband, who was a member of the Lok Sabha, she stood for election from a Parliamentary (Schedule Tribe) Constituency in the State.
Another candidate B filed objections to her nomination that she was not a Munda and her nomination was rejected by the Returning, Officer, and the appellant was elected.
She filed an Election Petition for setting aside the election of the appellant.
She alleged that according to, the Munda Customary Law when a Munda male married outside the tribe, if his marriage was accepted by the tribe, he continued to be a member of the tribe and his wife also acquired its membership, and so, she became a Munda.
In the petition it was also stated that while hearing B 's objections the Returning Officer allowed irrelevant personal aspersions to be cast against her and that the Returning Officer had been influenced by B. The High Court allowed the petition.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court, on the questions : (1) Whether B. was a necessary party to the Election Petition; (2) Whether the marriage of the respondent, who was a divorcee, was a nullity under section 57 of the , in that she married her Munda husband within.
six months from the date of the decree being made absolute; and (3) Whether the petitioner became member of the Munda Tribe, HELD : (1) According to section 82(b) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, a petitioner must join as a respondent any candidate against whom allegations of any corrupt practices are made in the election petition.
Section 123 deals with corrupt practices.
The essential ingredient of section 123(7) on which reliance was placed, is to obtain, procure etc.
by a candidates of any assistance (other than the giving of a vote)for the furtherance of the prospects of that candidate 's election from any person in the service of the Government and belonging to the classes.
mentioned in the sub section.
In the present case, there was absolutely no allegation or suggestion that the Returning officer was influenced by B for the purpose of rendering assistance for the furtherance of the prospects of a candidate 's election.
The influence, mentioned in the election petition, had reference only to the conduct of the Returning Officer is allowing personal aspersions to be cast against the respondent.
The allegations do not also amount to any suggestion of direct or indirect interference or attempt to interfere on the part of a candidate with the free exercise of any electoral right, and hence, do not amount to undue influence under section 123(2).
Therefore, since there was no allegation of any corrupt practice against B be was not a necessary party.
[366 D H;368 A G] 362 2 The respondent had contracted a marriage with a Member of the Munda Tribe according to Munda rites and ceremonies and not as one ,Christian marrying another Christian.
In the absence of any pleadings .Or issues or material on record to show that in view of the provision, of Is.
57 of the there could not be a valid marriage ,a ccording to Munda customary law, such a contention could not be allowed to be agitated for the first time in this Court.
[369 D G] 3(i) The information contained in authoritative books dealing with Munda Customary Law and the evidence of witnesses who had made special research in the matter, show that : (a) The Mundas are endogamous and intermarriage with non Mundas is normally prohibited; (b) A Munda male along with his family, on marrying a non Munda girl, is often excommunicated or outcasted; (c) the rule of endogamy is, however, not so rigid that a Munda cannot marry a non Munda even after performing special ceremonies; (d) Such marriages have been and are being sanctioned by Parha Panchayat, and (e) Where a Munda male and his family are outcasted for marrying a non Munda they are readmitted .to the tribe after certain special ceremonies are performed.
[376 C F] In the present case, there is no evidence that the deceased husband of the respondent was ex communicated or outcasted because he had married a non Munda; on the contrary, the evidence is that the rule of endogamy has not been observed in a rigid or strict form, and that the marriage was accepted as valid and was approved by the Parha Panchayat and the elders of the Tribe.
Once the marriage of a Munda male with a non Munda female is approved or sanctioned by Parha Panchayat they become members ,of the community.
The contention that a person can be a Munda by birth alone can be sustained only if the custom of endogamy is established with,out any exception.
[377 A D] (ii) Munda is one of the specified tribes or tribal communities in the 'Schedule to the Constitution (Schedule Tribes) Order 1952.
The term 'tribal community ' is of wider connotation than the expression 'tribe '.
A "person who, according to the strict custom of a tribe, cannot be regarded ,as a member of that tribe may be regarded as a member of that tribal community.
Where a non Munda woman is married to a Munda male and the marriage is approved and sanctioned by the Pahra Panchayat of that tribe, and the marriage is valid, she may not, on the assumption that 'the rule of endogamy prevails, become a member of the Munda tribe in the stick sense as not having been born in the tribe.
But a marriage between a Hinduised Munda and a Munda converted to Christianity is permitted.
That being so, the wife cannot be excluded from the large r group, namely, the tribal community.
In the present case the respondent 's manage with a Munda male having been approved and sanctioned by the Pahra panchayat of the Munda tribe, it can be said that she became a member of the Munda tribal community.
When a person, in course ,of time, has been assimilat ed into the community that person cannot be denied the rights and privileges which may be conferred on that community, even though tribal, by Constitutional provisions.
[377 E, H; .378
