The appellant company was making two payments of bonus every year one for the half year ending 30th June and the other for the half year ending 31st December.
The payment was on the basis of profits earned by it and the payment was not a condition of service and had nothing to do with any custom or festival.
When the came into force, the appellant issued a circular that as bonus was payable under law only within a period of 8 months from the end of the, accounting year (the appellant 's accounting year was the calendar year), no bonus was payable for the accounting year 1965 until the accounts for the year are closed, and the announced payment of one month 's basic wages as advance against wages for the half year ending 30th June 1965.
The questions, (1) whether the appellant was justified in announcing the payment as advance against wages instead of as advance bonus, and (2) whether the respondents were justified in claiming bonus for the years 1962 and 1963, in addition to what had already been paid by the appellant were referred to the Industrial Tribunal.
On the first question the Tribunal held.
that the appellant was not justified in announcing the payment towards advance wages and directed the appellant to pay profit bonus in two installments one as advance against the final declaration of bonus, and the balance, if any, as the second instalment.
On the second question the Tribunal held that the question of bonus payable was to be calculated in accordance with the Labour Appellate Tribunal Full Bench Formula approved in Associated Cement Companies Ltd. vs Workmen, r 19591 S.C.R.25; that in calculating the return on Reserves the claim of the appellant to include in the working capital the amounts sunk in (a) fixed assets and (b) capital work in progress should be disallowed; and that the claim of the appellant for a provision for rehabilitation should be rejected.
In appeal to this Court.
HELD : (1) (a) Under the Act, bonus for a particular accounting year will have to be computed in accordance with the provisions of the Act on the basis of the gross profits determined at the close of the accounting year.
The Act makes provision as to how the gross profits, available and allocable surplus are to be calculated, and section 19 prescribes 8 months from the close of the accounting year as the period within which the bonus was to be normally paid.
The scheme of the Act shows that a claim for bonus can be made only after the close of the accounting year, because., gross profits and the available and allocable surplus can be worked out only at the end of the accounting year and not earlier, whereas the direction given by the Tribunal requires the employer to make two computations at the end of each half year.
[469 E H; 470 A B] 463 (b) The direction given by the Tribunal making it obligatory on the management to make half yearly payments of bonus apart from being opposed to the scheme of the Act, runs counter to section 19.
Under the section, whether it is the minimum bonus of 4% under section 10 or the maximum bonus of 20% under section 11, they have to be paid only within a period of 8 months from the closing of the accounting year.
[470 C E] (c) Section 17(b) is an enabling section in favour of the employer in that it visualizes a situation when he may have paid during the accounting year a part of the bonus payable under the Act, before the date on which such bonus becomes payable.
If the payment was by way of profit bonus, he is entitled to deduct it from the final amount that may be payable under the Act.
But that provision does not give a right to an employee to claim payment of bonus by way of part payment during the currency of the accounting year.
Therefore, the mere fact that the appellant has been making payments on previous occasions half yearly, does not confer a right on the employee to have such payments by way of bonus in the same manner after the Act has come into force.
Hence, the Tribunal had no jurisdiction to give a direction to the appellant to, pay bonus at the end of each half year.
[471 A C] (2) (a) In considering the claim for return on working capital two questions have to be kept in view : (i) whether Reserves were available, and (ii) whether they were used as working capital, and if so, what was, the amount used.
1477 GI In the present case, the Tribunal has correctly kept the two principles in view in arriving at the amount of Reserves used as working capital and on which a return is to, be allowed.
The balance sheets of the appellant do not have any figures from which the Tribunal would be able to, draw a conclusion.
The Tribunal, therefore, while accepting the statements.
of account filed by the appellant for the two years, for showing how it had calculated the amount of Reserves utilized as working capital, held, that the two items should be deducted; because, working capital represents the funds required for day to day Work of the company and cannot include,, fixed assets, and the capital works in progress.
[477 G H; 478 A C] Workmen of M/s. Hindustan Motors Ltd. vs M/s. Hindustan Motors Ltd. & Anr. ; and M/s. Aluminium Corpn.
of India vs Workmen, , referred to.
Therefore, the contention that the Tribunal had committed a mistake in calculating the amount of Reserves used as working capital cannot be accepted.
[478 D E] (b) A company should build up rehabilitation reserve taking into consideration the increase in price in plant and machinery which has to be replaced at a future date.
But since it is a substantial item which goes to reduce the available surplus and as a result, affects the right of the employees to bonus, the employer will have to place all relevant material, before the Tribunal for its scrutiny.
The burden of proof is on the employer to prove the price of the plant and machinery, its age, the period during which it requires replacements, the cost of replacement, the amount standing in the Debenture and Reserve Funds and to what extent the funds at its disposal would meet the cost of replacement.
If the employer fails to lead satisfactory evidence on these points his claim for rehabilitation will be rejected.
Also, if a company has no scheme for rehabilitation then its claim on that bead must be rejected.
[479 A E; 481 B C] 464 Azam Jahi Mills Ltd. vs Workmen, and National Engineering Industries Ltd. vs Workmen, ; , referred to.
in the present case, the averment in the written statement of the respondents, that the appellant 's machinery was among the most modern and no provision for rehabilitation was necessary, was not controverted by the appellant.
The balance sheets for the two years showed that some amounts were spent on machinery.
But when the respondents were contesting the claim of the appellant on the ground that it had no scheme of rehabilitation and that it had not spent any amount by way of replacement, it was the duty of the appellant to have made a proper claim and to adduce evidence regarding that aspect.
Mere production of balance sheets and profit and loss accounts and adding a note in the statements, of account filed that the figure is 'subject to claim for rehabilitation ' will not entitle the appellant to sustain its claim for rehabilitation.
Moreover, the appellant had large Reserves to meet rehabilitation expenses.
It had also 'Boated a debenture for buying new machinery.
[481 G H; 482AC, D] Further, in determining the claim of an employer far rehabilitation, two, factors are essential to be ascertained, namely, (i) the multiplier, which has to be done by reference to the purchase price of the machinery and the price which has to be paid for replacement; and (ii) the divisor, which has to be done by deciding the probable life of the machinery.
[479 E F] Honorary Secretary, South India Millowners ' Assn.
vs Secretary Coimbatore District Textile Workers ' Union, [1962] Supp. 2 S.C.R. 926 and M/s. Gannon Dunkerley & Co. vs Their Workmen, A.I.R. 1971 S.C. 2567, referred to.
In the present case no material was placed before the Tribunal by the appellant from which the multiplier and divisor can be properly worked out.
[481 E F] Therefore, the Tribunal was justified in holding that the appellant had not made out its claim for making provision for rehabilitation.
[482 C D] (c) The equitable method of allocating the available surplus between the company and its workmen is to distribute 60% as bonus to the workmen leaving the remaining 40% to the company.
In the present case, the method of calculation adopted for 1962, by the Tribunal, shows that the amount of bonus awarded by the Tribunal together with the amount already paid by the appellant exceeded 60% and the award of the excess was not justified.
[484 A C] M/s. Gannon Dunkerley & Co. vs Their Workmen, A.I.R. 1971 S.C. 2567.
referred to.
