The appellant, a preventive officer, applied for permission to allow his wife to run a taxi service.
He was informed that no permission was necessary.
Thereafter, appellant acting on behalf of his wife, purchased a few cars which were used as taxis.
Later several complaints were made against him to the effect that he was canvassing business for his wife.
Enquiry was made and the appellant was served with a memorandum stating that while functioning as Preventive Officer he had contravened the provisions of Rule 12(1) of the Central Civil Services (Conduct) Rules 1955.
The factual allegation made against him was that he canvassed business for his wife.
An Enquiry Officer was appointed.
On enquiry the appellant was found guilty of contravening rule 12(1) of the Central Civil Service (Conduct) Rules 1955, and his removal from service was recommended.
On the basis of that recommendation, the Disciplinary Authority served on the appellant a notice to show cause why he should not be removed from service.
The appellant submitted his explanation; but the Disciplinary was not satisfied and consequently, the appellant.
was removed from service.
The appellant challenged the order by a writ petition which was dismissed both by a single judge as well as by a Division Bench of the High Court.
On appeal to this Court, it was contended by the appellant that he was not given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of the charge levelled against him and there was a violation of rule 15 of ,the Central Civil Services (Classification, Control & Appeal) Rules 1957 and article 311 of the Constitution.
Hence the order of removal was bad in law One trained police prosecutor, was appointed as the officer to present the case before the Enquiry Officer in support of the allegations made against the appellant.
Therefore, the appellant wrote to the Disciplinary Authority for permission to engage a counsel to defend his case, but even after a number of written requests, he was not given the permission to engage a legal practitioner to defend himself.
Further, the appellant was denied the assistance of a government servant.
Allowing the appeal, HELD:(i) In the facts and circumstances of the case, it was clear that the appellant had not been afforded a reasonable opportunity to defend himself.
The grievance of the appellant that he was pitted against a trained prosecutor was not considered by the Disciplinary authority.
The fact that the case against the appellant was being hand led by a trained prosecutor was a good ground for allowing the appellant to engage a legal practitioner to defend him lest the scales should be weighted against 3 L1031SupCI/72 486 him.
The disciplinary authority completely ignored that circumstance.
Therefore, that authority clearly failed to exercise the power conferred on it under the rule.
[490 G] (ii)There had been a clear violation of rule 15(5) of the Central Civil Service (Classification, Control & Appeal).
Rules 1957 which provides for the engagement of a legal practitioner in certain circumstances.
The present case required that the appellant be given a chance to defend himself by a legal practitioner.
Since he was denied such an opportunity, the order was bad and therefore, it should be struct down.
1495 HI Pet.
vs Greyhound Racing Assn.
Ltd., ; Kalindi Ors.
vs Tata Locomotive & Engineering Co. Ltd, ; ; Brooke Bond India Private Ltd. vs Subba Ramman (S) & another, , discussed and distinguished.
