The right to exploit a bamboo coup in the Hazaribagh district of Bihar was auctioned in August 1970.
The reserve price was Rs. 95,000/but the appellant 's bid of Rs. 92,001/ being the highest was accepted by the Divisional Forest Officer.
The petitioner deposited the security required and executed an agreement.
The Divisional Forest Officer about the auction sale to the Conservator of Forests, Hazaribagh Circle .
As the price for which the coup was provisionally settled exceeded Rs. 50,0001 the Conservator of Forests forwarded the papers regarding the auction sale to the Deputy Secretary to the Government of Bihar, Forest Department for confirmation of the acceptance, by the Go Since provisional settlement was made for an amount less than the reserve price the matter was also referred to the Finance Department.
When the matter was pending the appellant expressed his willingness to take the settlement at the reserve price of Rs., 95,000/ by his communication dated October 26, 1970.
The appellant thereafter filed an application on November 3, 1970 praying for settlement of the coup on the basis of the highest bid.
The Minister of Forest by his proceedings dated November 27, 1970 directed that the coup may be settled with the highest bidder viz. the appellant at the reserve price.
A telegram was sent by the Government to the Conservator of Forests, Hazaribagh Circle on November 28, 1970 with copy of the same to the Conservator of Forest, Bihar co the auction sale at the reserve price of Rs, 95,000/.
As no intimation was received by the Divisional Forest Officer he did not communicate the proceedings of the Minister to the appellant.
On December 24, respondent No. 6 filed a petition to the Government offering to take the settlement of the coup in question for Rs. 101125/ .
The Minister, by his proceedings dated December 13, 1970 cancelled the settlement of the coup with the appellant and settled the same with respondent No. 6 for Rs. 101125/ . 'The appellant filed a writ petition in the high Court contending that there was a concluded contract when the bid of the appellant was accepted by the Divisional Forest Officer though that was subject to the confirmation by the Government and when the Government confirmed acceptance by its proceedings dated number 27, 1970 it was no longer within the Dower of the Government to make the settl ement of the coup upon the 6th respondent.
It was also contended that the settlement of the coup in favour of the 6th respondent was invalid because (a) rule 10(1) of the Rules of Executive Business made under article 166(3) of the Constitution as relaxed by the letter of.
the Deputy Secretary to the Government dated November 27, 1967 pro hibited the grant of lease by private treaty and (b) the requirement of 12 L1031SupCI/72 630 prior consultation in r. 10(1) with the Finance Department was mandatory and had not been complied with.
The High Court rejected the appellant 's contentions.
In appeal to this Court by special leave.
HELD : (1) The acceptance of the appellant 's offer was subject to confirmation by the Government and in the absence of such confirmation them could be no concluded contract.
The appellant 's bid was for Rs;.
92001/ .
The acceptance of the bid by the Divisional Forest Officer was therefore, subject to confirmation by the Government.
The proceeding of the Minister dated November 27, 1970 would show that he did not confirm acceptance of the offer by the Divisional Forest Officer.
What the Minister did was not to confirm the acceptance made by the Division 31 Forest Officer but to accept the offer made by the appellant in his communication dated October 26, 1970 that he would take the coup for the reserved price of Rs. 95,000/.
There was, there for, no confirmation of the acceptance of the bid to take the coup in the settlement for the amount of Rs. 92,001/ .
[634 G 635B] If the offer that was accepted was the offer contained in the communication of the appellant dated October 26, 1970 it could not be said that there was any communication of the acceptance of that offer to the appellant.
The telegram sent to the Conservator of Forest, Hazaribagh by the Government on November 28, 1970 could not be considered as a communication of the acceptance of that offer to the appellant.
The acceptance , of the offer was not even put in course of transmission to the appellant; and so even assuming that acceptance need not come to the knowledge of the offer or, the appellant could not contend that there was a concluded contract on the basis of his offer contained in his communication dated October 26, 1970, as the acceptance of that offer was not put in the course of transmission.
Apart from that the appellant himself revoked the offer made by him on October 26, 1970 by his letter dated November 3, 1970 in which he stated.
that the coup may be settled upon him at the highest bid made by him in, the auction.
There was, thus no concluded contract between the appellant and the government.
[635B D] The Rajanagaram Village Cooperative Society, vs Veeraswami Mudaly, , distinguished.
Somasundaram Pillai vs Provincial Government of Madras, A.I.R. 1947 Madras, 366, applied.
(ii)Rule 10(1) in so far as it was relevant to the present case only says that no department shall without prior consultation with the Finance Department authorise by any order the lease of license of mineral or forests.
The rule read in the context of its relaxation as mentioned in the letter of the Deputy Secretary would only show that consultation with the Finance Department is not necessary for a lease if lease is of land of the value of more than Rs. 50,0001 and 'is granted in pursuance of public auction held in conformity with the conditions mentioned in the letter of the Deputy Secretary.
The rule where before or after relaxation did not prohibit the grant of leave by private treaty.
[637C] (iii)It was clear from records relating to the proceedings for the grant of the lease in favour of the 6th respondent that the Finance Department was not consulted before the Minister passed the order on December 13, 1970.
to grant lease.
It could not be said that rule 10(1) in so far Is it requires prior consultation with the Finance Department is only drirectory and therefore even if there was no, prior consultation the settlement 631 was valid.
The negative or prohibitive language of rule 10(1) is a strong indication of the intent to make the rule mandatory.
Further rule 10(2) makes it clear that where prior consultation with the Finance Department is required for a proposal and the department on consultation, does not agree to the proposal, the department originating the proposal can take no further action on the proposal.
The Cabinet alone would be competent to take a decision.
Prick consultation is, therefore, an essential prerequisite to the exercise of power.
The, order passed by the Minister of Forest, Government of Bihar on December 13, 1970 settling the coup in favour of the 6th respondent was, therefore bad and the order must be quashed.
[637EF; 638D F] Dattatreya Moreshwar Pangerkar vs The State of Bombay and Others.
applied.
