The respondent had bean employed by the appellant as an Assistant Station Superintendent.
An order was passed terminating his services with immediate effect With payment of one month 's salary in lieu of notice.
He filed a complaint under section 33A of the before the Labour Court before which, in industrial dispute was pending alleging that the termination of his service was illegal for the reason inter alia that the approval of ' the Labour Court for such termination was not obtained.
The appellant contended that the respondent was not a workman and that he was not concerned in the industrial dispute pending in the Labour Court.
Pursuant to the directions of the Labour Court, the appellant filed n. written statement in which it was pleaded that without prejudice to the contention that this case should be decided 'an the aforesaid preliminary points raised by the appellant the order of termination of the respondents ' services was valid 'because his services were terminated under Regulation 48 of the Air India Employees ' Service Regulations framed with previous approval of the Central Government, and under that regulation the services of a permanent employee may be terminated without assigning any reason.
it was added that without prejudice to the plea that the appellant was not bound to disclose any reason for terminating the services of the respondent, the latter 's services we 're terminated be cause of the appellant 's total loss of confidence in the respondent on account of grave suspicions regarding his private conduct and behaviour with the Air Hostesses of the appellant Corporation.
The Labour Court held one the preliminary question that the respondent was a workman concerned in the industrial dispute pending before it and that his discharge was in breach of section 33 of the Act.
On the question Whether the action taken by the appellant, was hit by section 33 of the Act, HELD: (1) Section 33 (1) (b) bans the discharge or punishment,whether by dismissal or otherwise, of a workman for misconduct nected with a pending dispute without the express permission in writing of the authority dealing with the pending proceeding.
Section 33(2)(b) places a similar ban in regard to matters not connected with the pending dispute; but the employer is free to discharge or dismiss a workman by paying wages for one month provided he applies to the authority dealing with the pending proceeding for approval of the action taken.
Whether the action is taken under.
33 (1) (b) or section 33 (2) (b), the ban is imposed only in regard to election taken for misconduct whether connected or unconnected with the dispute.
Unlike under section 33(3) which gives a blanket protection to 'protected workmen ', an employer is free to take action against other workmen if it is not based off any misconduct on their part, [617B D, C G] 607 (2) In the present case, on the face of it, the language of the order does not show that the respondent 's services were terminated because of any misconduct.
Prima facie, therefore, the impugned order was not an order discharging or punishing the respondent for any misconduct.
[618A B] (3) Action under Reg.
48 can be validly, taken by an employer at his sweet will without assigning any reason, and he is not bound to disclose why he does not want to continue in service a particular employee.
[620D E] (4) It is however open to the respondent to urge that reliance on, Reg. 48 was not bona fide and that it was a colourable exercise of the right conferred by the Regulation, because, the form of the order is not decisive and attending circumstances are open to consideration though the motive for the order, if not malafide is not open to question.
[619H; 620B C] workmen of sudder office cinnamara v Management [1971] II L.L.J. 620.
Chartered Bank, Bombay vs Chartered Bank Employees ' Union, [1960] II L.L.J. 222 and Tata Oil Mills Co. Ltd. vs WorKmen , referred to.
(5) But the reason of the employer for the terminating the services of ' his employee need not be his misconduct but may, inter cilia, be want of full satisfaction with the employee 's overall suitability in the job assigned to the employee.
Such want of satisfaction does not imply misconduct of the employee.
[620E F] (6) The loss of confidence in the present case cannot be considered to be malafide.
Assuming that the reason stated in the appellant 's written statement could be taken into account, the bona fides of the appellant in making the impugned order could not be challenged.
The respondent had to deal with Air hostesses in the performance of his duties and if the appellant was not fully satisfied beyond suspicion about his general conduct and behaviour while dealing with them it could not be said that the loss of confidence was not bona fide.
Once bona fide loss of confidence is affirmed the impugned order must be considered to be immune from challenge.
The opinion formed by the employer about the suitability of his employee for the job assigned to him, even though erroneous, if bona fide is final and not subject to review by industrial adjudication.
Such an opinion may legitimately induce the employer to terminate the employee 's services, but, such termination can, on no rational grounds, be considered to be for misconduct, and must therefore be held to be permissible and immune from challenge.
[620F H; 621A B] Management of U.B. dutt & co. vs Workmen of U. B. Dutt & Co. [1962] Supp. 2 S.C.R. 822, distinguished.
[The question whether the reason stated in the appellant 's written statement filed without prejudice and pursuant to the direction of the Labour Court could be taker into account, left open.] [621E F]
