The appellants filed a petition for winding up of the respondent company, on the grounds : (1) that the company was unable to pay the debts due to the appellants, (2) that the company showed their indebtedness in their books of account for a much smaller amount, (3) that the company was indebted to other creditors, (4) that the company was effecting an unauthorised sale of its machinery, and (5) that the company had incurred losses and stopped functioning, and therefore the substratum of the company disappeared and there was no possibility of the company doing any business at profit.
The High Court dismissed the petition.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court, HELD : The rules for winding up on a creditor 's petition are if there is a bona fide dispute about a debt and the defence is a substantial one, the court would not ' order winding up.
The defence of the company should be in good faith and one of substance.
if the defence is likely to succeed on a point of law and the company adduced prima facie proof of the facts on which the defence depends, no order of winding up would be made by the Court.
Further under section 557 of the , in all matters relating to winding up of a company the court may ascertain the wishes of the creditors.
If, for some good reason the creditors object to a winding up order, the court, in its discretion, may refuse to pass such an order.
Also, the winding up order will not be made on a creditor 's petition if it would not benefit the creditor or the company 's creditors generally.
[207 D, G H; 208 C D] (1) In the present case, the claims of the appellants were disputed both in fact and in law.
The company had given prima facie evidence that the appellants were not entitled to any claim.
The company had also raised the defence of lack of privity and of limitation.
[208 D F] (2) One of the claims of the appellants was proved by the company to be unmeritorious and 'false, and as regards the admitted debt the company had stated that there was a settlement between the company and the appellants that the appellants would receive a lesser amount and that the company would pay it off out of the proceeds of sale of the company 's properties.
[208 F G] (3) The creditors of the company for the sum of Rs. 7,50,000 supported the company and resisted the appellants ' application for winding up.
[209 G] (4) The cumulative evidence in support of the case of the company is that the appellants consented to any approved of the sale of the machinery.
As shareholders, they had expressly written that they had no objection to the sale of the machinery and the letter was issued in order to enable the company to hold an extraordinary general meeting on the subject.
The company passed a resolution authorising the sale.
The 256 Sup.
Cl/72 202 appellants themselves were parties to the proposed sale and wanted to buy the machinery.
Where the shareholders had approved of the sale it could not be said that the transaction was unauthorised or improvident.[209 A F] (5) In determining whether or not the substratum of the company had gone, the objects of the company and the case of the company on that question would have to be looked into.
In the present case, the company alleged that with the proceeds of sale the Company intend to enter into some other profitable business.
such as export business which was within its objects.
The mere fact that it had suffered trading losses will not destroy its substratum unless there is no reasonable prospect of it ever making a profit in the future.
A court would not draw such an inference normally.
One of its largest creditors, who opposed the winding up petition would help it in the export business.
The company had not abandoned the objects of its business.
Their ,fore, on the facts and circumstances of the present case it could not be held that the substratum of the company had gone.
Nor could it be held that the company was unable to meet the outstandings of any of its admitted creditors.
The company had deposited money in court as per the directions of the Court and had not ceased carrying on its business.
[211A G] (6) On the facts of the case it is apparent that the appellants had presented the petition with improper motives and not for any legitimate purpose.
The appellants were its directors, had full knowledge of the company 's affairs and never made demands 'for their alleged debts.
They sold their shares, went out of management of the company and just when the sale of the machinery was going to be effected presented the petition for winding up.
[211 A; 212 A C] Amalgamated Commercial Traders (P.) Ltd. vs A. C. K. Krishnaswami & Anr., , London & Paris Banking Corporation, , Re.
Brighton Club & Norfold Hotel Co. Ltd., ; , Re. A. Company, 94 S.J. 369, Re.
Tweeds Garages Ltd., (1962) Ch.
406, Re. P. & J. Macrae Ltd., , Re.
Suburban Hotel Co. and Davis & Co.v.
Burnswick (Australia) Ltd., , and Mann & Am .v.
Goldstein & Anr., , referred to.
