The first respondent was carrying on business of selling country liquor.
In exercise of the powers conferred by section 29(2) of the Bihar and Orissa Excise Act, 1915, the appellant issued an Order and in pursuance of that Order a date was notified for selling by public auction the exclusive privilege.
of selling by retail, country liquor in 8 shops.
The respondent was the highest bidder but his bid was rejected because the Government was of the view that inadequate prices had been offered as a result of collusion between the bidders.
Thereafter, tenders were called for and the appellant accepted the tender in respect of one shop and rejected the others as it was again of the opinion that the price offered was inadequate.
Thereafter, the remaining 7 shops were ' sold by private negotiation for substantially higher prices.
A writ petition filed by the respondent in the High Court was allowed mainly on the ground that the power centered on the Government by cl.
(vi) of the Order, that no sale shall be deemed to be final unless confirmed by the State who shall be at liberty to accept or reject without assigning any reason, was an unguided power violative of articles 14 and 19(1) (g).
Allowing the appeal to this Court, HELD : (1) Section 22 of the Act confers power on the Government to grant to any person on such conditions and for such period as it may think fit the exclusive privilege of selling in retail country liquor; and section 29 empowers the Government to accept payment in consideration of the grant either by calling tenders or by auction or otherwise as it may by general order direct.
The powers conferred on the State Government by sections 22 and 29 are absolute.
The Government cannot be said to have conferred on itself arbitrary power under cl.
(vi) of its Order, passed under section 29(2), because, the power that the Government reserved for itself under that clause is nothing more than what was conferred on it by the Legislature under the sections.
Since the validity of the sections was not challenged the validity of the Order could not also be challenged.
[792 B F] (2) Even otherwise, one of the important purposes of selling the exclusive right to sell liquor in wholesale or retail is to raise revenue; and excise 'revenue forms an important part of every State 's revenue.
The Government is a guardian of the finances of the State and is expected to protect its financial interests.
The fact that the prices fetched by the sale of the privilege to sell country liquor is an excise revenue does not change the nature of the right in the Government.
Therefore, the 785 Legislature has empowered the Government to see that there is no leakage in the revenue.
It was for the Government to decide whether the price offered in an auction is adequate and the conclusion reached by the Government does not affect anyone 's rights.
[793 D F; 794 F G] (3) Public auctions are held to get the best possible price and there is no completed contract till the bid is accepted.
There is, therefore, no basis for, contending that the owner of the privileges who had offered to sell them cannot decline to accept the highest bid if he thinks that the price offered is inadequate, and, it makes no difference that the Government was the seller.
[793 G H; 794 A] (4) If the Government is exclusive owner of the privileges, the respondent could not rely on article 14 and 19(1)(g), because, citizens cannot have any fundamental right to trade or carry on business in the properties or rights belonging to Government, nor can there be any infringement of article 14 if Government tries to get the best available price for its valuable, rights.
Further there is no inherent right in a citizen to sell intoxicating liquor by retail.
[793 A; 794 A B] Coverjee B. Bharucha vs The Excise Commissioner and the Chief Commissioner, Ajmer and Ors., ' ; and Union of India and Ors.
vs M/s. Bhimsen Walait Ram, ; , followed.
(5) Assuming that the question of arbitrary or unguided power can be raised it should be remembered that the power to accept or reject the highest bid is given to the highest authority in the State, namely, the Government, which is expected to safeguard the finances of the State and it is not a case of delegated power but of power conferred by the Legislature.
While accepting or rejecting a bid Government is performing an executive function and the correctness of its conclusion is not open to Judicial review where the power is not used for any collateral purpose.
[793 F , 794 C E] (6) The real conclusion.
of the Government was that the price fixed was inadequate and hence High Court erred in thinking that the Government was bound to satisfy the Court that there was collusion between the bidders.
[794 E F] Barrium Chemicals Ltd. and Anr.
vs Company Law Board and Ors.
[1966] Supp.
S.C.R. 311 and Rohtas Industries Ltd. vs section T. Agarwal; , referred to.
(7) The Government was not precluded, having had recourse to the auction method once, from either calling for tender or selling by negotiations.
Once the Government declines to accept the highest bid or the tender price offered, the government was free to have recourse to other methods.
The pow(* given to the Government to sell in such other manner as it thinks fit is a very wide and unrestricted power and includes within it the power to; sell the privilege by private negotiation.
[795 A B] (8) The Government is not required by section 29 (2) (a) to make an order that the privilege will be sold by private negotiation, since, it makes no sense to require Government to first make an order that it is going to negotiate.
The section only says that the State Government 'may by general or special order direct ' and the direction contemplated is one to subordinate officials and not to itself.
[795 D F]
