Section 55 of the Tamil Nadu Hindu Religious.
and Charitable En dowments Act, 1959, gave the trustee of a temple the power to appoint the officer holders or servants of the temple and also provided that where the office or service is hereditary, the person next in the line of succession shall be entitled to succeed.
In only exceptional cases the trustee was entitled to depart from the principle of next in the line of succesion, but even so, the trustee was under an obligation to appoint a fit person to perform the service after having due regard to the claims of the members of the family.
Section II 6 (2) (xxiii) of the Act gave power to the Government to make rules providing for the qualifications to be possessed by the officers and servants and their conditions of service.
The State Government framed the Madras Hindu Religious Institutions (Officers and Servants) Service Rules, 1964.
Rule 12 provided that an Archaka, whether hereditary or nonhereditary whose duty it is to perform Pujas, shall, before succeeding to the office or appointment to the Office, obtain a certificate of fitness for performing the duties of his office from the head of an institution imparting, instructions in Agamas or from the ' head of a math recognised by the 'Commissioner or front such other person as may be designated by the Commissioner.
The Act was amended by the Amending Act of 1970.
The Amending Act did away with the hereditary right of succession to the office of Archaka.
The petitioners who were Archakas of saivite and Vaishnavite temples and Mathadhipatis to whose Maths temples are attached firm writ petitions in this Court contending that the amendments violated articles 25 and 26 of the Constitution.
Dismissing the petition HELD : (1) The protection of Arts, 25 and 26 of the Constitution is not limited to matters of, doctrine or believe, they extend also to ' 'acts done in pursuance of religion and therefore contain a guarantee for rituals and observances etc.
which are the integral parts of religion.
What constitutes aft essential part of a religion or religious practice has to be decided by the Courts with reference to the doctrine of at particular teli including practices which are regarded by the community as a part of its religion.
[8271] Sardar Syedna Taher Saifuddin Saheb vs The State of Bombay, [1962] *pp. 2 S.C.P. 490, referred to.
(2) With the establishment of temples and the, institution of Archakas in the temples, treatises on rituals were compiled known as Agamas .
The rituals have a two fold aspect, to attract the lay worshippers and to 816 preserve the image of the Deity from pollution, defilement or desecration.
Pollution or desecration may take place in a variety of ways and according to the Agamas, an image becomes defiled if there is any departure or violation of the rules relating to worship.
Further, in all the temples in which images are consecrated the Agamas insisted that only the qualified Archaka shall step inside the sanctum sanctorum after observing certain disciplines imposed by the Agamas.
Hence the Archaka of such a temple, besides being proficient in the rituals appropriate to the worship of the particular Deity, must also belong to a particular denomination; because, an Archaka of a different denomination would defile the image by his touch.
[825 F H; 826 E G] Sri Venkataramana Devaru vs The State of Mysore, [1958] S.C.R. 895, His Holiness Peria Kovil Kelvi Appean Thiruvenkata Ramanuja Pedda Jiyyangarlu Varlu vs Prathivathi Bhayankaram Venkatacharlu, 73 I.A. 156 and Mohan Lalji vs Gordhan Lalji Maharaj, 35 Allahabad P.C. 283, referred to.
(3) The hereditary principle in the appointment of an Archaka had been adopted and accepted from antiquity and had also been fully recognised in the unamended section 55.
But the change effected by the amendment to section 55, namely, the, abolition of the principle of next in the line of succession is however, not invalid, because, the usage is a secular and not a religious usage.
[833 A C] (a) An archaka has never been regarded as a spiritual head however accomplished and well versed in the agamas and rituals he may be.
He is a servant of the temple subject to the discipline and control of the trustee as recognised by the unamended section '56 of the Act.
That being his position the act of his appointment by the trustee is essentially secular, 'though after appointment he performs some religious functions.
That after his appointment he performs worship is no ground for holding that his appointment is either a religious Practice or a matter of religion.
He owes his appointment to a secular authority.
Any lay founder of a temple may appoint him and the She baits and Managers of temples .exercise an essentially secular function in choosing and appointing the Archaka.
The fact that in some temples the hereditary principle was followed in making the appointment would not make the successive appointments anything but secular.
[832 A G] K. Syedna Taher Saifuddin Saheb vs Ranga Bhattar, I.L.R. , Kali Krishna Ray vs Makhan Lal Mookerjee, I.L.R. , Nanabhai Narotamdas vs Trimbak Balwant Bhandare, (1878 80) Vol. 4 (Unreported printed judgments of the Bombay High Court p. 169) and Maharanee Indurjeet Koer vs Chundemun Misser, XVI Weekly Reporter, :89, referred to.
(b) The power given to the trustee under the amended section to appoint any body as an Archaka so long as he possessed a fitness certificate under r. 12 was not an unqualified power, because the power had to be read with section 28 of the Act which controlled it.
Section 28 directs the trustee to administer the affairs of the temple, in accordance with the terms of the trust or usage of the institution.
Therefore, the appointment of the Archaka ' will have to be made from the specified denomination, sect or group in accordance with the directions of the Agamas governing the temple.
In view of.
the amended section 55(2).
, the choice of the trustee in .the matter of appointment of an archaka is no longer limited by the Operation of next in line of succession in temples where the usage was 817 to appoint the Archaka on the hereditary principle.
To that extent the trustee is released from the obligation imposed on him by section 28 to administer the affairs in accordance with that part of the usage of a temple which enjoined hereditary appointments.
But the legislation in this fact does not interfere with any religious practice.
[832 H 833 C] (4) The other changes effected in the other provisions of the Act are merely consequential, and therefore, the Amendment Act as a whole must be regarded as valid.
[833 F] (5) The rule making power is conferred by section 116 on the Govern ment with a view to carry out the purposes of the Act which are essentially secular.
The Act nowhere gives the indication that one of its purposes is to effect a change in the rituals and ceremonies followed in the temples.
Section 105 and 107, on the contrary, emphasize that there shall not be any contravention of the rights conferred on any religious denominations of any section thereof, by article 26 of the Constitution.
Rule 12 still holds the field and there is no reason to think that the State Government would frame rules to revolutionise temple worship by introducing methods of worship not current in the several temples.
If any such rule is framed by Government which purports to interfere with the rituals and ceremonies of the temples, it will be liable to be challenged by those who are interested in the temple worship.
[834 C G]
