The application of one B for a mining lease was rejected on the ground that another applicant V had a prior claim.
B 's writ application was dismissed by the High Court and while his appeal in this Court was pending he died and his sons were allowed to be impleaded as legal representatives subject to any objection that may be taken to their right to continue the appeal.
it was not in accordance with r. 27 of the Mineral Concession Rules and because of want of a map and 'some details regarding area, and therefore, whether B 'section appli cation should have been granted, HELD : (1) The details mentioned in r. 27 are intended for the correct identification of the individual to whom the lease is to be granted, the minerals which are to be mined the area in respect of which the lease was to be granted and the qualifications of the applicant.
Rules 32(2), introduced in 1955, before the grant of V 's application, shows that individual qualifications of the applicants including their special knowledge, .their capacity to engage technically efficient staff, their financial soundness and stability, bad to be taken into account in determining the question of priority.
There is no prohibition against the grant of an application on the ground that the application is defective or not accompanied by a map.
There is also no provision in the Act showing that defects in an application could.
not be subsequently removed.
The form of the application is subordinate to the essential facts to be taken into account before granting a lease.
The information given in the application is intended for the satisfaction of the authorities granting the lease, so that, .after considering the merits and making a grant up Proper details are embodied in the lease actually granted.
ply of necessary details is directory and not mandatory.
It was not the cage here that as a result of the defects in V 's application the lease itself could not be executed.
Therefore, the mere want of a map or of details describing the area for which the lease was applied for, would not make the application itself void or of no effect.
If it did not produce a defect which affected the validity of the leak, and the details supplied in the application corresponded with the contents of the lease after the alleged lacuna had been removed the grant of the lease to V was valid.
[669 F H; 67OB F] (2) In order to enable a legal representative to continue a legal proceeding, the right to sue or pursue a remedy must survive the death of his predecessor.
Under the rules, the right of an applicant on the strength of a superior claim cannot be separated 'from his personal qualifications.
[671 G H] 666 Moreover, there is no provision in the Rules for imploding an heir to continue the application for a mining lease.
The scheme under the Rules is that if an applicant dies, a fresh application has to be presented by the heirs or legal representatives if they desire to apply far the grant of a lease.
It may be that they may obtain priority over an earlier applicant if they are continuing the business or industry of the decreased, but it would be on a fresh application setting out their qualifications.
Therefore, the heirs had no right to continue the appeal in this Court.
[672A C] Dhani Devi vs Sant Bihari & Ors.
, ; , distinguished.
(3) The acceptance of V 's claim by the Government on the strength of which he had made his investment, clothes his claim with an equity which could not be defeated without clear proof of some overriding legal right or terest of another claimant, and, there is no such right in the heirs of B [672G H]
