The two appellants were promoted in the years 1958 and 1959 respectively to the Military Engineer Service Class 1.
Some of the respondents were appointed to the said class I Service after they had appeared at the competitive examination while the rest were appointed by direct recruitment after having been interviewed by the Union Public Service Commission.
All the respondents were appointed to the service in the years 1962, 1963 and 1964.
The respondents were confirmed in their posts before the appellants.
The appellants filed writ petitions in the High Court which were dismissed.
In appeal before this Court the appellants contended (i) that the respondents who were directly appointed to class I service by inter view were not within the purview of recruitment to Class I service by competitive examination under the Military Engineer Service Class I (Recruitment Promotion and Seniority) 'Rules; (ii) that the respondents were recruited to Class I Service by inter view and competitive examination after the appellant had been promoted to Class I service and were therefore not to be confirmed in permanent posts before the appellants.
HELD : (i) The appointments to Class I Service by interview were made by the Government in consultation with the Union Public Service Commission.
The selection was made by the Union Public Service Commission.
The appointment by competitive examination proved fruitless.
The country was in a state of emergency.
The appointment and selection by interview was the only course possible.
It could not be said that all appointments should have been made by promotion; that would not he in the interest of the service.
The Service Rules were administrative in character.
The Government relaxed the rules.
The amendments of the rules in 1967 recognised the reality of the situation of appoint ment by interview.
That is why the 1967 amendment recognised that 50% of "the direct recruit by competitive ad hoc appointments were to be reserved for graduate ceneers who were commissioned in the Armed Forces on a temporary basis Ultimately, when the rules were amended in 1969 and the rules became statutory in character, not only the recruitment by interview but also the relaxation of rules was regularised.
The result is that the respondents who were appointed by interview fell within the Class I direct recruits.
[901 F 902 A] (ii) The appellants should have no grievance with regard to confirmation.
Departmental promotees had been confirmed against permanent posts within their quota in order of seniority.
The departmental promotees who had been confirmed up to the year 1970 had been promoted to 899 class I Service before the appellants.
On the other hand direct recruits consisting of those recruited by competitive examination as well as by inter view had been confirmed against permanent vacancies within their quota.
As a matter of fact between the years 1959 and 1963 inclusive the quota fixed for departmental promotees was increased from 10 to 50% and thereby confirmation of departmental promotees and direct recruits was equally balanced.[905 D F] Accordingly, the appeal must fail;
