The respondent was the owner of the flat on the second floor of a Building in Bombay.
She was a member of a Co operative Housing Society and had acquired the flat from that society.
In 1959 she had put the appellant in possession of the flat for a period of 11 months on payment of Rs. 5101 per month.
According to the written agreement the possession was given on leave and licence basis.
The government was signed by one of the partners of the appellant firm who also became members of the said Co operative Society.
The agreement was renewed until 25th October, 1962 when the first respondent asked the appellants to vacate possession on the ground that she required the flat for personal occupation.
As this was not complied with she filed a statement of claim before the Registrar of Co operativc Societies on the ground that there was a dispute within the meaning of section 91(1) of the Maharashtra Co operative Societies Act.
The Registrar referred the case to a nominee whose jurisdiction was challenged by the appellants.
Nevertheless the proceedings before the nominee went on for some time and on July 3, 1964 the nominee made an award to the effect that the appellants were occupying the flat on leave and licencee basis.
The appellants, anticipating the award, filed a suit in the Court of Small Causes Bombay stating that they were in occupation of the flat as tenants and as such entitled to protection under the Bombay Rent Act, 1947.
The Small Causes Court held that the suit was maintainable and answered the other preliminary issues in favour of the plaintiff.
In revision the bench of the Small Causes Court held that the Registrar 's nominee did have jurisdiction to try the dispute between the parties and remanded the proceedings to the trial court for disposal of the suit after deciding an issue as to res judicata by reason of the award of the nominee.
The High Court up held the order of the bench.
In this Court the questions that fell for consideration were (1) Whether there was any dispute between the parties touching the business of the co operative society which could be decided by the Registrar or referred by him to a nominee for disposal and (2) Whether the suit filed in them Small Causes Court was maintainable having regard to the nature of the relief sought.
Allowing the appeal HELD : (i) No doubt it was a business of the society to let out premises and a member had no unqualified right to let out his flat or tenement to another by virtue of the bye laws and a breach of the byelaws could affect the defaulting member 's right to membership.
But HELD : (i) No doubt it was a business of the society to let Out touch the business of the society which included inter alia the trade of buying, selling, hiring and letting land in accordance with cooperative principles.
The letting of flat by respondent No. 1 was a transaction of 54 the same nature as the society it if was empowered to enter into but such letting out itself did not concern the business of the society in the matter of its letting out flats.
There was nothing to show that such letting would effect the business of the society once it had sold the flat to the respondent No. 1.
The position might have been different if the latter had himself been a tenant of the flat under, the society.
"To touch" means "to corn in contact with" and it did not appear that there was a point of contact between a letting by the respondent No. 1 and the business of the society when the society was not itself the land lord of the flat.
[57D G] (ii) As observed by this Court in an earlier case the Bombay Rent Act and the Maharashtra Cooperative Societies Act can be harmonised best by holding that in matters covered by the Rent Act, its provisions rather than the provisions of the Co operative Societies Act, should apply.
[58A] Deccan Merchants Co operative Bank Ltd. vs M/s, Dalkhand Jugraj Jain and others, [1969] 1 S.C.R., 887, distinguished.
