The respondent, an employee of the appellant was suspended and 'the suspension remained in force till the date of his dismissal.
He applied to the Labour Court under section 33C(2) of the , for computation of the benefits and amounts he was entitled to receive during the period of suspension, and the Labour Court decided in his favour.
On the question whether the section can be invoked by a dismissed workman in respect of, benefits and salary due to him for the period prior to the date of dismissal, HELD: The sub section provides that where any workman is entitled to receive from the employer any money or any benefit which is capable of being computed in terms of money and if any question arises as to the amount due, then the question may be decided by the appropriate 'Labour Court.
The definition of 'workman ' in section 2(s) of the Act includes within its fold, only for the purpose of a proceeding under the Act in relation to an industrial dispute, persons who have been dismissed, ,discharged or retrenched in connection with or as consequence of that dispute or whose dismissal, discharge or retrenchment has led to that dispute.
The definition specifically excludes from its purview four categories of persons employed in an industry, who would have otherwise been within the periphery of the definition.
But, because the definition includes only specified types of dismissed, discharged or retrenched workmen for limited purposes and expressly excludes certain categories of persons, it cannot, on that account, be contended that the definition is precise and exact and cannot be extended to other dismissed, discharged or retrenched workmen, whose claim requiring computation is in respect of an existing right arising out of his relationship as an industrial workman of his employer.
[50B E, 51A C] The definition section begins with the clause, 'unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context. ' The context and the subject matter are accordingly important factors, because, all parts of the Act have to be in harmony with the statutory intent.
The object of enacting the section was to enable individual workmen to implement, enforce or execute their existing individual rights against their employers without being compelled to have recourse to section 10 by raising disputes and securing a reference which is obviously a lengthy process.
It clothes the Labour Court with powers similar to those of an executing court so that the concerned workman gets speedy relief.
It therefore calls for a broad and beneficial construction, consistent with the other provisions of the Act, which should serve to advance the remedy and to suppress the mischief.
The mischief which the section was designed to suppress was the difficulty faced by individual workmen in getting relief in respect of their existing 41 rights without, having, resort to section 10 of the Act.
Therefore, the term workman ' as used in the sub section must include all persons whose claim, requiring compuation under the sub section, is in respect of an existing right arising from his relationship as an industrial workman with his employer.
Otherwise, it would always be open to an unfair, unsympathetic and unscrupulous employer to terminate the services of his employee in order to deprive him of the benefit conferred by the section and compel him to have resort to the lengthy procedure by way of reference under section 10, thereby defeating the very purpose and object of enacting the provision.
[5lE A, 52 A E] Chief Mining Engineer, East India Coal Co. Ltd. vs
Rameshwar & Ors.
[1968] 1 S.C.R. 140, U.P. Electric Supply Co. vs R. K. Shukla; , , R. B. Bansilal Abhirchand Mills Co. (P) Ltd. vs The Labour Court, Nagpur, ; and Bennet Coleman & Co. (P) Ltd. vs Punya Priya Das Gupta, , referred to.
Central Bank of Indict vs P. section Rajagopalan, [1964] 3 S.C.R. 140 and Kesoram Cotton Mills vs Gangadhar, [1964] 2 S.C.R. 809, disting Tiruchi Srirangam Transport Co., (P) Ltd. vs Labour Court, Madurai, , Manicka Mudaliar (M) vs Labour Court, Madras, [1961] I L. L. J. 592, Bachittar Singh vs Central Labour Court, Jullunder, A.I.R. 1969 Punjab 187, Management of Government Soap Factory, Bangalore vs The Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Bangalore, A.I.R. 1970 Mys.
225 and U.P. Electric Supply Co. Lod.
vs Assistant Labour commissioner, Allahabad, approved.
This judgment should not be considered as an expression of opinion on the interpretation of sections 20 read with section 2(1) of the .
