The respondent State served a notice on the appellant, who was a member of the Municipal Committee, under the proviso to section 16(1) of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 calling upon him to show cause why he should not be removed from the membership of the committee under section 16(1)(e).
The notice charged the appellant with having brought outsiders into the ball where a meeting was being held for the election of the President and Vice President of the Committee and caused disturbance to the meeting that he did not maintain decorum, and t hat he did not obey the rulings of the Chairman of the meeting.
The appellant denied the allegations and averred that it was the Chairman who was actively helping the opposite party and that it was he who brought in outsiders to create confusion and disorder.
The Governor of Punjab passed an order under section 16(1) (e) read with the proviso, removing the appellant from the membership of the Committee and also disqualifying him for a period of three years under section 16(2).
The appellant challenged the order before the High Court and the trial judge held that the allegations against the appellant in the show cause notice, even if true, would not attract section 16(1)(e) of the Act, and, therefore, quashed the order.
The appellate Court, held, after examining the note file produced by the State that the State had considered the explanation offered by the appellant and the other materials before it, and that the State was justified in passing the order.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court, HELD : (1) Section 16(1) of the Act gives power to the State Government to remove any member of the Committee if he is guilty of one or other of the acts mentioned in clauses(a) to (g).
To attract clause (e), the State Government must form an opinion that the appellant had "flagrantly abused his position as a member of the Committee".
The evression 'flagrantly ' means glaringly, notoriously, scandalously; and a position is said to be abused when it is put to a bad use or for a wrong purpose depending upon the circumstances of the case.
When a meeting of the membership of the Committee was being held the appellant had a right to participate in the proceedings as a member of the Committee.
if he had not been a member of the committee he would not be entitled to be present at the time of the meeting.
But he had no business to go outside and bring in hooligans for the purpose of creating confusion and chaos.
The appellant thus flagrantly abused his position as a member of the Committee while participating in the meeting of the Committee, and therefore the State Government was, justified in passing the order.
[100D H] 93 (2) The High Court was justified in holdingthat the State Government had considered the appellant 's representations as also the other relevant materials before it passed the impugned Order.
since there had been a proper consideration of the explanation furnished by the appellant there was no violation of theprinciples of natural justice.
[1104C F] (3) In as much as very severe penal consequences result by removing a person from the membership of a committee and appeal is provided under the Act it is not only desirable but essential that the State Government should indicate its reasons for forming the opinion as required under section 16(1)(e) of the Act.
It is obligatory on the part of the ' State Government to make available to the member concerned the materials available before it and on the basis of which the show cause notice is issued, and it is open to the member concerned, to request the State Government to furish him the materials, so, that, be may love an effective answer to the averments contained in the show cause notice and to the materials on the basis of which it had, been issued.
When such an order is challenged the State must place before the Court the.
necessary materials which were available before it and which were taken info consideration for forming the opinion to, remove the person concerned from membership of 'the committee.
in the present case, however, the appellant had not made a grievance either before the High Court or before this Court that the proceedings initiated against him suffered from the infirmity of not having been made available to him the materials that were before the Government when it passed, the order removing him from the membership of the Committee.
[102F H; 103A E; 104,B C] The averments of the appellant and the Chairman of the meeting raised a disputed question of fact on which Government was not entitled to take a view rejecting the plea of the appellant without having disclosed to him the alleg ations made in the report.
If disputed questions ' of fact arise for the consideration of the Government there is no provision as to how the State has to deal with the matter.
Therefore, suitable provision may be made either in the Act or in the Rules for dealing with such disputed question of fact.
[1O4A B]
