Nine employees of the octroi department, 13 employees of the water works.
department and a time keeper of Nagpur Corporation applied under section 20 of the Minimum Wages Act to the Small Causes Court of Nagpur for overtime wages at the rate of double the wages for the period they worked beyond prescribed hours and holidays.
The authority raised several issues but they were decided against the applicants and their applications were dismissed.
Being aggrieved the said decision, four applications were presented before the High Court under article 227 of the Constitution and the High Court also upheld the view of the authority.
It was contended by the appellants that under Rule 25 of M.P. Minimum Wages Rules, 1,1951, they were entitled to overtime wages at double the ordinary rate of wages for the period they worked beyond prescribed hours and holidays.
For their claims they relied on 2 minimum wages notification one dated 21 2 51 and the other dated 23 2 56.
On behalf of the appellants the only point canvassed before this Court was the rejection of their claim with regard to overtime work done by them and work done on weekly rest days.
The respondent contended that as the employees of the Corporation were paid higher wages than those fixed under the Act as minimum wages, the Act did not operate, and the employer could not be compelled to pay higher wages.
Secondly, the second notification did not supersede the first notification which only applied to unskilled labour as to, cover all employees skilled or unskilled.
Further, the provision inquiring payment at double the ordinary rate of wages contained in Rule 25 must be read as the ordinary rate of minimum wages fixed.
Allowing the appeal, HELD : (i) Rule 25 contemplates overtime work at double the rate of wages, which the worker actually receives, including the casual requisite and other advantages mentioned in the explanation.
By using the phrase "double the ordinary rate of wages", the rule making authority intended that the worker should be the recipient of double the remuneration which he, in fact, ordinarily receives, and not double the rate of minimum wages fixed for him under the Act.
Had it been intended to provide for merely double the minimum rate of wages fixed under the Act, the rule making authority could have so expressed its intention in clear and explicit words.
The word "Ordinary" used in rule 25 reflects the actuality rather than the workers ' minimum entitlement under the Act.
169A D] (ii) The second notification was not applicable to all categories of labour as wrongly held by the High Court.
The second notification has to be read in the background of the first notification with the result that 162 the later notification must also to, be held to be confined to unskilled labour in so far as it varies revises some of the rates fixed in the earlier notification without extending its operational boundaries by deleting the word "unskilled" from the explanation "unskilled labour".
[170G] Union of India v B. D. Rathi, A,.
I. R .
1963, Bom,. 54, referred to and distinguished.
