The respondent challenged the appellant selection to the Madras Legislative, Council from the Madras District Graduates ' Constituency on the grounds, (1) that, the purpose of article 171 of the Constitution was to confer a right of functional representation upon persons possessing certain educational or other qualifications so that the appellant who was not a graduate could not be elected to the Legislative Council from the Graduates ' Constituency; (2) that, it would be absurd and destructive of the concept of representation that an individual, who did not possess the essential or basic qualification of the electors, should be their representative, and (3), that, the Constitution, being an organic instrument, must be interpreted in a broad and liberal manner so as to give effect to the underlying principles and purposes of the system of representation sought to be embodied in it.
The High Court set aside the election.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, HELD: (1) (a) Graduates are not an occupational or vocational group, but merely a body of persons with particular educational qualifications.
It would, therefore, not be correct to describe the additional representation sought to be given to them in the Legislative Council as an attempt to introduce functional or vocational representation.
[181B] (b) The qualifications of the elector constituting the electorate, and of those who can represent each electorate, contemplated by the Constitution and supplemented by Parliament, are separately set out for each House.
As regards the Legislative Council, the qualifications for the four electorates are indicated in article 171 (3) (a), (b), (c) and (d).
The plain and ordinary meaning of the term "electorate is that it is the body of persons who elect.
It does not take in the extended notion of a body of persons electing representatives from amongst themselves.
It does not impose a requirement that the person to be chosen must also be a member of the electorate.
[177D F] (c) The qualifications of candidates for seats in the Council are given in section 6 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
While a member of the Legislative Assembly should also be an elector in the constituency from which he stands, the member of the Legislative Council is not so required to be a member of the electorate.
All that is required is that the person to be chosen as a member of the Legislative Council should be an elector for an Assembly constituency in the State to whose Legislative Council he is chosen.
[179E] (d) Whatever may have been the opinions of the Constitution makes or their advisors it is not possible to say, on a perusal of article 171, that the Second Chamber found here were meant to provide for functional 173 or vocational representation.
AR that can be inferred is that additional representation or weightage was given to persons possessing special types of knowledge and experience by enabling them to elect their special representatives.
The concept of such representation does not carry with it the further notion that, the representative must also possess the very qualifications of those he represents.
The High Court erroneously travelled outside the four corners of the statutory provisions when there was no ambiguity at all in the language, and by resorting to a presumed legislative intent, it added a qualification to those expressly laid down in the Constitution and other statutory provisions.
[1 80F] Davies Jankins & Co. vs Davies, 1967 (2) W.L.R. p. 1139 (a_) 1156, inferred to.
2(a) Article 171 is designed only to give a right to choose their representatives to those who have certain types of presumably valuable knowledge and education.
If the presumption of their better competence to elect a suitable representative is there, it would be for the members of such a constituency themselves to decide whether a person who stands for election from their constituency possesses the right type of knowledge , experience and wisdom.
The Constitution makers, acting on such a presumption, may have intentionally left the educational qualifications of candidate for election from the Graduates Constituency unspecified.
[181C] (b) It could not possibly be said that the question to be dealt with was not known to the legislators.
The provisions of law show that the qualifications of the electors as well as of those to be elected were matters to which the attention of the law makers, both in the Constituent Assem bly and in Parliament, was specifically directed.
Hence, the omission must have been deliberate.
[181G] R. vs Cleworth, (1864) 4 BSS 927 and Craies on Statute Law6th Edn.
1963 72, referred to.
(c) The legislative history of the Article also shows that the omission by the Constitution makers or by Parliament, to prescribe graduation as a qualification of the candidate from the Graduates ' constituency, was deliberate.
The provisions of the Government of India (Provincial Legislative Assemblies) Order, 1936, prescribing the qualifications of persons to be chosen from special constituencies set up for representation in the Legislative Councils under the Government of India Act, 1935, indicate that it was invariably expressly provided where it was so intended, that a necessary qualification of a candidate for a seat was that he should be entitled to vote for the choice of a member to fill it.
Such a qualification was not left to mere implication.
[181H 182E] (3) It is true that a constitution should be interpreted in a broad and generous spirit, but the rule of "plain meaning" or "literal" interpretation could not altogether be abandoned.
The object of interpretation is to discover the intention of the law makers, and this object can obviously be best achieved by first looking at the language used in the relevant provisions.
A logical corollary of the rule of literal interpretation is that a statute may not be extended to meet a case for which provision has clearly and undoubtedly not been made; and an application of this rule necessarily involves that addition to, or modification of, words used in statutory provisions is not generally permissible.
Courts may depart from this rule only to avoid a patent absurdity.
[175D] Sri Ram Narain Medhi & Ors.
vs The State of Bombay, A.I.R. ; British India General Insurance Co. Ltd. vs
Captain 174 itbar Singh & Ors., ; R. C. Jacob vs Union of India; , ; State of Madhya Pradesh vs M/s. Azad Bharat Finance Co. & Anr.
A.I.R. 1967 S.C. 276; Hira Devi vs District Board, Shabiahanpur, ; & 365, referred to.
From the language as well as the legislative history of articles 171 and 173 of the Constitution and section 6 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, it could be presumed that the omission of the qualification that the representative of graduate should also be a graduate was deliberate.
By presuming such an intention of the law makers, no absurdity results.
By adding 'deemed to be necessary ' or 'implied ' qualification of a representative of the graduates, which the Constitution makers or Parliament could easily have imposed, the Court would be invading the legislative sphere.
[183F]
