The respondent, a partnership firm of which the second respondent was a partner, carried on business as manufacturers of bidis at various places in the State of Madhya Pradesh.
Being unable to secure sufficient tendu leaves locally, the firm took leases for the collection of such leaves in Bihar & Maharashtra.
They actually imported tendu leaves under two railway consignments from Bihar.
They informed the Divisional Forest Officer about the same and asked permission for transport of the leaves and to utilise them in their factories.
By letter, the D.F.O. informed the respondents that the leaves must not be moved for bidi manufacture until permission is given.
Respondents obeyed the order; but in spite of that, the Sub divisional Forest Officer seized two quantities of such leaves and filed a complaint alleging contravention of section 5 of Madhya Pradesh Tendu Patta (Vyapar Viniyaman) Adhiniyam, 1964.
The respondent filed a petition under article 226 of the Constitution for a writ of certiorari quashing the complaint.
The contention of the respondents was that the Act did not prohibit import of tendu leaves from outside nor was there any restriction on a manufacturer to consume the same for the manufacture of bidis or the Rules made under the Act did not regulate the transport of the tendu leaves imported from outside.
The State however, contended that transport of tendu leaves whether grown locally or imported from outside was completely prohibited under section 5 of the Act, except by a license holder in terms of a permit issued.
S.5(1) provides that no person other than the State Government or an Officer of the State Government etc.
shall purchase or transport tendu leaves.
Further, the Act did not prohibit import of tendu leaves and so the Act is not violative of articles 31, 301 and 304 of the Constitution and the control of movement of tendu leaves after their import was in no way repugnant to articles 301 and 304 of the Constitution.
The State contended that unless the State had the power to check the purchase of tendu leaves from outside the State and to restrict the transport thereof within the State, the monopoly of State trading in tendu leaves would not be effective.
The High Court rejected these contentions of the State and hence the appeal.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD : (1) All the relevant provisions of the Act and the rules made thereunder show that the legislature intended that everybody growing leaves within the State should offer the same to it to its agents in different units for sale and the State was bound to purchase every single lot of usable tendu leaves.
Prima facie trade in tendu leaves could consist of dealing in those leaves, i.e., their purchase and sale but transport 'of the leaves once purchased or sold would not prima facie be an organic or integral part of dealing in those leaves.
[842 D] 839 Vrajlal Manilal vs M.P. State ; , followed.
(ii) In the present case, the transport of tendu leaves purchased outside but consigned to places within the State to be used for the manufacture of bidis is not integrally connected with the State monopoly as envisaged in the Act.
The Act ought not to be construed so as to ban import of tendu leaves from outside the State or restrict their movement once they are within the State unless clear language was used in that behalf.
[844 C] Akadasi Padhan vs State of Orissa, [1963] Supp. 2 S.C.R. 691, referred to.
