A Sen Raleigh cycle which was stolen by one S was recovered from the house of the appellant along with several other cycles.
The appellant 's explanation was that some of the cycles belonged to members of his family and the others were pledged with him in the course of his business. Ext.
DA was produced by the appellant to show that the Sen Raleigh cycle in question had been pledged with him by section The Trial Court did not accept the document as genuine, rejected his explanation as to how the said cycle came into his possession and convicted him under section 411 I.P.C.
The conviction was upheld by the High Court Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD,: The appellant had sought to prove the document ext.
DA to support the transaction of pledge.
That document had rightly been found not to have been proved.
Apart from the Sen Raleigh cycle several other cycles were found in the possession of the appellant which he claimed to have been, pledged with him.
No article of any other kind was either pointed out or claimed to have been pledged with the appellant or with members of his family which would normally have been done if the version given by him that the business of pawn brokers was being carried on had any truth in it.
Pawn brokers are ordinarily and in normal course expected to maintain some books of account or some documents which contain the particulars of the transactions relating to pledge.
There was no indication or suggestion by the appellant that he was maintaining any such books of account or documents.
[211F] The above circumstances were sufficient to show that the court would be justified in holding that the explanation given by the appellant could not reasonably be true.
A presumption therefore could immediately be drawn in accordance with section 114.
Illustration (a) of the Evidence Act.
There was hardly any evidence worth the name by which it could be said that the presumption had been rebutted by the appellant.
[211H] The appeal must accordingly be dismissed.
Atwal vs Massay, ; Otto George Gfeller V. The King, and Rex vs Abramoitch, referred to.
