The appellants and the petitioners challenged the vires of the Gudalur Janmam Estates (Abolition and Conversion into Ryotwari) Act, 1969, on the ground that it was violative of articles 14, 19, and 31 of the Constitution.
Their case was that their lands in the Gudalur Taluk, in the State of Tamil Nadu, were previously Janmam estates, but, subsequently became ryotwari estates, especially after the Resettlement of 1926,and as such, the provisions of the Act were not applicable to these lands; that so far as the forest areas in the Janmam lands in question were concerned they did not constitute "estate"; and that the acquisition of the lands was not for implementing agrarian reforms and, therefore, did not get the protection of article 31A.
HELD : that the provisions of section 3 of the Act in so far as they related to the transfer of forests 'in Janmam estates to the government were not protected by article 31A, and, being violative of the Constitution had to be struck down; and that the vires of the Act in other respects had to be upheld.
(i) The effect of the Resettlement of 1926 was to retain the Janmam estates and not to abolish the same or to convert them into ryotwari estates.
There was merely a change of nomenclature.
Government Janmam lands, were called the new holdings while private Janmam lands were called the old holdings.
In respect of Janmabhogam (Janmi 's share) relating to government Janmam lands, the order further directed that the amount to be paid to the government should include both the taram assessment and Janmabhogam.
It is difficult to infer from these that Janmam rights in the, lands in question were extinguished and converted into ryotwari estates.
The use of the word Janmabhogam, on the contrary, indicates that the rights of Jenmis were kept in tact.
[271B] Kottarathil Kochuni and Others vs The State of Madras and Others, , Karimbil Kunhilkoman vs State of Kerala, [1962] 1 Supp.
S.C.R. 847 and Secretary of State vs Ashtamurthi, I.L.R. 13 Madras 89, referred to.
The grant of a right of relinquishment to a Janmi would not by itself convert janmam rights in the lands into ryotwari estate.
[272A B] 259 (Khanna, J.) Further, apart from the lands in question, there are no janmam estates in the State of Tamil Nadu (Madras).
To hold that the Janmam rights in the lands ceased to exist after the Resettlement of 1926 would have the effect of rendering the words, in clause (2)(a)(i) of article 31A, wherein there is a reference to Janmam rights in the State of Madras meaningless and without any purpose.
[272 D] (ii)As Janmam lands fall under clause (2) (a) (i) of article 31A it is not essential to show that the requirements of clause (2)(a)(iii) too are satisfied for such lands and it would make no difference whether forests are a part of the Janmam lands.
All lands which are part of a Janmam estate of a Janmi in the State of Madras and Kerala would constitute "estate" as mentioned in Clause (2) (a) (i) of Article 31A. [273 E] (iii)The object and general scheme of the Act is to abolish intermediaries between the state and the cultivator and to help the actual cultivator by giving him the status of directs relationship between himself and the State.
The Act, as such, in its broad outlines,, should be held to be a measure of agrarian reform and would consequently be protected by article 31A of the Constitution.
Therefore, it is immune from attack on the ground of being violative of articles 14, 19 or 31.
[274 A] Vajrayelu Madaliar vs Special Deputy Collector, Madras & Anr. ; , referred to.
(iv)But, the acquisition of forests in Janmam estates is not in furtherance of the objective of agrarian reform, and, as such, is not protected by article 31A.
In the absence of anything in the Act to show the purpose for which the forests are to be used by the Government, it cannot be said that the acquisition of the forests in Janmam land would be for a purpose related to agrarian reform.
The mere fact that the ownership of forests would stand transferred, to the State would not show that the object of the transfer is to bring about agrarian reform.
Augmenting the resources of the State by itself, and in the absence of anything more re garding the purpose or utilisation of those resources cannot be held to be a measure.
of agrarian reform.
There is no material on the record to indicate that the transfer of forests from the Janmi to the Government is linked in any way with a scheme of agrarian reform or betterment of village ceremony.
[274 H] State of Uttar Pradesh vs Raja Anand Brahma, [1967] 1 S.C.R. 362, held inapplicable.
