The appellant Association was recognised under section 27 read with section 3(23) of the Bombay Industrial Relations Act, 1946 as the Association of employers in Silk and Art Silk Textile Industry within the local area of Greater Bombay.
The respondent Sabha represented the workmen in the Industry.
By a supplementary award dated October 15, 1971 the Industrial Court modified an existing award of the Industrial Court of Maharashtra, Bombay, dated April 25, 1962 by directing with retrospective effect from January 1, 1971 that the employees in Silk and Art Silk Industry who were concerned in the dispute shall be granted dearness, allowance at the rate of 99 per cent neutralization of the rise in the Bombay Consumer Price Index 106 (old series) on the basis of the minimum wage of Rs. 30/ 4 per month of 26 working days.
The appellant Association and one of the Silk Mills appealed.
HELD : The award did not suffer from any infirmity.
(i) The Association represented 55 units of employers and out of these only 28 produced their balance sheets and profit and loss accounts.
The other 27 units did not supply any materials with respect to their financial capacity but agreed to abide by the decision of the Industrial ' Court on the basis of the materials furnished by the 28 units.
The award in so far as it concerned these 28 units proceeded on the basis of their financial capacity as judged from accounts produced by them and the materials in the case.
There is no substance in the complaint that any adverse inference had been drawn against that 28 units on account of non production of materials by others.
[283 H] (ii) The contention that the position of the industry was not stable and that its prospects were bleak could not be accepted.
A broad and ' overall view of the financial position of the employer units was taken into account by the Industrial Court and it had tried to reconcile the natural and just claims of the employees for a higher rate of dearness allowance with the capacity of the employer to pay it and in that process it hadmade allowance for the legitimate desire of the employer to make reasonable profits.
What is really material in assessing the financial capacity of the employer units in this context is the extent of gross profits made by them.
On the basis of exhibit U.9, which was an analysis of the balance sheet, and profit and loss accounts of the 28 units, the Court found 'that the 28 mills had been making good profits and that, on an average, the profit would work out at 40 and odd per cent of the capital.
There was some decline in the profits made during the years 1966, 1967 and 1968 but, the Court found that the industry was rallying round in 1970.
[286 C] 278 Ahmedabad Mill Owners ' Association, etc.
vs The Textile Labour Association; , at p. 426 and Unichem Laboratories Ltd. vs Their Workmen, Civil Appeals No. 1091 93 of 1971, decided on 24 2 1971, referred to.
(iii) No evidence had been adduced to show what exactly had been the ,effect on the industry of the enhancement in excise duty.
Without further evidence it was not possible to draw an inference that the sale of the products had been adversely affected.
Moreover the economic incidence on the excise duty had been passed on to the consumer and the em ployer unit did not have to bear any additional burden on account of the levy.
[286 H] (iv) Exhibit U.8 is a comparative Table showing the minimum basic wages and dearness allowance paid in other industries in the region like the engineering, pharmaceuticals, etc.
The Court relied upon it only to show the trend in the region.
The Court also relied upon the report of the Norms Committee which stated that the trend for the last decade in industrial adjudication as well as in settlements and awards, was to allow 100 per cent neutralization in the case of lowest paid employees.
The Court was of the view that if 80 per cent neutralization could be allowed in the industry under the settlement arrived at in 1957, there was no reason why 100 per cent neutralization should not be granted in view of the steep rise in the cost of living from 1957, to the lowest paid employees.
It is not possible to agree with the contention of the appellant that the Industrial Court went wrong in relying upon exhibit U.8 or the report of the Norms Committee to find out the trend in the region as to the extent of neutralization to be allowed to the employees concerned.
[287 F] Bengal Chemical and Pharmaceutical Works Ltd. vs Its Workmen, referred to.
(v) The Association never wanted the Court to make any comparison with any other units in the same industry in the region.
In the written statement of the Association there was no averment that there were other comparable units in the same industry in the region.
No did the Association, at the time of argument before the Industrial Court, put forward the contention that there were comparable concerns in the same industry in the region and that the Court should make a comparison of the employer units in question with those concerns to find out the extent of neutralization which could be granted.
The Association was certainly in a position to tell the Court whether there were any other comparable units in the same industry in the region and the only inference from its conduct was that there were no comparable units in the industry in the region.
[290 A] French Motor Car Co. Limited vs Workmen, [1963] Supp.
at pp.
20 21.
Williamsons (India) Private Ltd., vs The Workmen, [1962] I L.L.J. 302 and Greaves Cotton and Co. and others vs Their Workmen, ; at pp.
367 369, referred to.
