The Cutchi Memons had migrated from Cutch to Bombay, Madras and other places.
They were originally Hindus and were converted to Islam three or four hundred years ago. 'Me family of the respondents originally settled in Madras, and between 1928 and 1930, went over to Mysore and settled down in the Bangalore Civil Station.
The father of the respondents died in 1955 at Bangalore leaving properties which were sought to be charged to estate duty.
The respondents claimed that they were governed by Hindu Law as their customary law including its concepts of joint family property, the right of a son by birth in such property and its devolution by survivorship and that therefore, only one third of the said properties, that is, the undivided share of their deceased father could be property said to have passed to them on his death and be assessable under the .
The Deputy Controller of Estate Duty held that as there was only one solitary decision of the Madras High Court in favour of the respondents ' contentions as against a large number of decisions of the Bombay High Court which limited the application of Hindu Law to matters of succession and inheritance only, the Bombay view was the correct one.
On a reference to the High Court, the High Court upheld the respondents ' contentions.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court, HELD : (1) According to Mohamedan Law a person converting to Mohamedanism changes not only his religion but also his personal law.
This rule, however, applied only to cases of individual conversions and not to wholesale conversions such as Khojas and Cutchi Memons.
In such cases of wholesale conversion of a caste or community the converts might retain a part of their original personal law according to the hitherto held habits, traditions and the surroundings.
[236C] (2) The view finally settled in Bombay is that the application of Hindu Law to Cutchi Memons is now restricted to cases of succession and inheritance as it would apply in the case of an intestate, and separate, Hindu, possessed of self acquired property.
[241H] Haji Cosman vs Haroon Saleh Mahomed, Bom. 369, referred to.
(3) But the Madras view, supported by the records of several cases in the Madras High Court, is that Cutchi Memons, who had settled down in Madras, had regulated their affairs, since they had settled down amidst 232 Hindus, according to Hindu Law not only in matters of succession and inheritance, but also in matters of their property including the Hindu concepts of coparcenary and survivorship.
[246C D] Hajee Aboo Bucker Sait vs Ebrahim Hajee Aboo Bucker Sait, A.I.R. 1921 Mad.
571; Abdul Sattar Ismail vs Abdul Hamid Sait, A.I.R. 1944 Mad. 504; Abdul Hameed Sait vs The Provident Investment Company Ltd., I.L.R. ; Abdurahiman vs Avoomma, A.I.R. 1956 Mad. 244 and Begum Noorbanu vs Deputy Custodian General of Evacuee Property, A.I.R. 1965 S.C. 1937, referred to.
(4) The question as to which customary law is applicable turns really on the consideration as to which law a community decides to have for regulating succession to the properties of its members depending upon amongst whom they had settled down and the surroundings and traditions they found in that place.
That being the position, there is no question of preferring one view to another in the present case as between the Madras and Bombay views, because the Madras view applies to the respondents.
[245H] Abdulrahim Haji Ismail Mithu vs Halimabai, (1915 1916) L.R., 43 I.A. 35 and Khatubai vs Mohamad Haji Abu, (1922 1923) L.R., 50 I.A. 108, applied.
Ella Sait vs Dharanayya, , disapproved.
(5) Moreover, if such preference is expressed by the Court now, it may have the result of upsetting a number of titles settled on the basis of the decisions of each of the two High Courts and perhaps elsewhere.
(6) The Cutchi Memons Act (46 of 1920) does not apply to the respondents, because, the declaration under section 2 of the Act to get its benefit and be governed by Mahomedan Law had not been made by any one concerned.
[247E] (7) The option of being governed by the Mahomedan Law contained in the 1920 Act was replaced by a uniform and mandatory provision, in the Cutchi Memons Act (10, of 19,38), which provided that all Cutchi Memons shall, in matters of succession and inheritance, be governed by the Mahomedan Law.
But the 1938 Act was not extended to the Civil Station area in Bangalore where the deceased and the members of his family had settled down and carried on business.
In 1948, when that area was retroceded to Mysore, the Mysore Legislature passed the Retroceded (Application of Laws) Act, 1948 extending to that area certain laws and enactments in force in the Princely State of Mysore, one of which was the Mysore Cutchi Memons Act, 1943, which was 'identical with 1938 Central Act.
But section 3 of the 1943 Act provided that 'nothing in 'this Act shall affect any right acquired before its commencement etc. ' The respondents having been born.
before 1948 (when the Act was made appli cable to them) had already acquired a right by birth in the property held by their father which right was expressly saved by section 3 of the 1943 Act.
There was, therefore, no question of the passing of the properties to the respondents on the death of their father as envisaged by section 3 of the .
[247H 248F]
