D, a Lecturer in a Government College, was appointed as examiner of a physics practical examination held by the Gujarat University.
He allegedly took Rs. 500 from a candidate at the examination for showing him favour .
He was charged with offences under section 161 Indian Penal Code and section 5(2) read with section 5(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act 1947.
The Sessions Judge held him to be a 'public servant ' within the meaning of cl. 9 of section 21 as it stood before its amendment by Act 40 of 1964, and held him guilty under section 161 of the I.P.C. He was also held guilty under the 1947 Act.
In, appeal the High Court held (1) that in is capacity as examiner of Gujarat University lie was not a public servant and therefore not guilty under, section 161 I.P.C.; (ii) that though a public servant in his capacity as lecturer in a Government College he had not abused his position as such public servant and ' therefore was not guilty under section 5(2) read with section 5(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act.
The State appealed to this Court.
HELD : (i) As rightly held by the High Court a public servant within the meaning of cl. 9 of section 21 as it stood at the relevant time must be an officer of the Government and the fee or commission must be payable by the Government.
A University Examiner cannot be considered to hold an office in the sense in which that word has been understood and employed in the Ninth Clause even though examining answer books may fall within the performance of a public duty.
A private individual who has no employment may be appointed an examiner because of his high academic qualifications.
He cannot be said to be holding any office.
An examiner who is in the regular service of a University also cannot be said to be a public servant since a University is not a local authority within the meaning of clause 12(b).
Since the appellant was not a public servant under section 21 I.P.C. he was rightly acquitted of the offence under section 161 I.P.C. [319 F 320 H] Ram Krishna Dalmia vs Delhi Administration, [1963] 1 S.C.R. 253, applied.
(ii)It was never the case of the prosecution that D had been guilty of any abuse of his position as a lecturer of the Government College.
As he was not a public servant when he was acting as an examiner it could not be said that there had been any abuse by him of his position as a public servant.
He was therefore rightly acquitted by the High Court of the offence, under section 5 (2) read with section 5 (1) (d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act 1947.
[325 E] 314 There are two ways of looking at clause 5(1)(d).
One is that the words "corrupt or illegal means" stand by themselves and as soon as it is established that a public servant has by such means obtained any valuable thing or pecuniary advantage he is guilty of the offence.
The other way of reading this clause is by confining the words "by otherwise" to the means employed.
Thus the means employed may be corrupt or illegal or may be of such a nature as would savour of a dishonest act.
But the abuse of position as a public servant would be essential whether the means are corrupt or illegal or are of the nature covered by the word "otherwise".
The analysis of clause (d) made in Narayanan Nambiar 's case seems to lend support to the view taken by the High Court that the abuse of position as a public servant is essential.
[324 A D] In clauses (a), (b) and (c) of section 5(1) the abuse of position as a public servant is clearly implied.
Clause (e) also carries the same implication.
It would, therefore, be reasonable to put on clause (d) a construction which is consistent with the other clauses of the sub section.
[325 C] M.Narayanan Nambiar vs State of Nerala, [1963] Suppl.
2 S.C.R. 724 and Rain Krishna & Another vs The State of Delhi, ; , applied.
Dhaneshwar Narain Sexana vs Delhi Administration,[1962] 3 S.C.R. 259, distinguished.
State of Ajmer vs Shivji Lal, [1959] Suppl.
S.C.R. 739, referred to.
