Differences having arisen among members of a family governed by the Aliyasantana Law, all the major members of the family except one referred the disputes to arbitration.
As per the authority given to the arbitrators the arbitrators had to decide the disputes in accordance with the Aliyasantana Law of inheritance, according to which, partition was impermissible except with the consent of all the adult members of the family.
The arbitrators were not required to divide the Kutumba properties on Kavaru basis; but the arbitrators divided the properties between the two Kavarus, which were then in existence in the family, in order to avoid disputes and to fix the responsibility for income, and loss.
There was an award decree in terms of the award, Thereafter, the members of one Kavaru filed a suit for partition under section 35 of the Madras Aliyasantana Act, 1949, and the appellants and some other members of the other Kavaru, contended that the Kutunba had been partitioned by the award, decree or, that the arrangement thereunder was a deemed partition under section 36(6) of the Act.
The trial court dismissed the suit, but the High Court, in appeal, held that the award decree did not evidence partition, and that it was not covered by section 36(6) as it was an award decree and not a mere award.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court, HELD : (1) When the Act came into force, in addition to joint living by the members of the Kutumba, three types of arrangements were in existence in various Kutumbas, namely, (a) When the senior most member of the family (Yejman) or (Yejmanthi) made maintenance allotments which were purely temporary in character, (b) a permanent arrangement for maintenance, and (e) partition with the consent of all adult members.
In the ease of a permanent, arrangement for maintenance it was usually done on Kavairu basis, the jointness of the family was kept intact, but arrangement was made for separate living and separate management of Kutumba properties on a permanent basis which; could not be disturbed without the consent of all the adult members of the Kutumba.
Such of these permanent arrangements which came within the scope of section 36(6) are deemed to be partitions despite the fact that under those arrangements the jointness of the Kutumba was kept intact.
[386A F] (2) The conditions to be satisfied before a document can be considered as coming within the scope of section 36(6) are : (a) there is a registered family settlement or award (b) all the major members of the Kutumba are parties to it; (c) the whole of the kutumba properties have been or were intended to have been distributed; and (d) the distribution is among all the Kavarus of the Kutumba for the separate and absolute enjoyment in perpetuity.
[387 A D] 384 Gummanna Shetty vs Nagaveniamma, ; , followed.
(3) In the present case, the award decree did not evidence a partition; because it contained clauses inconsistent with an out and out partition.
The award decree recited that 'proper arrangements were made for the maintenance of the Kutumba Without disrupting its oneness '; that both Kavarus should together conscious functions; and the members of one of the Kavarus were to show accounts to the senior most member who continued to be the yejman of thee entire kutumba.
[388G H] Ammalu Amma vs Vasu Menon, A.I.R. 1944 Mad.
108, approved.
(4) (6) Award decrees have to be considered as awards for purposes of section 36(6).
[391B C] (a) The principle underlying section 36(6) is not to disturb the finality of, arrangements made.
If that were so, such permanency should be available, in a larger measure to an award decree, for otherwise, parties could enforce partition ignoring award decrees while they would be bound by awards.
[390 G H] (b) After the coming into force of the , all awards had to be compulsorily made decrees of courts if they were to have force.
The Akiyasahntana Act came into force in 1994 and the legislature would not have denied to the awards passed after 1940 (in terms of which decrees would have been passed) the benefit of section 36(6) of the Aliyasanatana Act.
The Legislature, by using the expression 'award ' intended to include both awards simpliciter as well as awards which had been made decrees of Courts.
[391A B] Parameshwari Hengsu vs Venkappa Shetty and ors., (1961) Mys.
L.J. 686 on the interpretation if section 36(6), overruled.
(5) (a) But the second condition for the application of the section is not satisfied in the present case, as one of the major members of the Kutumba was not a party to the award.
[392D] (b) Even though he acquiesced in the arrangements made under the award decree he would not be a party to the arrangement.
Before the arrangement can be deemed to be a partition under section 36(6), all the conditions should be fully satisfied, and substantial compliance is not sufficient, since, it is a case of a deemed partition and not an actual partition.
[392E F]
