The Food Inspector purchased 1 1/2 seers of Shakkar from the appellant after paying its price.
He divided the sample into three parts, gave one to the appellant and retained the other two with him.
One of the samples retained ' was sent to the Public Analyst for examination.
The Public Analyst found it to be adulterated because of excess of extraneous matter.
The food Inspector filed a complaint before the Magistrate who convicted the appellant 'for an offence under section 16 read with section 7 of the .
In appeal the Sessions Judge acquitted the appellant but in further appeal to High Court the appellant was again convicted.
He appealed to this Court by special leave.
The contentions on behalf of the appellant were : (i) that Shakkar is not jaggery and since no standard of quality has been prescribed for Shakkar under the rules framed under the Act the Shakkar was not adulterated; (ii) that he had not kept the Shakkar for sale but for manufacturing Rab out of it and therefore the convicion under section 16 read with section 7 of The Act was bad.
HELD : (i) Shakkar is a product obtained by following processing juce pressed from out of sugar cane and therefore in view of the definition of jaggery in para A.07.05 of Appendix B of the rules framed under the Act Shakkar is jaggery.
In Chambers 20th Century Dictionary (revised edition) also the Hindi equivalent of jaggery given as Shakkar.
Therefore the finding of the High Court on the basis of the report of the Analyst that the Shakkar did not conform to the standard of quality prescribed for jaggery and was thus adulterated was correct and had to be maintained.
[353 B F] (2) The finding of the High Court was that the Shakkar was kept by the appellant for the purpose of sale and not for the purpose of manufacturing Rab out of it and that the attempt of the appellant was to sell the Shakkar as an article of food after mixing Shelkhari in it.
There was no reason to think that the finding was wrong.
But assuming that the finding was wrong and that the appellant kept the Shakkar not for sale, but for manufacturing Rab out of it, the appellant would still be guilty.
If Shakkar is an article of food, it does not matter whether the appellant kept it, for sale or for manufacturing Rab out of it provided the appellant bad sold it.
And a sale to the Food Inspector is a sale for the purpose of 16(1) of the Act.
[C D] The Food Inspector, Calicut Corporation v, Charukanttil Gopalan and another, , followed and applied.
The appeal must accordingly be dismissed.
