The fact that the High Court, in a reference under section 374 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, has to appraise the evidence for itself and has to arrive at its own independent conclusion would not prevent this Court from interfering with the order of the High Court if the High Court reverses the judgment of the trial court on grounds which are manifestly fallacious and untenable.
This Court in an appeal under article 136 of the Constitution does not normally reappraise the evidence and interfere with the assessment of that evidence by the High Court.
Where, however, this Court finds that grave injustice has been done by the High Court in interfering with the decision of the trial court on grounds which are plainly untenable and the view taken by the High Court is clearly unreasonable on the evidence on record this Court would not stay its hand.
There are, however, certain cardinal rules which have always to be kept in view in appeals against acquittal.
Firstly, there is a presumption of innocence in favour of the accused which has to be kept in mind especially when the accused has been acquitted by the Court below , Secondly, if two views of the matter are possible a view favourable to the accused should be taken; thirdly, in case of acquittal by the trial judge the appellate court should take into account the fact that the trial judge had the advantage of looking at the demeanour of witnesses; and fourthly, the accused is entitled to the benefit of doubt.
The doubt should, however, be reasonable and should be such as a rational thinking man will reasonably, honestly and conscientiously entertain and not the doubt of a timid mind which fights shy though unwittingly it may be or is afraid of the logical consequences, if that benefit was not, given.
To put it differently, it is "not the doubt of a vacillating mind that has not the moral courage to decide but shelters itself in a vain and idle scepticism,,.
[69H 70E] Himachal Pradesh Administration vs Shri Om Prakash, Cr.
Appeal No. 67 of 1969 decided on December 7, 1971, referred to.
