A dispute arose between the respondent company and the appellants workmen as regards payment of profit bonus under the .
The company, and the appellants, represented by its Union had been entering into various agreements from time to time, the last being the agreement on August 30, 1962 (,Ex.
As per exhibit A 5, the respondent paid bonus for the year 1964 at the rates mentioned therein.
The appellants demanded that they should be paid the profit bonus as per the Act in addition to what has been paid under the agreement, exhibit A 5.
The Company pleaded section 32(vii) (a) of the Bonus Act as a bar to further bonus.
On a reference to the Industrial Tribunal, it was held that in view of the general bonus paid under agreement exhibit A 5, it was an annual bonus, though paid quarterly, and it was linked with production or productivity and that it was paid in lieu of bonus based on profits.
Therefore, the workmen are not entitled to claim bonus for the year 1964 under the Act.
On appeal to this Court, it was contended that payments.
under the agreement, exhibit A 5, was made quarterly and they do not have that character of an annual bonus.
There is no material or record to show that the company paid the amount in lieu of bonus based on profits.
The amount paid under the agreement was only an ex gratia payment and not a profit bonus under the Act.
The respondent, however, contended that in order to decide the character of the general bonus paid under the agreement of 1962, previous agreement must be referred to, which would clearly show that what was being paid by the company was production bonus or as an incentive wage and not an ex gratia payment.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD : The general_ bonus paid under article VI or the agreement dated August, 30, , was a payment of annual bonus based on profits.
Although Article VI of exhibit A 5 does not throw much light as to the nature and character of the general bonus payable under it, a reference back to previous settlements and discussions between the parties will show that the pattern of bonus paid to the workers weresometimes called production bonus, later on called ex gratia payment.
, but from 1951 called as general bonus, which was paid quarterly, at the request of the workers, at a particular percentage based on salary excluding dearness allowance, having this background in mind, it is clear that what was being paid under article VI of exhibit A 5 was a payment linked with production or productivity.
The principal emphasis was that the amount, was being paid as an incentive to production and therefore, it was paid as production bonus as a wage incentive.
Further, it was an annual bonus paid from year to year not only during the period of agreement but also for the succeeding year till the required notice was given under the agreement.
Even then, the agreement was to continue to have 451 force notwithstanding the notice till a fresh agreement entered into.
Therefore, it is clear that the payment of general bonus paid quarterly was "annual bonus" as contemplated by section 32(vii)(a) of the Act.
[464 A 465 G] Smith vs Smith, , and Moss ' Empires Ltd. vs Inland Revenue Commissioners, followed.
Under the circumstances ' workers could claim not any additional bonus under the Art for the period for which the agreement was in operation and section 32 (vii) (a) of the Act was a bar to their claim.
[465 C] M/s Titaghur Paper Mills Co. Its Workmen, [1959] Supp. 2, S.C.R. 1012; The New Manek Chowk Spinning and Weaving Co. Ltd. Ahmedabad and others vs The Textile Labour Association, Ahmedabad, [1961] 3 S.C.R. I and Sanghi Jeevaraj Chewar Chand and others vs Secretary, Madras Chillies, Grains Kirana Merchants Workers Union and another; , , referred to,
