The petitioner was detained by an order under section 3 of the .
In a petition under article 32 of the Constitution it was urged on behalf of the petitioner that a prosecution for theft under the Indian Penal Code could have been launched on the facts alleged against him in the grounds of detention and therefore his detention was illegate.
Rejecting the plea, HELD : It is always open to the detaining authority to pass an order for the detention of a person if the grounds of detention are germane to the object for which a detention order can legally be made.
The fact that the particular act of the detenue which provides the reason for the making of the detention order constitutes ,in offence under the Indian Penal Code would not prevent the detaining authority from passing the, order for detention instead of proceeding against him in a court of law.
The detaining authority might well feel that though there was not sufficient evidence admissible under the Indian Evidence Act for securing a conviction, the activities of the person ordered to be detained were of such a nature as to justify the order of detention.
Even in cases where a person has been actually prosecuted in a court of law in respect of an incident and has been discharged by the trying magistrate, a valid order of his detention can be passed against him in connection with that very incident.
[46 H 470 C] Mohd. Salim Khan v, Shri C. C. Bose & Anr.
(Writ petition No. 435 of 1971 decided on April 25, 1972) relied on.
Sahib Singh Duggal vs Union of India, referred to.
The particulars of the incident in the grounds of detention in the present case showed that the petitioner and his associates committed theft in respect of overhead electric wires.
The above act of the petitioner and his associate created complete dislocation of electric supplies of the area.
The above ground of detention was germane to the object for which a detention order can be made under section 3(1)(a)(iii) of the Act.
According to that provision, the detaining authority may, if satisfied with respect to any person that with a view to preventing him from acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of supplies and services essential to the community, it is.
necessary so to do, make an order directing that such person be detained.
[470 E F] Pushkar Mukherjee & Ors, vs The State of West Bengal, ; , Arun Ghosh vs State of West Bengal and Nagendra Nath Mondal vs State of West Bengal, , referred to. 468
