The appellant was granted a licence on March 13, 1968 by the Excise Collector to establish a warehouse for ' the storage in bond and wholesale vend of country spirit by import and for supply to the excise vendors in the territory of Tripura for five years commencing April 1, 1968 and ending March 31, 1973.
The mode of granting the licence was criticised by the Committee of Estimates.
As a result the Governor of Tripura on July 2, 1970 inserted r. 164 A in the Tripura Excise Rules of 1962 whereby fees for licence for the wholesale vend of country spirit were required to be fixed by tender cum auction.
On July 6, 1970 the Excise Collector exercising his power under section 43 of the Bengal Excise, Act 1909 as extended to the Union Territory of Tripura withdrew the licence granted to the appellant after 15 days ' notice and remission of 15 days fee.
The appellant challenged the Excise Collector 's order in a petition under article 226 of the Constitution.
The Judicial Commissioner dismissed the petition.
Intr alia the Judicial Commissioner held that the licence granted to the appellant was invalid because it was granted without public notice as required by the proviso to section 22(1) of the Act.
In appeal by special leave it was contended by the appellant that (i) the Collector had no power to pass the impugned order; (ii) the words "any cause other than" in section 43 must be read ejusdem generis with the causes in mentioned in section 42; (iii) section 43 was arbitrary and violative of article 14 of the Constitution; (iv)the terms of section 43 had not been complied with; (v) the impugned order was passed without a show cause notice and was against natural justice; (vi) section 43 being arbitrary imposed unreasonable restrictions on the appellant 's right to carry on business.
HELD : (i) Under section 22, Sub section
(1) the Chief Commissioner is no doubt given the power of granting the: exclusive privilege of manufacturing and selling country liquor or 'intoxicating drugs as mentioned in clauses (a) to (e) but subs.
(2) of this section in express terms provides that no, grantee of any privilege under sub section
(1) shall exercise the same unless or until he has received a licence in that be half from the Collector or the Excise Commissioner.
In view of this provision it is obvious that it is the Collector who grants the licence 534 within the contemplation of section 43 and therefore it was this very officer who rightly granted the licence to the appellant and is empowered to withdraw the licence under section 43.
[538 F G] (ii)The ejusdem generis rule strives to reconcile the incompatibility between specific and general words.
This doctrine applies when (1) the statute contains an enumeration of specific words; (2) the subjects ,of the enumeration constitute a class or category; (3) that class or ,category is not exhausted by the enumeration; (4) the general term follows the enumeration and (5) there is no indication of a different legislative intent.
In the present case it was not easy to construe the various clauses of section 42 as constituting one category or class.
But that . apart the very language of the two sections 42 and 43 and the object intended to be achieved by them also, negative any intention of the legislature to attract the rule of ejusdem generis.
Therefore the expression 'any cause other than ' in section 43(1) could not be considered ejusdem generis with the causes specified in clauses (a) to (g) of 42(1).
[540 F H] (iii)Trade or business in country liquor has from its inherent nature, been treated by the State and the society as a special category requiring legislative control which has been in force in the whole of India since several decades.
In view of the injurious effect of excessive .consumption of liquor on health this trade or business must be treated as a class by itself and it cannot be treated on the same basis as other 'trades while considering article 14.
[541 A B] (iv)The submission that a separate order withdrawing the licence after the expiry of 15 days period from the order dated July 6, 1970 was necessary could not be accepted.
Section 43 does not provide for ,any such procedure.
All that this section contemplates is that ever the authority concerned considers that the licence should be withdrawn for any cause other than those specified in section 42 it may withdraw the same but to do so it must remit a sum equal to the amount of fees payable in respect of the licence for 15 days.
It was not complained that this amount was not remitted in the present case.
[541 C D] (v)The order dated July 6, 1970 could not be attacked on the ground that a show cause notice was not given.
The contents of this order show that the appellant had ample opportunity of showing cause against the intention of the Collector to withdraw the licence from September 1, 1970.
Rules of natural justice vary with the varying constitutions of statutory bodies and the rules prescribed by the legislature ,under which they have to act and the question whether in a particular case the rules of natural justice have been contravened must be judged not by any preconceived opinion of what they may be but in the light ,of the relevant statutory provisions.
Applying this test the impugned order could not be considered to violate any principle of natural justice.
Gullapalli Nageswara Rao vs A.P. State Road Transport Corporation, [1959] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 319 and K. K. Narula vs State of J. & K., ; referred to.
(vi)It is no doubt true that in section 43 there is no express mention of the precise grounds on which a licence may be withdrawn.
But keeping in view 'the nature of the trade or business for which the grant of licence under 'the Act is provided the cause contemplated by section 43 must be such as may have reasonable nexus with the object of regulating this trade or business in the general interest of the Public.
In 535 the determination of reasonableness of restrictions on trade or business regard must be had to its nature, the conditions prevailing in it and its, impact on the society as a Whole.
article 47 of our Constitution directs the State to endeavour to prohibit consumption of intoxicating drinks, and of drugs which are injurious to health except for medicinal purpose.
The cause for withdrawing the appellant 's licence was in terms of a major policy decision of the Tripura Government and this was a cause which while keeping in view the purpose and object of granting such.
exclusive privileges and licences could not be considered to be either irrelevant or collateral to that purpose and object.
[543 B E] K.K. Narula vs The State of J. & K. , referred to.
(vii)The public notice under section 22(1) is a condition precedent to the grant of the exclusive privilege of selling liquor.
The underlying policy of section 22 seems to be not to allow such an important matter to.
be decided in the secrecy of office without giving it publicity.
Failure to give such public notice was therefore rightly considered by the Judicial Commissioner to be fatal to the grant of the exclusive privilege to the appellant.
[544 G 545 A] The appeal must accordingly be dismissed.
