The members of the family of the plaintiff who belonged to the Saurashtra community had constructed a Mandapam on land of which they were the owners.
There were a Garbha Griha in front of the mandapam, stone idols called Dwarabalakas on either side and implements necessary for offering puja in the mandapam.
But there were no Dwajasthamba, Balipeeda or Gopuram.
The authorities under the Madras Hindu Religious Endowments Act, 1927, held that the mandapam was a public temple within the meaning of the Act.
A suit filed for a declaration that it was a private temple was decreed by the trial court, but in appeal, the High Court held that it was a public temple, on the grounds that, the members of the public had been worshipping at the shrine without let or hindrance, and that the temple was being run only by contributions and by benefactions obtained from members of the public.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, HELD : (1) According to the definition in the Act a public temple is a place by whatever designation known used as a place of public religious worship and dedicated or used as of right by the Hindu community or a section thereof as a place religious worship.
[592C] The Saurashtra community maintained a tradition of having private temples.
in the present case, the management and control over the mandapam was at all times with some or other members of the plaintiff 's family.
The trial court rightly approached the evidence, oral as well as documentary on the principle that once the private character of the temple was established stronger proof was necessary to hold that the temple was subsequently dedicated to the public.
The evidence produced by the parties was carefully considered and analysed, and, in discussing the evidence, the trial court gave detailed reasons for accepting or rejecting the evidence of a particular witness.
[587C E; 590F] The trial court held that thee was no satisfactory evidence that any donations had ever been collected from members of the public; that there was no evidence to establish that the deity was ever taken out in procession or that any person who was not a member of the 'family had ever performed any religious festival in the temple; and that the case set out by the defendant in the pleadings that there had been user of the temple by members of the Saurashtra community was inconsistent with the evidence produced on their behalf to the effect that any member of public, whether a Saurashtra or non Saurashtra, had a right to worship therein.
[587H; 588A C] (2)The High Court was in error in reversing the findings of the trial Court.
No attempt whatsoever was made by the High Court to discuss the reasons which the trial court had given for not accepting the evidence of the defence witnesses.
In the matter of appreciation of evidence if the 585 trial court had given cogent and detailed reasons for not accepting the testimony of a witness, the appellate court, in all fairness to it, ought to deal with those reasons before proceeding to form a contrary opinion.
Apart from this, the High Court did not consider the evidence produced by the plaintiff (appellant) without which matters could not be properly appreciated or explained.
The conclusions of the trial court receive support from the entire material on record, and this Court is not in a position to know on what grounds the High Court disagreed with the reasons which prevailed with the trial court for not relying on the evidence of the witnesses produced by the respondents.
[589F H; 590A] (3) The High Court also erred in not attaching importance to the following matters : (a) the origin of the temple had been proved to be private, (b) the management had remained throughout in the members of the appellant 's family, (c) the absence of any endowed property and (d) the absence of Dwajauthamba or Nagara bell or Hundial in the temple.
[592H; 593A B] (4) The origin of the temple, the manner in which its affairs were managed, the nature and extent of the gifts received by it, the rights exercised by devotees in regard to worship therein, the consciousness of the manager and the consciousness of the devotees themselves as to the public character of the temple are factors which go to establish whether a temple is public or private.
In the present case,the mandapam had somephysical characteristics and persons which are generally found in a public temple.
It was also published that persons who did not belong to appellant 's family used to worship at the temple and make offerings therein.
There were also some jewels and other articles in the temple.
But the determination of the question whether the temple was public or private did not depend on some facts or set of facts alone.
The entire evidence, both documentary and oral, had to be considered as a whole.
[573B E] Babu Bhagwan Din & Others vs Gir Har Saroop & Ors.
67 I.A. 1, applied.
Goswami Shri Mahalaxmi Vahuji vs Rannchboddas Kalidas & ors.
; , , followed.
Mundancheri Koman vs Achuthan Nai & Ors., 61 I.A. 405 and Mad.
ras Hindu Religious Endowments Board vs V. N. D. Ammal, , referred to.
