Under section 15 of the Central Sales tax Act the imposition of a tax on the sale or purchase of declared goods is inter alia subject to the restriction that such tax shall not be levied at more than one stage.
Groundnuts are declared good under section 14 of the Act.
Item 6 of schedule 3 to the Andhra Pradesh General Sales tax Act (6 of 1957) levies tax on groundnuts when purchased by a miller other than a decorticating miller in the State at the point of purchase by such miller, And in all other cases at the point of purchase by the last dealer who buys in the State.
The appellants were millers other than decorticating millers.
In writ petitions under Article 226 of the Constitution they challenged the levy of tax at the point of purchase by them on the ground that item 6 of schedule III was in conflict with section 15 of the Central Act in as much as tax on groundnut purchased by a non decorticating miller and later sold as such to other dealers would be taxed at two points once in the hands of the said miller, and again, at the point of purchase by the last dealer.
The High Court dismissed the petitions.
By certificate appeals were filed in this Court.
Dismissing the appeals, HELD : The validity of the levy of tax upon a purchase by a last dealer could be questioned by one of the appellants only if he was being taxed as a last dealer and not as a miller.
It was apparent that the appellants were being taxed at the point of purchase by them as millers only.
Each of the appellants became liable to the payment of tax as a purchasing miller just as a last dealer would be liable on the purchases made by him.
Hence the last dealer and the miller who purchases presumably to convert the groundnuts into other products, are placed on an equal 'footing.
It was not shown that there was a possibility of double taxation or of taxation of the same product at more than one point of purchase.
[711 D] Sri Venkataswara Rice, Ginning & Groundnut Oil Mill Contractors Co. etc.
vs The State of A.P. & Ors., A.I.R. , applied to.
[On the facts of the case the Court did not find it necessary to consider the position of a miller who purchases some grounds( for milling and the rest for sale.]
