The appellant purchased on July 1, 1945, the property of a colliery company and the consideration of Rs. 6 lacs was allocated in the sale deed in a certain manner among the various items purchased.
From the assessment year 1946 47 to the assessment year 1952 53, the appellant claimed depreciation on the basis of the written down value of the assets as per the.
assessment record of the vendor company, and the Income tax officer allowed depreciation on that basis.
For the assessment year 1952 53, however, the appellant contended that the depreciation should have been worked out on the basis of balance sheet valuation of the assets as per the audited accounts submitted by the appellant and as claimed in their return.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner held against the appellant.
On appeal, the appellate Tribunal remanded the matter to the Income tax Officer, and the income tax Officer, after inquiry, held that some of the directors of the vendor company and the appellant were the same, that the valuation of the depreciable assets had been written up while that of the non depreciable assets was written down and that no provision was made for the goodwill of the vendor company even though it was making good profits.
He made the allocation of Rs. 6 lacs in a different manner, and included the goodwill of the vendor also as having been sold to the appellant, and made provision for it from out of the Rs. 6 lacs.
The Tribunal accepted the report of the Income tax Officer and held that when the settled practice was sought to be reopened by the appellant the Income tax Officer had a right to see whether there was any justification ,for the departure, that the break up of the valuation in the sale deed was in fact arbitrary and that it was unlikely that the goodwill was provided for in the break up of the valuation in the sale deed.
On reference, the High Court also held that the Income tax Officer was competent to go beyond the conveyance and refix the valuation and that he bad correctly worked out the valuation of the goodwill after examining all the relevant facts and reports of experts and that the method adopted was not challenged by the appellant.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court, HELD : In the case of an asset, other than ocean going ships, with regard to which depreciation allowance is claimed under 'section 10(2)(vi) of the Income tax Act, 1922, in view of section 10(5), the original actual cost to an assessee of the asset has to be ascertained for the purpose of finding out its written down value.
For the purpose of getting the benefit of cl.
(c) of the proviso to section 10(2) (vi) also the original cost to the assessee,that is theperson who owns the asset and who is being assessed,has to be ascertained.
[748F H] 743 The original cost of a particular asset is a question of fact which has to to determined on the evidence or on the material produced before or available to the Income tax authorities.
Any document or formal deed mentioning the consideration or the cost paid for the purchase of an asset by an assessee would be a piece of evidence and prima facie the statements or figures given therein show how much the cost of the asset to the assessee is.
But if circumstances exist showing that a fictitious price has been put on the asset or there is fraud or collusion between the vendor and the vendee and there has been inflation or deflation of value for ulterior purposes it is open to the Income tax authorities to refuse to accept the price mentioned in the deed or alleged by the assessee and to ascertain what the actual original cost was.
[749C E] Even if it is not expressly mentioned that goodwill has been sold it can be shown and ascertained by evidence whether it has been purchased or not by the assessee.
[749F G] Commissioner of income Tax, Madras vs The Buckingham & Carnatic Co. Ltd. Madras, [935] I.T.R. 384; Jogta Coal Co. Ltd. V. Commissioner of Income Tax, West Bengal 36 I.T.R. 521; Pindi Kashmir Transport Co. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Lahore ; and Kalooram Govindranm vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Madhya Pradesh, Nagpur and Bhandara, , referred to.
tax Therefore, in the circumstances of this case it was open to the Incomeauthorities to go behind the valuation as also the allocation given in the deed of conveyance and to determine afresh the valuation as well as the allocation between the depreciable and non depreciable assets.
[749G H]
