The appellant mortgagor tendered to the mortgagees the mortgage money due on their mortgages and, on the refusal of the mortgagees to accept the amount, deposited the mortgage money into court.
The appellant thereafter filed suits for redemption and mesne profits.
The terms of the mortgage deeds indicated that, (i) the mortgagee shall have the possession and occupation of the mortgaged property and the right to appropriate the produce thereof in lieu of interest on the mortgage money and that the mortgagor shall have no claim to any excess produce or mesne profits; (ii) the mortgagee was to pay to the mortgagor the amount mentioned in each mortgage bond as annual reserve rent; and (iii) the mortgagor was liable for the payment of government revenue or cess.
The mortgagees, however, paid the revenue and cess on behalf of the mortgagor.
The total amount of revenue and cess paid by the mortgagees each year exceeded the amount due to the mortgagor as reserve rent.
The trial court, and the High Court in appeal, held that the amounts representing the government revenue and cess should have been added to the mortgage money and deposited in court, and, since it was not done, there was no valid deposit in court of the money due on the mortgages, and hence, the appellant was not entitled to mesne profits.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court, HELD : (1) Under the provisions of the Cess Act, 1880, cess is a public demand and linked with rent.
Under the terms of the mortgage deed the appellant was liable for the payment of both revenue and cess.
Since the mortgagees paid the government revenue or cess on behalf of the appellant and the amount so paid exceeded the amount payable by the mortgagees as reserve rent, the mortgagees were entitled to the excess payment from the appellant and add it to the mortgage money due.
[1020E F H] (2) There was nothing to account on the part of the mortgagees, because, (a) the mortgagees had to pay to the mortgagor a fixed amount as reserve rent; and (b) the mortgages were covered by section 77 of the Transfer of Property Act and therefore the provisions as to accounts in section 76(g), are excluded.
[1020B D]
