The assessee, a firm carrying on mining business, took on lease for 20 years certain areas which had been worked previously by.
others, and in which mica pillars had been exposed by those earlier mining operations.
Mica scrap was also lying on the surface.
The assessee paid a sum of money, part of which was towards the mica scrap lying on the surface.
The assessee also paid at Re. 1 / per acre per year as fee for prospecting licence., The assessee claimed the 1/20th part of the money paid for the lease as well as the fee paid for the prospecting licence as revenue expen diture for purposes of income tax.
The Tribunal allowed the money paid for the mica scrap lying on the surface as revenue expenditure, but disallowed the other claims.
The High Court also, on reference, held against the assessee (appellant).
Dismissing the appeal to this Court, HELD : The expenditure incurred for the lease, as well as the fee paid for the prospecting licence, were not allowable as revenue expenditure.
[362G H; 371C] (1)The test for ascertaining whether the amount spent for the lease is of a capital nature, is whether it was spent for obtaining a right of an ,enduring character, which, in the case of mining lease is to acquire rights over land for winning the mineral.
In other words, where the mineral is part of the land and some mining operations have to be performed to extract it from the earth, the amount paid to acquire a right over, or in the land, to win that mineral, is of an enduring character, and hence, a capital expenditure.
But where the mineral has already been gotten and is on the surface, then the expenditure incurred for obtaining the right to acquire the raw material, that is, the mineral would be a revenue expenditure laid out for the acquisition of a stock in trade.
[365A B; 368G H] In the present case, the findings of the Tribunal are clear and consistent with those given by the Income tax Officer and the Appellate Assistant Commissioner, in that, all of them distinguished between the raw materials which had already been extracted and brought to the surface, and those that are still to be extracted.
The mica pillars which had been exposed by the earlier mining operations, had enhanced the value of the right which was leased to the appellant, but none the less, the appellant still had to carry out some mining operations to extract the mineral from the pillars which were embedded in the land.
The lease was for a long period and it conferred a right to excavate the mica.
The amount paid was therefore for acquiring a right of an enduring nature to extract and remove the mica, to bring it to the surface, grade it, and pay royalty to the Government in accordance with the quality of each grade of mica extracted.
[368C D, H; 369A C; 370B D] Pingle Industries Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax Hyderabad, , followed.
361 Artherten vs British Insulated and Helsby Cables Ltd. , 213, Kauri Timber Co. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Taxes, [1913] A.C. 771, Golden Horse Shoe (New) Ltd. vs Thurgood (H.M. Inspector of Taxes), 18T.C. 280, Abdul ayoom vs Commissioner of Income Tax, at 703, Mohanlal Hargovind vs C.I.T., and M.A. Jabbar vs Commissioner of income Tax, , referred to.
(2)The term prospecting licence ' shows that the mine has not yet started working as a mine.
The finding by the authorities and the Tribunal that the fee paid for the prospecting licence was a payment for initiating the mining operations was a finding of a fact.
It was, in fact, a fee paid irrespective of the quantity of minerals obtained showing that the object of the payment was to initiate the business.
The period for which the licence was obtained, namely one year, does not also make it a revenue payment.
The fee paid to obtain the licence to carry out, investigate, search and find the mineral with the object of conducting the business of extracting ore from the earth, is a fee paid for indicating the business and therefore, is of a capital nature and could not be equated to a payment for the purposes of stock in trade.
[370D H; 371A B]
