The assessee, a trading company, paid wealth tax and sought to, deduct it as a business expense under section 10(1) and section 10(2) (xv) of the Income Tax Act, 1922, in computing its assessable incomes from business for the purpose of the Income Tax Act.
The High Court held against the assessee following the decision of this Court in Travancore Titanium Product Ltd. vs C.I.T., ; The test adopted by this Court in the Travancore Titanium case was that "to be a permissible deduction, there must be a direct and intimate connection between the expenditure and the business, that is, between the expenditure and the character of the assessee as a trader, and not as an owner of the assets, even if they are the assets of the business".
Allowing the appeal to this Court, HELD : The Court is unanimous that the test laid down in the decision in the Travancore Titanium case should be modified.
[20A, 39B] (Per S.M. Sikri, C. J., A. N. Grover, A. N. Ray and D. G. Palekar, JJ.) : (1) Certain important aspects of the question were not brought to the attention of this Court when the earlier case was decided.
if that decision is modified as erroneous, it is not likely to cause any public inconvenience hardship or mischief; and numerous assessees would be affected by the decision.
[20A B] Keshav Mills, Co. Ltd. vs C.I.T. ; , 922, followed.
(2) There is no doubt that in one sense when rates and taxes on property are paid by a trader he pays them as owner or occupier, because taxes are either on possession of property or on its ownership.
But when a person has the dual capacity of a trader cum owner, and he pays tax in respect of property which is used for the purpose of trade, the payment must be taken to be in the capacity of a trader according to ordinary commercial principles.
[25A B, C D] Moffatt vs Webb, ; applied (Not cited in the Travancore Titanium case.
Smith vs Lion Brewery Company, , Usher 's Wiltshire Brewery Ltd. vs Bruce, , Harrods (Buenos Ayres) Ltd. vs TaylorGooby, and observations of Lord Davey in Strong and Co. Romsey Ltd, case ; , referred to.
(3) In the case of a trading company all the assets are owned and the liabilities are incurred for the purpose of trading, as outlined in its memorandum of association.
If all the assets are owned and used for the purpose of trade, the net wealth would also be owned and used for the ,purpose of trade.
The net wealth is as much an instrument of trade as the capital value of assets.
Therefore,.the test laid down in the earlier case should be qualified, by stating that, if the expenditure is I aid out by the 16 assessee as owner cum trader, and the expenditure is really incidental to the carrying on of his business, it must be treated as having bean laid out by him as a trader and as incidental to his business.
[29F H, 3OA C] (4) It may be difficult for the Revenue to allow the deduction of debts, and non business assets and debts.
But the wealth tax return form itself requires the assessee to show what are business assets and liabilities and what are the non business assets and liabilities.
At any rate, it should not be difficult to evolve a principle or frame statutory rules to find out the proportion of the tax which is 'really incidental to the carrying on of the trade.
[30C E] (Per M. H. Beg, J.) : (1) One of the tests laid down in Keshav Mills co 's case ([1965]/2 S.C.R.908), for deciding whether a previous erroneous view should be set right by this Court, is whether any Possible advantage to public resulting from doing so would be outweighed by the mischief or harm a revision may cause.
[38E F] The Wealth Tax Act was not intended to strike at or check expansion of commercial activities by either individuals or companies.
Its underlying purpose is the removal of disparities of individual or personal wealth and not injury to trade.
The interpretation placed in the Travancore Titanium case ([1966] 3 S.C.R. 321) seems to penalise mere expansion of business and trade without serving the underlying purpose of wealth tax.
Therefore, a revision of opinion does not involve any such mischief or Such injury to the public interest as would stand in the way of correcting an erroneous view.
[38G H, 39A B] (2) The error which crept into the Travancore Titanium decision could be traced to an application of the criterion stated by the Lord Chancellor in Strong and Co. of Romsey vs Woodfield ; , that if.
the expenses fall on the trader in some character other than that of a trader, they could not be deducted in computing profits.
But in the same case, another Law Lord laid down a somewhat different test that the payment to be deductible must have been made for the purpose of earning profits.
[30G H, 31A B] (3) Liabilities incurred by a trader to pay damages for injury to his customer due to his personal neglect in maintaining his premises, even though the premises were used for trade, could be looked upon as outside the course of trading altogether even if they arise out of commercial activity or result from something connected with or meant to serve a commercial purpose.
But in Strong and co. 's case the negligence which resulted in payment of damages, for which the deduction was claimed, was that of servants employed as an ordinary incident of trading, so that, the master was only vicariously liable; and the language used by the Lord Chancellor in that case covers more than what could be attributed to the trade man 's own personal wrongs.
[31B E] (4) In later English cases the test adopted is whether the expenses sought to deducted 'wholly or exclusively laid out for the purpose of earning profits.
[31F] Smith vs Lion Brewery Company Limited, ; Usher 's Wiltshire Brewery Ltd. vs Bruce ; Atherton vs British Insulted and Halsby Cables Ltd., ; Margan vs Tate and Lyle Ltd., , referred to.
Rushden Hell Co. Ltd, vs Commissioner of Inland Revenue, and Smith 's Potato Estates Ltd. vs Bolland, 30 T.C. 267 explained 17 Where profits, the net gains of business, determined after making all permissible deductions.
are taxed, the disbursements to meet such taxes cannot be deducted.
But, when the tax 'was levied on capital, or assets used for the purpose of earning those profits, it was a permissible de duction in calculating profits.
[32G H] Harrods (Buenos Ayres) Ltd. vs ' Taylor Gooby, , referred to.
(6) The principle, that tax paid by an assessee on property used by him to earn income is deductible in computing the income for paying income tax, was also laid down in Moffatt vs Webb ; , which was not cited before this Court when the Travancore Titanum case was argued.[34A B] (7) The test of trading character when incurring an expense for which deduction is claimed can be utilised usefully only in cases where the question is whether a payment was gratuitous or unnecessary or not made for a bona fide commercial purpose or connected more with some ulterior object really failing outside the normal sphere or regular course of commerce, such as the compounding of an offence even if committed while trading; but this could not be so in cases of payment of taxes[34D F] J.K. Cotton Spinning & Weaving Mills Co. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income Tax, A.I.R. 1957 All. 513, referred to; (8) There is no accepted commercial practice or trading principle according to which wealth tax could not be deducted in the computation of profits under section 10(i) and (ii) of the Income Tax Act.
Except the observation in the Travancore Titanium case, all the other cases indicate that commercial practice and trading principles 'also warrant such deductions of tax on capital assets used wholly and exclusively for carrying on trade or for earning profits.
Deductions of taxes on net profits may not be permited, but those imposed on net assets or wealth, used exclusively for making profits, can be deducted in, computing income for purposes of income tax.
Moreover, whatever commercial practice or trading principles may imply or import, they could not alter the meaning of statutory provisions.
All that the Language of section 10(2)(xv) requires, for claiming its benefit, is proof of direct causal connection between an outgoing and the commercial purpose which necessitated it.
To lay down that it is the causal connection between the payment of tax and that part of the net wealth which is used wholly and exclusively for trade, and not the mere character or capacity for the possession of which the tax is demanded, which determines whether it is an allowable deduction or not, under section 10(2) (xv), nothing more than giving effect to the plain and literal meaning of a provision of a taxing statute.
[35A B, 35B C] (9) To exclude from the purview of section 10(2)(xv) wealth tax simply because it was a tax on assets or net wealth paid by its owner so as to reduce his wealth, is to bring in the misleading test of either of capacity of the owner for the possession of which, or the purpose for which, the wealth tax may be demanded.
instead of the inevitable need and the purpose of the trader in paying the tax, as relevant matters.
[35D F] (10) Wealth tax is imposed on net wealth of of assessees who are persons both natural and artificial.
In the case of an artificial or juristic person like a company, it is difficult to separate the purpose of the Juristic "persona" which is certainly commercial, from the character of the "persona" itself.
Even as regards other traders that part of the tax which falls on assets used exclusively for I trade could 'be really ascribed 18 only to a trading character.
To the extent it is a tax on property used for earning profits it must enter into a computation of profits from trading.
Therefore, nothing less than express, statutory provision would justify a denial of the right to a deduction which the language of section 10(2) (xv) confers upon assessees.
[36D F] (11) The Court is not concerned with any difficulty in separating that pail of the tax which is levied on any part of the net wealth, used wholly or exclusively for trade, from the rest of it.
The Court is concerned only with the interpretation of section 10(2)(xv) and not with any difficulty which may arise in actually computing the deductible amount.
Moreover, since net wealth is an amount by which an aggregation of all the assets exceeds all the debts there can be no intractable difficulty in calculating what part of the net Wealth is used for trade or business of an a sessee and what is not, an aggregation being collection of items n being collection of items which can be separated, and not a mixture whose ingredients became inseparable.
Further, the wealth tax return form divides wealth under two heads, one of business assets and another of other assets, showing that the Wealth Tax Act its itself makes that part of the net wealth separable which is used wholly and 'exclusively for trade from the reminder of it.
If this can be done, there is no difficulty in separating that part of the wealth tax which could be deducted under section 10(2)(xv) of the Income Tax Act.
[37D G] Assuming there is some difficulty the principle involved or.
the meaning of the relevant previsions will not be affected thereby.
