The respondents were landlords of two houses in the Karol Bagh area of Delhi.
The houses were built on lands given on long lease by the Delhi Improvement Trust to the rights, liabilities and assets.
of which the Delhi Development Authority subsequently succeeded.
Under the terms of the leases the buildings erected on the lands were to be used for residential purposes only.
If they were used for any other purpose without the approval of the lessor the leases would become void.
Portions of the buildings in question were however let out for commercial purposes viz.
a barber shop and a scooter repair shop.
The Delhi Development Authority gave notice to the landlords that since the buildings had been permitted to be used for commercial pur poses the leases were liable to be determined.
They were called upon to discontinue the use of the land for commercial purposes failing which they were asked to show cause why their leases should not be determined and the land together with the buildings thereon be not reentered upon without compensation.
Thereupon the landlords issued notice to the tenants asking them to stop the commercial use of the buildings.
The landlords later on instituted proceedings against the tenants under the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 but the Controller ,dismissed the petitions.
Their appeals were dismissed.
The Division Bench of the High Court decided in favour of the landlords.
In appeal to this Court by special leave the question for consideration was whether the landlords were estopped or otherwise prohibited from getting possession of the property from the tenants because they themselves had let it out for commercial purposes.
The Court had to consider the question in the light of the provisions of section 14 of the Act.
HELD : (i) If it is a case where the tenant has contrary to the terms of his tenancy used the buildings for a commercial purpose the landlord could take action under clause (c) of the proviso to section 14(1).
He need not depend upon clause (k) at all.
The only situation in which clause (k) can take effect is when the lease is for a commercial purpose agreed upon both by the landlord ,and the tenant but, that is ,Contrary to the terms of the lease of the land in favour of the landlord.
[459E G] (ii)The policy of the legislatures seems to be to put an end to unauthorised use of the leased lands rather than merely to enable the authorities to get back possession of the leased lands.
This conclusion is further fortified by a reference to sub section 11 of section 14.
The lease is not forfeited merely because the building put upon the leased land is put to unauthorised use.
The tenant is given an opportunity 455 to comply with the, condition imposed on the landlord by any of the authorities referred to in clause (k) of the proviso to sub section (1).
As long as the condition imposed is complied with there is no forfeiture.
It even enables the, controller to direct compensation to be paid to the authority for a breach of the conditions, which must be done in the presence of the authority.
[459H; 460A D] (iii)The anxiety of the legislature is to prevent unauthorised user rather than protection of the tenant or strengthening the hands of the Development Authority in effecting forfeiture.
The Development authority can always resort to the terms of the least, [460F G] There is no estoppel here because both the landlord and the tenant knew that the tenancy was not one permitted under the terms ofthe lease of the land.
In any case there can be no estoppel againstthe statute.
It would not benefit the tenant even if it is held thatthe landlord cannot, under the circumstances evict him.
The landlordwill lose his property and the tenant will also lose.
He cannot after the Development Authority takes over the building use it for a commercial purpose.
[460G H] Therefore the conclusion must be that the lease in its inception was not void not is the landlord estopped from claiming possession because he himself was a party to the breach of the conditions under which the land was leased to him.
Neither the clear words of the section nor a consideration of the policy of the Act lead us to the conclusion that the lease was void in its inception if it was for an unauthorised user.
[461A] Smt.
Uma Kumari vs Jaswant Rai Chopra, P.L.R. (1960) 460 and section P. Arora vs Ajit Singh, I.L.R. (1970) 11 Delhi 120, disapproved.
Waman Shriniwas Kini vs Rati Lal Bhagwandas, ; , referred to.
[The Court found that section 14 of the Delhi Development Act was inapplicable to the case.
The matter was sent back to the Controller for deciding the question under sub section (11) of Section 14 whether he should exercise the one or the other of two alternatives mentioned therein.]
