The appellant was prosecuted under section 9 of the Maintenance of Punjab Security of State Act for addressing a public meeting in which it was alleged that he had incited the defence employees to commit offences prejudicial to security of the.
State or to, the maintenance of public order.
Sec. 9 of the Act prohibits speeches or statements etc.
which have effect of undermining the security of the.
State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order decency or :morality or which amount to contempt of court, defamation or.
incitement to an offence prejudicial to the security of the State or the maintenance of public order or which tends to over throw the State.
On perusal of the documents filed section 173 of the Cr.
P.C., the Magistrate cam to the conclusion that the prima facie case was established.
The appellant unsuccessfully challenged the said interlocutory order before the Sessions Court and then in the High Court.
On appeal by special leave, the appellant raised the question.
of constitutional validity of Sec. 9 of the Act.
The appellant contended : (i) that Sec. 9 of the Punjab Security of State Act was violative of the fundamental right guaranteed under article 19(1) (a) of the Constitution, and (ii) in the alternative, the operation of Sec. 9 should be limited only to such matters as involve incitement to violence or intention or tendency to create public disorder or cause disturbance to public peace.
In dismissing the appeal.
HELD : (i) Except the words "tends to over throw the State" the rest of the provisions of Section 9 reproduce the provisions of article 19(2) of the Constitution.
The prohibition relating to offending speech, wods or the other publications which tend to over throw the State clearly fall within the sweep of the expression "incitement to an offence prejudicial to the security of the State".
Restriction, therefore, is.
Prima facie reasonable restriction.
[537 C E] Superintendent of Central fail, Fatehgarh vs Ram Manohar Lohia , distinguished on facts.
(ii) Reasonable restrictions in respect of matters specified in article 19(2) are essential for integrated development on egalitarian.
progressive lines of any peace loving civilised society.
article 19(2) thus saves the constitutional validity of Sec. 9 of the Act.
The analogy between s.124(1)IPC and Sec.
9 of the Act is wholly misconceived and in view of the comprehensive sweep of article 19(2).
Sec. 9 of the Act cannot be restricted to those speeches and expressions which incite or tend to incite violence only.
Sec. 9 cannot be interpreted in a restricted L 761 SupCI/73 534 manner Sec.
124(1)IPC was interpreted in Kedarnath Singh vs State of Bihar [1966 Supp. 2 S.C.R. 7691] [539 A C] (iii) The Supreme Court may allow the question of law effecting the constitutional validity of an Act for the first time to be 'raised in Supreme Court.
In an appeal by special leave under article 136 of the Constitution, the scope, of the appeal is not enlarged after leave and the appellant cannot as of right claim adjudication on merits.
The, Court would not pronounce its opinion on the merits of the charge framed against the appellant.
[540 C E]
