On receipt of information the police searched the appellants house on May 14, 1968.
In the central room of that house there was an almirah of which the key was produced by the appellant and handed over to the Inspector of Police.
When the almirah was opened with the key it was found to contain a bag with live cartridges and a gun.
As no licence or permit for their possession was produced, the appellant was prosecuted and was convicted under Ss. 25(1)(a) and 27 of the and the appellant was sentenced to imprisonment for two years R.I.
His appeal to the High Court was dismissed summarily.
Special leave to appeal to this Court was granted and the accused was on bail pending disposal of the appeal.
HELD: (1) The High Court has the power to dismiss an appeal in limine where in its opinion there is no substance in the appeal.
But in cases where ,questions of fact or law, which are arguable and which are not unsubstantial, are ,raised, it is desirable that the High Court, while dismissing summarily, should indicate broadly the reasons which prevailed with it.
In such cases not only the reasons recorded by the High Court would be helpful to this Court in better understanding and appreciating the High Court 's 'line of approach but it would also serve to assure the accused that the arguable points in his appeal have been properly argued and duly considered by the High Court.
[64D F] Mushtak Hussain vs Bombay ; and Mushtaq Ahmed Hussain ,and Mukhtar Hussain Ali Hussain vs The State of Guj., Cr.
A. No. 9 of 1973 decided on 13 3 73 followed.
(2) However, it is undesirable and unnecessary in the larger interests of justice to send the present case back to the High Court for re decision.
The appellant was convicted in June 1969 and the High Court 's decision was shortly there after.
Undue delay in final disposal of criminal appeals tends to some extent to defeat the very purpose of criminal justice.
Speedy disposal of criminal cases for commission of offences promotes confidence of the society in the administration of criminal justice which is essential for sustaining the faith of the law abiding members of the society in the effectiveness of the rule of law.
It also saves the accused from avoidable harassment inherent in unreasonably prolonged trials and appeals.
[64F H; 65A B] (3) On the evidence on the record it is not possible to hold that the existence of the arms in the almirah was without the appellant 's knowledge and that his possession of the arms was unconscious.
Therefore, his conviction under section 25(1) (a) was justified.
[65E F] (4) There is no evidence in support of the conviction for the offence under section 27, and therefore, his conviction under that section cannot be sustained.
[65F G] (5) There is no evidence of any undesirable antecedents of the appellant, and the possession of the arms has not been shown to be inspired by any sinister purpose.
Since more than 4 years had elapsed since the date of the offence it would be in the ends of justice if the sentence of imprisonment was reduced to that already undergone and a sentence of fine is, imposed in addition.
[65H; 66A D]
