The appellant firm was assessed to sales tax for the assessment years 1957 58 and 1958 1959.
On an application made by the appellant for the composition of tax the recovery of the tax for 1957 58 was stayed.
The stay order was vacated oh September 25.
Thereafter the sales tax officer issued a certificate to the Collector for the recovery of arrears of sales tax for the said assessment years.
In the certificate it was mentioned that 8% interest per annum on the arrears of tax was also to be recovered as arrears of land revenue in terms of the provisions of section 8(1 A) of the U.P. Sales Tax Act, ' 1948 as amended by Act 3 of 1964.
in a writ petition under article 226 of the Constitution the appellant challenged the recovery of interest mainly on the ground that there was no assessment order in regard to the interest and no notice of demand had been issued.
The High Court dismissed the petition.
Appeal in this Court was filed with certificate.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD : (i) The provision in sub section (1 A) of section 8 according to which interest shall be added ' to the amount of tax and shall be deemed for all purpose to be part of tax has been added only for the purpose of recovery.
The object apparently was that the amount of interest should be recovered in the same manner as the amount of sales tax.
The amount of sales tax and other dues under sub section (8) of section 8 can be recovered as arrears of land revenue.
It was with a view to nut the matter beyond any pale of controversy and to obviate any objection that the interest on sales tax cannot be recovered as land revenue that sub section (1 A) provided that the interest shall be added to the amount of tax and be deemed for all purposes to be a part of the tax.
It is a matter of mere arithmetical calculation to arrive at the figure of interest.
There is nothing in any of the provisions of the Act as may warrant making of another assessment order by the sales tax officer regarding the amount of interest or making it obligatory for him to issue a demand notice in respect of the interest before sending the recovery certificates to the Collector.
[28G 29C] (ii)The argument that the sales tax officer should specify the amount of interest in the recovery certificate could not be@ accepted.
As the amount of interest would go on increasing every day till the recovery of the sales tax it is plainly not possible to specify the exact amount of interest in the recovery certificate.
[29D] (iii)According to clause (b) of subsection (1) of section 5 of the U.P. General Clauses Act, 1904 where any U.P. Act is not expressed to come into force on a particular day than in the case of a U.P. Act made ' after the commence ment of the Constitution it shall come into operation on the date on which the assent thereto of the Governor or the President as the case may require is first published in the official gazette.
In the present case the President 's assent to U.P. Act 3 of 1964 was published in the official Gazette on February 1, 1964 and hence it must be held to have come into force on that day and not on the date on which the President 's assent was given, [29F] (iv)There is nothing in the language of section 8(1 A) of the Act which prevents the running of interest because of, the operation of any stay order.
Indeed the liability to pay interest is created by the statute and the Sales tax Officer has no discretion to grant any exemption from the payment of interest.
[30A] 26
