The appellant company retired three of its workmen and the industrial dispute thus arising was referred to the Labour Court, Gorakhpur, for adjudication The reference was registered by the Labour Court as Adjudication Case No. 93 of 1960.
The parties filed their written statement and proceedings went on resulting in the Labour Court passing an order dated February 26, 1961 holding that the retirement of the three workmen was neither legal nor justified.
There were similar disputes regarding the retirement of several other workmen and the dispute relating to them was referred to the same Labour Court and this reference was registered as Adjudication Case No. 98 of 1960.
The three workmen whose cases were the subject matter of the first reference were also included in the second reference.
They applied to the Labour Court to have their names deleted from the second reference, and they were accordingly deleted.
The Labour Court gave its award in the second reference on February 27, 1961.
In this award the Labour Court specifically stated that it was not recording any finding with regard to the three workmen covered by the first reference.
On a representation made by the appellant the State Government issued a notification on February 28. 1961 withdrawing the first reference relating to the three aforesaid workmen.
This was purported to be done under sub section (1) of section 6 G of the U.P.
Even so the State Government published the award in the first reference on May 6, 1961.
The appellant filed a writ petition in the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution for the issue of a writ of certiorari quashing the award dated February 26, 1961 and also for a mandamus directing the State Government to withdraw its Notification dated May 6. 1961.
The single Judge as well as the Division Bench decided against the appellant.
In appeal before this Court, HELD : (i) The wording of sub section (1) of section 6 G is capable of being construed as conferring on the State Government a power to withdraw any proceedings or to transfer a proceeding from one Labour Court or Tribunal to another.
But having regard to the scheme of section 6 G read in the light of the other provisions of the Act the section will have to be interpreted as giving to the State Government only a power to transfer a proceeding from one Labour Court to another.
When section 6 makes it obligatory that an award has to be made by the tribunal concerned and that It has to be published by the State Government within 30 days of its receipt and declares that the award on is idle to expect that the legislature intended to by conferring an absolute power of withdrawal on Government State section 6 G.
The proper way of reading section 6 G is to limit the power of withdrawal referred to therein only for the purpose of transferring proceedings from one Labour Court or Tribunal to another.
[75D] The provisions of section 33B and section 6 D of the Act did not support a contrary conclusion.
Sirsilk Ltd. and Others vs Government of Andhra Pradesh & Another ; , distinguished.
(ii) The expression 'or ' in section 6 G (1) interposed between 'withdraw any proceedings ' or 'transfer a proceeding ' will have to be understood as 'and '.
[75H] Mazagaon Dock Ltd. vs The Commissioner of income tax and Excess Profits Tax; , relied on.
