Three industrial undertakings owned and managed by the Madhya Pradesh Government were transferred to the Madhya Pradesh State Industries Corporation with effect from April 1, 1963.
By letter dated February 16, 1963 the State Government offered to transfer the services of the employees of the three undertakings to the Corporation on two conditions.
The first one was that their existing pay and scale and other conditions of service and benefits to which they were entitled would not be affected by the transfer.
The second was that the transfer of services would not be treated as an interruption in service.
In other words, it was said.
the employees would be entitled to leave and other benefits on the same basis as if their services under the State Corporation were a continuation of their total uninterrupted services under the said undertakings.
This offer was accepted by the employees.
However, relying on the second condition mentioned In the aforesaid letter the employees raised an industrial dispute in 1968, claiming from the Corporation, dearness allowance on the same scale and on the same basis as it was subsequently being paid by the State Government to its employees.
The Labour Court rejected the contention.
The present appellant as Secretary of the employees Union filed a writ petition under Article 2 the Constitution.
The High Court dismissed the petition.
By certificate appeal was filed in this Court.
Dismissing the appeal.
HELD : Ordinarily the change of employers would have the effect of interrupting service.
Condition 2 was, therefore.
meant to overcome that situation.
That condition dealt solely with effect of the transfer of service on the benefits to which an employee would be entitled if there was no interruption in his service.
The second sentence therein, namely 'in other words ' etc.
was merely ex planatory.
of the first sentence that the transfer of service will not be treated as an interruption in his service.
The second sentence was not intended and could not be read as meaning that whatever benefits an employee of the State Government were to get in future the employees of the Corporation would automatically become entitled to them.
If condition No. 2 was to be read as securing to a transferred employee benefits which the Government might in future confer upon its employees that would contradict condition No. 1 which secured only such benefits to which a transferred employee Was entitled at the time of transfer.
[89F].
