The appellant, according to the usual practice of the company, at the beginning of 1966, had published a list of holidays for that year.
According to this list, the holiday for Kalipuja was stated to be on Friday the 11th November 1966.
The workmen in this company were represented by two Unions The Amco Employees Association ' and Amco Shramic Sangha ' of which the Sangha represented the majority of the workmen of this company.
On November 8, 1966, the appellant notified that the factory will remain closed for Kalipuja on 11th November 1966.
On 10th November 1966, the General Secretary of the Sangha wrote a letter to the Factory Manager of the Company requesting him to close the factory on Saturday the 12th November, 1966 on account of Kalipuja instead of 11th November, 1966.
A further request was made that the factory may be kept working on Friday in accordance with the timings of the company and stated in his letter that if the request for change in the holiday is not acceptable a large number of workmen will not be attending on Saturday and there will be heavy loss of production.
On receipt of this letter, the appellant put up a notice the same day that in response to the request of the Sangha the factory will remain closed on Saturday the 12th November instead of Friday the 11th.
After the company 's notice regarding the change of holiday for Kalipuia, the other Union, the Association on the same day addressed a letter to the Management that the change of holiday for Kalipuja was not justified and that the original date should be allowed to stand.
The company did not accede to this request and as a result most of the workmen belonging to the Association did not attend work on November 11, 1966.
The wages for the day were not paid by the appellant to those workmen who were absent on that day.
After about a year, the respondent& filed an application before the Labour Court under section 33 A of the Act.
The grievance of these workmen was that there was an industrial dispute pending at the relevant time and that without complying with the provisions of section 33 and section 9 A, the employer had altered the condition of the service by changing the date of the holiday for Kalipuja.
According to the respondents, one day holiday for Kalipuja was allowed to them for a number of years and that it had become a condition of service.
The standing orders of the company did not give any power to the appellant to change the, holiday for Kalipuja, and therefore section 33 (2) (a) of the Act was violated.
According to them, any change of date can only be affected in accordance with section 9 A.
Therefore the employer in declaring 12th November as a holiday and refusing to pay wages for 11 November 1966 acted illegally.
The management on the other hand, Contested the application on the ground that there had been no change in the conditions of service of the workmen.
The change was made to suit the convenience of the workmen themselves and it was done for their benefit.
The Labour Court accepted the plea of the management but held that as the holiday has been originally fixed for 11th but later changed to 12th amounted to a change in the condition of service and therefore, the procedure under section 9 A had not been followed.
As the said procedure had not been followed by the appellant, the Labour Court held that there had been it violation of section 33 read with section 9 A of the Act and he granted the reliefs accordingly.
Allowing the appeal, 117 HELD : (i) The alteration of the date regarding the holiday for Kalipuja from 11th to 12th November 1966 cannot be considered to be an alteration in the conditions of service.
The workmen may be entailed to have a holiday for ' Kalipuja.
But on what particular date Kalipuja falls or it is being observed and a holiday is to be declared, is a matter to be decided by the management in consultation with the workmen.
If a large body of the workmen require a change in the date of the holiday on the ground that the festival was not being observed on the day originally fixed.
and the management changed the date, it cannot be stated that there was an alteration in the conditions of service.
The workmen were no, being deprived of a holiday at all for Kalipuja.
In fact, they had got it on the 12th November 1966.
[120D] The Workmen of M/s. Sur Iron & Steel Company Private Ltd. vs M/s. Sur Iron & Steel Co. Private Ltd. , referred to.
(ii)Even assuming that alteration of the date of the holiday for Kalipuja will amount to a condition of service there is no question in the present case of a contravention.
of section 9 when the majority of the workmen themselves requested the employer to make the alteration.
The employer was within its rights under section 33(2).
Further.
the evidence on the side of the respondents showed that the workmen actually celebrated Kalipuja on the 12th November which was declared to be a holiday.
Therefore, the application filed by the workmen before the Labour Court under section 33 A was misconceived.
[121E] M/s. Tata Iron & Steel Co. Ltd. vs Workmen and Ors. , discussed and distinguished.
