R who was tried for an offence under section 16 read with section 7 of the Prevention.
of Food Adulteration Act.
stated in Court that he had purchased the curry powder in question in sealed tins from the appellant under a warranty given by them and that he sold the curry powder in the same condition in which he had purchased it from the appellants.
The first appellant was examined in the case.
He gave evidence that the curry powder was manufactured by, the second appellant company and that it had been sold in tins to the concern of which R was the proprietor.
He also admitted the issue of a warranty on.
behalf of the second appellant.
In the light of this evidence R was acquitted.
Subsequently the appellants were sought to be tried for issuing a false warranty.
The appellants contended that the proceedings against them should be quashed, as according to the provisions of the Act, they ought to have been impleaded in the proceedings against R. The, High Court concurred with the conclusions.
of the Courts below and held that the fact that the appellants were not impleaded and tried along with R was no bar to the prosecution of the appellants.
In appeal by special leave, this Court had to consider the effect of Ss. 20 and 20A of the Act.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: (1) There is no provision in the Act which obliged the Food Inspector to have joined the appellants as parties to the complaint filed, against R. Section 20 of the Act has nothing to do with the matter.
On the other hand,,, section 19(3) which says that any person by whom a warranty is alleged to have been given shall be entitled to appear at the hearing and give evidence, seems.
to proceed on the assumption that it is not obligatory on the part of the Food Inspector to join the manufacturer, distributor ;Or dealer in a complaint against a person for an offence alleged to have been committed underthe Act [160B L] (ii) Section 20A is an enabling one.
There is nothing mandatory about it.
It is left to the discretion of the Magistrate whether, ina particular case, having regard to the evidence adduced.
it is necessary, in theinterest of justice, to implead the manufacturer, distributor, dealer as the case may be.
[161B] The normal rule under the Criminal Procedure Code is to try each accused separately when the offence committed by him is distinct and separate.
The provisions of Ss. 233 to 239 would indicate hat joint trial is the exception.
Section 5(2) of the Criminal Procedure Code provides that the provision of that Code will apply to trial of an offence under any law other than the Indian, Penal Code subject to any enactment for the time being in force regulating the manner or place of investigating, inquiring into, trying or otherwise dealing with such offence.
If that be so.
unless there is something in section 20A which, creates an exception to the normal procedure prescribed by the Criminal Procedure Code.
there would be no justification for importing into the section by implication an absolute obligation to implead the manufacturer, distributor or dealer and try him also with the person who is alleged to have committed an offence under the Act.
in the sense that if the manufacturer, distributor or dealer is not impleaded and tried under the provisions of section 20A, a separate trial; would be barred.
[161D G] State of Andhra Pradesh vs Cheemalapati Ganeswara Rao and Another,. ; 324, referred to.
158 The real purpose of section 20A is to avoid, as far as possible, conflicting findings.
In order to avoid multiplicity of proceedings and conflict of findings it is imperative that the Magistrate should implead these persons under section 20A whenever the conditions laid down in the section are satisfied.
It is a far cry from this to say that if this is not done.
the manufacturer, distributor or dealer, would get an immunity from a separate prosecution.
[162E, G] (iii) It is impossible to predicate in the abstract whether a joint trial would be more advantageous to the manufacturer.
distributor or dealer than a separate trial.
Therefore the plea that there could be discrimination if unguided discretion is given to an authority to choose one or the other.
could not be accepted.
[163D] Northern India Caterers Private Ltd. and Another vs State of Punjab and Another, ; , referred to.
