In his election petition challenging the election of the respondent the appellant alleged that the respondent and three other defeated candidates committed various corrupt practices within the meaning of sub sections (1) to (7) of section 123 of the Representation of the People, Act, 1951.
The respondent raised a preliminary objection that the petition was liable to be dismissed for noncompliance with the provisions of section 82 of the Act inasmuch as the defeated candidates against whom allegations of corrupt practice had been made had not been joined as parties to the petition.
The High Court upheld the objection and dismissed the petition.
In appeal to this Court it was contended that: (i) since the affidavit filed by the appellant in support of the election petition merely stated that the allegations contained in the relevant paragraphs were based on information received and had not stated what the sources of information were, that part of the petition in which the allegations of corrupt practices were made could not form the basis of a triable issued (ii) while section 82(a) was mandatory s.82(b) was directory and as such the petition could not be dismissed: (iii) s.82(b) was violative of article 14 of the Constitution.
Dismissing the appeal.
HELD : (i) The provision for setting out the sources of information in an affidavit was not a requisite prescribed under r. 94 A of the conduct of Election Rules, 1961.
There was 'nothing in the affidavit in Form 25 under this rule which required the petitioner to state the source or source", of his information.
When there were specific rules under the Act no other rules were applicable.
If the petition and the affidavit conformed to the provisions of the Act and the rules made thereunder, it could not be said that because the source of information had not been given.
the allegations made in the petition had to be ignored.
[353E F] Smt.
Sahodrobai Rai vs Ram Singh Aharwar & Ors.
A.I.R. ; Amulva Chandra Rhaduri vs Satish Chandra Giri & Ors.
A.I.R. 1932 Cal.
255 and Wasudeoraoji vs A. D. Mani A.I.R. 1951 Nag.
26, held inApplicable.
(ii) Section 82(2) enioins that, apart from the returned candidate whose election was challenged, any other candidate against whom any allegations of corrupt practices were made should be joined as parties to the petition Section 86 read with s 82 makes both cls.
(a) and (b) of s 82 mandatory and noncompliance with these requirements renders the petition to be dismissed.
In view of these provisions it was incumbent upon the High Court where the allegation *as that the requirements of section g) were not complied with, to deter mine that issue as a preliminary issue.
[353A D] Charan Lal Sohu vs Nandkishore Bhatt & Ors.
C. A. No. 2411 of 1972 dated August 1, 1973, referred to.
Mohan Singh vs Bhanwarlal & Ors. ; , held inapplicable.
(iii)An election petition cannot be split up in such a manner as to maintain it in respect of allegations of corrupt practiced only against some persons and not against other persons who were required to be made necessary parties.
350 A person who was not a party and against whom corrupt practices had been proved at the trial, natural justice required that he should also be afforded an opportunity to contest that finding.
Article 14 had no application because the object of section 82 was one and indivisible and a person coming to the court had to come with clean hands and not attempt to prevent a full and complete enquiry or thwart fair trial by picking and choosing the parties to the peti tion.
[357C F]
