As a result of a fight between the members of the accused party and the party of the complainants the accused were tried and convicted for various offences.
The first.
appellant was convicted of the offence under section 304, Part 1, and of offences under Ss. 148, 323, 324 and 325 read with 14.
The appellants were convicted of the offences under Ss. 147 and 04, 323, 324 and 325 read with section 149.
The High Court, in appeal, while acquitting one of the accused, observed that the conclusion reached by the trial court were substantially correct and were based upon reasonable appreciation of the evidence.
In appeal to this Court, HELD : On the findings of the trial court neither party attacked the members of the opposite party at the commencement of the occurrence.
There was at that stage remonstrance and counter remonstrance only.
Someone then started ,a fight, and according to the trial court it could not definitely be determined as to which of the two parties struck the first blow.
There was no premeditation :and the occurrence was a sudden affair.
The circumstances of the case do not ,show that the appellants formed a common object to do any of the acts mentioned in the 5 clauses of section 141.
Section 141 (4), I.P ' C., could not be relied upon by the prosecution because, it could not be said that the common object of the accused was to enforce any right or supposed right by means of criminal force or show of criminal force.
The circumstances of the case show that the lathis were weilded by the accused not with a view to enforce any right or supposed right but because of the fact that a fight had started and the complainants ' party was found to be armed Therefore, it should be held that each accused was liable for his individual act and not vicariously liable for the acts of the others.
Hence, the first appellant could be convicted only of the offence under section 304, part 1, I.P.C. and his conviction for offences other than that should be set aside.
As regards the other appellants they caused simple hurt with their lathis and they could be convicted only of the offence under a. 323 I.P.C. One grievous injury was caused to a member of the complainants ' party but, on the material on record, it could not be said who caused that injury.
[371B H]
