The appellant filed a complaint against respondent No. 2, his superior officer, in the Postal Department, under sections 323 and 502 of I.P.C. alleging that when the appellant went with a certain complaint to the second respondent, the second respondent kicked him,in his abdomen and abused him by saying "Sale, gunde, badmash.
" The second respondent filed an application under section 197 of the Cr.
P.C. praying that the Court should not take cognizance of the offence without the sanction of the Government, as required by Section 197 of the Cr.
P.C. it was further contended that the alleged acts, if at ail done by the accused were done while discharging his duties as a public servant.
The trial Magistrate dismissed the application.
The 'High Court allowed the revision application of second respondent.
Allowing the appeal, HELD : (1) At this stage, the Court is concerned only with one point, whether on facts alleged in the complaint, it could be said that the acts were done in purported exercise of his duties.
Applying the test laid down in the decisions of the Federal Court and Supreme Court to acts complained of, viz., licking the complainant and abusing, cannot be said to have been done in the course of the performance of the duty by the second respondent.
[561H] (2) The facts subsequently coming to light during the course of the judicial enquiry or during the course of the prosecution evidence at the trial may establish the necessity for sanction.
It may be possible for the second respondent to,place the material on record during the course of the trial for showing what his duty was and also that the acts complained of were so inter related with his official duty, so as to attract the protection afforded by sec.
197 of the Cr.
Whether sanction is necessary or not may have to depend from stage to stage.
[562D] Horiram Singh, , Bhagwan Prasad Srivastava vs N. P. Mshra, [1971] 1 S.C.R. 317, Matajog Dobey vs H. C. Bhari ; and Sarjoo Prasad vs The King Emperor.
relied upon.
