Prior to the Hindu Seccession Act, 1956, the parties were governed by the Aliyasantana law.
The customary Aliyasantana law was known by two different names, namely marumakattayam and aliyasantana which literally connotes inheritance in the line of nephews ' or sisters ' sons respectively.
The basic principle underlying the joint family composition, otherwise known as kutumba or tarwad, is the matriarchal system, in which devolution is through females.
A kutumba under the customary Aliyasantana law was a family corporation; every member, male or female, born in it has equal rights in the property owned by it.
On the death of any member of the kutumba, his or her interest in the kutumba property devolved on the remaining members by survivorship.
Partition could be effected only at the instance of all the adult members.
The children of the female members alone were the coparceners in the kutumba, but not the wife and children of the male members.
The Madras Aliyasantana Act, 1949, defined and amended in certain respects the customary Aliyasantana laws relating to, inter alia, intestate succession and partition and in other respects saved the prevailing laws.
Thereafter, the Hindu Secession Act, 1956, came into operation whereby the antecedent Hindu Law ceased to have effect to the extent that it was either provided for or was inconsistent with the Act.
The first appellant and the other appellants are the widow and sons respectively of C, while the first respondent and the other respondents are C 's sister and her sons respectively.
C executed a will on January 15, 1957 bequeathing his interest in favour of the appellants.
On January 25, 1957, the respondents issued a notice to C stating that he was the manager of the undivided family, that he was a missanthathi kavaru while the respondents were santhathi kavaurs, as such there were only two kavarus and that they had decided to divide the properties between C and themselves.
They, therefore, demanded under the Madras Act a share belonging to their kavaru from out of the entire movable and immovable properties of the family.
C replied on January 24, 1957, stating that the respondents ' family was not a santhathi kavaru but a nissanthathi kavaru as the first respondent was mere than fifty years old on the date of the said notice and had no female issue.
He admitted, however, that there are only two kavarus in the family, and as both the kavarus were nissanthathi kavarus, each kavaru was entitled to a absolute share in the kutumba properties.
He also stated that he bad no objection to the claim for partition made by the respondents and was prepared to effect it provided the respondents cooperated.
C subsequently died on February 13, 1957, after the coming into force of the Succession Act.
On March 23 1957, the appellants gave a notice to the respondents claiming a separate share under C 's will.
The respondents replied to the notice on the same day denying that the appellants had any share because according to them C was entitled only to a life interest under the Aliyasantana law.
The appellants plaintitfs then filed a suit against the respondents defendants for partition, separate possession of their 7/20th share of the suit Properties and for mesne profits.
The trial court decreed the suit but the High Court dismissed.
In appeal by special leave to this Court, the questions that arose for consideration were : (i) whether the rights of the parties, are to be determined in accordance with the Aliyasantana law or under the Succession Act; (ii) what interest C had, 708 under the Madras Act, in the joint family properties on the date of his death; (iii) whether a partition had been effected; (iv) whether C 's will is effective in respect of his share; (v) whether he had a life interest in the properties; and (vi) whether, under the Succession Act.
that interest had been enlarged into an absolute interest which could be bequeathed by a will.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD : (i) From the definitions of 'kavaru ' [section 3 (b) (i) & (ii) ], 'Kutumba ' section 3(c), 'Nissanthathi kavaru ' section 3(f) and 'Santhathi Kavaru section 3(h), under the Madras Act, it is apparent that the, basic concept of inheritance through a female has been maintained.
The presence of even one female in the kavaru will have the effect of continuing the kavaru, while the absence of a female would amount to the absence of progeny.
[712D] (ii) Under the provisions of Sections 35 and 36 of the Madras Act, any kavaru represented by the majority of its major members can claim its share of all the properties of the kutumba over which the kutumba has power of disposal.
It may thereafter take its share and separate from the kutumba provided that where a kavaru consists of only two persons, such a claim can be made by either of them.
But no kavaru can make such a claim during the life time of any common ancestress who is common to such kavaru and to any other kavaru or kavarus of the kutumba who has not completed 50 years unless she has signified her consent in writing or 2/3 of the major members of the kavaru have joined in making the claim for partition.
The common ancestress can however on her own volition claim a partition.
The share obtained by the kavaru on partition is with all the incidents of a kavaru property which is divisible into certain proportion for a period of 15 years from the commencement of that Act, and thereafter, is divisible per stirpes and each kavaru gets a share on the basis.
The same position applies to every kavaru possessing separate property as if it were a kutumba.
However, u/s 36(3), if at the time of the partition any kavaru taking a share is a nissanthathi kavaru it would have only a life interest in the property allotted to it, if the kutumba from which it separated has at least one family member who has not completed the age of 50 years or where the kutumba broke up into a number of kavarus at partition, if at least one such kavaru is the santhathi kavaru.
But if there is no such female member or santhathi kavaru, the nissanthathi kavaru would have an absolute interest in the properties allotted to it.
The properties allotted to a nissanthithi kavaru at a partition and in which it had only a life interest at the time of the death of the last of its members, devolves upon the kutumba or where the kutumba is broken up at the same or at a sub sequent partition into a number of kavarus, upon the nearest santhathi kavaru or kavarus.
[713H] Gupte, Hindu Law of Succession, 2nd edition, at page 484, referred to.
(iii) The provisions of the Madras Act, particularly section 36(2)(h) with its explanation without doubt indicates the time when a share of a kavaru is ascertained on a partition in the family and whether the property is divided by metes and bounds or not the share in the property has to be determined as on the date when the claim is made.
In the present case, the claim was made on January 22, 1957, and therefore, the share of the parties has to be determined as on that date even though the physical partition of the properties by metes and bounds may take place some time later.
[715B] (iv) Under the provisions of the Succession Act, on the demand for partition, there is a division in status, and though partition by metes and bounds may not have taken place, that family can thereafter never be considered as an undivided family nor can the interest of a coparcener be considered to be an undivided interest.
It is a well established principle in the Hindu Law that a member of a joint Hindu family has a right to intimate his definite and unambiguous intention to the other members of the joint family that he will separate himself from the family and enjoy his share in severally.
Such an unequivocal intention communicated to the other will amount, to a division in status and on such division, he will have a right to get the division of his specific share of the joint family property in which till then all of them had an undivided coparcenary interest, and in which none of them could claim that he had any right 709 to any specific part thereof.
Once the decision to divide has been unequivocally expressed and clearly intimated to his co sharers, whether or not the other co sharers agree, an immediate severance of the joint status is effected and his right to obtain and possess the share to which he is admittedly entitled becomes specified.
This principle enunciated in Girja Bai vs Sadashiv Dhundiraj and others L.R. 43 I.A. 151 and Appovier vs Ramasubbier [1866] 11 M.I.A. 75 has been enacted in section 36(2) (h) of the Madras Act which specifies the point of time for ascertaining the share when a division in status is effected.
The term "partition" in sub section (3) of section 36 therefore, must be given the same meaning as in Sec.
36(2)(h) of the Madras Act.
If so on a demand for partition, a severance of status takes place and the share to which each is entitled in the undivided properties is ascertained.
In the case of an Aliyasantana kutumba, this Court, in Panduraja and others vs Dhanawanti and others, held that if the jointness of the kutumba had been disrupted, there is no question on claiming any partition as there is no kutumba in existence as in the present case.
Similarly, on the same parity of reasoning, when there are two kavarus, demand for partition would disrupt them within the meaning of section 7(2) of the Succession Act.
If he had no undivided interest in the property, his interest cannot be enlarged into an absolute estate nor can his interest devolve upon his heirs by intestate succession.
Prior to the Succession Act, neither under the customary law nor under the Madras Act, nor under the Indian Succession Act, the interest of a coparcener in an Aliyanasantana kutumba could have been disposed of by testamentary disposition.
But section 30 of the Succession Act made a definite change in the law by enabling a member of an undivided Aliyanasanta kutumba or of a kavaru to dispose of his interest in the kutumba or kavaru properties by a will.
[717H] Karthiyayini Kunehi vs Minakshi Ammal [1935] M.L.F. 114 and Mahalinga Sherty vs Jataja Shedthi and others [1956] 2 M.L.F. 446, approved.
Padmaraja and others vs Dhanavanthi and Ors.
[1972] 2 S.C.C. 100, 104, applied.
Girja Bai vs Sadashiv Dhundiraj and others L.R. 43 I.A. 151 and Appovier vs Ramasubbier [1866] 11 M.I.A. 75, referred to.
(v) In the present case, there is neither a kutumba nor can C be a kavaru.
The two kavarus after the division in status, became only one kavaru, viz. that of respondent No. 1 (C 's sister).
C will not be a kavaru within the meaning of section 3(b) of the Madras Act because u/s 3(b)(ii), there being no female line, it is only C 's mother who can be a kavaru but not C.
In fact, a male can never be a kavaru either under the customary law or under the Madras Act.
When Sec.
7(2) of the Succession Act refers to kavaru in relation to its "undivided interest ', it is the kavaru under the customary law or the Madras Act and not a deemed kavaru for the purpose of partition.
If C is not a kavaru, there is no property of a kavaru, which can be disposed of under sec.
30 of the Succession Act.
Even under the explanation to that section, the life interest which C had on severance of status is not property capable of being disposed of by a will nor could it devolve by survivorship.
He is no longer a kavaru and had, therefore, no interest in the property of the kavaru.
C 's live interest is also not enlarged u/s 7(2) of the Succession Act into an absolute interest, because a male with a life interest under the Aliyasantana law being in the same position as a female limited owner under the Hindu law, the Succession Act while enlarging the right of the latter under sec.
14 into an absolute interest did not specifically provide for the enalrging of the right of the former.
In the absence of any such specific provisions, it must be held that C 's interest enured till his life time only.
[721] Dundara Adapa and others vs Girija & Ors.
I.L.R. , applied.
