One of the cardinal principles which has always to be kept in view in our system of administration of justice for criminal cases is that a person arraigned as an accused is presumed to be innocent unless that presumption is rebutted by the prosecution by production of evidence as may show him to be guilty of the offence with which he is charged.
The burden of proving the guilt of the accused is upon the prosecution and unless it relieves itself of that burden, the courts cannot record a finding of the guilt of the accused.
There are certain cases in which statutory presumptions arise regarding the guilt of the accused but the burden even in those cases is upon the, prosecution to prove the existence of facts which have to be present before the presumption can be drawn.
Once those facts are shown by the prosecution to exist the court can raise the statutory presumption and it would, in such an event, be for the accused to rebut the presumption.
The onus even in such cases upon the accused is not as heavy as is normally upon the prosecution to prove the guilt of the accused.
If some material is brought on the record consistent with the innocence of the accused which may reasonably be true, even though it is not positively proved to be true, the accused would be entitled to acquittal.
[733 H; 734 C] Another golden thread which runs through the web of the administration of justice in criminal cases is that if two views are possible on the evidence adduced in the case, one pointing to the guilt of the accused and the other to his innocence, the view which is favorable to the accused should be adopted.
This principle has a special relevance in cases where the guilt of the accused is sought to be established by circumstantial evidence.
Rule ha, .
accordingly been laid down that unless the evidence adduced in the case is consistent only with, the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused and is inconsistent with that of his innocence, the court should refrain from recording a finding of guilt of the accused.
It is also an accepted rule that in case the court entertains reasonable doubt regarding the guilt of the accused, the accused must have the benefit of doubt.
Of course, the doubt regarding.the guilt of the accused should be reasonable, it is not the doubt of a mind which is either so vacillating that it is incapable of reaching a firm conclusion or so timid that it is hesitant and afraid to take things to their natural consequences.
The rule regarding the benefit of doubt also does not warrant acquittal of the accused by resort to surmises, conjectures or fanciful considerations.
As mentioned by this Court in the case or Slate of Punjab vs Jagir Singh, (Crl. A. No. 7 of 1972 d/ August 6, 1973) a criminal trial is not liked a fairy tale wherein one is free to give flight to one ' In arriving at the conclusion about the guilt of the imagination and phantasy.
accused charged with the evidence by the yardstick of witnesses.
Every case own facts.
Although the.
to the accused the courts commission of a crime, the court has to judge the of probabilities, its intrinsic worth and the animu, in the final analysis would have to depend upon it benefit of every reasonable doubt sh uld be given should not at the same time reject evidence which is ex facie trustworthy or grounds which are fanciful or in the nature of conjec [734 G H; 735A D] It needs all the sameto be re emphasised that if a reasonable doubt arise regarding the guilt of theaccused, the benefit of that cannot be withheld from the accused.
The courts would not be Justified in withholding the benefit be cause the acquittal might have an impact upon the law and order situation or create adverse reaction in society or amongst those members of the society who believe the accused to be guilty.
The guilt of the accused has to be 723 adjudged not by the fact that a vast number of people believe, him to be guilty but whether his guilt has been established by the evidence brought on record.
Indeed, the courts have hardly any other yardstick or material to adjudge the guilt of the person arranged as accused.
It is no doubt true that wrongful acquittals are undesirable and shake the confidence of the people in the judicial system, much worse, however, is the wrongful conviction of an innocent person.
The consequence of the conviction of an innocent person are far more serious and its reverberations cannot but be felt in a civilised society.
[735D F; H] Shivaji Sahabrao Bobade & anr.
vs State of Maharashtra, Cr. A. No. 26 of 1970 dated 27 8 73, referred to.
The appellant was convicted under section 302 Indian Penal Code and sentenced to death.
The High Court maintained the conviction and sentence.
The High Court relied on three pieces of evidence viz.; (i) evidence of a witness which was recorded by the police over two months after the occurrence; (ii) the letter written by the accused to the Deputy Commissioner making a confession and (iii) the confession made to S.R. who incorporated this in a letter to the Station House Officer.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, HELD : that the judgment of the trial court and the High Court had to be .set aside and the accused acquitted.
[736F] ( 1) If a witness professed to know about a gravely incriminating circumstance against a person accused of the offence of murder and the witness kept silent for over two months regarding the said incriminating circumstance against the accused, his statement relating to the incriminating circumstances, in the absence of any cogent reason, was bound to lose most of its value.
[73OB C] (2) The fact that no action was taken on the letter till it was taken into possession by the police, the incongruity of the portion of the letter relating to confession and the circumstances in which the accused is stated to have got the letter written all these make it unsafe to act upon the confession incorporated in the letter.
[730H] (3) The letter which was addressed by SR to the Station House Officer was in the nature of narration of what, according to SR, he had been told by the accused.
Such a letter would constitute a statement for the purpose of section 162, Cr.
P.C. The prohibition contained in section 162, Cr.
P.C. relates to all statements made, during the course of an investigation.
The prohibition relating to the use of a statement made to a police officer during the course of an investigation could not be set at naught by the police officer not himself recording the statement of a person but having it in the form of a communication addressed by a person concerned to the police officer.
If a statement made by a person to a police officer in the course of an investigation is inadmissible except for the purpose mentioned in section 162, the same would be true of a letter containing narration of facts addressed by a person to a police officer during the course of an investigation.
It is not permissible to circumvent the prohibition contained in section 1162 by the investigating officer obtaining a written statement of a person instead of the investigating officer himself recording that statement.
The restriction placed by section 162 on the use of statement made during the course of investigation is in general terms.
There is nothing in the section to show that the investigation must relate to any particular accused before a statement to the police pertaining to that accused can be held to be inadmissible.
The letter is, therefore, inadmissible in evidence.
[732C E; G] Sita Ram vs State of Uttar Pradesh, [1966] Supp.
S.C.R. 165 held inapplicable.
