Article 224A of the Constantine provides that notwithstanding anything contained in Chapter V of Part VI of the constitution the Chief Justice of a High Court for any State at any time, with the previous consent of the President, request any person who has held the office of a judge of *,hat Court or any other High Court to sit and act as a judge of the High Court for that 'State.
It is further provided that every such person so requested shall, while so sitting and acting, be entitled to such allowances as the President may by order determine and have all the jurisdiction, powers and privileges of, "but shall not otherwise be deemed to be a judge of that High Court".
The appellant 's election petition in the Madhya Pradesh High Court was posted, in the 'first instance, before a permanent Judge of that High Court in the meantime a retired Judge of that High Court was appointed as a Judge ,of that Court in accordance with the provisions of article 224A of the Constitu tion and the election petition of the appellant, along with a few.
other election petitions, was transferred to him for disposal.
The writ petition of the appellant questioning the jurisdiction of the Judge to try an election petition was dismissed by the High Court.
Before the Supreme Court it was contended (i) that a person requested to sit and act as a Judge of the High Court under Art 224A was not a Judge of the High Court for the purpose of section 80A of the Representation of the People Act and (ii) that even assuming that he was a Judge for the purpose of section 80A of the Act the election petition could not, after it had been entrusted to a permanent Judge, be allocated to a Judge appointed under article 224A. Disposing of the appeal HELD : It is inconceivable that the framers of the Constitution inserted an article in the Constitution which was in the nature of a dead letter.
Any construction of article 224A which would have the effect of rendering that article to be ineffective and purposeless must be rejected.
A person requested to sit and act as a Judge of the High Court under article 224A is a judge of that Court for the purpose of sub section
(2) of section 80A of the Act.
[214G H] Under article 224A the Chief Justice of a High Court, after obtaining the previous consent of the President, requests a person who has held the office of a High Court Judge to sit and act as a Judge of the High Court for that state.
The person requested, while so sitting and acting, shall have all the jurisdiction, powers aid privileges of a Judge of the High Court,.
Such a person shall not otherwise be deemed to be a Judge of that Court.
[212D & F] The words "while so sitting and acting ' show that the person requested ,not merely has the jurisdiction, powers and privileges of a Judge of the High Court, he also sits and acts as a Judge of that Court.
The words "but shall not otherwise be deemed to be a Judge of that Court" indicate that in matters not relating to jurisdiction, powers and privileges the person so requested shall not be deemed to be a Judge of that Court.
The word "Otherwise" would point to the conclusion that for the purpose of jurisdiction, powers and privileges the person requested shall be a Judge of the concerned High Court and for purposes other than those of jurisdiction, powers and privileges,the person requested shall not be deemed to be a Judge of that Court.
The use of the 20 7 word "deemed ' shows that the person who sits and acts as a Judge of tic High Court under this Article is a Judge of the said High Court hub by a legal fiction he is not to be considered to be a Judge of the High Court for purposes other that those relating to jurisdiction, powers and privileges.
The words "but shall not otherwise be deemed to be a Judge of that High Court" by necessary implication emphasis and highlight the fact that for purposes of jurisdiction, powers and privileges the person requested under article 224A is a Judge of the High Court concerned.
The effect of the non obstante clause at the beginning of article 224A is that notwithstanding the other provisions of Chapter V of Part VI of the Constitution, the person requested under article 224A would sit end act as a Judge, of the High Court are would have the jurisdiction, powers and privileges of a Judge of that Court.
The difference in the language of articles 224 & 224A would not detract from the conclusion that a person requested under article 224A sits and acts as a Judge of the High Court for the purpose of exercising jurisdiction, powers and privileges, Articles 224 & 224A deal with different matters.
[212H; 213A D; 214B] (ii)There is nothing in the language of section 80A of the Representation of People Act which stood in the way of the Chief Justice relieving a Judge from the task of trying the election petition which had been earlier entrusted to him.
[215C] Zikar vs The State I.L.R. held not applicable.
