Section 43 of the , lays down that the State Government may, from time to time issue directions to the State Transport Authority regarding fixing of fares and freights for stage carriages and public carriages, and section 44(3) requires the State Transport Authority to give effect to such directions.
In exercise of these powers the fare structure had been fixed for stage carriages in the respondent State from time to time.
In 1963, the.
respondent decided, to increase the motor vehicles tax, to introduce tax on passengers and goods, and to modify the fare structure suitably for stage carriages.
Accordingly under the Kerala Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1963, the new rate of tax was fixed.
Section 3 of the Kerala Motor Vehicles.
(Taxation of Passengers and Goods) Act, 1963, provided that there shall be levied and paid to the Govern ment a tax on all passengers, luggage etc and the composition fee Was fixed per seat per quarter.
Also, after hearing the representations and objections of the operators and the public, there was a revision, as from July 1, 1963 of the fare structure of stage carriages in the State.
Till July 1966, the operators collected tax on passengers and goods and paid the taxes to the Government, But in 1966, the operators agitated for enhancement of fares and look the matter to Court.
In Thomman & ors.
vs The Regional Transport Officer, Ernakulam & Anr.
I.L.R. [1968] 2 Kerala 153 the, High Court held that the tax under the, 1963 Act (Taxation of Passengers and Goods) was vs, tax on passengers and.
goods.
, and: not on the operators as, contended by operators.
but held that the Act contained no satisfactory provision for its collection, in that it was not clear that the tax was payable,by the passengers to the operators.
Thereafter, the Kerala Motor Vehicles (Taxation of Passengers and Goods.
Amendment) Act 18 of 1971 was passed amending the 1963 Act.
Two new sub sections to section 3 provided that the tax levied shall be paid by the, passengers and consignors of the goods to the operators along with fares and freights and that the operators shall be liable to pay the tax so levied to the Government.
There was also a validating section in Act 18 of 1971, which stated that taxes levied or collected shall be deemed to be and to have always been levied or collected in accordance with law as if section 3 of the 1963 Act, as amended by Act 18 of 1971 was in force at all material times.
Another Act, Motor Vehicles (Kerala Third Amendment) Act 34 of 1971, effected 2 principal changes, namely,, (1) the addition of sub.
section (1A) to section 43 of the which provided that any direction regarding the fixing of fares and freights prospectively, or retrospectively might provide that such fares and freights shall be inclusive of the tax payable by passengers or consignors of goods; and (2) a validate provision validating the directions, relating to fares issued on or after March 1. 1963 to be inclusive of the tax payable under the 1963 Act.
With effect from,October 15, 1971, the Government also revised the rates offare.
The operators contended that : (1) The provisions of Acts 18 and 34 of 1971 amounted to a tax not on passengers and goods but on the income of the operators, (2) the retrospective validation of levy an( collection amount to a tax on amounts collected as fare and therefore the tax was a new tax on fare, and (3) the retrospective validation was unreasonable because the operators were made liable for a tax which they did not in fact collect during the period July 1966 to October 14 1971, when they were agitating for enhancement of fa re. 322 Rejecting the contentions.
the Court, HELD : (1) The Provisions of the 1963 Act (taxation of passengers and goods) indicate that the tax under that Act is a tax on passengers and owners of goods and that the operators only collected the tax.
When passengers and owners of goods pay the tax, the Government requires an agency to collect it and the operators are such agents.
The power to enact such a measure is derived from entry 56 of the State List If of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution.
[329B C. D F] M/s Sainik Motors, Jodhpur & Others vs The State of Rajasthan, ; , followed.
(2) The tax recovered retrospectively as well as prospectively is the same tax, a tax on passengers and goods.
The tax is imposed by the 1963 Act and its character as well as incidence is determined by the 1963 Act.
No tax is imposed or collected under Act 34 of 1971, nor was there any alteration of the character of the tax which had already been imposed.
The machinery for its collection which was implicit in the 1963 Act was made explicit by Act 18 of 1971.
The State Government fixed the fare in July 1, 1963 after taking into account the element of tax on passengers and goods imposed by the 1963 Act.
The operators in collecting fares from passengers in fact collected the tax due from them under the 1963 Act along with the fare.
Section 43(A) of the only clarified the factual basis.
It is competent to the State Legislature to amend the by enacting that directions regarding fares can be inclusive of tax.
The two Acts of 1971 were only for the purpose of dispelling the doubts expre ssed in Thomman Case. ' [333C G] Rai Ramkrishna & Others vs The state of Bihar; , , explained ;and followed.
section Srikantiah & Ors vs The Regional Transport Authority, Anantapur & Ors., [1971] Supp.
S.C.R. 816, followed.
(3) The correspondence and representations by the operators and notes of hearing prepared by the Secretariat in connection with the revision of fares, show, that the incidence of the increase in the motor vehicles tax and the increase in tax liability on account of tax on passengers and goods were all taken into consideration in fixing the fare with effect from July 1, 1973.
Since the tax was an element included in the fare structure, the retrospective validation cannot be said to be unjust.
especially because the operators had collected the entire amount.
[332B C; 334C D]
