The appellant, a judicial officer, was convicted and sentenced under the , by a Full Bench of the Orissa High Court.
Registrar of Orissa High Court vs Bardakanta Mishra & Ors.
I.L.R. [1973] Cuttack 134.
The appellant 's career as a judicial officer was far from satisfactory.
When he was working as Additional District and Sessions Judge he showed gross indiscretion and committed grave judicial misdemeanor.
The contempt proceed ings arose out of the representation he made to the Governor for canceling the order of suspension passed against him by the High Court and the allegation he made in a memorandum of appeal he had filed earlier in the Supreme Court.
In his representation to the Governor the appellant made false insinuations that the Governor cancelled the previous disciplinary proceedings against him on the ground that the same was vitiated as the High Court prejudged the matter and the government set aside the punishment because three of the judges were biased and were prejudiced against him, that the proceeding involved the Government in heavy expenses on account of the "palpably incorrect views of the High Court", that the High Court did not gracefully accept the Government 's order cancelling his demotion, that the High Court resorted to "subterfuge ' to counteract the said decision of the government by taking a novel step and that the High Court 's action suffered from patent mala fides.
He stated that the other judges had no independent judgment of their own and were influenced by the Chief Justice to take a view different from what they bad already taken and characterised the High Court as an "engine of oppression" and his order of suspension as "mysterious".
In another representation made to the Governor the appellant alleged that the High Court on the administrative side was seriously prejudiced and biased against him and it acted as if the charges stood established requiring extreme punishment and as such justice May not be meted out to him by the High Court, if it conducted the departmental inquiry.
He also stated that he considered it risky to submit his explanation to the High Court and that the High Court in the best interests of justice, should not inquire into these charges again st him.
He suggested that "the Court was not in a position to weigh the evidence and consider the materials on record and impose a sentence commensurate with his delinquency.
" The action taken by the High Court was branded as "unusual".
A copy of this representation was sent to the High Court with the remark that since the High Court was likely to withhold the representation it was submitted direct to the Governor.
In the memo of appeal filed in the Supreme Court, the appellant alleged bias and prejudice against the High Court and its Chief Justice.
He took the plea that the High Court had become disqualified to deal with the case and expressed the view that "the judges of the High Court had fallen from the path of rectitude and were vindictive" and had decided to impose substantive sentence and that "they were not in a position to mete even handed justice '.
In appeal to this Court.
it was contended : (i) that the passages about which the complaint was made did not amount to contempt of court since they did not purport to criticize any 'judicial, acts of the judges and criticism of the administrative acts of the High Court even in vilification terms did not amount 28 3 to contempt of court, and (ii) that the acts complained of were in the court of the appellant challenging his suspension and holding of disciplinary proceedings, in an appeal or representation to the Governor from the orders of the High Court and he gave expression to his grievance or had otherwise acted not with a view to malign the court or in defiance of it but with, the sole object of obtaining the reversal of the orders passed by the High Court against him.
HELD : The imputations have grossly vilified the High Court tending to affect substantially administration of justice and, therefore, the appellant was rightly convicted of the offence of criminal contempt.
[304F] (i)Proceedings in contempt are always with reference to administration of justice.
All the three sub clauses of section 2(c) of the , define contempt in terms of obstruction or interference with administration of justice and scandalisation within the meaning of sub clause (1) must be in respect of the court or the Judge with reference to administration of justice.
[297C D] Debi Prasad Sharma vs The King Emperor.
70 Indian Appeals.
216, referred to.
(a)The question whether contemptuous imputations made with reference to the administrative acts of the High Court amount to contempt of court will depend upon whether the amputations affect the administration of justice.
This is the basis on which the contempt is punished and must afford the necessary test.
[298E] (b)The mere functions of adjudication between the parties is not the Whole of administration of justice for any court.
The presiding judge of a Court embodies in himself the Court.
and when engaged in the task of administering justice is assisted by a complement of clerks and ministerial officers.
The Acts in which they are engaged are acts in aid of administration of justice.
Therefore, when the Chief Justice appoints ministerial officers and assumes disciplinary control over them, that is a function which through described as administrative, is really in the course of administration of justice.
Judical integrated function of Judge and cannot suffer any dissection nuance of high standards of rectitude in judical administration administration is an so far as maintain concerned.
The whole set up of a court is for who ' purpose of administration of justice and the controlwhich the judge exercises over his assistants has also the object of maintaining the purity of administration of justice.
[298F H; 299A] (c)The disciplinary control over the misdemeanors of the subordinate judiciary in their judicial administration is a function which the High Court must exercise in the interest of administration of justice.
It is a function Which is essential for the administration of justice in the wide connotation it has received and, therefore, when the High Court functions in a disciplinary capacity, it Only does so in furtherance of administration of justice.
it is as important for the superior court to be vigilant about the conduct and behaviour of the subordinately judge as it is to administer the law, because both functions are essential administration of justice.
The Judge of the superior court in whom this disciplinary control is vested functions as much as a Judge in such, matters as when he bears and disposes of cases before him.
[300E; 299D] (d) What is commonly described as an administrative function has been when vested in the High Court, constantly regarded by statutes as a function in the administration of justice.
[299F G] Letters Patent for the High Courts of Bombay, Calcutta and Madras a. 8; High Courts Act, 1861, a. 9; the Government of India Act, 1935, %.
224; Constitution of India, 1950, articles 225, 227 235; State of West Bengal V.Nripendra Nath Bagchi ; referred to.
(e)Thus the courts of justice in a State froth the highest to the lowest are by their constitution entrusted with functions directly connected with the administration of justice and it is the expectation and confidence of all those who have or likely to 'have business there that the courts Perform all their functions 284 on a high level of rectitude without fear or favour, affection or ill will.
And, it in this traditional confidence in the courts that justice will be administered in them which is Fought to be protected by proceedings in contempt.
[300F G] Rex vs Almon [1765] Wilmot 's Notes of Opinions 243, referred to.
(f) Scandalisation of the court is a species of contempt and may take several forms.
A common form is the vilification of the Judge.
When proceedings in contempt are taken for such vilification the question which the court has to ask is whether the vilification is of the Judge as a Judge or it is the vilification of the Judge as an individual.
If the latter, the Judge is left to this private remedies and the court has no power to commit for contempt.
If the former, the court will proceed to exercise the jurisdiction with scrupulous care in cases which are clear and beyond reasonable doubt.
Secondly, the court with have also to consider the degree of harm caused.
as affecting administration of justice and if it is slight and beneath notice, courts will not punish for contempt.
Ibis salutary practice is adopted by section 13 of the .
If the attack on the Judge functioning as a Judge substantially affects administration of justice it becomes a public mischief punishable for contempt, and it matters not whether such an attack is based on what a Judge is alleged to have done in the exercise of his 'administrative ' responsibilities.
A Judge 's functions may be divisible, but his integrity and authority are not divisible in the context of administration of justice.
[301D F] Queen vs Gray, [1900] (2) Queen 's Bench, 36, at page 40, referred to.
(g)"Judicial capacity" is an ambivalent term which means "capacity of or properto a Judge" and is capable of taking in all functional capacities of a Jurodge whetheradministrative, adjudicatory or any other, necessary for the administration of justice.
There is no warrant for the narrow view that the offence of scandalisation of the court takes place only when the imputation has reference to the adjudicatory functions of a Judge in the seat of justice.
[302D] Rex vs Almon [1765] Wilmot 's Notes of Opinion 243; MOti Lal Ghose and Others, XLV Calcutta, 169, The State of Bombay vs Mr. P.
A.I.R. 1959 Bombay, 182, Debi Prasad Sharma vs The King Emperor, 70, Indian Appeals, 216, Special Reference from the Bahama Islands, A.C. 138 at 144, Queen vs Gray , referred to.
Brahma Prak ash Sharma and others vs The State of Uttar Pradesh, [1953] S.C.R. 1169, Gobind Ram vs State of Maharashtra.
and State vs The Editors and Publishers of Eastern Times and Prajatantra, , held inapplicable.
(ii)If in fact the language used amounts to contempt of court it will become punishable as criminal contempt.
The right of appeal does not give the right to commit contempt of court nor can it be used as a cover to bring the autho rity of the High Court into disrespect and disregard.
[298C D] Jugal Kishore vs Sitamarhi Central Co.op.
; referred to.
Per Bhagwati & Krishna Iyer, JJ : (Concurring in ultimate decision) : The dilemma of the law of contempt arises because of the constitutional need to balance, two great but occasionally conflicting principles freedom of expression and f air and fearless justice.
It is a moot point whether we should still be bound to the regal moorings of Rex vs Almon.
[306E] (i)The emphasis in Ss. 2(c), 3 and 13 of the .
to the interference with the course of justice or obstruction of the administration of Justice or scandalising or lowering the authority of the Court not the Judge highlights the judicial area as entitled to inviolability and suggests a functional rather than a personal or 'institutional ' immunity.
The unique power to punish for contempt of itself inheres in a Court qua court, In its essential role of dispenser of public justice.
The phraseological image projected 285 by the catena of expressions in the Act, the very conspectus of the statutory provisions and the ethos and raison d 'eire of the jurisdiction point to the conclusion that the text of the Act must take its colour from the general context and confine the contempt power to the judicial cum para judicial areas, including such administrative functions as are intimately associated with the exercise of judicial power.
In short the accent is on the functional personality which is pivotal to securing justice to the people.
Purely administrative acts like recruitmerits, transfers and postings, routine disciplinary action against subordinate staff, executive acts in running the establishment and ministerial business ancillary to office keeping these are common to all departments in the public sector and merely because they relate to the judicial wing of government cannot enjoy a higher immunity from criticism.
The quintessence of the contempt power is protection of the public, not judicial personnel.
If the slant on judict poalisation as a functional limitation on the contempt jurisdiction is accepted, it must exclude from its ambit interference with purely administrative acts of courts and non judicial functions of judges.
This dichotomy is implicit in the decided cases.
To treat as the High Court has done.
"the image and personality of the lush Court as an integrated one" and to hold that every shadow that darkens it is contempt is to forget life, reason and political progress.
The basic 'public duty" of a Judge in his "judicial capacity" is to dispense public justice in Court and anyone who obstructs or interferes in this area does so at his peril.
Likewise, personal behaviour of judicial personnel, if criticised severally or even sinisterly. cannot be countered by the weapon of the contempt of court.
[309C E, 3 10 A F] The paramount but restrictive jurisdiction to protect the public against substantial interference with the stream of justice cannot be polluted or diffused into an intimidatory power for the judges to strike.
at adverse comments on administrative, legislative (as under articles 225, 226 and 227) and extra judicial acts.
Commonsense and principle can certainly accept a valid administrative area so closely integrated with court work as to be stamped with judicial character such as constitution of benches, transfer of cases, issue of administrative directions regarding submission of findings or disposal of cases by subordinate courts and the like.
Not everything covered by article 225, 227 and 235 will be of this texture.
Thus even though Judges and courts have diverse duties functionally and historically and jurisprudentially, the value which is dear to the community and the function which deserves to be pardoned off from public molestation is judicial.
Vicious criticism of personal and administrative acts of Judges may indirectly mar their image and weaken the confidence of the public in the judiciary but the countervailing good, not merely of free speech but also of greater faith generated by exposure to the acting light of bona fide even if marginally overzealous, criticism cannot be over looked.
[315B E] In the instant case the suspension of the District Judge was so woven into and integrally connected with the administration of justice that it can be regarded as not purely an administrative act but a para judicial function.
The appeal was against the suspension which was a preliminary to contemplated disciplinary action which was against the appellant in his judicial capacity for acts of judicial misconduct.
The control was, therefore, judicial and hence the unbridled attack on the High Court for the step was punishable impugned conduct of the condemner was qua Judge and the evil a supervisory act of the High Court.
[315G H] (ii)A large margin must be allowed for allegations in remedial representation; but extravagance forfeits the protection of good faith.
[315H] In the matter of a Special Reference from the Bahama Islands, ; 149; Debi Prasad Sharma vs The King Emperor, [1942] 70 I.A. 216, Kayiath Damodaran vs Induchoodan, A.I.R. 1961 Kerala 321, K. L. Gauba 's case, I.L.R. [1942] Lab.
411, 419, Rex vs B. section Nayyar, A.I.R. 1950 All '.
555, In re section B. Sarbadhicary, [1906] 14 XX I.A. 41, Brahma Prakash Sharma vs State of Uttar Pradesh, , State V. N. Nagamani, A.I.R. 1959 Pat. 373 and In the matter of an.
Advocate of Allahabad, A.T.R. 1935 All. 1, referred to.
28 6 Remedial process cannot be a mask to malign a judge.
Irrelevant or unvarnished amputations under the pretext of grounds of appeal amount of foul play and perversion of the legal process.
In the instant case the appellant, a senior officer who professionally weighs his thoughts and words has no justification for the immoderate abuse he has resorted to.
In this sector even truth is no defence, as in the case of criminal insult in the latter because it May produce violent breaches and is forbidden in the name of public peace, and in, the former it may demoralise the community about courts and is forbidden in the interest of public justice as contempt of court.
The Court being the guardian of the people 's rights, it has been held repeatedly that the contempt jurisdiction should be exercised with scrupulous care and only when the case is clear and beyond reasonable doubt.
[317C E; 318H] State of Uttar Pradesh vs Shyam Sunder Lal, A.I.R. 1954 All.
308, Rex vs R. section Nayyar, A.I.R. 1950 All. 549; 554, State of Madhya Pradesh vs Ravi Sharker. ; Govind Ram vs State of Maharashtra, , Swarnamayi Panigrahi vs B. Nayak, A.I.R. 1959 Orissa 89, Quintin Hogg.
1206 7.
C. K. Paphtary vs O. P. Gupta, A.I.R. 1971 S.C. 1132 1141 para '52, R vs Gray,, , Special ,Reference No. 1 of 1964; , 501; referred to.
(iii)In sum, the key note word is 'justice, not 'judge '; the 'key note thought is unobstructed public justice, not the self defence of a judge; the corner stone of the contempt law is the accommodation of two constitutional values the right of free speech and the right to independent justice.
The ignition of con, tempt action should be substantial.
and mala interference with fearless judicial action, not fair comment or trivial reflections on the judicial process and personnel.
[319E]
