The second respondent had been an employee of the Central Railway as a daily rated casual labourer on specified daily wages since 1941.
He continued to receive his wages at the specified rate until October 1949.
In October 1949 he made an application through an official of the Registered Trade Union a person permitted by the authority under sub section (2) of section 15 of the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 claiming his wages due in respect of six months from May to October 1949.
The respondent did not allege delay in the 1354 payment of his wages or deduction of his wages in contravention of the provisions of section 5 or section 7 of Act IV of 1936 respectively.
The respondent alleged that he had been paid his actual wages as fixed by the railway administration but that after the introduction of the scheme of upgrading of persons employed under the daily wages scheme, others who were junior to him had been placed on the monthly wages scheme whereas his claim to be so placed, had been ignored and that he had not been paid wages on the scale to which he would have been entitled if he had been placed on the monthly wages scheme.
Held, per SINHA J. (VIVIAN BosE and VENYATARAMA AYYAR JJ.
concurring, JAGANNADHADAS J. dissenting), that the respondent 's complaint fell under the category of potential wages and the authority appointed under the Act had no jurisdiction to decide the question of potential wages.
It had the jurisdiction to decide what actually the terms of the contract between the parties were, that is to say, to determine the actual wages.
On the case as made on behalf of the respondent, orders of the superior officers were necessary to upgrade him from a daily wageearner to a higher cadre.
The authority under the Act has not been empowered under section 15 to make any such direction to the superior officers.
Per JAGANNADHADAS J. Undoubtedly a claim to a higher potential wage cannot be brought in under the category of "claim arising out of deduction from the wages or delay in payment of the wages" if that wage depended on the determination by a superior departmental or other authority as to whether or not a particular employee is entitled to the higher wage a determination which involves the exercise of administrative judgment or discretion or certification, and which would, in such a situation, be a condition of the payability of the wage.
But where the higher wage does not depend upon such determination but depends on the application of and giving effect to certain rules and orders which, for this purpose, must be deemed to be incorporated in the contract of employment, such a wage is not a prospective wage merely because the paying authority concerned makes default or commits error in working out the application of the rules.
The wage under the Act is not necessarily the immediately pre existing wage but the presently payable wage.
Whether or not an employee was entitled to wages of a higher category than what he was till then drawing would depend entirely on the scope of the rules with reference to which he is entitled to become one in the higher category and it cannot be assumed a priori that such a claim is a claim to "prospective wages".
On the facts of the case as found the dispute as to the wage was one that fell within the jurisdiction of the "authority" concerned.
