The appellant took a lease of shop premises from the respondent.
From the time of letting, a chemist 's business was carried on in the shop by S with the occasional help of the appellant.
S and the appellant were living as husband and wife to the knowledge of the respondent.
The respondent applied under section 14 of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958, for eviction of the appellant on the ground that she had sublet the premises toS.
The Rent Controller and the Tribunal on appeal held that the appellant and section were living together as husband and wife, and that therefore there wasno question of any subletting by the appellant.
In second appeal, holding that two substantial questions of law were involved namely, one relatingto the status of the appellant as the wife of S, and the other, whether sub lettingwas established, the High Court concluded that there was subletting in favour oOf section Allowing the appeal to this Court, HELD : (1) Under section 39 (2) of the Act the High.
Court could interfere in second appeal only if there was a substantial question of law.
On the question whether the appellant was legally married no finding was necessary in the eviction suit.
It was sufficient for the rent court to proceed on the finding that the appellant and S were living together as husband and wife, whether they were legally married or not.
[528C D, E F] (2)The question whether there was subletting is not a mixed question of law and fact.
In a mixed question of law and fact the ultimate conclusion has to be drawn by applying principles of law to basic findings, but in the determination of a question of fact no application of any principle of law is required in finding either the basic facts or in arriving at the ultimate conclusion.
The question to be determined in the circumstances of this case was whether it was likely that the appellant had sublet the premises to section The negative answer given by the rent court is merely the factual common sense inference which did not call for the application of any principle of law.
[528F G; 529A B] Meenakshi Mills, Madurai vs The Commissioner of Income tax, Madras, ; , followed.
(3)When eviction is sought on the ground of subletting the onus of proving subletting is on the landlord.
If the landlord prima facie shows that the occupant was in the exclusive possession of the premises let out for valuable consideration, it would then be for the tenant to rebut the evidence.
But in the present case the respondent produced no evidence to show subletting in spite of the appellant 's denial in the written statement.
[527C D] Associated Hotels of India Ltd. Delhi vs section B. Sardar Ranjit Singh, ; , followed.
(4)Under section 14 (4) premises could be deemed to have been sub let by the tenant only when the Controller is satisfied that some person is let into possession ostensibly as a partner in business but really for the purposes of subletting.
This provision has no application to the facts and circumstances of the present case.
[526G H]
