The Settlement Officer under the Madras Estates (Abolition and Conversion into Ryotwari) Act, 1948 suo motu made an inquiry as to whether a particular village notified by the State Government was an estate or not within the contemplation of section 9(2) of the Act and held that it was not an "inam estate" within the meaning of section 2(7) of the Abolition Act but that the village became an estate by virtue of Madras Estates Land (3rd Amendment) Act, 1936.
Ther appellants unsuccessfully appealed to the Estate Abolition Tribunal.
The appellant then instituted a suit (O.S. 47 of 1953) against the State Government for a declaration that the village was not an "estate" under section 3(2)(d) of them Madras Estates Land Act, 1908 and consequently Madras Estate (Reduction of Rent) Act, 1947 and the Abolition Act were not applicable to it.
The trial court decreed the suit.
The State Preferred an appeal.
During the pendency of the appeal the appellant filed a suit (O.S. No. 101 of 1954) against the respondents for recovery of certain amount as rent or damages in respect of lands cultivated by them in the village in dispute.
The respondents contended that the village was an estate within the meaning of the Act and that it had been so held by the Settlement Officer.
Ultimately both the parties filed a joint memo on 26th March, 1958 that they would abide by the decision of the High Court or the Supreme Court in the appeal or revision arising out of the suit (O.S. 47/53) on the question whether the village was or was not an "estate" under, section 3(2)(d) of the Madras Estates Land Act.
The High Court (in A.S. No. 668 of 1954 which was an appeal arising out of O.S. 47 of 1953) confirmed the decree of the trial court that the village in dispute was not an 'estate '.
The State did not appeal, with the result that the High Court 's decision became final and the decree dated 28th March, 1958 became, effective.
Against the decree of 28th March, 1958 the appellants preferred an appeal (A.S. 239 of 1961) to the High Court.
The appeal related only to the extent of the land in the possession of the respondents and the quantum of rent or damages.
The appellants ' claim was that the entire land was under cultivation of the respondents and so the lower court was wrong in not decreeing the appellants ' claim for rent or damages in toto.
The respondents raised a preliminary objection at the time of hearing of the appeal that the suit itself was incompetent as the Civil Court had no jurisdiction to decide whether the suit village was an estate or not and, therefore, any (decision given by the High Court would not bind the parties and the decree in O.S. 101 of 1954 would be without Jurisdiction rendering it null and void and that the Settlement Officer was the competent authority to decide the tenure of the village and his deci sion had become final in view of the introduction of section 9A by Act 20 of 1960.
The High Court upheld the preliminary objection of the respondents and rejected the contentions of the appellants that since section 9A was inserted by an amendment which came into force on 23rd June, 1960, it could not affect the compromise decree of the court passed on March 28, 1958 or the decree of the High Court by which both the parties agreed to abide by the decision of the High Court or the Supreme Court in appeal or revision arising out of O.S. 47 of 1953.
The High Court held that the Civil Court was not the forum for the suit as framed by the appellants and the questions raised in the suit L748SuP CI/74 656 including the claim for arrears of rent or damages, were outside the jurisdiction of the Civil Court, and so dismissed the appeal.
Allowing the appeal, HELD:1 (a) There is no doubt that the question was within the competence of the Civil Court.
Under the Abolition Act, as it stood at the material date, the inquiry of the Settlement Officer could legitimately be confined to the ascertainment of only two disputes of fact, viz., (i) Was the village an "inam village"? (ii) If so, was it an 'Inam Estate ' as defined in section 2(7) of the Abolition Act ? Once issue (ii) was determined, the inquiry would be complete and the limits of his exclusive jurisdiction circumscribed by section 9(1) reached; if he went beyond those limits to investigate and determine something which is unnecessary or merely incidental or remotely related to issue No. (ii), 'then such incidental or unnecessary determination could be questioned in a Civil Court.
[668FG] (b) Any finding recorded by the Settlement Officer regarding the property in question being an 'inam village ' or not, ' is not final or conclusive it being a finding of a jurisdictional fact only, the Preexistence of which is a sine qua non to the exercise of his exclusive jurisdiction by the Settlement Officer.
[668H] (c) The legislature must have visualised that under the cloak of an erroneous finding as to the existence or nonexistence of this prerequisite, the Settlement Officer may illegally clutch at jurisdiction not conferred on him or refuse to exercise jurisdiction vesting in him.
Perhaps that is why the statute does not leave the final determination of this preliminary fact to the Settlement Officer/Tribunal and his erroneous finding on that fact is liable to be questioned in a Civil Court.
Once it is held that determination of this fact is not a matter of the exclusive jurisdiction of the Settlement Officer, the appellants cannot be debarred on the basis of any doctrine of res judicata from getting the matter fully and finally adjudicated by a court of competent jurisdiction.
[669B C; E] Addanki Tiruvenkata Tata Desika Charyulu vs State of Andhra Pradesh A.I.R. 1964 S.C. 807 followed.
District Board, Tanjore vs Noor Mohammed, (1952) 2 MJ.
586 (S.C.) referred to.
(2) It is well settled that ordinarily when the substantive law is altered during the pendency of an action, rights of the parties are decided according to law, as it existed when the action was taken unless the new statute shows a clear intention to vary such rights.
A plain reading of the impugned Act would show that there was nothing of this kind which expressly or by necessary intendment affects pending actions.
[67OC D] (b) There is no non obstante clause in the amending Acts 17 and 18 of 1957 with reference to pending or closed civil actions.
These amending Acts ' were published in the government gazette of December 23, 1957 and will therefore be deemed to have come into force from that date only.
They could therefore be construed as having prospective operation only.
[67OG H] (c) In the Amending Act 20 of 1960 also no back date for its commencement has been mentioned.
It will, therefore, be deemed to have commenced on June 23, 1960 which is the date on which it was published in the Government gazette.
[674E] Section 9A takes in its retrospective sweep only those decisions of the Settlement Officer or the Tribunal which at the commencement of 'the Amending Act 20 of 1960 were subsisting and had not been totally vacated or rendered non est by a decree of a competent court.
[675 F] In the instant case the decision of the Settlement Officer dated September 2, 1950 was not such a decision.
It had ceased to exist as a ' result of the inter linked decree in O.S. 47 of 1953 and O. section 101 of 1954 passed before the enactment of the Amending Act.
The Amending Act of 1960, therefore, does not in any way affect the finality or the binding effect of those decrees.
[675G] 657 (d) Order 23 rule 3 C.P.C. not only permits a partial compromise and adjustment of a suit by a lawful agreement, but further gives a mandate to the court to record it and pass a decree in terms of such compromise or adjustment in so far as it relates to the suit.
If the compromise agreement was lawful the decree to the extent it was a consent decree was not appealable because of the express bar in section 96(3) of the Code.
[672E] Raja Sri Sailendra Narayan Bhanja Deo vs State of Orissa ; , Shri Prithvi Cotton Mills Ltd. vs Broach Borough Municipality and Reid vs Reid at 408, followed.
(e) In any suit the parties, in order to avoid unnecessary expenses and botheration, could legitimately make an agreement to abide by a determination on the same point in issue in another pending action in an advanced stage There was nothing unlawful and improper in such an arrangement particularly when the interests,of the respondents were sufficiently safeguarded by the State.
By no stretch of reasoning it could be said that the agreement was collusive or was an attempt, to contract out of the statute.
In the instant case as soon as the parties made the agreement to abide by the determination in the appeal (A. section 668) and induced the court to pass a decree in terms of that agreement the principle of estoppel underlying section 96(3) C.P.C. became operative and the decree to the extent it was in terms of that agreement became final and binding between the parties.
It was as effective in creating an estoppel between the Parties as a judgment on contest.
[672F C & 673C] In the instant case that part of the decree in suit No. 101 of 1954 and the appeal from that decree could not be said to be a continuation of that part of the claim which had been settled by agreement.
The combined effect of the two integrated decrees was to completely vacate and render non est decision dated September 2, 1950 of the Settlement Officer.
[673F] Raja Sri Sailendra Narayan Bhanja Deo vs State of Orissa ; applied.
Per Krishna Iyer, J. concurring Courts have to be anchored to well known canons of statu tory construction and if they are out of tune With the law maker 's meaning and purpose the legitimate means of setting things right is to enact a new Interpretation Act.
[678B] The Indian Constitution, adopting the fighting faith of equal I protection of the laws to all citizens, necessarily contemplates a new jurisprudence where vested rights may be, and often times are, extensively interfered.
with for achieving the founding fathers ' social goals.
Legislative exercises directed towards distributive justice as in the present case, cannot be considered in the light of dated value system, though sanctified by bygone decisions of Courts.
[677H] In the present case the Act in question is clear about its intent and its application gives little difficulty.
