Three accused were convicted by a Magistrate under section 379 of the Indian Penal Code of the offence of theft of the value of Rs. 3 and sentenced to a fine of Rs. 25/ each.
The question for determination was whether the case should have been tried by a Panchayat Adalat constituted under the U. P. Panchayat Raj Act, 1947 and the Magistrate had no jurisdiction to try it.
Two of the accused belonged to U. P. State and the third belonged to Madhya Pradesh State.
Section 52(1) of the Act provides that certain specified offences (including the offence of theft when the value of stolen property does 1445 not exceed Rs. 50/ ) shall be cognizable by a Panchayat Adalat.
Section 55 provides that no court shall take cognizance of any case which is cognizable under the Act by the Panchayat Adalat.
Section 49 provides: " 49(1) The Sarpanch shall, for the trial of every case, form a bench of five Panches from the panel referred to in section 43.
(2) Every such bench shall include one Panch who resides in the area of the Gaon Sabha in which the complainant of a case resides and likewise one Panch in the area in which the accused resides and three Panches residing in the area of the Gaon Sabha in which neither party resides, provided that in police cases one Panch shall be such as may be residing in the Gaon Sabha in which the offence was committed, one Panch residing in the area of Gaon Sabha in which the accused resides and three Panches residing in the areas other than those mentioned above".
Rule 84 framed by the State Government under section 49(4) of the Act reads as follows: " For the purposes of trial or decision of any case or proceeding parties of which are residents of different circles or different districts or any one of the parties is a resident of a place not governed by the Act, the prescribed authority having jurisdiction over the Panchayati Adalat in which a case or proceeding is instituted or transferred for disposal shall constitute a special bench consisting of Panches of the said Panchayati Adalat and if convenient and possible may include a Panch of the other circle and shall appoint one of them as Chairman of the bench unless the Sarpanch is a member of it".
Held that inasmuch as in the present case one out of the accused belonged to Madhya Pradesh it was not possible to constitute a bench in strict compliance with section 49(2) of the Act to try his case.
Section 84 in so far as it relates to the constitution of a special bench where one of the parties belongs to a place outside the State of U. P. is ultra vires.
Hence no competent bench could be constituted under section 49 of the Act for the trial of the present case in which there were three accused one of whom was a person belonging to a different State.
Under the circumstances the jurisdiction of the ordinary courts was not excluded.
Exclusion of jurisdiction of a court of general jurisdiction, can be brought about by the setting up of a court of limited jurisdiction, in respect of the limited field, only if the vesting and the exercise of that limited jurisdiction is clear and operative.
The bar under section 55 of the Act relates to the case as a whole and has reference to the entire proceeding in respect of all the accused together.
