The appellants, five of whom were directors and one an officer of a company, were prosecuted under the Employees Provident Funds Act, 1952 on the ground that they had failed to pay the contribution to the Provident Fund and thereby committed an offence punishable under paragraph 76(a) of the Employees Provident Fund Scheme, 1952.
Later, an investigation was made into the affairs of the company under section 15.
of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 and an order was issued authorising the Gujarat State Textile Corporation to take over the management of the company.
By a notification the State Government declared the company to be a "relief undertaking" under section 4 (1) (a) (iv) of the Bombay Relief Undertakings (Special Provisions) Act, 1958 and directed that "all rights, privileges, obligations and liabilities accrued or incurred before the undertaking was declared a relief undertaking and any remedy for the enforcement thereto shall be suspended and all the proceedings relevant thereto pending before any court, tribunal, officer or authority shall be stayed" with effect from a certain date.
An application filed by the appellants for stay of the prosecution in view of the notification issued by the Government was rejected by the lower court on the view that .the operation of section 4 of the 1958 Act was restricted to the statutes mentioned in the Schedule to that Act and that clause (iv) of section 4 (1) (a) did not contemplate stay of criminal proceedings.
On appeal the High Court summarily rejected the revision application.
The appellants came in appeal to this Court by special leave.
On the question whether the prosecution pending against the appellants under paragraph 76 (a) of the Employees Provident Funds Scheme 1952 is liable to be stayed by virtue of the notification issued by the State Government.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD : The personal liability of the directors and officers does not fall within the scope of section 4 (1) (a) (iv) of the Act.
The responsibility to pay the contribution to the Fund was of the appellants and if they had defaulted in paying the amount they were liable to be prosecuted under paragraph 76 (a) of the Scheme.
The phrase "all proceedings relative thereto" patently means all proceedings relating to "any right, privilege, obligation or liability accrued or incurred before the undertaking was declared a relief undertaking".
Sub clause (iv) concerns itself with the pre existing obligations and liabilities of the undertaking and not of its directors.
managers or other officers.
Neither the language of the statute nor its object would justify the extension of the immunity so as to cover the individual obligations and liabilities of the directors and other officers of the undertaking.
If they had incurred such obligation or liabilities as distinct from the obligations or liabilities of the undertaking they were liable to be proceeded against for their personal acts of commission and commission.
The remedy in that behalf cannot be suspended nor can a proceeding already commenced against them in their individual capacity be stayed.[52E; 53E] The occasion for declaring an industry as a "relief undertaking" would arise out of causes connected with the defaults on the part of its directors and other officers.
To declare a moratorium on legal actions against persons whose activities have necessitated the issuance of a notification in the interest of unemployment relief is to give such persons the benefit of their own wrong.
Section 4 (1) (a) (iv) advisedly limits the power of the State Government to direct suspension of all remedies and stay of proceedings involving the obligations and liabilities in relation to a relief undertaking and which were incurred before the undertaking was declared a relief undertaking.
[53F] 51
