The appellants firm was carrying on the business of manufacturing and exporting polished granite memorial stones.
The firm was a factory both under the Factories Act as well as under the Employees ' State Insurance Act.
Adjacent to this factory was another factory situated on the appellant 's land leased out to two contractors who employed 50 workers in their factory for the purposes of cutting and dressing the granite stones.
The granite stones unloaded outside the factory by the lorries were brought on the portion of the leased land and after cutting them they were sent back to the appellant 's factory where they were designed and polished.
The Employees ' State Insurance Corporation claimed from the appellant a certain sum as the firms contribution on account of the workers employed by the two contractors described as 'immediate employers ' under the Act.
The Employees ' State Insurance Court held that the contractors were not 'immediate employers ' within the meaning of section 2(13) of the Employees ' State Insurance Act and that they were independent contractors.
On appeal the High Court held that the appellant was a principal employer and the contractors were the immediate employers under the Act.
The High Court also held that the workers tinder the contractors were employees within the meaning of section 2(9)(ii) of the Act.
Dismissing the appeal, to this Court, HELD : (1) The underlying aim of the Act is to insure the employees against ,various risks to their life, health and well being and the charge is upon the principal employer even though he may get his usual work done through an intermediary who is described in the Act as 'immediate employer '.
Any dispute between the principal employer and the immediate employer has to be settled between themselves de hors, the employees and the Act charges the principal employer with the liability to pay the contribution not only of its own but also that of the employees subject to his right to deduct the employees ' contribution from their wages under section 40(2) Of the Act.
[147A] (2) On the findings of fact the work undertaken by the contractor 's in the adjoining vicinity is preliminary or incidental to the work in the principal employer factory turning out the finished product for export.
The work in the two places has intimate correlation and is a niece of an integrated whole and the said work by the contractors through their labour is ordinarily part of the work of the principal factory undertaken by the contractors.
Their factory is situated in the premises of the appellant 's factory which, according to the definition clause, includes the precincts thereof.
In the instant case on an examination of the site plan and the evidence it is evident that there is a definite environmental as well as functional unity between the two portions, namely, the main factory and the contractors ' factory with the precincts even though separated by a wall in which there was a door which sometimes was closed.
The work undertaken by the contractors and carried on in their portion of the area is surely componental to make it a part of the complex whole.
The principal requirement of the definition namely, that the work or the ,construction is undertaken on the premises of the factory is satisfied in the present ,case.
It therefore follows that the two contractors are 'immediate employers within the meaning of section 2(13) and the workers employed for cutting and dressing the granite stones by the immediate employers are employees within section 2(9)(ii) of the Act.
[148B] Employees ' State Insurance Corporation.
Bombay vs Raman (Chittur Harihar Iyer),[1957] 1 L.L.J.267,Nagpur Electric Light and Power Co.Ltd.
vs Regional Director Employees State Insurancea Corporation, Etc. , Employees '.
143 State Insurance Corporation, vs Peter Sewing Machine Co. etc.
A.I.R. 1970 Delhi 182, and M/s Hindustan Construction Co. Ltd. vs Employees ' State Insurance Corporation, Assam & Nagaland 87, referred to.
