The first respondent filed a writ petition in the High Court challenging the grant of a mining lease to the appellant on the ground of a direct.
infringement of his right to be granted a mining lease over an area for which he applied for a mining lease and which, according to him, formed part of the area for which the appellant was given the lease.
But in fact, the first respondent 's application was not in respect of any part of the area for which the appellant was granted a mining lease.
Though the appellant was made party to the proceeding, he did not appear as notices were not served on him.
The High Court allowed the petition in the view that there was a violation: of section 31 of the , and rr. 58 and 59 of the Mineral Concession Rules 1960.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, HELD : The first respondent had no interest in the subject matter of the lease, and the petition was not maintainable.
[618 G H] Though this contention was not urged before the High Court as the appellant did not appear in the High Court, this Court, in appeal, can not only determine the soundness of the decision, but has jurisdiction to determine any point raised before, it, such as, whether the appeal is competent, whether a party has a locus standi to present the petition and whether the petitioner was maintainable.
Ordinarily, the foundation for exercising the jurisdiction under Article 32 or Article 226, is the personal or individual right of the petitioner himself, though in cases of writs of habeas corpus or quo warranto, the rule may be relaxed.
In respect of persons who are not aggrieved and who seek to invoke the jurisdiction of the High Court or this Court, the matter rests ultimately on the discretion of the Court, and depends on the nature and extent of the right or interest said to have been infringed and whether the infringement affects the petitioner in some way.
[619 A B, D, G H] In the present case, the first respondent only alleged direct infringement of his right,but it was found that no right of his had been affected.
He was neither aparty nor a person aggrieved or affected and hence had no locus standi to file the petition.
[620 B C] Ebrahim Aboobakar and Another vs Custodian General of Evacuee Property, ; , Chiranjit Lal Chowdhuri, vs The , Union of India, ; , The State of Orissa vs Madan Gopal Rungta, [1952] S.C.R. 28, The Calcutta Gas Company (Proprietary) Ltd. vs The State of West Bengal and Others [1962] Supp.
3 S.C.R. 1, Godde Venkateswara Rao vs Government of Andhra Pradesh and Others ; and R. vs Thamples Magistrates ' Court ex.
p. Greenbaum, [19571 in Yardley Source Book of English Administrative Law, , referred to.
