The first plaintiff became entitled to claim a consignment of 53 bundles of mild steel plates despatched by a Japanese exporter to be delivered at the port of Bombay.
The goods were discharged in the docks on 12th September 1959, into the custody of the Bombay Port Trust, the appellant.
The goods were insured and the second plaintiff was the insurer.
On September 19, 1959, delivery of the goods was applied for and was given but only 52 bundles.
A week thereafter, the first plaintiff demanded the missing bundle but was put off from time to time by the appellant assuring that a search was in progress to trace the goods.
From the Indian Maritime Enterprises, the agents of the Japanese vessel, the plaintiff came to know on November 7, 1959 that all the 53 bundles had been duly unloaded.
The plaintiff enquired from the appellant again on December 5, 1959 whether the bundle had been landed; but the port authorities still informed that the missing bundle was still under search.
Thereafter, on January 22, 1960, the appellant informed the first plaintiff that the bundle under reference had been out turned as landed but missing.
Within a week thereafter, the first plaintiff asked for a non delivery certificate and the certificate was issued on March 1, 1960 and on May 12, 1960 a statutory notice under section 87 of the Bombay Port Trust Act, 1879, was issued and a suit was filed for the missing bundle or its value by way of damages.
The defence put forward by the appellant was, that since the suit was governed by section 87 of the Act and the cause of action having arisen on September 19, 1959, the claim is barred by limitation because 6 months had already passed from the time the first cause of action arose.
The second plaintiff, insurer, having paid the value of the lost articles to the first plaintiff got itself subrogated to the later 's right, and they together filed the suit before the Court of Small Causes.
That Court held against the appellant but the full Court in appeal reversed the judgment of the trial court and held in favour of the appellant holding that the claim was barred by limitation.
The High Court, however, held in favour of the plaintiff and hence the appeal to this Court.
Section 87 of the Bombay Port Trust Act, 1879, provides that no suit or other proceeding shall be commenced against any person for anything done or purporting to have been done, in pursuance of this Act without one month 's previous notice, and not after 6 months from the accrual of the cause of such suit or other proceeding.
The question was whether the suit was for anything done or purporting to have been done in pursuance of this Act, when the action is for non delivery of one out of 53 bundles.
Allowing the appeal, HELD : (1) Where a statute imposes a duty, the omission to do something that ought to be done in order completely to perform the duty, or the continuing to have any such duty unperformed, amounts to an act done or intended to be done within the meaning of a statute which provides a special period of limitation for such an act.
[403 H 404 A] Halsburys Laws of England, 3rd Ed.
Vol. , referred to.
Therefore in the present case, the truncated limitation prescribed under the Act will apply.
[415 E] 13 L 954 SupCI/74 398 (2)Sec.
87 of the Act insists on notice of one months This period may legitimately be tacked on to the six months period mentioned in the section (vide sec.
15(2) .
[422 G H] (3) The starting point of limitation is the accrual of the cause of action.
Two components of the "Cause" are Important.
The date when the plaintiff came to know or ought to know with reasonable diligence that the goods had been landed from the vessel into the port.
Two clear indications of when the consignee ought to know are : (1) when the bulk of the goods are delivered, there being short delivery leading to a suit, and (2) 7 days after knowledge of ,he landing of the goods suggested in Sec.
Whichever is the later date ordinarily sets off the running of limitation.
[422 H 423 B] (4) Utters of assurance cannot enlarge the limitation once the goods have landedand the owner has come to know of it.
[423 B C] (5) Sec. 87 is attracted not merely when an act is committed but also when a omission occurs in the course of the performance of the official duty.
[1423C D] In the present case, applying the above principles, the case has to be decided against the plaintiffs and the appeal is allowed.
[423D]
