The appellant and his companions were charged with an offence under section 302 I.P.C. for causing the death of the deceased by pouring acid on him when he was sleeping on his cot on the night of the occurrence.
After recording the first information report the police sub inspector recorded the statement of the deceased and at the dispensary the doctor recorded the statement of the deceased, in both of which he stated that the appellant poured acid over his body and caused injuries to him.
The deceased succumbed to his injuries.
Disbelieving the prosecution evidence the trial court acquitted him.
The High Court on the other hand accepted the evidence of all the prosecution witnesses and convicted and sentenced the appellant to life imprisonment but acquitted the remaining two accused.
In appeal to this Court it was contended that the High Court should not have reversed the judgment of the trial court and the evidence relied upon by the High Court was not satisfactory.
Dismissing the appeal.
HELD : that the approach of the trial court was clearly unreasonable and the High Court was fully justified in setting.aside the acquittal of the.
appellant.
It is well settled that in an appeal under section 417 of the Code of Criminal Procedure the Court has full power to review at large the evidence on which the order of acquittal was founded and to reach the conclusion that upon the evidence the order of acquittal should be reversed.
No limitation should be placed upon that power unless it be found expressly stated in the Code, but in exercising the power conflict by the Code before reaching its conclusion upon facts the High Court should give proper weight and consideration to such matters as (1) the views of the trial judge as to the credibility of the witnesses; (2) the presumption of innocence in favour of the accused, a presumption certainly not weakened by the fact that he has been acquitted at his trial; (3) the right of the accused to the benefit of any real and reasonable doubt and (4) the slowness of an appellate court in disturbing the finding of fact arrived at by a judge who had the advantage of seeing the witnesses.
[576 D F] In the instant case there was no doubt that the deceased died as a result of acid bums.
There was no cogent reason to disbelieve the evidence of the prosecution witnesses.
The trial court was wrong in rejecting evidence of these witnesses on the ground that they were related to the deceased.! Close relatives of the deceased would normally be most reluctant to spare the real assailant and falsely mention the name of another person as the one responsible for causing injuries to the deceased.
The deceased would not spare his real assailant ' and falsely mention the name of the appellant as one who poured acid over his body.
There was no reason to discard the dying declaration made by the appellant to the police sub inspector, The trial Court was wrong in rejecting the dying declaration to the police (F.I.R.) on the ground that the deceased had stated to the doctor that he had become unconscious after the occurrence.
There was nothing in the statement recorded by the doctor to indicate that the deceased remained unconscious for.
a long time and as such was not in position to lodge the F.I.R. The fact that the language used in the dying declaration made to the doctor was rather chaste would not go to show that the said statement could not have been made by the deceased.
As to the language used in the dying declaration there is nothing abnormal or unusual in the same person using colloquial language while talking to one person and using refined language while talking to another person.
[574 E F ; 575D; 576A] 571
