V, the father of the appellants had a brother R who died childless leaving behind him his widow, N.
After R 's death a series of litigation started between V & N. V filed a suit in 1913 against R. for waste committed by her husband 's estate and was appointed a receiver in that suit.
In that suit, he got a decree, V as receiver filed 3 suits on the foot of 3 mortgages in favour of R.
In execution of the decrees, 3 valuable properties were purchased.
These three properties are the subject matter of the present appeal.
V died in 1947 and N in 1951 after executing a will bequeathing in favour of her brother S all her properties.
S filed the suit out of which this appeal arises, for pos session of the properties bequeathed to him under the will and for mesne profits.
The Sub judge held that the said properties became accretions to the main estate of R and therefore, the plaintiff was entitled only to an account of the income from these properties till the death of V.
On appeal, the High Court allowed the appeal in part.
Before this Court four points were raised by the appellants : (I) The High Court committed an err or in not hearing the whole appeal but confining the hearing merely to the points on which the finding was called for from the lower court.
(2) a portion of the properties which was lost to the estate due to N 's negligence of not paying the land revenue, should be debited against her share in them.
(3) the cost incurred by V in the suit and in the execution proceedings should have been taken into account in allocating the properties between the appellants and the respondents and (4) that the widow N, bad treated the properties as accretion to the husband 's estate and therefore, the appellants are entitled to the whole of the property.
Allowing the appeal, HELD : (1) When a finding is called for on the basis of certain issues framed by the Appellate Court, the appeal is not disposed of either in whole or in part.
Therefore the parties cannot be barred from arguing the whole appeal after the findings are received from the Court of first instance.
[597 E) Gopi Nath Shukul vs Sal Narain Shukul, A.I.R. 1923 Allahabad 384, referred to.
(2) A Hindu widow is entitled to the full beneficial enjoyment of the estate.
So long as she is not guilty of wilful waste, she is answerable to no one.
In her lifetime, the reversionary right is a mere possibility or spes successionis.
It cannot be predicted who would be the nearest reversioner at the time of her death.
It is, there , fore, impossible to contend that for any loss to the estate due to the negligence on the part of the widow, he should be compensated from out of the widow 's separate properties.
He is entitled only to the property left on the date of the death of the widow.
[599 C; FG] (3) The income received by V and the amounts spent for the suit and the execution proceeding were taken into account at the time of settlement of accounts and it was open to V to realise the excess amount from the estate of R.
It is not now open to the appellants to claim that these amounts should be separated from the amount of the decree and should be added to the amount of principal and interest accrued during the lifetime of R. [600 A C] (4) From the evidence, it is clear that the widow did not show any intention to treat the income from, the husband 's estate as an accretion to that estate.
[601D] Akkanna vs
Venkayya, I.L.R. , referred to.
The appeal was sent back to High Court for hearing afresh.
