On the question whether, the right to execute a decree for the possession of watan land which has been obtained by the watandar came to an end, because of the abolition by the Gujarat Patel Watans Abolition Act.
1961, of patel watans and the extinguishment of all incidents appertaining to them under section 4 of, the Act, HELD : (1) There is nothing in the language of section 4 which renders such decrees for possession to be in executable.
Had the legislature intended that such decrees should become in executable, the legislature would have indicated .such intention by incorporating some provision to that effect.
[121B] (2) The words "any decree or order of a Court" in the opening clause of the section do not indicate that the decree or order of court could not be executed with effect from the appointed day.
The opening clause of the section only indicates that irrespective of any usage or custom and irrespective of any settlement, grant, agreement, sanad or decree or order of a court or the existing watan law.
which might have defined and declared the incidents appertaining to patel watans, the results contemplated by the various clauses of the section would follow and nothing contained in such settlement etc.
would prevent the operation of that section.
[122E 123A] (3) If the fact that patel watans have been abolished and incidents appertaining to them have, been extinguished does, not lead to the conclusion that the right of the erstwhile watandar to the possession of the watan lands also comes to an end.
Section 4(iv) expressly provides that the resumption of watan land consequent upon the abolition of patel watans would be subject to the provisions of sections 6, 7 and 10, According to section 6, the watan land.
subject to the conditions mentioned in that section, shall be regranted to the watandar.
He shall be deemed to be occupant of the said land, and he would be entitled to continue in possession if he complies with the provisions of that section.
That is, so far as the quondam watandars are concerned, they are entitled to be in possession of the watan lands, though not in their capacity as watandars but by virtue of the operation of section 6 of the Act.
If the respondent would be entitled to be in possession of the land under section 6, the right to execute the decree for possession of land cannot be denied to him.
[121C 122] (4) If the respondent is entitled to execute the decree for possession of the land obtained against the appellants the question whether the appellants, if allowed to remain in possession, could have applied for regrant to them under section 10 is not relevant.
[122C E]
