The Uttar Pradesh Krishi Utpadhan Mandi Adhiniyam, 1964 as amended by U.P. Acts 25 of 1964 and 10 of 1970.
was enacted to provide for the regulation of the sale and purchase of agricultural produce, to protect the producers from exploitation and for the establishment, superintendence and control of markets in U.P.
Under section 5, the State Government is empowered to declare a particular area as market area and under section 7.
the principal market yard and sub market yards are declared.
Section 7(2) provides that no person shall in a principal market yard or sub market yard carry on business as a trader, broker, commission agent etc., in respect of specified agricultural produce except in accordance with the conditions of a licence obtained from he concerned market committee.
Sec. 13 provides for the constitution of the market committee and for representation on the committee from different sources.
Under section 17.
the committee has power to issue, renew, suspend or cancellicences.
Section 25 provides for appeals against orders of the committeeto the Director of Agriculture and section 32 for revision by the State Government Under section 16(2)(vii), the committee has to provide accommodation for storage.
40 enables the ' State Government to make rules Rule 70(4)(1)provides that the Committee may issue a licence to an applicant if it is satisfied.
(a) that the applicant is solvent and (b) that the applicant is a desirable person.
Rule 76(1) provides that every consignment of specified agricultural produce brought for sale into the principal or sub market yard shall be sold by open auction.
The petitioners who were traders or commission agents, dealing in agricultural produce, challenged the validity of the Act, and the rules made thereunder on the ground of violation of articles 14 and19(1)(g).
They contended that : (1) that constitution of the committee is prejudicial to their interests since.
it will have a perpetual majority of producers, (2) the entrustment of licensing to such a committee is an unreasonable restriction on their right to trade, (3) there is no guidance in the matter of grant of licences, the criteria mentioned in r. 70(4) being vague, (4) the requirement to provide storage space for the producers by the petitioners is an unreasonable restriction, and (5) r. 76(1) is ultra vires section 40 and also places an unreasonable restriction on the petitioners.
Dismissing the petitions, HELD : (1) Under section 13, the Committee is to consist of 23 members and out of, them only 10 are from the producers.
Therefore the submission is factually inaccurate as there is no question of a perpetual majority of producers.
[381G H] (2) There are no unreasonable features in the scheme of representation in the committee.
Under 8. 13, 8 producers are elected who may represent the 8 categories of agricultural produce mentioned in the schedule and two producers are nominated from the schedule castes by the Government, because, they may not get due representation in the election.
The performance of the duty of licensing by such a committee cannot prejudice the petitioners.
In fact, none of the petitioners has been refused a licence.
Though usually some governments] authority is charged with the duty of granting licences under various Acts, that does not prove that the duty cannot be property and impartially exercised by a Committee representing various interests which are 377 vitally interested in the trade.
of agricultural produce.
If in a particular case.
the action of the Committee is mala fide ' or otherwise objectionable such grievance can be properly dealt with.
[381H 382E] (3) It is not correct to say that there is no guidance in the Act in the matter of grant of license and that the two criteria provided by rule 70(4)(1) are vague.
[382E F] (a) The Committee which is entrusted with the duty of granting licences consists of people from different sources vitally interested in the marketing of agricultural produce, as well as Government officials.
It is a well represented Committee which is expected to know the object and purpose of the Act of ' which it is a creature.
There is sufficient guidance from the preamble and other provisions of the Act with which the members of the Committee would be familiar and conversant, for example, section 16 of the Act and the particulars in Forms XI and XIII.
for the application of a licence and Conditions of a licence.
With the help of Government officials in the committee there is no reason to think that the Committee will not function smoothly or to apprehend that licence would be refused arbitrarily.
There is also a limitation on the power of the Committee in that the Act insists that the Committee should record its reasons while refusing a licence.
Further, there is provision of appeal against the decision of the Committee and a further revision to the State Government.
[382F 383D] (b) One of the two criteria mentioned in r. 70(4)(i).
is solvency and the criterion on the score or 'bankruptcy is well known and cannot be said to be vague or indefinite.
As regards the second criterion, namely, that the applicant should be a desirable person the Act itself provides sufficient guidance to the Committee in the matter of deciding whether a particular applicant is or is not a proper person to hold the licence.
[383F H] (4) The requirement to provide a storage space is only an interim measure pending arrangements by the Committee for proper storage as required by section 16.
Under r. 52(4) storing of the specified agricultural produce shall be subject to the payment of such storage fee and other conditions as may be: specified in the bye laws.
Since the storage by the traders in the market yards will always be paid for under the rule there is no substance in the contention that the requirement is unreasonable.
[384A B] (5)(a Rule 76(1) is not ultra vires section 40 Section 9(2) restricts the right to carry on trade except under and in accordance with the licence_ and section 17 provides for issuing or renewal of licences subject to the restrictions under the rules, and these sections are not challenged.
Section 40 empowers the State Government to make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act, and under section 40(2) (xxvii), r. 76(1) only prescribes open auction as the mode of sale.
[384B D] (b) The rule does not violate the fundamental right of the petitioners under article 19(1)(g).
[384G] The definitions of sale and purchase in the.
Act do not run counter to the provisions relating to auction sale under, the rule and, it Could not be field to be an unreasonable mode considered in the entire scheme of the Act.
in order that the producers may obtain the best price for their commodity, sale by open auction is prescribed under the rule to fulfil one of the important purposes of the Act.
The legislature is intervening to see that the producers get the maximum pecuniary return possible in the transaction and as a necessary concomitant eliminated the made of private sale by individual negotiation resulting in malpractices.
Besides, by the Proviso to the rule the restriction is not allowed to operate in the case of retail sales.
[384D G] Lala Hari Chand Sarda vs Mizo District Council and all) .
and Harakchand Ratanchand Banthia and ors.
vs Union of India and ors.
; , distinguished.
