The appellant filed the suit against the respondent in 1964, on the original side of the High Court, claiming six months salary in lieu of notice and gratuity.
An application for amendment of the plaint in regard to damages for the right to pension was made in 1970.
The respondent contended that the amendment should not be allowed on the ground inter alia that the alleged claim was barred by limitation in 1970.
The trial Court allowed the amendment, but in appeal under Cl. 15 of the Letters Patent, the order was set aside.
The High Court considered the application for amendment to be a new claim based upon a new set of facts which became barred on the date of the application for amendment.
In appeal to this Court, it was contended that: (1) the order of the trial Court was not a judgment and hence not appealable under Cl. 15, and (2) the order was a discretionary order and the appellate Court should not have interfered with the exercise of discretion.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD : (1) A judgment within the meaning of Cl.
15 would have to satisfy two tests, (a) it must be the final pronouncement which puts an end to the proceeding so far as the Court dealing with it is concerned; and (b) it must involve the determination of some right or liability though it may not be necessary that there must be a decision on the merits.
[554 B] In finding out whether any decision is a judgment within the meaning of Cl. 15, each case must be looked into in order to find out whether there is a decision determining the right or liability of the parties affecting the merits of the controversy between the parties.
It is not the form but the nature of the order that has to be examined in order to ascertain whether there has been a determination of any right or liability.
If an amendment merely allows the plaintiff to state a new cause of action or to ask a new relief or to include a new ground of relief all that happens is that it is possible for the plaintiff to raise further contentions in the suit, but it is not decided whether the contentions are right.
Such an amendment does nothing more than regulate the procedure applicable to the suit and does not touch the merits of the controversy between the parties.
Where, on the other hand, an amendment takes away from the defendant the defence of immunity from any liability by reason of limitation, it is a judgment within the meaning of Cl. 15.
The reason why it becomes a judgment is that it is a decision.
affecting the merits of the question between the parties by determining the right or liability based on limitation.
It is the final decision as far as the Court is concerned.
The respondent, in the present case, has acquired, by reason of limitation, immunity from liability, and the appellant, because of the limitation of the cause of action, has no power to render the respondent liable for the alleged claim.
[554 B C, G., 555F H,556A C] (2) The order of the trial Court is not one purely based on discretion, and even with regard to discretionary orders the appellate Court can interfere where the order is unsupportable in law or is unjust.
The High Court was right in holding that there we 're no special circumstances to entitle the appellant to introduce the claim by amendment.
[556F] Asrumati Debi vs Kumar Rupendra Deb Raikot & Ors.
[1953] section C. R. 1159, followed.
Justice of the Peace for Calcutta vs Oriental Gas Company, 8 Bengal L. R. 433, Tuliaram vs Alagappa 1.
L. R. 35 Mad.
J., M. B. Sirkar & Sons vs Powell & Co. A.I.R. 1956.
630, approved.
Charan Das vs Amir Khan 47 1.
A. 255 referred to.
Dayabhai vs Murugappa Chettiar I. L. R. 13 Rang.
457 and Manohar vs Bailram I.L. R. , overruled.
551 For the appellant: On the first point, an order allowing amendment is not a "Judgment" within the meaning of clause 15 of the Letters Patent.
Divergent views have been taken by various High, Courts as to the meaning of word "Judgment".
This question came before this Court also in the case of 'Asrumati devi ' (1953) SCR II 59 where a question arose whether an order for transfer of a suit under clause 13 of the Letters Patent (Calcutta High Court) is not a "Judgment" within the meaning of clause 15 of the Letters Patent; and this Court took the view that an order of this character could not be regarded as a 'Judgment ' but it did not determine the true meaning and scope of the word "Judg ment", nor did it resolve a wide divergence of judicial opinion on the subject.
An order to be a 'Judgment ' in Cl.
15 of the Letters Patent must either determine some right or liability which is in controversy in the suit either partially or wholly; or it should terminate the proceedings even without deciding any right or liability in controversy.
Any wider definition of the word 'Judgment ' will make all orders appealable irrespective of their nature and irrespective of the proceeding in which they are passed.
An interim order which does not determine any substantive right or liability in controversy (i.e. does not grant or refuse any part of the relief prayed for in a suit), but decides a procedural right, however important, is not a 'judgment '.
An order allowing the amendment does not decide any substantive right or liability.
It only permits a claim to be agitated and does not decide the claim and, therefore, the order of the single judge was not appealable.
Justice of the Peace for Calcutta vs The Oriental Gas Co. 8 Bengal L.R. 433, Tuljaram vs Alagappa Chelter I.L.R. 35 Mad., I;I.L.R. Rang. 457 and I.L.R. referred to.
On the second point, it is settled law that an appellate Court will not interfere with such an order passed by the trial Court in exercise of its discretion without exceeding the limits, of its power, unless it acted perversely or unless the view taken by it is clearly wrong.
The amendment sought for became necessary as on the true and full dis closure of the terms of Pension Rules, the Appellant was found to be entitled to damages in lieu of pension.
The principle of res judicata did not apply as the earlier order of the Single Judge allowing the first amendment application partly on 19 1 1970 did not deal with the claim for mortised damage now sought to be added.
For the Respondent: There is no need to go into the larger question because judged by the tests laid down by all the High Courts including the Nagpur High Court, the decision of the trial Court in the instant case allowing the amendment, is a judgment within the meaning of Cl. 15 of the Letters Patent.
By reason of the amendment of the plaint, the claim made in the amended plaint dates back to the date of the plaint.
The application for amendment was filed in April, 1970 and by that time, the claim for pension was clearly barred by limitation.
By allowing amendment, the valuable right which had accrued to the defendant to resist the claim for pension, has been lost the defendants cannot therefore, once the amendment is allowed raise the plea of limitation.
There is a clear negation of valuable right of 552 the defendant which is undoubtedly a determination of right or liability as between the two parties.
There is difference between the amendment which does not take away the right of the defendant to plead limitation and an amendment which affects the rights of the defendants to raise the plea of limitation 1946 Calcutta 630; 1946 Bom. 361; AIR 1972 Bombay 27 ; 1967 (2) M.L.J. (FB) referred to.
35 Madras at p. 9 lays down the law that the fact that the order is one allowing the amendment, is not decisive and that if in any proceeding, the defendants could have succeeded by the Court passing an order as prayed for, that itself is sufficient to make a decision a judgment and the fact that the defendant 's contention was negatived i.e. an order prayed by him was not passed; does not make the decision any the less a judgment under Cl.
15. 29 Bombay 249, 253 in ; , 1168.
70 Ca.
W.N. 670; , referred to.
By allowing the amendment, the right is conferred upon the plaintiff and it carries with it the fastening of liabilities upon the defendants.
The decision on a vital points adverse to the defendant which goes to the root of the matter and which becomes final and conclusive, so far as the court passing of the order is concerned, would amount to a Judgment because the order is to the effect that the plaintiff is entitled to make the claim negativing the right of the defendants which has accrued to him by lapse of time.
