By a registered deed, a donor gifted to the appellant shares in various limited companies.
Before her death the donor had signed several blank transfer forms to enable the done to obtain transfer of the shares in the register of companies and share certificates in his name.
She had signed at the correct places showing that she meant to sign transfer of shares but the transfer could not be effected before the donor 's death.
The respondent claiming the shares filed an administration suit.
A single Judge of the High Court held that the appellant was entitled to shares covered by the gift deed to which blank transfer forms could be related.
A division bench of the High Court reversed the decision of the Single Judge on the ground that the gift was incomplete for failure to comply with the formalities prescribed by the Indian Companies Act, 1913 for transfer of shares.
It further held that there was no equity in favour of the appellant so that he may claim the right to complete what was left incomplete by the donor in her life time.
On appeal it was contended in this Court (1) that since the donor had signed the blank transfer forms and handed them over to the done, the gift deed and the signed blank forms had to be read together and (2) that the transfer was complete with the registration of the gift deed and even delivery of share certificates to the done was not necessary in view of section 122 of the .
Allowing the appeal, HELD:(1) The respondent has not made out a case for defeating the clearly expressed intentions of the donor, coupled with the authority with which the donor was armed by reason of the signed blank transfer forms.
On a correct interpretation of the gift deed and other material the right to obtain a transfer of shares was clearly and completely obtained by the donee appellant.
There was no question of competing.equities because the donee appellant was shown to have obtained a complete legal right to obtain shares under the gift deed and an implied authority to take steps to get his name registered.
[549B D] The fact that the relevant provisions of the and the Companies Act must be interpreted harmoniously does not mean that a provision of one Act could be nullified by any provision of the other Act.
It means that the provision of the two Acts should be read consistently with each other so far as it is reasonably possible to do so.
This end can be best achieved by examining the objects and the subject matter of each enactment and by viewing each relevant provision as a limb of an integrated whole meant to serve the underlying purposes.
In this way their separable spheres of operation will be clarified so as to avoid possibilities of conflict between them or any unnecessary overflow of what really appertains to one field into another.
[539H 540B] (2) The is an enactment meant for defining certain basic types of transfers and lays down the requirement both of substance and of form for their legal recognition and effectiveness.
Section 5 of the Act gives a wide connotation to "transfer of property".
Section 6 of the Act lays down that "property of any kind may be transferred" subject to certain exceptions.
Shares in a company are certainly a form of property.
Section 28 of the Companies says that they "shall be movable property, transferable in the manner provided by articles of the Company".
A wide definition of "property" in section 6 of the includes not merely shares as transferable, movable property.
but would cover as a separate form of property a right to obtain shares which may be antecedent to the accrual of rights of a shareholder upon the grant of a share certificate in accordance with the articles of association of a company.
[540B E] There is a distinction between "the title to get on the register" and "the full property in the shares in a company".
The first is acquired by mere delivery, with the required intention of the share certificate and a blank form signed by the transfer.
The second is only obtained when the transferee, in exercise of his right to become a shareholder, gets his name on the register in place of the transferor.
This antecedent right in the person to whom the share certificate is given with a signed blank transfer form under a transaction meant to confer right or title upon him to become a shareholder is enforceable so long as no obstacle to it is shown to exist in any of the articles of association of a company or a person with a superior right or title, legal or equitable, does not appear to be there.
Section 6 of the T.P. Act justifies such a splitting up of rights constituting property in shares just as it is well recognised that rights of ownership of property may be split up into a right to the "Corpus" and another to the "usufruct" of the property and then separately dealt with.
[541C E] M.P. Barucha & Anr.
V. V. Sarabhai & Co. & Ors.
53 Indian Appeals P. 92 @ 97 98, relied on.
Section 122 of the defines a "gift".
Section 123 of the T. P. Act prescribes the mode of transfer by gift.
No special mode of delivery is specified in the section.
On the other hand it is indicated that the delivery "may be made in such a way as the goods sold are delivered".
[541E G] In the instant case the registered document was signed both by the donor and donee and is attested by witnesses.
The donor specified and gave particulars of the shares meant to be gifted.
The donor delivered the registered gift deed together with the share certificates to the donee.
On these facts the donation of the right to get share certificates made out in the name of the donee became irrevocable by registration as well as by delivery.
The actual transfers in the registers of the companies concerned were to constitute mere enforcement of this right.
They were necessary to enable the donee to exercise the rights of the shareholder.
The mere fact that such transfers had to be recorded in accordance with the Company Law did not detract from the completeness of what was donated.
[541G 542B] The broadly indicated requirements of regulation 18 of Table A of 1st Schedule to the Companies Act, 1913 were also complied with by the contents of the gift deed.
It is immaterial that the gift deed deals with a number of items so long as the requirements of Regulation 18 are fulfilled.
The observance of a form whether found in the or in the Companies Act is meant to serve the needs of the substance of the transaction which were undoubtedly shown to have been completely fulfilled here.
There is nothing in Regulation 18 to indicate that without strict compliance with some rigidly prescribed form, the transaction must fail to achieve its purpose.
The subservience of substance of a transaction to some rigidly prescribed form required to be meticulously observed, savors of archaic and outmoded jurisprudence.
[543G 544A] Re Nose, Midland Bank Executer & Trustee Co. Ltd. vs Rose.
, Re Rose, Rose vs Inland Renvenue Commissioners, , M/s.
Howrah Trading Co. Ltd. vs The Commissioner of Income tax, Calcutta, [1959] Supp.
(2) SCR 448 @ 453 referred to.
