The petitioner was detained under the Maintenance of Internal Security Act on the ground that on a particular day he along with his associates broke open a railway wagon loaded with foodgrains.
The petitioner in Writ Petition filed in this Court under article 32 contended that he was detained on the basis of a single isolated incident and that no reasonable person could possibly come to the conclusion that it is necessary to detain the petitioner in order to prevent him from acting prejudicially to the Maintenance of Supplies and Services essential to the community.
It was contended by the respondent that the sufficiency of grounds of detention is not a justiciable issue and all that the courts can consider is whether the grounds of detention are germane to the grounds on which the detention has been ordered.
If wagon breaking for the purpose of committing theft of foodstuffs bears nexus with the maintenance of supplies and services essential to the community, the detention must be upheld at all events and the courts have no jurisdiction to enter into the question whether any other conclusion was possible on the basis of facts placed before the detaining authority.
Setting aside the detention, HELD : Following the decision of this Court in Debu Mahato vs State of West Bengal, , it is true that the courts cannot sit in appeal over the propriety of a detention order.
But there is a distinction between the Court 's jurisdiction in regard to the sufficiency of grounds necessitating the detention and its jurisdiction to examine whether a reasonable person could at all reach the conclusion that unless a person was detained he would in all probability indulge in a similar course of conduct.
So long as the grounds of detention are germane to the purpose of detention courts do not weigh the evidentiary value of the data placed before the detaining authority.
In the present case, no reasonable person can come to the conclusion on the basis of a solitary act of wagon breaking that it is necessary to detain the petitioner.
Considering the nature of the act attributed to the petitioner and its context and not merely the fact that the ground of detention refers to a single incident the satisfaction reached by the District Magistrate that the petitioner, unless detained, was likely to commit similar acts in the future, is such as no reasonable person could possibly reach.
The conclusion that the past conduct of the detenu raises apprehension regarding his future behaviour must at least be rational.
[452A BD]
