The separate income and means of the wife can be taken into account in determining the amount of maintenance payable to her under section 488, Criminal Procedure Code, 1898.
[490 D] (1)(a) The section does not confer an absolute right on a neglected wife to get an order of maintenance against the husband nor does it impose an absolute liability on the husband to support her in all circumstances.
The use of the word ,may ' in section 488(1) indicates that the power conferred on the Magistrate is discretionary, though the discretion must be exercised in a judicial manner consistently with the language of the statute and with due regard to other relevant circumstances of the case.
[486 B I] (b)The object of Ss. 488 to 490 being to prevent vagrancy and destitution, the Magistrate has to find out what is required by the wife to maintain a standard of living which is neither luxurious nor penurious, but is consistent with the status of the family.
Such needs and requirements of the wife can be fairly determined only if her separate income, also, is taken into account together with the earnings of the husband and Ms commitments.
[488 D E] (c)The mere fact that the language of section 488(1) does not expressly make the inability of a wife to maintain herself a condition precedent to the maintainability does not imply that while determining her claim and fixing the amount of maintenance, the Magistrate is debarred from taking into consideration the wife 's own separate income or means of support.
There is a clear distinction between a wife 's locus standi to file a petition under the section and her being (entitled to a particular amount of maintenance.
Even in the case of a neglected child the proof of the preliminary condition, namely, the inability to maintain itself, will only establish the child 's competence to file the petition; but its entitlement to maintenance and the fixation of the amount would depend upon the discretion of the Magistrate.
[485 B D] (d)There is nothing in the sections to show that in determining the maintenance the Magistrate should take into account only the means of the husband and not the means of the wife.
On the contrary, section 489(1) provides that 'on proof of a change in the circumstances of any person receiving under section 488 a monthly allowance, the Magistrate may make such alteration in the allowance as he thinks fit; ' and 'circumstances ' must include financial circumstances.
[488 E G] P.
T. Ramankutty Achan vs Kalyanikutty, A.I.R. 1971 Kerala 22, approved.
Major Joginder Singh.
vs Bivi Raj Mohinder Kaur, A.I.R. 1960, Punjab 249, and Nanak Chand Banarsi Das and Ors.
vs Chander Kishore and Ors.
A.I.R. 1969 Delhi 235.
overruled.
(2)Section 488, Cr.P.C., provides a summary remedy and is applicable to all persons belonging to all religions and has no relationship with the personal law of the parties It provides a machinery for the summary enforcement of the moral obligation of a man towards his wife and children.
But section 23 and other provisions of the , relating to fixation of the rate of allowance, provide for the enforcement of the rights of Hindu wives and dependents under their personal law.
There is no inconsistency between the 1956 Act 16 M 255 Sup CI/75 484 and section 488, Cr.
P.C. Both could stand together, and hence, there is no question of section 488 being partially repealed or modified by section 23 of the 1956 Act.
[490 A B] Manak Chand vs Shri Chandra Kishore Agarwal and Ors.
, ; , followed.
