On 14th April, 1973, the petitioner was alleged to have committed theft of aluminium wire and a criminal case was filed but it was ultimately dropped and the petitioner was discharged, because, the witnesses were not willing to give evidence for fear of danger to their life.
On 10th September, 1973, the District Magistrate passed an order under section 3(2)(i) of the , detaining the petitioner with a view to prevent ing him from acting in a manner prejudicial to the maintenance of supplies and services essential to the community, on his subjective satisfaction, based upon the solitary incident of the theft of aluminum wire.
The petitioner was actually detained on 23rd November, 1973.
Allowing the petition challenging the order of detention, HELD : The condition precedent for the making of the order of detention, namely the existence of a. real and genuine subjective.
satisfaction of the District Magistrate was not satisfied in the case.
and consequently, the order of detention must be quashed and set aside.
[596D E] (a) It must be assumed that the petitioner was discharged on or about 10th September, 1973, because, the District Magistrate must have made the order of detention in anticipation of the order of discharge.
If that was so, though the petitioner was available for detention, there was a delay of about two and half months in detaining the petitioner pursuant to the order of detention.
This delay, unless satisfactorily explained, would throw considerable doubt on the genuineness of the subjective satisfaction of the District Magistrate recited in the order of detention.
If the District Magistrate was really and genuinely satisfied he would have acted with greater promptitude.
But he has not offered any explanation as to why the petitioner was not detained until 23rd November, 1973, more than two months after he made the order of detention.
[595D H] (b) It is the obligation of the State or the detaining authority in making its return to the rule nisi, in cases of habeas corpus, to place all the relevant facts before the court and if there is any delay in arresting the detenu pursuant to the order of detention, which is prima facie unreasonable, the State must explain the delay.
The State cannot contend that the petitioner has not raised the contention in his petition.
[596B C] Sk.
Serajul vs State of West Bengal W.P. 2000 of 1973, decided on September 9, 1974, followed.
