Three brothers by the name of Sia Ram, Shri Ram and Ram Chandra, a woman by the name of Violet, and her son Ramesh were tried by the learned Sessions Judge Farrukhabad, in connection with the murder of one Kunwar Singh.
The learned Judge convicted Sia Ram under section 302, Penal Code and sentenced him to death.
Violet was convicted under section 302 read with section 109 and was sentenced to imprisonment for life.
The remaining three accused were acquitted by the Sessions Court.
Sia Ram and Violet challenged their conviction by filing an appeal in the High Court while the State of U.P. filed an appeal against the acquittal of Shri Ram, Ram Chandra and Ramesh.
The High Court confirmed the conviction and sentence of Sia Ram and Violet.
It dismissed the appeal filed by the State Government except in regard to Shri Ram whom it convicted under section 302 read with section 109.
He was sentenced to imprisonment for life.
Shri Ram, Sia Ram and Violet have filed these appeals by special leave.
Allowing the appeals by Shri Ram and Violet and rejecting that of Sia Ram.
HELD : (i) The only part attributed to Violet is that on seeing the deceased Kunwar Singh, a practising lawyer, who was coming by cycle along with his two brother lawyers, Brijendra Singh Yadav and Om Prakash Dubey, she shouted "The Vakil has come.
" The Sessions Court and the High Court have accepted the evidence that she did give the particular shout.
In accordance with the practice of this Court, no different view ought to be taken of these simple facts.
[625A C] (ii) In order to constitute abetment, the abettor must be shown to have "intentionally" aided the commission of the crime.
Mere proof that the crime charged could not have been committed without the interposition of the alleged abettor is not enough compliance with the requirements of section 107.
intentional aid and therefore active complicity is the gist of the offence of abetment under the third paragraph of sec.
[625E F] (iii) Apart from the words attributed to Violet.
there is nothing at all to show that she was aware of the nefarious design of Sia Ram and his associates.
Violet who was working as a nurse with a doctor was friendly with Sia Ram who was his compounder but that may explain why, if at all, she agreed to do as directed.
it is true that the assailants were carrying guns and hockey sticks.
But on that account no fair inference can be drawn that she knew that they had all gathered to commit the murder of Kunwar Singh.
The Court cannot heap one assumption on another to give to Violet 's conduct a meaning which it does not naturally 623 bear.
The Words of Violet are at best in the nature of a circumstance and they do not, without more, necessarily justify the inference that she was a party to the murderous design.
[625G H] (iv) The High Court found fault with Violet for not having offered any explanation during the trial as to why she uttered the particular words.
This approach is impermissible.
The burden was on the prosecution to establish its case and no adverse inference could be raised against Violet for her failure to explain her utterance.
Besides, an accused cannot while being examined under section 342 of the Code of Criminal Procedure be subjected to cross examination and a bald assertion to explain a piece of conduct almost always fails to convince.
Therefore, it is not possible to agree with the High Court that Violet would not have announced the arrival of Kunwar Singh "unless she was aware that the accused persons were lying in wait on the other side of the road and it was necessary to inform them so that they might accomplish their aim." [626D F] , (v) Shri Ram, along with Ram Chandra, had moved an application ',before the Additional District Magistrate (Judicial) who was conducting the committal proceedings that he was not known to the witnesses and therefore he should be put up for being identified in 'an identification parade.
The Public Prosecutor objected to that request.
The learned Magistrate upheld the objection and refused to direct that a parade be held.
The circumstance that Shri Ram had voluntarily accepted the risk of being identified in a parade but was denied that opportunity was an important point in his favour.
The High Court rejected it as inconsequential by observing that the oral testimony of witnesses, even if not tested by holding an identification parade, can be made the basis of conviction if the request made by the accused is groundless and the witnesses knew the accused prior to the occurrence.
It is correct to say that no rule of law requires that the oral testimony of a witness should be corroborated by evidence of identification.
In fact, evidence of identification is itself a weak type of evidence.
But the point of the matter is that the court which acquitted Shri Ram was justifiably influenced by the consideration that though at the earliest stage he had asked that an identification parade be held, the demand was opposed by the prosecution and the parade was therefore not held.
But that is not the only point in favour of Shri Ram.
Brijendra Singh who was riding on bicycle in the company of the deceased did not implicate Shri Ram.
It was the other lawyer, Om Prakash Dubey, who implicated him.
His evidence shows that it would be unsafe to rely on his capacity or ability to identify Shri Ram.
Sone Lal who gave the First Information Report at the police also implicated Shri Ram.
Sone Lal 's evidence is insufficient to sustain the conviction of Shri Ram.
In view of the serious infirmities from which the evidence of Dubey suffers, the High Court ought not to have interfered with the order of acquittal passed by the trial court in favour Shri Ram.
[626 627C; 628A B]
