The Gujarat Vacant Lands in Urban Area (Prohibition of Alienation) Act,, 1972 is enacted to prohibit the alienation of certain vacant lands in urban areas in the State of Gujarat.
Section 2 of the Act embodies a declaration that the Act is for giving effect to the policy of the State towards securing the principles specific in clauses (b) and (c) of article 39 of the Constitution.
Section 4 prohibits the alienation of vacant land after the appointed day.
It however exempts one plot of vacant land owned by a person not exceeding 1000 sq. metres and not forming part of a compact block.
The transfers in favour of the State Government, Central Government, local ' authority, Government company, statutory corporations and cooperative house building societies are also exempted.
The State Government has been empowered by general or special order to exempt any area or any alienation from all or any of the provisions of the Act.
This is subject to the rules made by the State Government.
Every order made by the State Government and the Collector exempting any area or alienation from, any of the provisions of the Act is required to be laid before the State Legislature.
The Learned Counsel for the petitioner conceded that in view of the proclamation of emergency fundamental right guaranteed under Article 19 is under suspension.
It was contended that the Act offended Article 14 and that the Act was not directly relatable to the object of Article 39 (b) and (c) and, therefore, Article 31C could, not protect it.
HELD : (i) It is not necessary to take recourse to Article 31C for upholding constitutional validity of the Act as, it does not infringe equal protection of law guaranteed under Article 14 of the Constitution.
Urban area means any area which is comprised in the city or a municipal Borough.
Surrounding area not exceeding 16 kms.
has to be fixed ' by a notification of the State Government.
By notifications limit of 16 kms. has been fixed in case of big cities like Ahmedabad, Baroda, etc.
but lesser limits of distance have been notified in case of small municipal boroughs.
When the limit of the distance outside the city or town area differed from place to, place it was not necessary to fix the limit of permissible area of transfer with reference to the value of the land.
It was neither feasible nor expedient to do so.
From the permissible limit of transfer the area forming part of the compact block had to be excluded as it would have led to monopolisation and monoeuvrings by persons belonging to the same family unit.[668F; 672 B] (ii) There is reasonable classification and there is a clear nexus between the object of the Act and the classification.
The Act has neither put unequals as equals nor has it discriminated between equals.
The object of the Act being to prevent alienation of vacant lands it rightly excludes the building lands from its operation.
Since the object of the Act is to ultimately distribute ownership and control of the material resources to subserve the common good transfer in favour of Government, Local Authorities, Government Companies and Statutory Corporations has been excluded.
Formation of Cooperative House Building Societies is obviously a step for fulfilment of the object of the Act.
The power of the State Government to exempt any area or any alienation from all or any of the provisions of the Act is a power which is to be exercised for the reasons to be recorded and in furtherance of the object of the Act.
The guideline is to be found in the object of the Act.
The order of exemption to be made by the Collector is only where the land is to be used for any educational, scientific, industrial or commercial purposes.
The exercise of the power by the Collector is further controlled by providing an appeal to the State Government.
The orders are to be placed before the State Legislature which will act as a supervisory of the orders of exemption made by the State Government or this Collector.
[672D H] 668
