The assessee who followed the mercantile system of accounting debited in its account books certain sums of money as remuneration of the managing agents for the assessment years 1957 58 to 1959 60.
For the purpose of income tax the company added back the sum to its taxable income and claimed the whole sum as a deductible expenditure in the assessment year 1959 60 on the ground that the sum became payable only during that year when the Government accorded its approval to the new managing agency agreement.
The income tax Officer rejected the claim holding that the approval of the Central Government was necessary only for actual payment and the assessee should have ascertained the liability for each year and claimed it since he followed the mercantile system of accounting.
This view was upheld by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and the Income tax Appellate Tribunal.
The High Court held that although at the time the debit entries were made in the account books of the assessee, approval of the Central Government had not been received, when it came later, it gave legal effect to the debit entries with retrospective effect from April 1. 1956 and that the refusal of deduction by the Income tax Officer was right.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, HELD : The High Court was in error in answering the question against the assessee.
Even an assessee following the mercantile system of accounting is not entitled to claim a deduction until liability for the sum for which deduction is claimed has accrued.
The High Court overlooked the plain terms of s.326 of the under which it could not be assumed that the Central Government would approve every proposed appointment or re appointment of managing agent.
[809A; D; 810A] In the instant case it is only when the Central Government conveyed its approval to the appointment of managing agents by its letter dated September 2, 1957 that the appointment became effective and the Company 's liability to pay the remuneration of the managing agents accrued.
The liability became effective from April 1, 1956 because the Central Government chose to give its approval retrospective operation.
The liability could not be said to had &risen from any date prior to September 2, 1957 when the approval was given.
Section 326 of the contains an absolute prohibition against the appointment or re appointment of a managing agent before the approval of Central Government was obtained.
[810B C]
