The petitioner was directed to be detained by an order of the Dist.
Magistrate under the .
with a view to preventing him from acting in a manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order.
The order was made on December 29, 1973.
and the fact of making the order was reported to the State Government on January 2, 1974.
He was arrested on Jan. 8. 1974.
The grounds of detention referred to only one incident, namely, that on the night of 25/26 6 73, the petitioner along with his associates being armed with fire arms, raided a house, looted cash and ornaments brutally assaulted some of the inmates and fired indiscriminately a. result of which the house owner and his neighbour sustained grievous injuries and subsequently died.
The petitioner challenged the detention order in a writ petition on the following grounds : (1) There was a time lag of 6 months between the date of the incident and the date of order and hence the Dist.
Magistrate could not have possibly arrived '.It his Subjective satisfaction on the basis of that incident, (2) the incident merely affected law and order and not public order, (3) the District Magistrate had taken into account other material in the history sheet which was not disclosed to the petitioner.
in arriving at his subjective satisfaction, (4) there was a delay of 20 days in arresting the petitioner pursuant to the order of detention, and (5) there was a delay of 5 days in reporting the fact of making the order of detention to the State Government.
Dismissing the writ, petition, HELD '.
(1) (a) There is no hard and fast rule that merely because there is a time lag of about 6 months between the 'offending acts ' and the date of the order of detention the causal link must be taken to be broken and the satisfaction claimed to have been arrived at by the Dist.
Magistrate must be regarded as sham or unreal.
Whether the acts of the detenu forming the basis of the subjective satisfaction are too remote in time must depend on the facts of each case.
The test of proximity is not a rigid or mechanical test to be blindly applied by merely counting the number of months between the two dates.
The test is evolved by the court for determining the main question whether the past activity of the detenu is such that from it a reason able prognosis can be made as to the future conduct of the detenu.
The prejudicial act of the detenu may be of such a character as to suggest that it is a part of an organised operation, and in such a case, the detaining authority may reasonably feel satisfied that the act which has come to light cannot be a solitary or isolated act but must be part of a course of conduct of similar activities and that therefore, it is necessary to detain him with a view to preventing him from indulging in such activities in the future.
[999 C G] In the present case, the act was a daring act of dacoity in a village by the petitioner 's gang, and judged in its correct setting, it could not be a stray isolated act but must be the work of a habituated and hardened criminal given to commit dacoities.
and therefore, the Dist.
Magistrate could reasonably arrive ,it a satisfaction that with a view to preventing him from carrying on such activities, it was necessary to detain him.
[999 G H] (b) Further, it was stated in the counter affidavit that a criminal case was filed in the Magistrates ' court in connection with the identical incident on June 26, 1973 and the petitioner was arrested but it was found that witnesses were unwilling to give evidence against him.
The Dist, Magistrate, 9 97 therefore.
passed the order of detention in anticipation of the petitioner being released as a result of dropping the criminal case against him.
The petitioner was discharged between January 3, 1974 and Jan. 18, 1974, and on the latter date he was once again arrested pursuant to the order of detention.
[1000 A D] Golam Hussain vs The Commissioner of Police, Calcutta & Ors. ; and Lakshman Khatik vs State of West Bengal.
[1974] 4 S.C.C. I referred to.
(2)The act alleged against the petitioner was calculated to disturb the current of life of the community in the village.
It was a serious act of dacoity perpetrated at dead of night.
It created panic in the locality and seriously disturbed the even tempo of life of the community in the village.
It was clearly disturbance of public order and the act of the petitioner had nexus with the object of maintenance of public order.
[1001 E G] Arun Ghosh vs State of Bengal followed.
(3) There was no factual basis for the contention that the Dist.
Magistrate had taken into account any other material not disclosed to the petitioner.
[1002 A B] (4) (a) The delay of 20 days between the date of the order of detention and the date of arrest cannot be regarded as unreasonable.
[1002 C D] (b) The petitioner was in jail on Dec. 29, 1973 when the order of detention was made and was once again arrested only after he was released on some date between January 3, 1974 and Jan. 18, 1974.
and hence the delay was explained.
[1002 D E] (5) Section 3(3) of the Act requires that the fact of the making of the order of detention must be reported forthwith to the State Government.
An act which is to be done forthwith must be held to have been so done when it is done with all reasonable despatch and without avoidable delay.
It is a very important requirement intended to secure that the State Government shall have sufficient time for consideration before it decides and the decision has to be made within 12 days of the making of the order of detention whether or not to approve the order and the Court.
would, therefore.
insist on strict compliance with it and not condone avoidable delay even if it be trivial.
When them is an interval of time between the date of order and the date of report what has to be considered is whether the delay in sending the report could have been avoided, or to put it differently, whether, in the present case.
in spite of all diligence, the Dist.
Magistrate was not in a position to send the report until Jan. 2, 1974.
[1003 A C] In the present case.
the facts stated by the Dist.
Magistrate in his affidavit show that be acted with prompt despatch and was not guilty of any avoidable delay.
On Dec. 29, 1973 he had passed 9 orders of detention and the typing of the material in connection with the 9 cases took time.
Dec. 30 was a Sunday and he could not send the reports on Dec. 31 as he was very busy in connection with food procurement work.
Jan. 1, 1974 was a public holiday, and hence, he could send the report only on Jan. 2.
[1003 C E]
