In the election from 168 Katoria Bihar Legislative Assembly constituency, the Respondent No. 1 was declared elected having secured 16649 votes as against 16074 polled by the appellant.
The votes rejected as invalid were 1219.
The appellant filed an election petition challenging the election of the returned candidate on the ground that several irregularities and illegalities were committed in the counting of votes.
The petition was resisted by the returned candidate.
The High Court framed issues, recorded the evidence produced by the parties and held that the allegations had not been substantiated.
It declined the request for a recount and dismissed the petition.
Hence this appeal by the petitioner.
It was contended for the appellant : (i) Four unauthorised persons were allowed to work as Counting Supervisors at tables 4, 5, 7 and 9 in breach of the rules and this had vitiated the counting, (ii) When the fact, that, 50 unsigned ballot papers relating to polling station No. 74 were in excess of those actually polled, was brought to the notice of the Assistant Returning Officer, he, in violation of Rule 93(i) of the Conduct of Election Rules and to cover up the irregularity, opened that packet and inspected those unused ballot papers; (iii) The detailed result sheet prepared tablewise in accordance with the instructions of the Election Commission has been deliberately suppressed to prevent detection of mistakes and manipulations made in the counting, and (iv) Despite protest, 600 votes were counted twice in favour of Respondent No. 1.
Rejecting the contentions and dismissing the appeal, HELD : The court would be justified in ordering a recount of the ballot papers, only where : (1) the election petition contains an adequate statements of all the material facts on which the allegations of irregularity or illegality in counting are founded.
(2)On the basis of evidence adduced such allegations are prima facie established, affording a good ground for believing that there has been a mistake in counting and; (3) the Court trying the petition is prima facie satisfied that the making of such an order is imperatively necessary to decide the dispute and to do complete and effectual justice between the parties.
[23H; 24A B] (i) There is not even an oblique hint in the election petition that any unauthorised person was allowed to act as Counting Super visor or Counting Assistant.
It was made at the stage of final arguments in the application seeding a recount.
Questioning the Returning Officer and the Assistant Returning officer in this regard during cross examination, could hardly constitute an adequate notice to the Respondent of this new plea.
That apart, neither the petitioner nor his chief Counting Agent alleged anything of this kind.
All the four persons are Govt.
Officials.
The fact that their names do not appear in exhibit 6 does not exclude the probability of their having been appointed and kept in reserve by a separate order or orders to act as counting Supervisors in case of need.
That such appointments were made and a waiting list was prepared is disclosed in the evidence of the Returning Officer, and it receives further support from the Evidence of R.W. 18 22 and R.W. 19.
The circumstances of this case fully attract the maxim omnia praesumuntur rite esse acta, and it would be presumed that the aforesaid four persons were rightly and regularly appointed and admitted into the Counting Hall to act as Counting Supervisors, by the Returning Officer.
On this score no violation of Rule 53 or any other statutory provision has been established.
[24F H; 24A E] (ii) The act of the Returning Officer in opening the packet, and inspecting and counting the unused ballot papers found the rein, far from amounting to an illegality, was necessary for the due performance of the duty enjoined on him by the Rules.
The language of Rule 93 is clear enough to indicate that the custody of the District Election Officer or the Returning Officer spoken of in the Rule is a postelection custody.
Indeed, in the present case, an objection was raised that fifty unused ballot papers in the packet did not bear the mark or signature required by Rule 38(1).
The Returning Officer was therefore, fully competent to open the packet and inspect and count the ballot papers found therein.
[28F; C] (iii) The absence of a detailed result sheet showing tablewise figures of each round of counting does not make the verification of the figures collated in the final result sheet drawn up in Form 20, impossible or even difficult as such figures can always be checked with the aid of Check Memos which contain tablewise figures of each round.
[29G H] (iv) In the application for a recount submitted to the Returning Officer, the appellant alleged that 600 votes constituting one bundle, have been "recounted again".
But it was not alleged therein, even in an embryonic form, that 600 uncounted votes in bundles were detected lying underneath the table of the Assistant Returning Officer.
Such an allegation appeared for the first time in the election petition filed 33 days later.
The original allegation was untenable because such an excess was not reflected in the grand total of the result sheet.
The total was correct.
The result sheet falsified the subsequent contention also which had been put forward as an afterthought.
[30F H]
