Section 7 of the Bonus Act provides as to how the direct tax payable by an employer is to be calculated for the purpose of computing the available surplus.
Clause (e) of section 7 enacts that no account shall be taken of any 'rebate ' or 'relief ' or deduction in the payment of any direct tax allowed under any law for the time being in force relating to direct taxes or under the relevant annual Finance Act for the development of any industry.
in the case of an industrial company, which is not a company in which public ,arc substantially interested, the Finance Act.
1966 fixed the rate of income tax at 55% on so much of the total income as did not exceed Rs. ten lakhs, on the balance, if any, of the total income 60% and 65% in the case of any other ,company.
In a dispute between its employees and the appellant, which is an industrial company the latter contended that for the purpose of computing the available surplus it was entitled to deduct direct tax at 65% and not 55% which was only a confessional levy amounting to a 'relief ' for the purpose of development.
The Tribunal accepted the contention of the appellant.
The High Court allowed the respondent 's writ petition under article 227 of the Constitution holding that the company being an industrial company could not claim deduction at a rate higher than 55% in calculating the available surplus.
On appeal it was contended that the 10% concession in the rate was given to industrial companies with a view to promote development of industry and as such must be deemed to be a 'relief ' or 'rebate ' in be payment of direct tax contemplated by section 7(e) of the Bonus Act.
Reliance for this had been placed on the speech of the Finance Minister on the budget for the year 1966 67.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD : (1) The company being an industrial company with total income not exceeding rupees ten lakhs the rate of tax under paragraph 1(A)(2)(i) of the Finance Act.
1966 applicable to it was 55% and not 65% of the total income.
[544H 545A] (2) The 'rebate or relief ' in the payment of any direct tax, in order to fall within the purview of section 7(e) of Bonus Act.
must be a rebate or relief "allowed under any law for the time being in force relating.
to direct taxes or under the relevant Finance Act.
for the development of any industry" which is one of the conditions to be satisfied.
In the present case it did not satisfy this condition.
The Finance Act, 1966 did not say that this difference of 10% in the rate of tax applicable to an industrial company and any other company is to be deemed to be a rebate or relief for the development of industry.
No, has it been shown that this difference in the rates is allowed as a rebate or relief under any other extant law relating to direct taxes.
[545F H] 3 (a) It was not permissible to use the speech of the Finance Minister to construe the clear language of the statute.
[545C D] (b) As a general principle of interpretation, where the words of a statute are ,plain, precise and unambiguous the intention of the Legislature has to be gathered from the language of the statute itself and no external evidence such as Parliamentary debate , Reports of the Committees of the Legislature or even the statement made by the Minister on the introduction of a measure or by the framers of the Act is admissible to construe those words.
It is only where a statute is not exhaustive or where its language is ambiguous, uncertain, clouded or susceptible of more 543 than one meaning or shades of meaning that external evidence as to the evils.
if any.
which the statute was intended to remedy.
or of the circumstances which led to the passing of the statute may be looked into for the purpose of ascertain ing the object which the Legislature had in view in using the words in question.
[545D F]
