The respondent, in his election petition before the High Court, allegedd a number of corrupt practices hit by section 123(4), (5) and (6) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 against the appellant, who was the duly elected candidate to the State Assembly.
The High Court allowed the petition and set aside the election.
On appeal to this Court it was contended that the High Court overlooked the well established principle that the charge of corrupt practice must be treated as quasi criminal in character which has to be proved beyond reasonable doubt.
Allowing the appeal and remitting the case to the High Court, HELD : (1)(a) The judgment of the High Court rests largely on appreciation of oral evidence.
It could not, therefore, be easily disturbed by this Court even in first appeal on facts in election cases.
[587B] (b) But if the High Court overlooks serious infirmities in the evidence adduced to support the case accepted by it or misreads evidence or ignores the principle that a charge of corrupt.
practice, in the course of an election, is a grave one which, if established, casts a serious reflection and imposes a disability upon the candidate held guilty of it, so that.
the Court must be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt about its veracity, this Court will not hesitate to interfere.
[587C] In the instant case, the High Court did nothing more than to rather mechanically accept the oral and documentary evidence given to support the charge of corrupt practice.
There was no consideration or discussion of a number of infirmities both in the oral and documentary evidence to support the charge.
Ibis is so because the High Court has held the view that a mere consideration of probabilities, without applying a strict standard of proof beyond reasonable doubt to a charge of corrupt practice was enough.
There is no indication , anywhere in the judgment that the stricter standard of proof, which is applicable to such charges, was kept in view by the High Court.
[588G H] Rahim Khan vs Khurshid Ahmed & Ors. ; @ 666. followed.
2(a) It is difficult to accept the contention of the appellant that oral.testimony could not be accepted in an allegation of corrupt practice unless it is corroborated by other kinds of evidence in material particulars.
There is no such general inflexible rule of law or practice which could justify a wholesale condemnation or rejection of a species of evidence which is legally admissible and can be acted upon under the provisions of the Evidence Act in every type of case if it is, after proper scrutiny, found to be reliable or worthy of acceptance.
There is no presumption that a witness deposing on oath in the witness box, is untruthful unless he is shown to be speaking the truth.
The ordinary presumption is that a witness deposing solemnly on oath before a judicial tribunal is a witness of truth unless the contrary is shown.
The evidence in an election petition cannot be equated with that of an accomplice in a criminal case whose testimony has, according to a rule of practice, though not of law, to be corroborated in material particulars before it is relied upon.
[589D E & F] 585 (b) It is not required by our law of evidence that a witness must be proved to be a perjurer before his evidence is discarded.
It may be enough if his evidence appears to be quite improbable or to spring from such tainted or biased or dubious a source as to be unsafe to be acted upon without corroboration from evidence other than that of the witness himself [589F] (c) There are no golden rules for appraising human testimony.
The extraction of what should constitute the credible foundation of judicially sound judgment is an art which nothing except sound common sense and prudence combined with experience can tear h.
[589G] (d) In judging the evidence of a grave charge, prudence dictates that belief in its correctness should form the basis of a judicial verdict of guilt only if that belief reaches a conviction beyond reasonable doubt.
[590B] (e) In deciding whether the stricter standard of proof is satisfied in a case of alleged corrupt practice, resting upon oral evidence only, the Courts should be particularly astute and not omit to examine fairly the effect of every existing substantial ground which could introduce a reasonable doubt in a case.
[590c] In the instant case the appellants contention that the motor drivers would be prepared to commit perjury at the instance of the respondent who was the defeated Minister and that because the respondent had been welcomed and garlanded by the President of the Motor Truck Drivers ' Union, the evidence of motor drivers was easily available to him cannot be accepted either as a general rule in election cases, or.
on the facts of this particular case.
It is not reasonable to carry a suspicion to the extent of attributing to every witness appearing in support of the respondent,,, case a tendency or desire to commit perjury.
The law does not discriminate against or frown upon a former Minister or view every witness produced by him with suspicion because he had been a Minister.
On the other hand, it is reasonable to believe that a person who has occupied the responsible position of a Minister would be less inclined to suborn witnesses or conspire to produce perjured evidence.
[590E G] Rahim Khan vs Khurshid Ahmed & Ors. ; (a) 666, followed.
(f) Where the examination in chief and cross examination of a witness are most unsatisfactory the Trbunal is not powerless in the performance of its duty to ascertain the truth.
There is not only section 165 of the Evidence Act which enables the Court to put any question it likes to a witness.
but there are also provisions of O.XVI, r. 14 CPC.
The High Court adopted a standard of proof which is not strict enough in appraising the worth of evidence produced to support a charge of corrupt practice.
[592G H]
