The respondents were tried for having committed offences under section 4(3), 20(3) and 22 of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947 read with section 120 B of the Indian Penal Code and section 23 of ' the Act.
The Court discharged the respondents in view of the decision of the High Court of Calcutta in M/s Serajuiddin & Co. and Ors.
vs Union of India and Ors.
Civil Rules Nos.
2183 (W) of 1966 and cases Nos.
1998 and 1999 of 1963 decided on 16 9 1971, holding that section 23(AI) was violative of article 14 of the Constitution.
The appellant filed a revision petition against the order, before the High Court.
The High Court concurred with the decision of the trial Court and dismissed the revision.
This appeal, by special leave, is against that order dismissing the revision, It was contended for the respondents that section 23 provides for two different procedures for dealing with contravention of the provisions of the Act.
That is to say, persons who have contravened the provisions specified in section 23(1)(a) and are found guilty by the Director of Enforcement need not face prosecution in a criminal court if the Director is of opinion that the penalty he is empowered to impose would be adequate punishment, whereas, the persons alleged to contravene the other provisions of the Act have necessarily to face prosecution in criminal court without being given the benefit of an inquiry by the Director of Enforcement and the opportunity to the delinquents to convince him that imposition of penalty by him would be adequate punishment even if they are found guilty.
The classification made in section 23(1) is under inclusive and is, therefore, unreasonable.
Allowing the appeal, HELD : (i) When the purpose of a challenged classification is in doubt, the courts attribute to the classification the purpose thought to be most probable.
Instead of asking what purpose or purposes the statute and other materials reflect, the court may ask what constitutionally permissible objective this statute and other relevant materials could plausibly be construed to reflect.
The latter approach is the proper one in economic regulation cases.
The decisions dealing with economic regulation indicate that courts have used the concept of 'purpose ' and 'similar situations ' in a manner which give considerable leeway to the legislature.
This approach of judicial restraint and presumption of constitutionality requires that the legislature is given the benefit of doubt about its purpose.
[805H 806C] (ii) Often times the courts hold that tinder inclusion does not deny the equal protection of laws under Article 14.
In strict theory, this involves an 803 abandonment of the principle that classification must include all who are similarly situated with respect to the purpose.
This under inclusion is often explained by saying that the legislature, is free to remedy parts of a mischief or to recognize degrees of evil and strike at the harm where it thinks it most :acute.
There are two main considerations to justify an under inclusive classification.
First, administrative necessity.
Second, the legislature might not be fully convinced that the particular policy which it adopts will be fully successful or wise.
Thus to demand application of the policy to all whom it might logically encompass would restrict the opportunity of a state to make experiment.
These techniques would show that some sacrifice of absolute equality may be required in order that the legal system may preserve the flexibility to evolve new solutions to social and economic problems.
[806E; H.807B] Missouri &. and T. Rly.
vs May, ; at p. 269 and Gujarat vs Ambica, Mills ; referred to.
(iii) The experience of the Government was that persons contravening the provisions of the Act specified in section 23(1)(a) invariably escaped without punishment.
: firstly because, successful prosecution of these offences in many cases was not possible for want of legal evidence; secondly because, the criminal courts were not equipped with the training, expertize and experience necessary to deal with the intricate and ingenious methods adopted by the persons contravening them.
The Government, therefore, thought that imposition of penalty by departmental adjudication would prove a more effective means of ,checking these types of foreign exchange offences as against the previous system of ' prosecution of all offences on the basis of the strict standard of proof required for criminal prosecution which proof was, by and large, so much within the special knowledge of the offender and so much out of the reach .of the department.
[808D F] The basis of classification was that in cases where there was likelihood of getting sufficiently unimpeachable evidence as, for instance.
in cases involving contravention of sections 14, 13(2), 15, 18 etc., where the Reserve Bank of India as a specialized agency comes into the picture and be in possession of relevant materials, those cases were left to be dealt with under section 23(IA) by criminal courts.
The classification made in section 23(IA) is, therefore, not dis criminatory.
[808H; 809E]
