Respondents Nos. 1 and 2 were mother and daughter.
The deceased was the brother in law of respondent No. 1.
For some days before the date of the Occurrence, the relations between the two families were none too cordial.
On the clay of the occurrence there was a scuffle between the respondents and the deceased.
A little later, when the deceased was sitting in the house of his father in law in the opposite row of houses, respondent No. 1 was alleged to have gone to the deceased with a stick to beat him.
Some neighbours intervened and tried to pacify both the parties.
When the deceased was going out, respondent No. 1 put her leg across the legs of the deceased, as a result of which he fell down on his back.
Respondent No. 2 immediately caught hold of both the hands of the deceased and respondent No. 1 is stated to have squeezed his testicles and pulled them.
Eventually the deceased succumbed to the injury.
After the incident respondent No. 1 lodged a complaint before the police stating that the deceased, his wife and his mother in law caught hold of her and gave her blows and kicks with a stick as a result of Which she fell down.
Holding that the prosecution case was proved beyond reasonable doubt, the Sessions Judge convicted respondent No. 1 under section 304, Part I I.P.C. Respondent No. 2 was convicted under section 323 read with section 144, I.P.C. On appeal, the High Court, even after believing the main part of the occurrence, acquitted respondent No. 1 of the charges levelled against her and consequently respondent No. 2 also on the ground that she must have done so in exercise of her right of private defence inasmuch as she must have squeezed the testicles of the deceased when be was showering blows with a stick on her in order to protect herself.
Allowing the appeal of the State.
HELD : (1) The trial Court was right in believing the evidence of the proSecution witnesses in regard to both the incidents and the occurrence in question forming part of the second incident.
The High Court differed from the view of the trial judge on flimsy and unsustainable grounds.
[998 D E] (2) There was absolutely no basis or material on the record to enable the High Court to record an order of acquittal in favour of the respondents by extending them a right of private defence.
Even going to the maximum extent in favour of the respondents that respondent No. 1 got the blows with a stick at the hands of the deceased and in the second incident it is manifest that her action of assault on him was a deliberate counterattack to cause him such injury which at least was likely to cause his death.
The counterattack could in no sense be an attack in exercise of the right of private defence.
[100 F G] (3) Neither in her complaint before the police nor in the statement under s.342 Cr.
P.C. Was there a whisper by respondent No. 1 of her having squeezed the testicles and private parts of the deceased in exercise of her right of private defence.
Not only was the plea of private defence not taken by the respondents in their statements under section 342, Cr.
P.C. but no basis for the plea was laid in the cross examination of the prosecution witnesses or by adducing any defence evidence.
The burden of establishing that plea was not discharged in any way by the respondents even applying the test of preponderance of probabilities in favour of that plea.
There is absolutely no material on the record to lead to any such conclusion.
[999 G H] Munhi Ram and Others vs Delhi Adtministration [19681 2 S.C.R. 455, followed.
