Under section 40 of the Ajmer Laws Regulation of 1877 (Reg. III of 1877) the Chief Commissioner is empowered, among other things, to make rules about. . . . the establishment of a proper system of conservancy and sanitation at fairs. . . . .
The first three sub rules of Rule 1, framed by the Chief Commissioner prohibit the holding of a fair except under a permit issued by the District Magistrate and the District Magistrate is enjoined "to satisfy himself, before issuing any permit that the applicant is in a position to establish a proper system of conservancy, sanitation and watch and ward at the fair".
The fourth sub rule empowers the District Magistrate "to revoke any such permit without assigning any reasons or giving any previous notice".
The appellant 's application for a permit to hold a fair was refused by the District Magistrate on the ground that no more permits were to be issued to private individuals.
Held, that under the Regulation it is the Chief Commissioner and not the District Magistrate who has power to frame rules, that the Chief Commissioner had no authority to delegate that power and that the Rules made by the latter are therefore ultra vires; Held further, that the Rule is also ultra vires for the reason that in authorising the District Magistrate to revoke a permit granted " without giving any reason or previous notice" it invests him with a power to prohibit the exercise by the citizen of the constitutionally protected right to bold fairs.
The District Magistrate 's order, which in effect prohibits the holding of the fair, is therefore bad, for, without the aid of these rules or some other law validly empowering him to impose the ban, he has no power in himself to do it.
1066 Per JAGANNADHADAS J. (DAS J. concurring): The impugned order of the District Magistrate is bad: (i)because the rules do not authorise him to reject an application on the ground on which lie has done; (ii)because the not effect of the rules is to establish a system of ad hoc control by the District Magistrate through the issue of a permit and by the vesting of other powers in him under the rules.
This result is not within the intendment of the section which authorises the making of the rules.
Tahir Hussain vs District Board, Muzafarnagar (A.I.R. referred to.
