For the purpose of acquiring land for an Agricultural College a notification was issued under section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, in January 1959, with respect to several pieces of land one of which belonged to the res pondents and was in possession of the appellant as tenant.
After the issue of the notification under section 6, in February 1959, the Commissioner directed that possession of that land may be taken under section 17(1) on the expiry of 15 days from the publication of the notice under section 9(1).
On March 24, 1959, the appellant filed a statement before the Land Acquisition Officer.
In that statement, he did not deny the publication of notice on the spot under section 9(1) nor did he put any impediment to the taking of the land.
He merely wanted the compensation amount to be paid to him and wanted stay of the taking possession of his house on the land.
The Land Acquisition Officer passed orders in the presence of the appellant directing the Tahsildar to take possession of the land and hand it over to the Principal of the Agricultural College.
The Tahsildar went to the spot, inspected the land for the purpose of determining what part was waste and arable and should therefore be taken possession of and took possession of the land, leaving out the small portion containing the house of the appellant, and handed over possession of the land so taken over to the Principal of the Agricultural College.
The appellant was not present at the time when the Tahsildar took possession.
There was, thereafter, correspondence between the appellant and the Government.
and various reports had been made by the officers of the Government and on April 16, 1959, a stay order was passed by the Government.
On December 13, 1961, the Land Acquisition Officer wrote to the Commissioner that possession of the land was still with the appellant, and on August 8, 1968, withdrawal from the acquisition of that part of the land under section 48(1) of the Act, was directed by the Commissioner.
The respondents and the Agricultural College filed writ petitions in the High Court, challenging the release of the land.
The High Court allowed the petitions holing that possession of the land was taken (even though the Government took the stand that they had taken only 'symbolical ' possession) and given to the Principal of the College and that, therefore, it was not open to the Commissioner to withdraw from the acquisition under section 48(1) as amended by the Land Acquisition (Maharashtra Extension and Amendment) Act.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court, HELD : (Per Curiam) : Neither the Government nor the Commissioner could withdraw under section 48(1) from the acquisition of any portion of the land which had been taken over by and vested in the Government.
[253 F] (Per P. N. Bhagwati and A. C. Gupta JJ) : When Government proceeds to take possession of the land acquired by it under the Act.
it must take actual Possession since all interests in the land are sought to be acquired by it, and there is no question of taking 'symbolical ' possession as understood 251 under the C.P.C. Nor would possession merely on paper be enough.
How such actual possession may be taken would depend on the nature of land.
It is not an absolute and inviolable rule that merely going on the spot and making a declaration by beat of drum or otherwise would be sufficient to constitute taking possession of land in every case.
It is also not strictly necessary as a matter of legal requirement that notice should be given to the owner or occupant of the land that possession would be taken at a particular time, though it may be desirable to do so in order to eliminate the possibility of a fraudulent or collusive transaction of talking of mere paper possession, without the occupant or the owner ever knowing about it.
[252E H, 153A B] On the facts and circumstances of the present case, the Tahsildar had taken actual possession of that part of the land which was waste or arable and handed it over to the Principal of the College.
The Land Acquisition Officer thought that actual possession could not be regarded as having been taken unless the appellant was excluded from the land, and, since the appellant, without any obstruction entered on the land and continued in possession, he mistakenly stated that actual possession was not taken.
The legal position is that even if the appellant entered upon the land after actual possession had been taken by and the land vested in, the Government, the appellant 's possession would not obliterate the consequence of vesting in the Government.
[253 B E] [Discussion regarding delivery of 'symbolical ' and 'actual ' possession under the C.P.C. is not necessary for the disposal of the appeals], [252 D] (Per Untwalia J.) : (1) Under the C.P.C., a symbolical or formal delivery of possession has the effect, of dispossessing the judgment debtor from his right, title or interest in the property, although, as a matter of fact, he may have succeeded in resuming possession shortly after dispossession.
It does not, however, dispossess the person in actual possession in his own right not liable to be evicted under the decree or in pursuance of the auction sale.
[263A B] (2)When a public notice under section 9(1) of the Act is published at a convenient place or near the land to be taken that Government intends to take possession, ordinarily there would be no question of resisting or impeding the taking of possession.
Delivery of possession by the owner is not required and the Collector can enforce surrender under section 47 if impeded.
On taking possession either under section 16 or section 17(1), the land vests absolutely in the Government free from all encumbrances.
Therefore, in a proceeding under the Land Acquisition Act for acquisition of land all interests are wiped out, and hence, the taking of possession must be taking actual possession on the spot and not symbolical possession; and surely it cannot be a possession merely on paper.
[263E G] (3)As to the mode of taking possession, the Act is silent.
Unless possession is taken by the written agreement of the party concerned the mode of taking possession obviously would be for the authority to go upon the land and do some act which would indicate that the authority has taken possession of the land.
It may be in the form of a declaration by beat of drum or otherwise or by hanging a written declaration on the spot that possession has been taken.
The presence of the owner or the occupant is not necessary to effectuate the taking of possession.
[263H, 264A] (4)In the instant case, actual possession of the land was taken by the Tahsildar on the spot and the possession was handed over to the Principal of the College.
The Land Acquisition Officer 's statement that the land was not actually taken possession and the Government 's stand that, only symbolical possession was taken, should be viewed from the correct legal position.
So viewed, the appellant 's resuming possession after once the land was validly taken by the Government would not have the effect of undoing the fact (if vesting in the Government.
[264B, E F] 252
