The respondent , a common carrier of goods, had taken out three transit policies of insurance renewable every year from the appellant.
The freight policy taken out in January 1969, was against risk of loss or damage to any goods or merchandise during transit.
In June 1971.
the respondent declared to the appellant that it had received for transit a consignment of 185 packages of general merchandise alleged to be of the total value of Rs. 1,10,000/(approx) for transportation from Calcutta to various places in Assam and Tripura and paid the requisite premium on the value of goods and the goods stood insured under the said policy.
According to the respondent on the evening of 29 6 71, the consignment of 185 packages was loaded in Truck No. WGH 8261, and the truck left Calcutta on the same day for Gauhati.
It is alleged that the owner of the truck reached Barasat on the night of 29th June, 1971, there was a robbery and neither the truck, nor the driver, nor the merchandise could be traced.
On 1 7 1971, the respondent sent letters to the officer incharge of Jorabagan Police Station, the Assistant Commissioner of Police, Intelligence Branch, Lall Bazar.
Calcutta and the Deputy Commissioner of Police Intelligence Branch intimating them that the truck, the driver, the assistant and the merchandise could not be traced.
A copy of the letter sent to the Assistant Commissioner of Police.
Lall Bazar, Calcutta was sent to the appellant and it was received by the appellant on 2 7 1971.
On 1 7 1971 and 21 9 1971, the respondent lodged the claim for loss with the appellant on the basis that the loss was covered by the policy.
On 3 7 1971, the appellant sent a, letter to the respondent calling upon the respondent to furnish the particulars as regards the name and address of the owner of the vehicle, the name and ' address of the driver and other particulars.
On 21 9 1971 the respondent informed the appellant by a letter that the information and the records asked for in the letter dated 3 7 1971 were already supplied to Mr. A. L. Chopra, the agent of the appellant on 5 7 1971 when he called upon the respondent for that, purpose.
On 10 10 1971.
the appellant wrote to the respondent informing that until the report of the investigation by the police was produced by the respondent, it would not be possible for the appellant to proceed further in the matter.
The appellant received a copy of the investigation report by the police at Barasat on 12 5 1972.
The report was to the effect that the alleged episode, of robbery was false.
On this basis, the appellant sent to the respondent a letter dated 4 8 1972 stating the contents of the investigation report of the police at Barasat asking for the investigation report of Jambagan Police Lall Bazar Police.
Thereafter the appellant intimated the respondent by letter dated 16 2 1973 disclaiming its liability under the freight policy as regards the loss of the consignment of 185 packages.
On receipt of the letter, the respondent wrote to the appellant on 30 3 73 asking for the ground on which the appellant disclaimed its liability.
The appellant sent a letter after two months on May 30, 1973, stating that it had nothing to add to what had been stated in its letter dated February 16, 1973.
Thereafter, the respondent took the advice of solicitors and counsel.
On 17 8 1973, the respondent filed the application before the High Court under section 37(4) of the Act for extension of time for referring the dispute to arbitration till a date 15 days after the order of the High Court.
In the application the respondent stated the reasons for the delay in filing the application in court after receiving the letter dated May 30, 1973.
In answer to the application, the appellant contended that section 37(4) of the Act had no application that the Court had no jurisdiction to extend the time and that even if the court had 137 jurisdiction, there were no valid grounds for extension.
The learned Judge of the High Court passed the order extending the time to refer the dispute to arbitration within a fortnight from 14 1 1974.
In this appeal by special leave, it was contended for appellant that there would be no undue hardship to the respondent if the time for preferring the claim to arbitration is not extended and, therefore, the High Court went wrong in exercising its discretion by extending the time.
Rejecting the contention and dismissing the appeal, HELD ; (i) Court has to take a liberal view of the meaning of the words "undue hardship" occurring in section 37(4) of the . 'Undue ' must mean something which is not merited by the conduct of the claimant, or is very much disproportionate to it.
[143E F] Steamship Co. of 1912, etc.
vs Anglo American Grain Co. [1958] 2 Llyod 's Rep. 341; Watney, Comba, Raid & Co. vs E. M. Dower & Co. etc.
, 13 1; F. E. Hookway & Co. Ltd. vs H. W. H. Hopper & Co. ; Stanhope Steamship Co. Ltd. vs British Phosphate Commissioners ; and Librarian Shipping etc.
vs A King & Sorts referred to (ii) The respondent was having dealings with the appellant in the business of insurance from 1958 onwards and in no instance was the claim made by the respondent rejected by the appellant.
The conduct of the respondent in enquiring of the appellant the grounds on which the claim was rejected was quite reasonable.
It was only after the grounds of rejection were known that the respondent could have decided whether to resort to arbitration or not.
If the grounds of rejection would come within the clause of exclusion of liability under the Policy, it would serve no purpose to incur the expense and hardship involved in resorting to arbitration.
The appellant did not give the reason for disclaiming liability even in its letter dated 30 5 1973.
We do not think that there was any lack of promptness on the part of the respondent in waiting for the reply to its letter dated 30 3 1973.
In the facts and circumstances of the case it is clear that the High Court exercised its discretion properly in extending the time.
The conduct of the respondent was reasonable.
It took all steps it could when it knew about the alleged robbery to inform the police and the appellant.
The fact that the Barasat police reported that the case was false does not necessarily mean that the respondent tried to practise any fraud on the appellant.
The respondent had filed a suit against the owner of the truck in question in July 1972 for the recovery of the amount of loss.
It also paid the claims arising out of the loss of goods which were transported through the truck.
All these go to show the bona fides and reasonableness of the conduct of the respondent.
Both the amount at stake and the reasons for delay are material in considering the question of undue hardship.
It cannot be said that any material prejudice would be caused to the appellant by extending the time.
There would be undue hardship if time is not extended, as the consequence of non extension would in any event be excessive and out of proportion to the fault of the respondent, if any, in not being prompt.
It also cannot be, said that the mere fact that a claim would be barred would be undue hardship.
[144B C; 14; 145A B]
