By virtue of a notification dated September 3, 1957, the Central Government granted compensatory allowance according to certain rates to all Central Government employees posted throughout Assam.
The appellant thought it fit in the circumstances to grant compensatory allowance to all its employees in September 1959.
It was not made through any standing order or circular.
Thereafter there was another notification by the Central Government dated December 8, 1960 by which it was provided that the employees in receipt of the compensatory allowance would be given the option to choose the house rent allowance or compensatory allowance but will not be entitled lo draw both.
this was to remain in force for five years.
In view, however, of the notification dated December 8, 1960, the management thought that the contents of the circular were binding on the company and therefore they unilaterally.
without giving any notice to the workers, withdrew the concession of the compensatory allowance which had been granted to the workers in September 1959.
This concession was withdrawn with effect from July 1960.
The workers moved the Government for making a reference to the Tribunal because a dispute arose between the parties regarding the competency of the appellant to withdraw he concession granted by it unilaterally.
The Government made a reference to the Industrial Tribunal which has held that there was a dispute between the parties and as s.9A of the , has not been complied with by the Company the management was not legally entitled to with draw the concession of the Assam Compensatory Allowance granted to.
the employees.
This appeal has been preferred by the management on the basis of the specials leave granted by this Court.
It was contended for the appellant (i) that the compensatory allowance was given purely on the basis of ' the Central Government circular dated September 3, 1957, on the distinct understanding that it was a temporary measure which could be withdrawn at the will of the employer and did not amount to a condition of service at all; (ii) that even if the provisions, of s.9A of the Act applied, since the management had substituted the house rent allowance for compensatory allowance the workers were not adversely affected and, therefore, it was not necessary to give any notice to them before withdrawing the concession of the, compensatory allowance.
Rejecting the contentions and dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: (i) 'There is no evidence to show that the management before granting the concession of the compensatory allowance had in any way indicated to the workers that this was only a stop gap arrangement which could be withdrawn after the housing subsidy was granted.
Even before the unilateral withdrawal of the concession granted by the appellant no notice was given to the workers nor.
were they taken into confidence, nor any attempt was made to open a dialogue with them on this question.
So far as the compensatory allowance is concerned it was given in order to enable the workers to meet the high cost of living in a far off and backward area like Assam.
It had absolutely no casual connection with the housing subsidy or house rent allowance which was a different type of concession.
Furthermore, the grant of compensatory allowance by the appellant was indeed a very charitable act which showed that the employers were extremely sympathetic towards the need of their 111 workers.
In these circumstances, the conclusion is irresistible that the grant of compensatory allowance was an implied condition of service so as to attract the mandatory provisions of section 9A of the Act.
Twenty one days notice has to be given to the workmen.
This was not done in this case.
[113C 114B] Workman of Hindustan Shipyard (Private) Ltd. vs Industrial Tribunal Hyderabad and others, [1961] 2 L.L.J. 526, Bhiwani Textile Mills vs Their The Workman and others , Oil and Natural Gas Commission vs The Workman ; , Hindustan Lever Ltd. vs Ram Mohan Ray and Other ; , and M/s. Tata Iron and Steel Co. Ltd. vs The Workman and others[1972] 2 S.C.C 383, referred to.
(ii) The compensatory allowance and housing subsidy are two different and separate categories of the terms of service conditions and they cannot be clubbed together, nor can one be made dependent on the other.
the object of these two concessions is quite different and both of them serve quite different purposes.
[118A B] .
