Section 13 of the Karnataka Municipalities Act, 1964, provides that for the purpose of election of councillors of a town municipality at a general election the State Government shall, after previous publication by notification, determine, (a) the number of territorial divisions into which the municipality shall be divided.
(b) the extent of each territorial division; (c) the number of seats allotted to each territorial division.
and (d) the number of seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes and women.
Section 14 provides that the electoral roll of the State Legislative Assembly for the territorial area comprised in the division, shall be deemed to be the list of voters of such division Rule 75 of the Mysore Municipalities (Election of Councillors) Rules, 196 empowers the State Government to make such orders as it deems fit for ensuring that the elections are held in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
For holding a general election with respect to a town municipal council, the State Government issued the notification under section 13.
Thereafter the Returning officer issued a notice fixing the calendar of events for holding the election.
The list of voters for each division was prepared exactly according to the Electoral Roll, and kept open for inspection In the office of the municipal council.
A list of the contesting candidates was also published and the poll date was also fixed as January 10, 1975.
At that state it was found that some voters residing in the border of one division had been included in the voters ' list of an adjoining division and the State Government, in purported exercise of the power under r. 75, cancelled the calendar of events published by the Returning officer and directed a fresh preparation of the voters ' list as per the divisions notified.
In a writ petition filed by the respondents, who were residents of the town, the High Court held that the State Government had no power to cancel the calendar of events and quashed the direction of the State Government.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court, ^ HELD: (1) What is required by section 14(1) is that the list of voters of a division should correspond ipsissima verba with the Electoral Roll for the territorial area included in the division.
of there is any mistake in the Electoral Roll in the some voters residing in one area or house number are shown as residing in another, it cannot be corrected by the Returning officer while preparing the list of voters for that division.
The only way in which such mistake can be corrected is by applying for rectification of the Electoral Roll under section 22 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950, but of such rectification is not made the entries in the Electoral Roll would stand and they would necessarily be reflected in the list of voters for the division.
But that would not constitute a mistake so far as the preparation of the list of voters for the division is concerned.
It is only if the list of voters for the division does not correspond" with the concerned Electoral Roll in the sense that the voters shown in the Electoral Roll as residing in the territorial are omitted to be included in the list of voters of that division or voters shown In the Electoral Roll as residing in the territorial area of one division are included in the list of voters of another.
that it can be said that the List is defective and not in accordance with the provisions of the Act [64D H] 58 (2) The scheme of the Act and particularly sections 14 and 15 show that it is only one list of voters that is contemplated to be in force during the entire process of election, and there is no question of correcting the list of voters according to the revised Electoral Roll which had come into being in February, 1975.
[65G H] The list of voters is to be prepared for the election tnd 'election ' means the entire process consisting of the several stages and embracing the several steps by which an elected member is returned.
[65H] Section 14(1) does not contemplate a list of voters which keeps on changing from time to time during the election process.
It deems the Electoral Roll for the territorial area of the division in force at the relevant time to be the list of voters for the division for the purposes of the Act that is, for the purposes of the 'election '.
Section 14(3) enacts that every person whose name is in the list of voters referred to in sub section
(1) shall be qualified to vote at the election of a member for the division to which such list pertains.
Section 15 (2) also says that the list of voters shall be conclusive evidence for the purpose of determining under this section whether the person is qualified or not qualified to vote or to be elected.
The sub sections refer to the same list of voters and it is, therefore, clear that the legislature did not intend that the list of voters should change from time to time during the process of election and the relevant Electoral Roll for the purpose of preparation of the list of voters must consequently be taken to be the Electoral Roll in force at the date when the election process commenced, that is when the calendar of events was published.
[66A F] Chief Commissioner, Ajmer vs Radhey Shyam Dani, ; , explained .
N. P. Ponnuswami vs Returning officer, Namakkal Constituency & Ors, ; , followed Shivappa Chanamallappa jogendra vs Basavannappa Gadlappa Bankar, [1965] Mysore L.J. 289.
approved.
Obiter: Till the election process has commenced by the issue of a notice fixing the calendar of events.
there is no reason why the designed officer should not be entitled to rectify the list of voters for a division if it can be shown that the list of voters does not correspond exactly with the Electoral Roll for the territorial area and bring the list of voters in conformity with the Electoral Roll, but once the calendar of events is published and the election process has begun it is extremely doubtful whether any changes can be made in the list of voters for the purpose of setting right any such defect.
[67 C]
