In 1956, the landlord let out for one year the land in question to the tenant on a monthly rent of Rs. 75/ .
One of the conditions of the tenancy was that the promises should not be used for any purpose other than the keeping of the lorries as garage.
The landlord asked the tenant to vacate by a not to quit.
the landlord filed a suit for eviction which was resisted by the tenant on the ground that he was a Thika tenant under Calcutta Thika Tenant, 1949.
The High Court held that the tenant was a Thika tenant.
The definition of a Thika tenant is a tenant who has erected or acquired by purchase or gift any structure on such land for residential, manufacturing or business purpose and includes the successors in interest of such person.
Admittedly, in the present case the tenant has erected a structure.
The counsel for the appellant landlord contents that since the structure was erected by the tenant without the permission or the landlord it is not a lawful erection of structure.
The Thika Tenancy Act does not talk about the consent of the landlord.
The Court, therefore, must look "t the Transfer of Property Act where section 108(o) prohibits the premises to be used for any purpose other than the one for which it is let out.
According to the appellant, the premises were let out for garage and, therefore the erection of ' structures for the purpose of running the workshop would attract section 108(o) of the Transfer of Property Act.
^ HELD: Negativing the contention of the appellant, The tenancy in question does not militate against the construction of structures and use of the land for the purpose of workshop for maintenance of lorries by the tenant.
A garage is a building where motor vehicles are housed.
The tenant has not used the land for purpose other than the purpose for which it was leased.
S.2(5) of the Act does not require a Thika Tenant to secure prior permission of the landlord for erection of structures on the land.
As the preamble shows the Act is for making better provision relating to the law of land lord and tenant in respect of Thika tenancies.
It is a piece of beneficial legislation Conferring certain rights upon the tenants.
in dealing with such a provision of law we cannot read into the definition something which is not already there and the introduction of which will lead to imposing a restriction upon the rights of this class of tenants by judicial interpretation.
Besides, there is no vagueness or uncertainty in the definition clause.
[108 E H]
