In pursuance of an adevertisement dated 31 5 1971 by the University of Saugar calling for applications for the post of Professor of Zoology, five persons including the appellant and the respondent applied.
The Selection Committee constituted in accordance with section 47 A of the Saugar University Act 1946 for considering these applications recommended on 4 12 1971 the name of the appellant to the Executive Council, which was competent to make the appointment.
The Executive Council refused to accept the recommendations of the Selection Committee on the ground that it would lead to administrative and disciplinary complications.
Thereupon the appellant filed a writ petition for quashing the resolution of the Executive Council and it was Quashed by the High Court of Madhya Pradesh.
Thereafter on 18 2 1973 the Executive Council appointed the appellant as Professor of Zoology.
On 9 7 1973 the respondent filed a writ petition for quashing the appellants appointment.
The High Court of Madhya Pradesh quashed the resolution dated 18 2 1973 appointing the appellant as Professor of Zoology and indicated that the University may advertise the post a fresh if they desire to fill in the vacancy.
The ground on which the resolution was quashed was that the appointment was made more than a year after the recommendation of the Selection Committee was made and this was not permissible.
The High Court relied upon the Statutes of the University made under section 31(aa) of the Act for this conclusion.
Section 31 (aa) enables statutes to be made among other things, for the mode of appointment of teachers of the University paid by the University.
The requirement of sub rule (2) of statute No. 21 AA is that the post should be readvertised before making an appointment if the appointment is not made within a year of the Section Committee 's recommendation.
In this appeal by special leave it was contended for the appellant that (i) the statute is directory and not mandatory, and (ii) that, in any case, the statute is beyond the rule making power conferred by section 31(aa).
Rejecting the contentions and dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD : The question whether a particular provision of a statute is directory or mandatory might arise in a case where merely a period is specified for performing a duty but the consequences of not performing the duty within that period are not mentioned.
In this case, the statute clearly provides for the contingency of the duty not being performed within the period fixed by the statute and the consequence thereof.
Unless the post is readvertised and an appointment is made from among those persons who apply in response to the readvertisement the appointment cannot be said to be valid.
Though the reason for the delay in making the appointment was the wrongful refusal of the Executive Council to act in pursuance of the recommendation of the Selection Committee and the pendency of the writ petition filed by the appellant in the High Court that does not in any way minimise the effect of sub rule (2) of statute No. 21 AA.
[150F H] (ii) Unless it could be said that the rule has no relation to the power conferred by the rule making power it cannot be said to be beyond the rule making power.
The statute provides that the appointment should be made after the post 149 is advertised and the applications received considered by a committee of selection.
It also provides that if no appointment is made to the post within one year from the date of nomination by the selection committee the post shall be readvertised.
The rule therefore certainly relates to the mode of appointment.
It cannot be said to be unrelated to the mode of appointment.[151A C] Dr. P. section Venkataswamy vs University of Mysore A.I.R. and S.B. Ray vs P.N. Banerjee, , referred to.
