The assessee acquired shares in a newly floated sister concern and later sold a part of its stock at a profit.
The Income tax officer assessed the profit to tax on the basis that i was profit accruing to the assessee from an adventure in the nature of business, and the order was confirmed by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner.
On appeal the Appellate Tribunal held that the transaction was in the nature of business adventure; that the assessee by its Memorandum of Association was authorised to buy and sell shares.
that there was a specific resolution to buy and sell shares.
that the assessee included the profit on the sale of shares in its profit and loss account without showing it in any reserve account, that the shares were purchased from borrowed funds and not with ready cash.
that the sales were not on account of any pressing necessity; that it kept the profit in cash in a bank and that the assessee had in the past dealt with shares as a business transaction.
On reference, the High Court held that there was no provision in the Memorandum of Association which authorised the carrying on or the business of purchasing and selling shares; that the inclusion of the profit in the profit and loss account was not conclusive of the question whether it was capital asset or revenue receipt.
that the nature and character of the money should be determined by its inherent character.
that there was no evidence that the shares were purchased out of borrowed funds; that a solitary transaction could not be taken as conclusive of the fact that the sale of shares was an adventure in the nature of trade and that in any case the dominant intention of the assessee in acquiring the shares was to boost the shares of a sister concern and when once that was achieved the assessee started selling the investments.
On appeal to this Court it was contended by the respondent that the profit can be taxed only if the dominant intention of the assessee was to carry on an adventure in the nature of business and not otherwise.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: The Tribunal found, after taking into account all the relevant circumstances, that the dominant intention of the assessee was to make profit by resale of the shares and not to make an investment.
[134F] (1) (a) The finding that loss or profit is a trading loss or profit is primarily a finding of fact though in reaching that finding the Tribunal has to apply the correct test laid down by law.
When the Tribunal has considered the evidence on record and applied the correct test, there is no scope for any interference with the finding of the Tribunal.
[134G] C.I.T. vs Ashoka Marketing Co. , referred to.
(b) The whole conclusion of the High Court was based on an unwarranted assumption of facts.
The danger of falling to recognise that the jurisdiction of the High Court in these matters is only advisory and that conclusions of facts are conclusions on which the High Court is to exercise the advisory jurisdiction is illustrated by this case At no time had the assessee a case that the shares were Purchased with a view to help a sister concern.
Nowhere in the statement of the case or the supplementary statement of case prepared by the Tribunal and filed in the High Court was there a finding on the question.
[134E; D] 127 (2) The tests for the purpose of ascertaining whether profits made upon a sale of an article are taxable profits are: (i) if a transaction is in the assessee 's ordinary line of business it is in the nature of trade.
[131B C] (ii) it is not necessary, to constitute trade, that there should be a series of transactions, both of purchase and sale.
A single transaction of purchase and sale outside the assessee 's line of business may constitute an adventure in the nature of trade; [131C D] Venkataswami Naidu & Co. vs C.l.T. [1959] 35 I.T.R. 594, followed.
I. R. vs Reinhold , 392 referred to.
(iii) where the purchase of any article or of any capital investment is made without the intention to resell at a profit the resale under changed circumstances would only be a realisation of capital and would not stamp a transaction with a business character.
[131G] C.I.T. vs P. K. N. Co. Ltd. referred to.
(iv) a transaction is not necessarily in the nature of trade because the purchase was made with the intention of resale.
[131H] Jenkinson vs Freeland ; Radha Debi Jalan vs C.l.T. [1951] 20 l.
T.R. 176; India Nut Co. Ltd. vs C.l.
T. Sooniram Poddar vs C.l.T. ; , 478 9; Ajax Products Ltd. vs C.l.
T. I.T.R. 297, 310; Gustad India vs C.l.
T. and Mrs. Alexander vs C.l.
T. 402.
referred to.
(v) a capital investment and resale do not lose their capital nature merely because the resale was foreseen and contemplated when the investment was made and the possibility of enhanced value motivated the investment [132B] Leeming vs Jones ; Saroj Kumar Mazumdar vs C.l.
T. [19591 , 250 1; I. R. vs Fraser 24 T. C. 498, 502.
Jankiram Bhadur Rant vs C.I.T. [1965] 57 I.T.R. 21, referred to.
(vi) the accretion to capital does not become income merely because the original capital was invested in the hope and expectation that it would rise in value.
[132D E] Leeming vs Jones , referred to.
(vii) The intention to resell would, in conjunction with the conduct of the assessee and other circumstances, point to the business character of the transaction.
[132F G] In the instant case, the assessee had been dealing in shares.
(i) In an earlier assessment year the assessee had shown in its profit and loss account and the balance sheet a loss in dealing of shares which showed that the assessee had been buying and selling shares even though as an isolated adventure in the nature of business.
The debit on account of devaluation of shares shown in the profit and loss account was permissible only on the footing that the shares, constituted the stock in trade of the assessee, (ii) in view of the resolution of the assessee authorising the director to purchase and sell shares the view of the High Court that the memorandum of association did not authorise the company to acquire and sell shares had no relevance: (iii) the finding that the shares were purchased with borrowed funds on which the assessee was paying interest was a finding supported by evidence.
The Tribunal was correct in holding that the assessee had not invested its funds with a view to earn dividend: (iv) the Tribunal found that the shares were not sold to liquidate the debts of the assessee as the balance sheet showed that the proceeds were kept as cash in bank.
[133A H] 128
