The appellant company which carried on business in tea garden tools and requisites and also acted as agents for selling tea, derived the bulk of its income from selling commission on tea.
The assessment year in question is 1950 60.
In the relevant previous year which ended on June 30, 1958 the assessee for the first time in its history entered into certain transactions in jute.
On April 17, 1958 the assessee had contracted to purchase 1100 bales of B Twill and 2500 bales of corn sacks.
the contract for B Twill was with two parties, M/s. Raghunath Sons (P) Ltd. for 500 bales and M/s. Mahadeo Ramkumar for 600 bales.
The corn sacks were all purchased from Tulsider Jewaraj under three contracts for 800 bales, 1000 bales and 700 bales respectively.
On June 18, 1958 the assessee entered into a contract with M/s. Lachhminarain Kanoria & Co. to sell the aforesaid quantities of B Twill and corn sacks.
The assessee had no godown for keeping the goods and had not handled them.
The goods were in the godown of the mills and only the delivery orders addressed to the mills changed hands.
The amount realised on sale to M/s. Lachhminarain Kanoria & Co. came to Rs. 10,49,865/=.
The assessee had however purchased the corn sacks and D Twill for Rs. 11,48,399/ .
The transactions thus resulted in a loss of Rs, 98,534/=/ to the assessee and the assessee claimed adjustment of this loss in the computation of its income for the assessment year 1959 60.
The Income tax officer held that the transactions involving mere transfer of delivery notes and not actual delivery of the goods were of a speculative character as contemplated in explanation 2 to sec.
24(1) and the loss could be set off only against speculation profits, and as there were no speculation profits is that year, he held that the loss would be carried forward and set off against speculation profits in the future.
The appellate Commissioner on appeal by the assessee held that the transaction were not speculative and the loss should be treated as business loss.
In appeal by the Department, the Tribunal held that this case came within the scope of Sec.
24(1 ) read with explanation 2 and restored the order of the Income tax officer.
In reference, the High Court answered the question formulated by the Tribunal in the affirmative and against the assessee.
Section 24(1) of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922, provides 'that where an assessee sustains a loss under any of the heads of income chargeable to income tax as enumerated in 9. 6 of the Act in any year, he shall be entitled to have the loss set off against his income, profits or gains under any other head in that year.
This general provision is qualified by the first proviso which permits the set off of a loss in speculative business against the assessee 's profit and gains, if any, in a similar business only.
Explanation 1 says that where the speculative transactions are of such a nature as to constitute a business, the business shall be deemed to be distinct and separate from any other business.
Explanation 2 defines a speculative transaction as a transaction in which a contract for purchase and sale of any commodity is periodically or ultimately settled otherwise than by the actual delivery or transfer of the commodity.
This appeal has been preferred by the assessee company after obtaining special leave from this Court, Dismissing the appeal, 181 ^ HELD: The words actual delivery in explanation 2 means real as opposed to notional delivery.
For the income tax purposes speculative transaction means what the definition of that expression in explanation 2 says.
Whether a transaction is speculative in the general sense or under the Contract Act is not relevant for the purpose of this explanation.
The definition of "delivery" in section 2(2) of the which has been held to include both actual and constructive or symbolical delivery has no bearing on the definition of speculative transaction in the explanation.
A transaction which is otherwise speculative would not be a speculative transaction within the meaning of explanation 2 if actual delivery of the commodity or the scrips has taken place; on the other hand, a transaction which is not otherwise speculative in nature may yet 'be speculative according to explanation 2 if there is no actual delivery of the commodity or the scrips.
The explanation does not invalidate speculative transactions which are otherwise legal but gives a special meaning to that expression for purpose of income tax only.
The question referred to the High Court in the present case has been correctly answered.
[186E G; 187D] D. M. Wadhwana vs Commissioner of Income tax West Bengal , approved.
Raghunath Prasad Poddar vs Commissioner of Income fax, Calcutta , over ruled.
Duni Chand Rataria vs Bhuwalka Brothers Ltd. ; Bayana Bhimayya and Sukhdevi Rathi vs The Government of Andhra Pradesh ; and The State of Andhra Pradesh vs Kolla Sreeramamurthy, ; , held inapplicable.
Manalal M. Varma & Co. (P) Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, and Butterworty vs Kingsway, , referred
