According to r. 9(1) of the Kerala General Sales tax Rules framed under.
the Kerala General Sales tax Act, 1963, in determining the taxable turnover of a dealer the excise duty, if any, paid by the dealer to the Government of Kerala or to the Central Government in respect of the goods sold by him shall be deducted.
Section ,22(3) of the Act provides that if any dealer or person collects tax on transactions not liable to tax under the Act or in excess of the tax leviable under the Act such dealer or person shall pay to the Government.
in addition to the tax payable, the amount so collected unless it was refunded to the person from whom it was collected.
The respondent deducted the sum paid by it as excise duty from its total turnover for the purpose of determining the taxable turnover.
The respondent, however, when it sold the goods.
had collected, sales tax from the purchasers on the invoice prices without deducting therefrom the excise duty paid in respect of the said goods.
This resulted in the respondent realising a sum in excess of the sales tax payable in respect of the goods sold by it.
The Sales tax officer held that the respondent was liable to pay that amount to the Government under section 22(3).
The writ petition filed by the respondent was allowed by the High Court on the ground that section 22(3) was not covered by Entry 54 of the State List in the VII Schedule to the Constitution, and hence, beyond the competence of the Slate Legislature.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court.
^ HELD: (1) Entry 54 empowers the State Legislatures to make laws, except in certain cases, in respect of taxes on the sale or purchase of goods.
As long as the law relates to taxes on the sale or purchase of goods, it would be within their legislative competence.
But, it would not be permissible for.
the State legislature to enact a law under Entry 54 for recovery by the State of an amount which could not be recovered as sales tax or purchase tax in accordance with the law on the subject and which was wrongly realised by a dealer as sales tax or purchase tax.
Such a l. would not be a law relating to tax of the sale or purchase of goods but would be one in respect of an amount wrongly realised by a dealer as sales tax or purchase tax.
[1 55A C] (2) The ambit of ancillary or incidental power would not go to the extent of permitting the Legislature to provide that.
though the amount collected, may be wrongly, be way of tax,, was not tax, it shall still be paid over to the Government as if it were a tax.
[156D E] (3) The fact that the amount realised is in excess of the tax leviable and not as amount which was not at all payable as tax, would not make any difference.
Any amount realised by a dealer in excess of the tax leviable, stands, for the purpose of determining the legislative competence under Entry 54, on the same footing as an amount not due as tax under the Act.
Tax, according to section 2(xxiv) of the Act, means tax payable under the Act.
This necessarily means that everything outside it, collected by the dealer.
would be an exaction not authorised by the Act.
The amount which was realised by the respondent in excess of what was due as tax cannot be held to be tax, because, such excess amount was not tax payable under the Act.
If the State Legislature cannot make a law under Entry 54 directing payment to the State of any amount collected as tax on transactions not liable to lax under the Act, it would likewise be incompetent to make a law directing payment to the State of an amount realised by a dealer in excess of the tax payable under the Act.
[157G 158C] 153 R. Abdul Quader & co. vs Sales Tax Officer , Hyderabad and Ashoka Marketing Ltd. vs State of Bihar & Anr. followed.
