The appellant was a multi unit co operative society governed by the Multi Unit Co operative Societies Act, 1942 Section 4(1) of the Act confers on the Central Government power to appoint a Central Registrar of Co operative Societies.
According to section 4(2) the Central Registrar, if , appointed, shall exercise, in respect of any co operative society to which the Act applies to the exclusion of State Registrars, the powers and functions exercisable by the Registrar of Co operative Societies of a State in which such society is actually registered.
In 1952 the Hyderabad Co operative Societies Act was passed which provides that the State Registrar had the power to dissolve a co operative society and appoint a liquidator. 'I he Central Registrar of Co operative Societies was appointed in 1956.
Section 5B of the 1942 Act empowered the Central Government to delegate "any power of authority exercisable by the Central Registrar under the Act" to State Registrars by a notification.
In pursuance of this power the Central Government published a notification in 1956 delegating the powers (under the 1942 Act) to the State Registrars, one of which was the power to dissolve a co operative society.
The notification specifically mentioned the Registrar of Co operative Societies of the State of Andhra Pradesh.
As a result of this notification the powers of the Registrar of Co Operative Societies under the State Act of 1952, which were divested by the appointment of the Central Registrar. were immediately restored to him.
In 1960, the State Registrar of Co operative Societies passed an order of dissolution of the Society under section 53 of the 1952 Act and appointed a liquidator.
In the State budget for.
the year 1959 60 provision was made for payment of certain sums of money to the appellant society.
The respondent, a decree holder of the Co operative Society, in an execution petition sought attachment.
Out of the sum provided in the budget, a certain sum due to him from the appellant society contending that the sum mentioned in the budget was a debt due to the appellant society.
The execution court issued a prohibitory order to the Commissioner of Civil Supplies and the Accountant General to hold the said sum until further orders.
On appeal the High Court held that the mere fact that the Commissioner of Civil Supplies, in whose custody the money was, directed the concerned officials to make payments to the co operative society as and when occasion arose did not mean that the amount became the property of the Society.
It further held that the attachment and prohibitory order were invalid.
As regards the order of liquidation the High Court held that it could not be sustained because the delegation made under section 5B of the 1942 Act was incompetent. ^ HELD: The budget provision fastened on to the claim of the co operative society against the State and it ripened into a debt payable to the Co operative Society.
(a) Attachment of debts is a purpose by means of which a judgment creditor is enabled to reach money due to the judgment debtor which is in the hands of a third person.
These are garnishee proceedings.
To be capable of attachment 160 there must be in existence at the date when the attachment becomes operative something which the law recognises as a debt.
So long as there is a debt in existence it is not necessary that it should be immediately payable.
Where any existing debt is payable by future instalments, the garnishee order may be made to become operative as and when each instalment becomes due.
The debt must be one which the judgment debtor could himself enforce for his own benefit.
[163D F] The facts in present case establish that there was a debt due to the cooperative society and the attachment was validly made.
The amount in dispute was not a mere budget provision bull the documents show that the amount ripened into a date and an order for payment to the co operative society.
The sum was impressed with the character of a debt due to the co operative society and it was validly attached.
[163 F G] (b) The contention that the amount was not brought t into court and, therefore the provision lapsed is devoid of substance.
The letter written by the Accountant General to the court is tantamount to the money being nationally brought to the court. 'the Accountant General said that the payment was not to be made except with the concurrence of the court.
Thus it came into the control of and was held on behalf of the court.
[163A B] 2(a) The order of delegation is valid and the State Registrar was competent to dissolve the co operative society.
The contention of the decree holder that the expression "any power or authority exercisable by the Central Registrar of Co operative Societies under this Act` in section 5B means only powers or authority under .
5A of the Act is unsound.
That expression takes m all powers under the 1942 Act including those under section 4(2) which are the powers under the State Act embodied by reference in that section.
[165F 166B] (b) The provisions contained in section 5B of the 1942 Act do not have any words of restriction in their application only to section 5A of the Act.
On the contrary, the provisions in section 5B of the Act speak of delegation of power or authority exercisable by the Central Registrar under the 1942 Act.
Whatever powers are exercisable by the Central Registrar by reason of section 4(2) are capable of being delegated by reason of provisions contained in section 5B of the 1942 Act.
The delegation by the Central Government of the powers exercisable by the Central Registrar to be exercised by the State Registrar is supported by the provisions of the 1942 Act.
[166B D] (c) The decree holder could, therefore prefer the claim on account of attachment before the liquidator who would make appropriate orders for payment of appropriate amount to the decree holder.
[166G H]
