The election for Pandhurna Constituency for the M.P. legislative Assembly took place in March, 1970.
There were 6 candidates who contested the election.
The main contest was between respondents nos.
1 and 2.
Respondent No. 1 was declared elected.
The appellant, a voter, filed an Election Petition challenging the election on the grounds that respondent No. 1 published and circulated a leaflet containing defamatory and false averments against respondent No. 1 and it was calculated to prejudice the election prospects of respondent No. 2.
The leaflet it was alleged contained the statement of fact about the personal character or conduct of respondent No. 2.
In the leaflet it was mentioned that respondent No. 2 committed rape and he was carrying on with another woman.
The ties of respondent No. 2 were stated to have driven his wife into insanity.
Reference was also made to some other shady and unethical activities.
Before the High Court the appellant wanted to file a photostat copy of the manuscript of the leaflet which according to the appellant was written by respondent No. 1.
The High Court did not admit the aforesaid photostat copy in evidence on the ground that there was no sufficient reason for allowing the appellant to lead secondary evidence.
The High Court also held that though the material contained in the leaflet related to the personal character and conduct of respondent No. 2, the appellant failed to prove that its contents were false to The knowledge of respondent No. 1, and he did not believe them to be true and that, therefore, the corrupt practice defined in section 123(4) of the Representation of the People Act was not proved.
While dismissing the appeal this Court held: ^ Under section 65(a) of the Indian Evidence Act, secondary evidence may been of the existence, condition or contents of a document when the original is shown or appears to be in the possession or power of the person against whom the document is sought to be proved or when a person refuses to produce it.
There was no affidavit that the original document was in possession of respondent No. 1.
The photostat copy appeared to the High Court to be not above suspicion.
In view of all the circumstances, the High Court rightly came to the conclusion that no foundation was laid by the appellant for leading secondary evidence in the shape of photostat copy.
There is no evidence on record to show that the contents of the leaflet were false.
The respondent No. 2 was not examined as a witness.
No other evidence was also led of any person who knew about the character or conduct of respondent No. 2 to show that the statements contained in the leaflet in question were false.
Apart from the other requirements, it is of the essence of section 123(4) of the Representation of the People Act.
1951 that the impugned statement of fact in relation to the personal character or conduct of a candidate.
which is alleged to have been published should be false [249D, F 250D]
