Rule 3(1)(ii) of the Orissa Industries Service Rules, 1971, provided that the junior grade of the service shall include the posts of Deputy Directors, Senior lecturers in Engineering, Schools etc.
besides the posts of Principal, Engineering Schools (except Mining Engineering) and Polytechnics which carry a special scale of pay.
The 1st respondent was appointed a lecturer in a Mining Engineering School.
In 1960, the School was brought under the administrative Control of the Industries Department of the State Government, and the respondent became an officer of the Industries Department.
Later.
he was appointed Principal of the School.
In 1964, there was a bifurcation of the common cadre of the Department, and a separate cadre for teaching posts of Engineering Schools in the State was created.
In 1967, the two cadres were again merged forming a combined cadre for the officers of the Industries Department.
The reason given for the merger was that the separate cadre for teachers was not beneficial to them because, promotion prospects for them were bleak in view of the limited posts available for promotion.
After the merger, in 1969, even though the 1st respondent was senior to the 2nd respondent, the latter was promoted as Joint Director superseding the former.
The High Court quashed the order and struck down r. 3(1)(ii) as violative of article 16.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court, ^ HELD: (1) In the resolution of 1967 merging the two cadres it was stated that the conditions of service of all the officers will be governed by a set of cadre rules to be framed later, but no such rules were framed at the time of promotion of the 2nd respondent.
The 1971 rules were framed during the pendency of the writ application, filed by the 1st respondent, in the High Court.
There was, therefore, at the time of promotion of the 2nd respondent, nothing to show that the post of a teacher or the Principal of a Mining Engineering School WAS treated as an ex cadre post and on a separate footing for the purpose of promotion to the administrative posts.
[303G H] (2) Rule 3(1)(ii) when it says in the first part Senior lecturers in Engineering Schools, it includes senior lecturers of Mining Engineering School also.
Even when the two cadres were separated, all Engineering Schools including Mining Engineering Schools were placed on the SAME Footing.
But, in the last part of the rule when referring to the post of Principal, the Principal of a Mining Engineering School is excluded.
The exclusion is without any justification or reasonable basis.
[304E H] Therefore, the rule is violative of articles 14 and 16 and the non consideration of the case of the 1st respondent at the time of promotion of the 2nd respondent was wholly arbitrary and illegal.
[33H; 304H] (3) It is however not necessary to strike down the entire rule 3(1)(ii).
It is sufficient if the words 'except Mining Engineering ' are struck down and deleted.
[304H]
