An application for delivery of interrogatories is one of the logical steps in aid of the prosecution of an election petition and is fully covered by section 87 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
C(1) (1) Order XI, C.P.C., forms part of the trial of suits and is not a special procedure.
Order X relates to the procedure for examination of parties by the Court and o. XI, is a part of it, because, it provides for examination through interrogatories, when personal appearance is not possible.
[262A B] (2) Before Act 47 of 1966 amended the Representation of the People Act, 1951, the power to try election petitions was conferred on the Erection Tribunal.
That Tribunal was not a Civil Court but was deemed to be a Civil Court.
Though section 90, as it then stood, provided that every election petition shall be tried, as nearly as may be, in accordance with the procedure under the C.P.C., in order to avoid doubts, the special powers under O. Xl, C.P.C., were conferred on the Tribunal by section 92.
When Parliament has expressly conferred the powers contained in O.XI on the Tribunal, it could not be contended that the principles contained therein are excluded from the trial of election petitions, on the basis of English Law.
[257F H] (3) After the amendment of 1966, as election petitions are to be tried by the High Court, a Court of Record, section 87, which is based on the repealed section 90, is sufficient to contain the entire procedure to be adopted by the High Court in trying election petitions.
Section 87 is of widest amplitude so as to cover the entire procedure mentioned in the Code of Civil Procedure with only two exceptions, (a) when the Act contains express provision for certain matters which are inconsistent with the procedure prescribed by the Code; and (b) when a particular provision of the Code is either expressly or by necessary intendment excluded by the Act.
That is why a provision like the repealed section 92 is unnecessary; and it cannot be contended that since Parliament repealed that section, Parliament intended that the provisions of O. XI, C.P.C., should not apply to election petitions tried by the High Court.
[258A E; 269C D] Sitaram Hirachand Birla vs Yograisingh Shankarsingh Parihar and others, AIR 1953 Bom.
293, Durvodhan vs Sitaram and others AIR 1970 All. 1; Jugal Kishore vs Dr. Baldev Prakash AIR 1968 Punj. 152 (F.B.) and Keshari Lal Kavi and another vs Narain Prakash and others, AIR 1969 Raj. 75, referred to.
Dr. Jagjit Singh vs Giani Kartar Singh and others A.I.R. 1966 S.C. 773, and V. K. Sakleha vs Jagjiwan ; , followed.
(4) Merely because in Inamati Mallappa Basappa vs Desai Basavaraj Ayyappu and others ; it was held that the procedure contained in O. 23, r. 1 C.P.C. does not apply to election petitions it could not be contended that O. XI: C.P.C., would not also be applicable to election petitions.
Order 23, r. 1 cannot be equated with the provisions of O. XI.
Having regard to the nature of an election petition which is a matter of moment and concern to the entire constituency the notion of abandonment of the claim or withdrawal is absolutely foreign to the scope of such proceedings and must, therefore, be held to be excluded by the necessary intendment of section 87 itself.
[260H 261 B, D E] 256 ^
