An inspector of the Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking demanded a bribe for giving the complainant a power connection for his factory.
Information having been given to the anti corruption police a trap was set.
The inspector did not turn up at the appointed time to receive the money, but the appellant, a permanent labourer working under him, came to the complainant 's factory, told him that he had been sent by the Inspector, and that the money should be given to him. 'The complainant, at first, insisted that the inspector himself should come but later gave him the money.
The money was recovered from the appellant and the inspector and the appellant were charged with offences under the Prevention of Corruption Act.
The trial court acquitted the inspector but convicted the appellant under section S(2) read with section 5(1)(d) of the Act, and under section 161 I.P.C., with the aid of the presumption under section 4(1) of the Act.
The conviction was confirmed by the High Court.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, ^ HELD : ( I ) The question whether a government servant receiving money had the requisite incriminatory motive is one of fact.
[353H, 354A] (2) one of the essential ingredients of the offence under section 161, I.P.C., is that the gratification must have been received by the accused as a motive or reward for committing an act or omission in connection with his official functions.
Even if the government servant was incapable of showing any favour or rendering any service in connection with his official duties, he may be guilty; but, the existence of an understanding that the bribe was given in consideration of some official act or conduct is an important factor bearing on the question as to whether the accused had received the gratification as a motive or reward as mentioned in section 161, I.P.C. [353GH] (3 ) The appellant being a mere labourer was incapable of showing any favour or rendering any service to the complainant in connection with his official duties.
It had not been shown by the prosecution that he was in any way officially concerned with the installation of poles or the giving of electric connection; nor was it shown that the appellant made any representation, claim or promise, that he would either himself or through his inspector get an official act done for the complainant.
Or that the appellant had demanded bribe from the complainant.
[353A C, F] In the absence of any such circumstances the conduct of the appellant was not incompatible with the role of an innocent carrier of money without the requisite mens rea.
[353E] (4) The charge under section 5(1)(d) also is unsustainable because, it could not be reasonably said that the appellant obtained the money by using corrupt or illegal means or otherwise abusing his official position, as a public servant (5) Section 4(1) of the Prevention of Corruption Act Provides that in the trial of an offence punishable under section 161 or 165, I.P.C., or under cls.
(a) or (b) of 5 5(1) read with sub section
5(2) of the Act, if the prosecution proves that the accused had accepted or obtained a gratification other than legal remuneration the court has to presume that the gratification was accepted or obtained by the accused as a motive or reward as mentioned in section 161, I.P.C. [351 H, 52B] 349 (6) (a) The presumption, however, is not absolute and is rebuttable.
The quantum and nature of proof required to displace the presumption, varies according to the circumstances of each case.
Such proof may partake of the shape of defence evidence adduced by the accused or, it may consist of circumstances appearing in the prosecution evidence itself as a result of cross examination or otherwise.
While the mere explanation given by the accused in his examination under section 342, Cr. P.C., may not b enough the burden on him to negate the presumption may stand discharged, if the effect of the material brought on record, in its totality renders the existence of the fact to be presumed improbable.
The accused may, therefore, rebut the presumption by showing a more preponderance of probability in his favour and it is not necessary for him to establish his case beyond reasonable doubt.
[352 CF]] Mahesh Prasad Gupta vs State of Rajasthan, ; followed. (b) Further, the sole purpose of the presumption under section 4(1) is to relieve the prosecution of the burden of proving a fact which is an essential ingredient of the offence under section 5(1) and (2) of the Act and section 161, I.P.C. The presumption, therefore, can be used only in furtherance of the prosecution case and not in derogation of it.
[352F G] (c) In the present case.
the statutory presumption being antithetical to the prosecution story, namely, that it was the inspector who demanded the bribe for showing a favour and that the payment was intended for him, could not be availed of by the Prosecution against the appellant.
[354 CD] (7) Nor can the appellant be held guilty of abetting the alleged attempt made by the inspector to obtain illegal gratification.
Intention to aid the conn mission of the crime is the gist of the offence of abetment, and such intention on the part of the appellant is lacking in this case.
It has not been shown that the appellant was present any occasion when the inspector demanded the bribe.
[354 D G] (8) Moreover, the principal accused had been acquitted.
The prosecution having failed to prove that the money had been paid to the appellant pursuant to the demand for a bribe by the inspector, the court cannot make out a new cause for the prosecution and hold that the amount had been.
received by the appellant on his own or for some person other than the inspector.
[355 B, D]
