Representation of the People Act, 1951, s.77 Election expenses Failure of successful candidate to maintain account in prescribed manner, if constitutes corrupt practice.
The appellant and the respondent were the main candidates in the election lo the Rajasthan Legislative Assembly from the Karauli constituency.
The result of the election was declared on March 12, 1972 and the respondent was declared elected.
The appellant challenged the election of the respondent on the ground that the respondent and his election agent Jagdish Pal published and got published statements of fact in relation to the personal character and conduct of the appellant which were false and which they believed to be false or did not believe to be true and which statements were reasonably calculated to prejudice the prospects of the appellant 's election.
The second ground on which the election of ' the respondent was assailed was that the respondent and his election agent deliberately failed to maintain regular and correct account I : of expenses incurred by them in connection with the election and that they incurred or authorised expenditure in contravention of s.77 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
The petition was resisted by the respondent and he denied the various allegations made by the appellant.
Five issues were framed on the basis of the pleadings before the High Court Issues (1) and (2) were decided against the appellant.
These issues related to the first ground.
The view of the findings on these issues, issue (3) was held not to arise.
Issues (4) and (5) relating to expenses were also decided against the appellant.
As a result, the election petition was dismissed.
This appeal has been preferred by the appellant against the judgment of the High Court dismissing his election petition.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: (i) It is well established that in an election appeal Supreme Court should not interfere with a finding of fact recorded by the High Court based upon the appraisement of evidence unless such finding is vitiated by some glaring infirmity.
[420F] F (ii) Even if the account of election expenses was not maintained in the prescribed manner, that fact would not constitute a corrupt practice.
[419G] (iii) The High Court has considered the evidence brought on record and has held on appraisement of that evidence that there was no cogent material to show that the respondent had incurred any expenditure over and above what had been shown in his return.
No cogent ground whatsoever has been made out lo interfere with the appraisement of the evidence by the High Court.
[419H 420 A] G (iv) The correctness of the figure of Rs. 3,523.27 as expenses incurred for the purchase of petrol is vouchsafed by the statement of account filed by Karauli Auto Stores a family concern of the respondent.
Nothing has been shown as to why the statement of account field by that concern cannot be accepted.
During the pendency of the trial on application filed by the appellant.
the High Court directed that the account books maintained by the respondent as well as the cash book and the credit and cash vouchers of Karauli Auto Stores might be shown to the appellant 's counsel.
In spite of that order the appellant or his counsel did not examine those account books and documents.
Nothing was consequently brought on record to question the correctness of the entries in the account books.
[420B C] 417 (V) The High Court declined to accept the oral evidence adduced by the appellant in support of his plea that the account does not correctly show the expenses regarding certain number of vehicles engaged by him.
The evidence adduced by the appellant was not only not supported by any documents, it ran counter to the documents which were produced by the respondent and some of which had been signed by the witnesses produced by the appellant.
[420EF] (vi) The plea of the respondent that he was charged only Rs. 35/ as daily hiring charge for the truck because he presented the requiring of those trucks by making a representation that they were needed for his election compaign, has been accepted by the High Court as plausible.
There is nothing cogent made out as to why a contrary view should be taken.
[420H] (vii) So far as the impugned issues of Hindi daily Kronch and pamphlet Ex.2 are concerned, there is no cogent evidence to show on the record that Radhey Shyam Sharma published those issues and the pamphlet at the instance of or with the consent of the respondent or his election agent.
It is indeed evident from the use of Kronch dated October 15, 1970 that Radhey Shyam Sharma was hostile to the appellant and had been criticising him since 1970 about 14 months before the election.
There is, therefore, nothing to rule out the possibility that Radhey Shyam Sharma published the impugned issues and pamphlet at his own and without the consent of the responaent or his election agent.
[421AB]
