The appellant was prosecuted for having purchased a certain quantity of ginger without obtaining a licence as required by the Gujarat Agricultural Produce Markets Act.
The trial court accepted the factum of purchase but it acquitted the appellant on the ground that the relevant notification in regard to the inclusion of ginger was not shown to have been promulgated and published as required by the Act.
On appeal, the High Court reversed the acquittal and sentenced the appellant to a fine of Rs. 10/ .
The High Court proceeded on the assumption that the notifications were property made.
In the erstwhile composite State of Bombay there was in operation The Bombay Agricultural Produce Markets Act of 1939.
On the bifurcation of the State in 1960 the said 1939 Act was extended by an appropriate order to the State of Gujarat.
That Act remained in operation in Gujarat till the year 1964 in which year the present Act came into force.
Section 5 of the Act requires the Director to notify in the Official Gazette his intention to regulate the purchase and sale of agricultural produce.
The section also requires the publication in Gujarati in a newspaper having circulation in the area.
The section further requires that the objections should be invited from the public.
Section 6(1) provides that after the expiry of the period for making objections and after considering the objections and suggestions received and after holding necessary inquiry, the Director may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare the area specified in the said notification to be a market area in respect of the agricultural produce to be specified in the notification.
Sub section (1) of section 6 further requires that the notification under the said section shall be published in Gujarati in a newspaper having circulation in the said area.
Sub section (5) of section 6 provides that the Director may, at any time by notification in the official gazette, exclude any area from a market area specified in a notification issued under sub section
(1) or include any area therein and exclude from or add to the kinds of agricultural produce so specified.
The sale or purchase of the agricultural produce concerned without a licence is made an offence by section 36 of the Act.
On appeal by special leave, the appellant contended that the notification under section 6(5) of the Act, covering additional varieties of agricultural produce, must not only be published in the Official gazette but must also be published in Gujarati in a newspaper.
The respondent contended that (1) the procedure in regard to the publication which is laid down in sub section
(1) of section 6 must be restricted to notifications issued under that sub section and cannot be extended to those issued under sub section (5) of section 6; (2) Assuming that the words "this section" are wide enough to cover every sub section of section 6.
the word 'shall ' ought to be read as 'may '.
^ HELD: (1) Section 6(1) means what it says.
That is the normal rule of construction of statutes, a rule not certainly absolute and unqualified, but the conditions which bring into play the exceptions to that rule did not exist.
It is not reasonable to assume in the legislature an ignorance of the distinction between a "section" of the statute and the "sub section" of that section.
The requirement 452 laid down by section 6(1) that a notification under "this section" shall also be published in Gujarati in a newspaper would govern any and every notification issued under any par of section 6, that is to say, under any of the sub sections of section 6.
[455E G] (2) Sometimes the legislature does not say what it means.
That has given rise to a series of technical rules of interpretation devised or designed to unraval the mind of the law makers.
The words of the concluding portion of section 6(1) are plain and unambiguous rendering superfluous the aid of artificial guide lines to interpretation.
[455H 456A] (3) "Shall" must normally be construed to mean "shall" and not "may", for the distinction between the two is fundamental.
The use of the word "shall" or "may" is not conclusive on the question whether the particular requirement of law is mandatory or directory.
In each case one must look to the subject matter and consider the importance of the provision disregarded and the relation of that provision to the general object intended to be secured.
It is the duty of courts to get at the real intention of the legislature by carefully attending to the whole scope of the provision to be construed.
The amendment to section 6(1) notification in regard to matters described therein is equated with a fresh declaration of intention in regard to those matters, rendering it obligatory to follow afresh the whole of the procedure prescribed by section 5.
The object of these requirements is quite clear.
The fresh notification can be issued only after considering the objections and suggestions which the Director receives within the specified time.
In fact, the initial notification has to state expressly that the Director shall consider the objections and suggestions received by him within the stated period.
The publication of the notification in the Official Gazette was evidently thought by the legislature not an adequate means of communicating the Director 's intention to those who would be vitally affected by the proposed declaration and who would therefore be interested in offering their objections and suggestions.
It is a matter of common knowledge that publication in a newspaper attracts greater public attention than publication in the official gazette.
That is why the legislature has taken care to direct that the notification shall also be published in Gujarati in a newspaper.
A violation of this requirement is likely to affect valuable rights of traders and agriculturists because in the absence of proper and adequate publicity their right of trade and business shall have been hampered without affording to them an opportunity to offer objections and suggestions.
Once an area is declared to be a market area.
no place in the said area can be used for the purchase or sale of any agricultural produce specified in the notification without the necessary licence.
A violation of the said provisions attracts penal consequences under section 36.
It is.
therefore, vital from the point of view of the citizens ' right to carry on trade or business, no less than for the consideration that violation of the Act leads to penal consequences, that the notification must receive due publicity.
There is something in the very nature of the duty imposed by sections 5 and 6.
something in the very object for which the duty is cast.
that the duty must be performed.
[456C, 458B, F H, 459A B] (4) The legislative history of the Act reinforces this conclusion.
In the Bombay Act, which was made applicable to Gujarat till 1964, it was not necessary to publish in the newspaper notifications corresponding to section 6(5) notifications under the new Act.
The Gujarat Legislature, having before it the model of the Bombay Act.
made a conscious departure from it by providing for the publication of the notification in a newspaper and by substituting the word 'shall ' for the word 'may '.
[459D F] (5) A notification under section 6 must be published in Gujarati in a newspaper.
This requirement is mandatory and must be fulfilled.
Admittedly, the notification in question was not published in a newspaper at all, much less in Gujarati.
Accordingly, the inclusion of new varieties of agricultural produce in that notification lacks legal validity and no prosecution can be founded upon its breach.
[459E H] (6) The High Court took into consideration a wrong notification.
Reliance on the earlier judgment of Gujarat High Court on the construction of the Bombay Act was also wrong since the language there was wholly different.
[460E G] 453
