The respondent landlord filled a suit for eviction against the appellant tenant on the ground that the appellant had sublet a portion of the premises.
The trial court and the First Appellate Court came to the conclusion that on the date when the notice terminating the tenancy was served on the appellant, he did, in fact, sublet a portion of the suit premises.
The courts, however, came to the conclusion that on the date when the respondent instituted the eviction suit the sub letting had ceased.
The trial court and the lower appellate court granted a decree of eviction in favour of the respondent.
A revision filed by the appellant before the High Court also failed.
Section 13(1)(e) of the Bombay Rents Act makes a ground of eviction, "that the tenant has, since the coming into operation of ' this Act, unlawfully sublet. " On appeal by special leave, it was contended by the appellant that the expression "has sublet" pre supposes that subletting must continue till the date of the institution of the suit.
Dismissing the appeal.
^ HELD: (1) The tenant is disentitled to any protection under the Bombay Rent Act if he is within the mischief of the provisions of section 13(1)(e).
To accede to the contention of the appellant would mean that a tenant would not be within the mischief of unlawful subletting if after the landlord gives a notice terminating the tenancy on the ground of unlawful subletting the sub tenant vacates.
The landlord will not be able to get any relief against the tenant in spite of unlawful subletting.
In that way the tenant can foil the attempt of landlord to obtain possession of the Premises on the ground of subletting every time by getting the sub tenant to vacate the premises.
[538 D] (2) The tenant 's liability to eviction arises when the fact of unlawful subletting is proved.
At the date of the notice if it is proved that there was unlawful subletting, the tenant is liable to be evicted.
[538 D] Maganlal Narandas Thakkar & Anr.
vs Arjun BhanjiKanbi [969]G.L.R. Vol.
10 p. 627 Goppulal vs Thakurji Shriji Shriji Dwarkadheeshji & Anr.
; , distinguished.
