(1) The jurisdiction of the High Court to issue a writ of certiorari under article 226 is a supervisory jurisdiction, and not as an appellate court.
The findings of fact reached by an inferior court or tribunal as result of the appreciation of evidence are not reopened or questioned in these proceedings.
An error of law which is apparent on the face of record can be corrected but not an error of fact, however grave it may be.
In regard to a finding of fact recorded by a tribunal a writ can be issued if it is shown that the tribunal had erroneously refuged to admit admissible and material evidence or had erroneously admitted inadmissible evidence which has influenced the impugned finding.
Again, if a finding of fact is based on the evidence, that would be regarded as an error of law which can be corrected be a writ of ' certiorari, but if there is some evidence which may reasonably support the conclusion, its adequacy or sufficiency and the inference of ' fact drawn, are within the exclusive jurisdiction of the tribunal.
The Court is concerned to determine whether the inquiry is held by an authority competent in that behalf, and according to the procedure prescribed in that behalf, and whether the rules of natural justice are not violated.
Therefore, in departmental enquires relating to the guilt of delinquent officers, the High Court may interfere only where the departmental authorities have held tax proceedings against the delinquent officer in a manner inconsistent with the rules of natural justice or in violation of the statutory rules prescribing the mode of inquiry or where the authorities have disabled themselves from reaching a fair decision by some considerations extraneous to the evidence and the merits of the case, or by allowing themselves to be influenced by irrelevant considerations or where the conclusion, on the very face of it, is so wholly arbitrary and capricious that no reasonable person could ever have arrived at that conclusion.
[525 E 527B] State of Andhra Pradesh vs section Sree Rama Rao ; Railway Board, representing the Union of India New Delhi & Anr.
vs Niranjan Singh ; and Syed Yakoob vs K. section Radhakrishnan & Ors.
[1964] 5 S.C.R. 64, referred to.
(2) There is no warrant for the view that in considering whether a public officer is guilty of misconduct charged against him the rule followed in criminal trials, namely, that an offence is not established unless proved beyond reason able doubt, must be applied.
[525F G] In the present case, charges that the respondent fraudulently claimed travelling allowance were inquired into by the Disciplinary Proceedings Tribunal.
The Tribunal found him guilty and recommended dismissal.
The Government accept ed the recommendation and dismissed the respondent.
In a writ petition challenging the order of dismissal, the High Court equated the charge of mis conduct to a charge under s.5(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 discussed the evidence and findings of the Tribunal on that basis and held that the prosecution did not adduce material and essential evidence namely; the conductor 's chart which would show whether the respondent travelled on a particular day, that a statement made by the respondent during investigation was not admissible in evidence, that it was not safe to rely on it and set aside the order of dismissal.
Allowing the appeal to this Court.
^ HELD .
(a) The High Court was not correct in holding that the domestic inquiry before the Tribunal was the same as prosecution is a criminal case.
[525C D] 3 L925SupCI/75 522 (b) The respondent was given full opportunity to explain the statement A made by him during investigation.
Further, the Tribunal did not base its findings only on that statement.
It had given its reasons for its conclusion and it is not possible for the High Court to say that no reasonable person could have arrived at that conclusion.
The High Court had accepted the explanation that the conductors ' charts were destroyed and therefore could not be Produced.
Moreover, the conductor 's chart would not show the names of the persons paying the money.
The High Court reviewed and re assessed the evidence and then rejected evidence as no evidence, and this is precisely what the High Court, in exercising jurisdiction under Art 226, should not do.
[525SC; 527B D] (c) The respondent 's contention that the Tribunal relied upon certain reports which were not available to the respondent is not correct.
A reference to the inquiry report of the Tribunal shows that the Tribunal had not relied upon those documents for finding the respondent guilty.
[527G 528B]
