Section 123(1) of the , provided that, where any goods to which this section applies are seized under this Act in the reasonable relief that they are smuggled goods, the burden of proving that they are not smuggled goods shall be on the person from whose possession the goods were seized.
On 21 4 1967 Police officers of the Anti Corruption and Prohibition Bureau.
Greater Bombay, acting on information received, had searched room No. 10 at 56, Sheriff Deoji Street Bombay.
This room was divided by petitions into three parts.
In the central portion the police found the appellant and three other persons.
This portion was again sub divided with a locked connecting door fixed in the passage to the sub divided part.
This was opened by one of the two Godrej lock keys produced by the appellant from a side pocket of his trousers.
Eleven wooden boxes covered with jute cloth and secured by iron strips were found there.
On opening them.
six of them were found to contain cigarette lighters of "Imco Triplex Junior" brand "Made in Austria.".
Each of the six boxes were tightly packed with 1 200 lighters.
The remaining five boxes contained fifty sealed tins of flints for cigarette lighters which bore the Following writing: "Tego Lighter Flints of Superior Quality Made in Germany" inscribed on them.
A panchnama was prepared before Panchas.
A rent receipt in the name of the appellant in respect of room No. 10, in this house, of which a portion was occupied by the appellant, and a bill for the consumption of electricity were also seized from the custody of the appellant together with the Godrej locks and the keys produced by the appellant.
On 30th October.
1968 the Assistant Collector of ' Central Excise, Marine and Prevention Division.
Bombay, filed a complaint alleging that the appellant had committed offences punishable under Section 135(a) and (b) of the .
The appellant had denied being in possession of the offending goods although he had admitted the production of keys from his possession.
The trying Presidency Magistrate convicted him under section 135(b)(ii) of the and sentenced him to six months rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 2,000/ , and in default, to three months further rigorous imprisonment.
The High Court dismissed his appeal.
This appeal has been preferred on the basis of the special leave granted by this Court.
It was contended for the appellant that: (1) the presumption contained in s.123(1) of the Act would not place the onus of proving innocent possession of the goods in question upon the appellant; and, (ii) the goods in respect of which the appellant was prosecuted were not seized under the Act.
Rejecting the contentions and dismissing the appeal.
the court ^ HELD: (1) Though lighters and flints were notified provided in Section 123(2), in the official Gazette of 26 8 1967 the provisions of Section 123(1) which only lay down a procedural rule, could be applied when the case came up for.
trial before the Presidency Magistrate.
He divided it on 15 7 1969.
The complaint itself ' was filed on 30 10 1968.
It is immaterial that the appellant was round in possession of the goods on 21 4 1967.
[542 B C] (ii) The very appearance of the goods and the manner in which they were packed indicated that they were newly manufactured and brought into this country very recently from another country.
The inscriptions on them and writing on the boxes were Parts of the state in which the goods in unopened boxes were found from which inferences about their origin and recent import 540 could arise.
The appellant 's conduct, including his untruthful denial of their h possession, indicated consciousness of their smuggled character or means rea.
There was some evidence to enable the courts to come to the conclusion that the goods must have been known to the appellant to be smuggled even if he was not party to a fraudulent evasion of duty.
[543 B D] Gian Chand & ors.
vs The State of Punjab, [1962] Suppl.
l S.C.R. 364 Collector of Customs, Madras & ors.
vs D. Bhoormull ; M/s, Kanungo & Co. vs The Collector of Customs, Calcutta & ORS.
A.I. R. 1972 S.C. 2136, Issaradas Daulat Ram & ors vs The Union of India & ors [1962] Suppl.
1 S.C.R. 358, Gopal Sheorey vs The State of Bombay ; and The State of Punjab vs Gian Chand & ors.
Criminal Appeal No. 195 of 1962 decided by this court on 2 4 1968, referred to.
