The plaintiff appellant entered into an agreement with the respondent to supply electrical energy to the respondent in 1944.
This agreement expired towards the end of January 1951, and which was to commence from February 1951, was executed between the parties.
This agreements was to ensure for a period of five years.
Clause 3 of the agreement first of ' all stipulated that in normal times, the Municipality was bound to take supply.
Of electrical energy for a minimum period of 16 hours a day and in view of this minimum guarantee Company would supply electricity for a maximum period of 20 hours a day.
In doing, this, however four hours, namely, from 6 p.m. to 10 p.m would be excluded.
The plaintiff averred that under the agreement the agreement was bound to consume electrical energy for 16 hours a day and pay the minimum charges even if no actual consumption was made. 'This claim was put forward by the plaintiff in December.
1953 on the basis of` clause 3 of the agreement Consequent upon its claim the plaintiff.
sent a number of bills to the defendant which it refused to pay and hence the present in was instituted on February ' ',.
Before the Trial Court the defendant Municipality denied the allegations of ' the plaintiff and averred that under.
the terms of the agreement the.
Municipality was not bound to pay to the plaintiff Company any minimum charges even if the electrical energy was not consumed.
It was also alleged the even if there was any such clause in the agreement it was void under section 23 of the .
The Trial Court accepted the defendant 's plea and dismissed the suit.
The plaintiff thereupon preferred an appeal to the High Court of Bombay. 'the high Court dismissed the appeal holding that the minimum charges were given only in clause 2 of the agreement and that clause 3 could be of ' no assistance to the appellant.
Allowing the appeal by special leave.
^ HELD: (i) An analysis of clauses 2 and 3 of the agreement clearly shows that these clauses are independent and separate provisions dealing with different contingencies.
The terms of clause 3 are absolutely clear and unambiguous and it was not at all necessary for the High Court to halve gone into 1 a plethora of extraneous circumstances when the terms of that document do not admit of any ambiguity.
The High Court seems to have completely overlooked the fact that clause 3 of the agreement embodied what is known in common parlance as the doctrine of minimum guarantee i.e. the Company was assured of a minimum consumption of electrical energy by the Municipality and for the payment of the same whether it was consumed or not.
That was the reason why the Company was prepared to charge a minimum rate of 0.5 anna per unit over and above the first 50 units.
The minimum charge of 0.5 anna per unit, therefore.
was actually the consideration for the minimum guarantee allowed to the plaintiff under clause 3 of the agreement.
[638 H. 639 C D] (ii) Clauses 2 and 3 of the agreement are in consonance with the spirit and letter of the proviso to s.22 of the .
A bare reading of clause 3 is sufficient to which ensures a provision for minimum guarantee for the supply of electricity.
[639 & G]
