Section 5(1) of the , provides two types of procedure for fixing and revising minimum wages in respect of any scheduled employment.
Section 7 provides for the appointment of an Advisory Board.
If the procedure provided in s.5(1) (a) is followed consultation with the Advisory Board is not u required while it is mandatory in case the procedure in cl.
(b) is followed.
Under cl.
(a), the Government can appoint as many Committees or sub committees as it considers necessary to hold inquiries and advise it in respect of such fixation or revision.
Section 9 requires that every committee, sub committee and the Advisory Board shall consist of representatives of the employers and employees in equal numbers and independent persons, whose number shall not exceed 1/3 of the total number of members.
One of the independent persons shall be appointed Chairman.
[643 G 644 F] In the present case the State Government followed the procedure under cl.
(a) and appointed a committee for revising the wages with respect to employment in Mica Mines which is a scheduled employment under the Act.
The committee consisted of five members, two representative of the employers,.
two of the employes and a Professor of ' Economics of a Government college as an independent member.
It submitted its report to the Government.
The Government referred the matter to the Advisory Board which consisted of 21 members, 8 representatives of the employers.
8 of the employees and 5 government officers as independent members.
The Advisory Board appointed a sub committee to further into matter.
In the sub committee were taken same persons who were, not members of the Advisory Board.
The sub committee made its recommendations and the Advisory Board after considering those recommendations also submitted its report and the State Government accepted it with slight variations and fixed minimum wages by a notification.
The respondent challenged its validity and the High Court struck it down holding that, (i) the constitution of The Wage Committee and the Advisory Board was not valid because the economics professor and the 5 government member were not independent members, (ii) the Board had exceeded its power.
in appointing a sub committee.
(iii) the Board committed an illegality in taking into consideration its recommendations while submitting its report to the Government.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, ^ HELD :(1) It may be that in certain circumstances persons who are in service of ' the Government may cease to have an independent character if the question arises of fixation of minimum wages in a scheduled employment.
the case of fixation of minimum wages in a scheduled employment in which the Government is directly interested, whether Government servants can come in the category of independent members in addition to the Government officer who come on the Board or Committee as representatives of the employers is a matter which has to be considered in an appropriate case.
But in the instant case the constitution of the Wage Committee or the Advisory Board was not bad as Government was not an employer in the Mica Mines in respect of which minimum wages were fixed.
[646 A E] The State of Andhra Pradesh vs Narayana Velur Beedi Manufacturing Factory and others [1973] I Labour Law Journal, 476, followed.
642 (2) The Advisory Board can device its own procedure and collect information by appointment of sub committees consisting only of some of its members.
But the Advisory Board has no power to appoint a rival subcommittee to the one appointed by the Government and take in such subcommittee, persons who are not members of the Board as was done in this case.
Therefore.
the Advisory Board committed an irregularity in appointing the sub committee and taking into consideration its report.
[646 E G] (3) But it does not follow that the impugned notification based upon the report of the Advisory Board was bad even is the irregularity is assumed to be an illegality.
The recommendations made by the Board even on consideration of the report of its sub committee was only that of the Advisor Board.
Since the procedure was under section 5(1)(a) it was not mandatory for Government to take the opinion of the Advisory Board at all.
Therefore, the impugned notification and the proceedings pursuant to it cannot be quashed [646 G 647 B] Gulamahamed Tarasaheb, a Bidi factory by its proprietors Shamrao and other vs State of Bombay and ' others A.I.R. 1962 Bombay 97 referred to.
