On a report given by the father, regarding the disappearance of his two daughters, investigation was taken up by the D.S.P. because of certain special circumstances.
After completing the investigation, A 2, a sub inspector of police, A 1, his friend, and another were charged with offenses under sections 120B, 366, 376.
302/34, 201, 218, 468/34, and 324 I.P.C. for conspiracy, abduction, rape, murder, calling evidence of crime to disappear, fabricating reports, forgery and causing hurt.
The trial court acquitted all the accused.
On appeal by the State, the High Court convicted A.1 and A.2 for offences under sections 201, 218 and 468 I.P.C. Dismissing the appeal to this Court, ^ HELD: (1) In order to bring home an offence under section 201, I.P.C., the prosecution has to prove; (a) that an offence has been committed; (b) that the accused knew or had reason to believe that the offence has been committed; (c) that with such knowledge or belief he, (1) caused any evidence of the commission of that offence to disappear, or, (ii) gave any information`respecting that offence which he then knew or believed to be false; (d) that he did so with the intention of screening the offender from legal punishment; and (e ) if the charge be of an aggravated form, as in the present case, that the offence in respect of which the accused caused evidence to disappear was punishable with death or with imprisonment for life or with imprisonment extending to 10 years.
[610A E] Whether the circumstantial evidence in a particular case is sufficient and safe enough to warrant a finding that an offence has been committed, is a question which belongs to the realm of facts and not of law.
So is the question whether the accused knew or had reason to believe that such an offence has been committed.
[617H 618B] F Palvinder Kaur vs State of Punjab , explained.
(2) In the present case the two girls died an unnatural death.
The corpse of one was found on a beach having been washed ashore and the Corpse of the other was seen floating in the sea.
A fisherman who noticed the second body saw marks indicating throttling.
He removed a wrist watch and ornament, from it and allowed the body to drift away.
The wrist watch and ornaments were identified as belonging to the younger sister of the first victim.
The 3 possibilities are, that they committed suicide by drowning, or that their deaths were accidental, or that they were done to death by some person or persons.
The choice of any of these possibilities would lead to the exclusion of the other two.
[610G H] 3(a) The elder sister was a graduate and a nature girl of 22 who used to be the leader of the College Union.
On the day of the occurrence the deceased girls along with their parents had participated in certain festivities.
They were cheerful and there was no evidence to show that they were suffering from any mental depression with suicidal tendencies.
[611E H] 603 (b) The body on the sea shore was in a semi nude condition.
It had on only blouse, brassiere, petticoat and drawers but no sari.
From the fact that it is customary for women of the locality to tie their series, tightly the possibility of the sari having been swept off be waves was remote.
This shows that she was not wearing her sari when her body was immersed in water, but no Indian woman would commit suicide by jumping into sea in such a near nude condition because.
ii would expose her body to post mortem.
indignity.
[611 H 162 C] (c) When the body was first seen there were, an injury on the forehead from which blood was oozing, a reddish abrasion on the thigh and blood marks on the drawers.
the stomach, however, was not in a bloated condition.
These circumstances show that death was not due to drowning.
[612 G; E F] (4) It was nobody s case that any boat met with an accident off or near the sea shore resulting in loss of human life.
No suggestion of accidental death of any person or woman was put to and prosecution witness.
Such a plea had not ever been put forward by the accused in their statements recorded under s, 342, Cr.
P.C. Therefore, the possibility of accidental death must also be excluded.
[613 B D] (5) This process of elimination of suicide and accidental death inevitably leads to the conclusion that the death of these two girls, or at any rate of the first victim, was due to culpable homicide.
[613 D] (6) From the very start, the investigation conducted by A. 2 was dishonest and fraudulent.
He intentionally indulged in suppessio veri and suggestio falsi.
[613 E F] (a) The morning after the night when the dead body was seen on the beach, a report was handed at the Police Station but the Head Constable returned it saying that it should be drawn up in the printed form and signed by the village Munsuff.
A little later, A 2, the sub inspector incharge of the police station, came there and the Head Constable told him about the report.
At that time A.1 and P. W. 49, also came to the Police Station, and A.1 also referred to the finding of the dead body on the seashore.
Thereafter, A.1` A 2 and P.W. 49 and others went to the seashore at about noon.
A 2 did not hold any inquest on the dead body, but instead, directed the body to be buried.
When the Karnam questioned A 2 why he did not send the body for post mortem examination, A 2 replied that the body was that of a prostitute though the body was in an identifiable condition and he new the victim personally.
He also said that it was a case of suicide and that P.W, 49 was a relation of the victim.
A.1, who heard this, also said that P.W. 49 was a relation of the victim.
Thereafter, A 2 fabricated an Inquest Report in which he stated falsely that there were no injuries on the dead body and that the stomach was bloated due to drinking of water, suggesting that it was a case of death by drowning.
He also fabricated a false report as if given to him by one who knew the victim and the other girl to be prostitutes.
That report was handed over by A 2 at the Police Station only 5 days later and he asked the Head Constable to note the date as if given 3 days before.
The Head Constable did so after some hesitation.
Inspire of persistent requests by the D.S.P., A.2 sent the copies of the F.I.R. and Inquest Report prepared by him only after an inordinate delay.
A 2 also made false entries in the General Diary of the Police Station to corroborate the false Inquest Report and the fictitious complaint.
He even tried to dissuaded the father from getting the body, which was buried, exhumed.
[605 G 607 C; 614 G 616 E] (b) It was A 2 s duty to enter faithfully and truly the substance of the information in the station diary and to record further that he was proceeding for investigation on the basis thereof when he received information from the Head Constable about the reports regarding the finding of a dead body on the seashore.
Instead of retrieving the written report that had been first received at the police station and returned by the head constable, he fabricated another document purporting to be the first information.
All the reliable witnesses for the prosecution have deposed that no such person as the one who gave the first information was present at the scene of occurrence.
When the D.S.P. was investigating into the matter, A 2 was not able to produce or give any indication about that informant though he claimed to have known him.
Efforts to trace the existence of the two prostitutes mentioned in that report were also futile leading to the inference that they were also fictitious persons.
[613 F 614 F] 604 The credible circumstantial evidence on record re inforced by the inference available from the incriminating conduct of the appellants, particularly A 2, in deliberately preparing false records to suppress the identity and the cause of death of the deceased girls fully justifies the conclusion reached by the High Court.
[611 B C] (c) Section 174, Cr.
P.C. peremptorily requires that the officer should hold an inquest on a dead body at the spot.
This mandate is conveyed by the word there occurring in section 174(1).
Section 174(3) gives a discretion to the Police officer not to sent the body for post mortem examination only in one case, namely, where there can be no doubt as to the cause of the death.
This discretion has to be exercised prudently and honestly.
[616 A C] (d) A 2 is a police officer of standing and experience, who was expected; to discharge the duties entrusted to him by law with fidelity and accuracy.
He was required to ascertain the cause of death and investigate the circumstances and the efforts in which it was brought about.
His duty was to make honest efforts to reach at the truth.
He knew the deceased and saw the injuries on her dead body and must have known that in the circumstances of the case autopsy of the dead body was necessary to ascertain the cause or her death.
He flouted all the salutary requirements of section 174.
P.C. and his conduct in distoring and suppressing material evidence and preparing false records as to the identity of the dead body the cause of death and the falsification of the data bearing on that cause, could not be explained on any reasonable hypothesis save that of his guilt.
[617 B E; 618 D F] (7) As regards A 1, his concerted conduct, including that in supporting the fraudulent misrepresentation made by A 2 to the Karnam.
regarding PW 49 being a relation of the deceased, shows that he was a guilty associate of A 2.
