The 4 appellants were tried along with 14 others for the offence of rioting in the course of which 2 murders were committed at 6 30 a.m on 7 1967.
The prosecution revealed a long standing enmity between the tyo groups; one to which the appellants belonged and the other to which the deceased belonged.
The defence case was that people belonging to the group of the deceased killed the deceased and that thereafter they attacked the 3 injured appellants.
At the trial however, the defence witnesses stated that the 3 witnesses who were injured(l a(tempted to save the deceased and were therefore injured.
The prosecution evidence suffered from some quite obvious infirmitied.
Each of the 4 injured eye witnesses while naming each of the IX accused persons as participants in the occurrence and specifying their weapons without any contradiction had failed to assign any particular part of any of them.
Each injured eye witness said that all 18 accused persons were assaulting the injured.
I his was hardly consistent with the medical evidence.
The Trial Court acquitted 11 accused giving them the benefit of doubt and convicted 7 including the 4 appellants under section 302 read with section 149.
The High Court gave the benefit of doubt to all the accused except the 4 appellants.
The High Court came to the conclusion that the 4 appellants had taken part in The attack in view of the admission of the 4 accused about their participating in the occurrence corroborated by the injuries on the bodies of 3 of them.
On appeal by Special leave it was contended by the appellants that since 14 out of 18 accused persons were actually acquitted the Court must presume that total number of assailants was less than 5 and that they.
therefore cannot be convicted under section t 49 ^ HELD: 1.
It is true that the acquittal of an accused person does raise in the eye of law, a presumption that he is innocent even if he was actually guilty.
but it is only the acquitted accused person and not the convicted accused person who can as a rule get the benefit of such a presumption.
The effect of findings on questions of fact depends upon the nature of those findings 1 only five known persons are alleged to have participated in an attack; and the counts find that 2 of them were falsely implicated it would be quite natural and logical to infer or presume that the participants were less than 5 in number.
On the other.
hand if the court holds that the assailant were actually 5 in number but there could be a doubt as to the identity of 2 of the alleged assailants and therefore acquits 2 of them the others will not get the benefit of douht.
so long as there is a firm finding based on good evidence and sound reasoning that the participants were 5 or more in number.
Such a ease is one of doubt only as to identity of some participants and not as to total number of participants.
[594A C] 2.
It is true that there are some unfirmities in the prosecution evidence However the impression of rustic witnesses sought to he conveyed through their statements cannot be interpreted as though they were made in carefully drawn up documents calling for a literal interpretation.
[592 H] 588 3.
The number and location of injuries on both sides also indicate an attack by a group of persons which must have surrounded the party of the deceased persons travelling in the Buggi.
Even is 2 persons are engaged in stopping the Buggi and there are 2 on each side of the Buggi then the number would be 6.
Again, even if one person Is assumed to be the assailant of each of the victims in a simultaneous attack upon them the number of such assailants alone would come to at least 6.
The deceased had injuries with sharp edged weapons and lathis.
It is therefore clear that each one was attacked by more than one person.
These facts were enough to come to the conclusion that the total number of assailants could not conceivably have been less than 5.
[593 C E] 4.
Even if the number of assailants could have been less than 5 (which can the facts stated was really not possible) we think that the fact that the attacking party was clearly shown to have waited for the Buggi to reach near the field of Daryao in the early hours shows pre planning.
Some of the assailants had sharp edged weapons.
They were obviously lying in wait for the Buggi to arrive.
A more convincing evidence of a pre concert was not necessary.
Therefor if necessary.
we would not have hesitated to apply section 31 of I.P.C. also to this case.
The principle of vicarious liability does not depend upon the necessity to convict the required number of persons but it depends upon proof of facts beyond reasonable doubt which makes such a principle applicable.
[594 F H 595 A] Yeshwant & Anr.
vs State of Maharashtra [1973] 1 S.C.R. 291 It 302 303 at and Sukh Ram vs State of U.P. ; distinguished.
5.The age of appellant Om Pal at the time of trial was IS years.
Section 29 of the U.P. Children Act 1951 was applicable to the case.
This question was not raised either before the Trial Court or before the High Court.
Although Om Pal accused was said to be armed with a lathi no specific part was assigned to him by the prosecution witnesses He must have been misled by the bad example of his elders.
No previous participation in such a case and no previous conviction was shown against him.
The appropriate ac(ion under section 29 of the Children Act could have been taken in his case is the question had been raised in time.
The Court recommended the remission of the remaining period of Om Pal to the authorities concerned.
[548D H. 599A C]
