Section 3 of the Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1 950, transfers all interests in estates or tenures of a proprietor or tenure holder to the State as from a date notified under section 4.
Section 6 carves out of this land mass and leaves untouched, apart from raiyati holdings the bakasht lands in Khas possession of the 'intermediary ' i.e., the prior full owner.
Several items of property were gifted by one Ram Badan Singh to his two wives whose names were duly mutated in the revenue register.
By further gift deeds and transfers the lands covered by the original gift deeds can to vest in the plaintiff and defendants, second party.
They divided them as per a partition deed Exhibit 4/a dated October 30, 1952 whereby the suit lands fell to the exclusive share, of the plaintiff along with some other items while other properties were similarly allotted to defendants 2nd party.
Despite this fact defendants, second party, sold the suit lands to the defendants first party alleging an oral partition sometime before August 1952 and under cover of that ease, committed trespass.
Thereupon, a scramble for possession of these properties and a proceeding under section 145 Cr.
P.C. ensued in which the defendants, first party, got their possession upheld by Magistrate 's order dated S 4 1954.
The plaintiff brought the present suit in April 1955 for a declaration of ' his title, for possession and mesne profits on the score that his exclusive possession was by force taken away in July August 1954 by defendants first party the latter put forward the plea of prior oral partition and exclusive hostile possession, tracing their claim through defendants second party.
The courts of tact found against the defendants and decreed the suit, but in Letters Patent Appeal, the respondents i.e., the defendants 1st party succeeded on the ground that the plaintiff had lost his title on account of the operation of sections 3 and 4 of the Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950.
In this appeal filed on the basis of the special leave granted by this court, it was contended for the appellant that (i) Section 6 of the Act applied to the facts of the case and so there was no vesting of title in the State of the suit lands; (ii) This case, resting on the Act, which had been on the statute book for several ' years, had not been set up at the earlier stages of the litigation at and should not have been permitted at the Letters Patent Appeal stage in the High Court for the first time; and (iii) The deed of partition was not legally divestative of rights in view of the provisions of the Estates Partition Act, 1897, which empowered the Collector along to partition the properties, which not having been done, the lands remained in co ownership therefore the possession of ' the defendants first party, was that of co sharers.
If that were so.
the possession of one co sharer was constructive possession of the other co sharer and the plaintiff was thus in khas possession under section 2k of the Act and, on that basis, section 6 of the Act saved the disputed properties from vesting in the State.
Rejecting the contentions except to a small extent of modifying the decree, ^ HELD: (i) It is well settled that a pure question of law going to the root or the case and based on undisputed or proven f acts could be raised even before the Court of last resort, provided the opposite side was not taken by surprise or otherwise unfairly prejudiced [745 E F] Connecticut Fire Insurance Company vs Kavanach.
, 480.
referred to.
740 In the present case the new plea springs from the common case of the, parties and nothing which may work injustice by allowance of this contention has been made out.
[746 A] (ii) The Magistrate did not direct possession of the B Schedule properties to be handed over to the defendants, first party, but declared their actual possession.
He has done no wrong nor conferred any unjust advantage.
There is no principle on which it could be held that these circumstances deprive .
party of the benefit of his possession and of the dispossession of the plaintiff flowing from s.6 of the Act.
[746D E] (iii) Neither the provisions of section 6(1) nor those of section 35 contain any prohibition against the civil court 's power to decide the issue of the and right to possession of the plaintiff and, as a necessary corollary, the claim of actual possession set up by the defendants, first party.
Nor can section 6(2) inferentially interdict the plenary power of the Civil court.
[746.A B] (iv) The partition is valid, it divests title it binds all.
but, so far as land revenue liability is concerned, it relieves parties from the burden falling on the other sharer 's land only if the exercise prescribed in the Estates Partition Act is gone through.
The statute is a protective fiscal armour, not a monorail for division among co owners to travel.
Section 7 makes it clear.
Not that Courts have lost power to decree partition nor that co owners have become powerless to separate their shares voluntarily but that land revenue shall not be prejudiced without the procedure under that Act being gone through.
More clinching is the fact that the plaintiff has here come to Court on the sole case of partition by metes and bounds and has founded his relief not as co sharer but as exclusive owner.
[747 G H, 748 Al Mahanth Ram Bhushan Das V. Ramrati Kuer, 1965 Bihar L.J. 119, referred (v) The purpose and purport of section 6(1) is to allow the large land holders to keep possession of small areas which may be designated as the private or privileged or mortgaged lands traditionally held directly and occasionally made over to others, often servants or others, in the shape of leases or mortgages.
It is obvious that section 6(1) uses the word 'including ' to permit enlargement of the meaning of khas possession for the limited purpose of that section, emphasising thereby that, but for such enlargement, the expression khas possession excludes lands outstanding even with temporary lessees.
It is perfectly plain, therefore, that khas possession has been used in the restricted sense of actual possession and to the small extent it had to be enlarged for giving relief to proprietors in respect of 'private ', 'privileged ' and mortgaged lands, inclusive expressions had to be employed.
Khas possession is actual possession.
Constructive possession or possession in law is what is covered by sub clauses of section 6(1).
It is not correct to say mat possession is so wide as to include a mere right to possess, when the actual dominion over the property is held by one in hostility to the former. [751 AB, G H, 752 C E.] (vi) In Anglo American jurisprudence also possession is actual possession and in a limited set of cases, may include constructive possession, but when there is a bare right to possess bereft of any dominion or factum of control, it will be a strange legal travesty to assert that an owner is in possession merely because he has a right to possess when a rival, in the teeth of owner 's opposition.
is actually holding dominion and control over the land adversely, openly and continuously.
This court has rejected the theory that the possession of a trespasser was that of the owner.
[752 H, 753A, 754 D.] Surajnath Ahir vs Prithinath Singh , Ram Bijai Singh & Ors vs Behari Singh @ Bagandha Singh relied on.
Brij Nandan Singh vs Jamuna Prasad A.I.R. 1958 Pat. 589, referred to.
(vii) It is undeniable that the plaintiff had title to the entire Schedule properties as against defendants, first party, and second party.
If defendants.
first party, were not in possession the plaintiff would still be entitled for a decree 741 for possession of the same.
If neither is in possession, the presumption that the owner is in possession holds good and he is entitled to that possession being restored to him.
Therefore, the plaintiff is entitled to a decree for possession regarding the items of properly covered by paragraph, 27 of the written statement filed on behalf of the contesting defendants, first party.
the rights of the State as against the plaintiff in regard these items of property, will not in any manner be effected.
[754H. 755 A B] observation: Prima facie section 4 (f) and (g) of the Act and rule 7 H of the Rules framed under the Act attract the jurisdiction of the State and its revenue authorities.
In the present case, the defendants, first party, are rank trespassers and have no equity in their favour.
Section 4(f) declares that the Collectors shall be deemed to have taken charge of the estates and interests vested in the State.
This means he has a public duty to take charge of lands vested in the State.
Surely, a responsible public office like the Collector, charged with duty of taking delivery of possession of lands which by virtue of the vesting the State is entitled to take direct possession, will proceed to disposses the trespasser.
In this case, defendants, first party the trespassers and the plaintiff being out of the pale of section 6, the State ii entitled to the direct possession of the suit lands.
[756B, 755 D E]
