Under Article 233(2) of the Constitution a person not already in service of the Union or of the State shall only be eligible to be appointed a District Judge, if he has been for not less than 7 years an advocate or pleader and is recommended by the High Court for appointment.
After interviewing a large number of candidates to fill six posts of District Judges the High Court recommended six persons as the most suitable candidates from among the applicants.
The appellant was one of ' them.
This recommendation having leaked out, the Government requested the High Court to send a list of persons whom the High Court considered to have reasonable claims to the appointment. 'The High Court sent the entire list of the candidates interviewed by it with the marks obtained by them, but without offering any remarks.
Treating the entire list of candidates sent by the High Court as candidates recommended by it in the order of merit, respondents 3 to 6 were selected, in addition to two candidates earlier recommended by the High Court.
The appellant 's name did not find place in the final list.
He, therefore moved the High Court contending that respondents 3 to 6 were appointed in violation of the provisions contained in article 233.
The High Court dismissed the petition holding that the entire list of the candidates should be taken as recommended by the High Court.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, ^ HELD :In the case of appointment of District Judges from the Bar it is not open to the Government to choose a candidate for appointment unless and until this name is recommended by the High Court.
The word 'recommend ' means "suggest as rut for employment." (2) 'The Government was not bound to accept all the recommendations made by the High Court but could tell the High Court its reasons for not accepting its recommendations in regard to certain persons.
If the High Court agreed with the reasons in case of a particular person the recommendation in his case stood withdrawn and there was no question of appointing him.
But it was certainly wrong and incompetent for the Government to write to the High Court and ask it to send the list of persons whom it considered to have reasonable claim to the appointment.
It was very much wrong on the part of the High Court to forward the entire list of the candidates interviewed with the marks obtained by them and adding at the same time that the High Court had no further remarks to offer. 'The reply sent by the High Court was by no means a recommendation of the High Court of all the candidates interviewed that all of them had reasonable claims or in other words were fit to be appointed as District Judges.
[623 H; 624 B, D E] Chandra Mohan vs State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors. , referred to (3) Respondents 3 to 6 were not eligible to be appointed as District Judges as their names had never been recommended by the High Court.
[625 A]
