To fill up a casual vacancy in the office of the President of the Municipal Board, Soron in the district of Etah in Uttar Pradesh, the District Magistrate issued notices to the members of the Board informing them that nomination paper should be filed in his office by 20th of September, 1974 and if necessary the election will take place on 1st October, 1974.
The 1st respondent thereupon filed a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution challenging the validity of the procedure adopted by the District Magistrate for holding the election and prayed for an order to the District Magistrate not to hold the election on 1st October, 1974.
The objection to the procedure for election was based on the allegation that it did not conform to the provisions of Rule of the U.P. Municipalities (Conduct of Election of Presidents and Election Petitions) order, 1964.
The High Court admitted the Writ Petition and directed that the election would be subject to ultimate decision in the Writ Petition.
Consequently the election took place on the 1st of October and the 1st appellant was declared elected.
Thereafter the 1st respondent filed an application for impleading the 1st appellant and the Municipal Board as parties and also claimed a further relief for quashing the election proceedings that took place on the 1st of October, 1974.
The High Court allowed the petition and set aside the entire election proceedings relating to the election of the 1st appellant as the President of the Municipal Board.
Allowing the appeal by special Leave, ^ HELD: The right to vote or stand for election to the office of the President of the Municipal Board is a creature of the statute, that is the U.P. Municipalities Act and it must be subject to the limitations imposed by it.
Therefore the election to the office of the President could be challenged only according to the procedure prescribed by that Act and that is by means of an election petition presented in accordance with the provisions of the Act and in no other way.
The Act provides only for one remedy, that remedy being an election petition to be presented after the election is over and there is no remedy provided at any intermediate stage.
[813 E, 814A B, 814C D] N. P, Ponnuswami v, Returning officer, Namakkal Constituency & Ors. ; relied on.
Desi Chettiar vs Chinnasami Chettiar A.I.R. 1928 Mad. 1271 and Wolverhamption New Water Works Co. vs Hawkesford ; referred to.
(ii) These conclusions in Punnuswami case were arrived at without taking the provisions of Article 329 of the Constitution into account.
Tho provisions of Article 329 are relevant only to the extent that even the remedy under Article 226 is barred as a result of the provisions.
But on e the legal effect of the provisions of law contained in Article 329 and in section 43 B of the U.P. Municpalities Act is taken into account there is no room for the High Courts to interfere in exercise of their powers under Article 226 of the Constitution.
810 Quaere: Can there be any extraordinary circumstances in which the High courts could exercise their power under Article 226 of the Constitution in relation to elections ? [814 E]
