The appellants challenged the validity of fixation of price of levy the high Court.
During the pendency of the petitions, the appellants a stay order from the High Court for charging the price in eyes price fixed by the State on furnishing Bank guarantees for the excess price Ultimately, the High Court upheld the control of price and directed appellants to restore the excess money recovered from the consumer to the through the State Government.
The appellants filed the present Special Leave against the said order of the High Court and contended that since the Sugar Industry had lean year, the excess amount should be allowed to retained by the appellant or that the excess amount should be to be utilised for stabilising the sugarcane growers ' economic position alternative, it was prayed that the excess amount could remain with the appellant unite a suitable scheme for the return of the excess amount to the was made.
Dismissing the appeals, ^ HELD : 1.
The appellants had doubt business use of these crores of rupees for nearly a year even after the High Court 's final judgment.
The money of the many little men got by the few millers by selling an essential commodity to the community at what is frankly black market price under the umbrella of court order of stay shall get back to the scattered crowd of small consumers as early and as inexpensively as possible.
A public injury perpetrated by calling in aid court process must waken judicial conscience to improvise an ad hoc procedure to restore through the court 's authority what has been nibbled from the numerous buyers.
The handling of small claims is probably a must deplorable features of the administration of civil justice and yet small claims are in many respect more signification than large ones, involving large numbers and inter class disputes.
If the confidence of the community in the justice system especially consumer protection.
is to be created, radical reform of the processual law is needed now and here.
The inherent power of the court has its roots in the necessity and its breadth is co extensive with the necessity.
The Court directed that the Bank guarantees furnished by the appellants should be encashed by the Registrar and kept in short term deposit.
That he claims of the consumers should be settled by the Registrar of the High Court under the order of the High Court through an easy and cheap machinery.
That wide publicity should be given about the method of returning and that small claims might be accepted by cost and money also returned by post.
[804 C E. 806 A. D 807 BD]
