Under section 186(1)(a) of the , if for any reason it is impracticable to call a meeting of the company, other than an annual general meeting, or to hold, or conduct it in then manner prescribed by the Act or the articles of the company, the Court may order the meeting to be called, held and conducted in such manner as the Court thinks fit; and section 186(2) provides that such a meeting should be deemed to be a meeting of the company duly called, held and conducted.
The Board of Directors of a company called an extraordinary general meeting of the company for the purpose of considering petitions filed by shareholders regarding the managing directors.
Apprehending trouble in the holding and conducting of the meeting two share holders filed a petition in the High Court under section 186 of the praying for the appointment of an advocate Commissioner as Chairman of the meeting, which was called.
The High Court, in letters Patent appeal, granted the prayer.
In appeal to this Court it was contended, inter alia that the power under section 186 of the Act could not be exercised until it was found that it was impracticable to call the meeting and to hold and conduct it in the manner prescribed by the Act or articles of association, and that the High Court had not jurisdiction merely to appoint a Chairman of the meeting already called.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, ^ HELD: Under section 186 the Court may order a meeting of the Company to be called, held and conducted, in such manner, as the Court thinks fit in any one or more of the contingencies, namely, if for any reason it is impracticable (1) to call a meeting of the company other than an annual general meeting.
(ii) to hold the meeting in the manner prescribed by the Act or the Articles of Association; and (iii) to conduct the meeting of the company in the same manner.
The use of the word 'or ' in the first part of sub section
(1) (a), may, therefore, be disjunctive or conjunctive as interpreted above but the use of the word and between the words 'held and conducted ' in the same clause shows that the order under cl.
(a) has got to be made for all the three purposes of calling, holding and conducting and not merely for holding or conducting the meeting.
Therefore, the Court has no power to make any order regarding the holding and conducting of any meeting which has already been called, without ordering a meeting of the company to be called, in place of the meeting already called.
The language of sub section
(2) also fortifies the above interpretation.
Since there was no prayer for an order of calling a meeting the application to the Court under section 186 was not maintainable.
[802A D]
