The appellant is a tenant or Plot No. 428.
A notification was issued under Section 4 (1) of the Land Acquisition Act for setting up an industrial estate in respect of Plot No. 428 and Plot No. 436.
By a notification under Section 17 (4) the provisions of section 5A were dispensed with in the ground that provisions of section 17(1) (Urgency) were applicable.
The appellant filed a Writ Petition in Hugh Court challenging the said notification issued under section 17 (4) The Single judge dismissed the Writ Petition.
An appeal filed to the Division Bench was also dismissed.
On an appeal by Special Leave, it was contended by the appellant that there was a pucca construction on Plot No. 436 which was also notified for acquisition under the impugned notification and consequently the provisions of Section 17 (4) would not be applicable to that land as it was not arable or waste land and could not be acquired by dispensing with the enquiry under section 5A and as such, the whole notification is bad and should be quashed.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
Admittedly the appellant 's land is a waste and arable land and thus falls under section 17(1).
The person who could have taken objection to the enquiry under section 5A being dispensed: with was the owner of Plot No. 436.
He has not objected to the acquisition it is, therefore, not open to the appellant to question the validity of the notification.
If the owner of Plot No. 436 had objected to the notification different considerations might arise.
Sarjoo Prasad vs State of U.P. (AIR distinguished.
[1827E F] 2.
Section 5A should be understood in the back ground of section 4(1).
Section 4 ( I ) requires only the locality in which the land is situate, to be mentioned in the notification.
But in actual practice the survey numbers of the lands sought to be acquired are given in such notifications.
The question of notifying the locality might probably arise when all the lands in village are sought to be acquired.
Otherwise.
the word locality is a word of such indefinite import that it is difficult to conceive of any locality in any particular village being notified for acquisition.
When a locality in the sense of a village or a group of villages in notified for acquisition any person interested in any land in that locality would be entitled to be, heard under section 5A.
But where land proposed to be acquired is specifically mentioned in the notification it is only the person interested in that land who is entitled to be heard under section 5A.
That is why section 5A provides that any person interested may object to the acquisition of land or of any land in the locality as the case may be.
The latter part would apply to a case where lands in.
any locality are notified under section 4 ( 1 ) .
That is the significance of the use of the words "as the case may be.
" Any person unconnected with land cannot object to the acquisition of the land in the locality since he would not be a person interested.
[828 F H 829A C]
