The Mysore Administrative Service (Recruitment) Rules, 1957 classified class I posts into two categories: senior scale posts and the junior.
scale posts.
Two thirds of the junior class I post were filled by promotion from Class II ' ' Officers and the balance of one third by direct recruitment by the Public Services Commission.
The Mysore Administrative Service (Cadre) Rules, 1958 fixed the cadre strength at 12 senior scale posts and 1 35 junior scale posts, all of which were permanent.
By the Mysore Recruitment of Gazetted Probationers Rules, 1959 the quota for direct recruitment to the Mysore Administrative Service was increased from one third to two thirds for a period of five years consequence of which the quota for promotees had been reduced to one third.
Rule 17(b) of the 1957 Recruitment Rules empowered the Government to fill up posts temporarily by promotion against vacancies for direct recruits but such promotees were liable to be reverted after the appointment of direct recruits.
In exercise of this power, the eight appellants along with 51 other were promoted to officiate as junior Class I officers in the 59 vacancies (39 for promotees and 20 for direct recruits).
In 1962, the Government appointed direct recruits to 20 of the junior Class I posts but to avoid any hardship to the officiating promotees and to avoid audit objections, the Government sanctioned 20 temporary posts to accommodate the probationer for the two year period of their training.
At the end of two years, and on completion of probation, in 1964 the Government terminated the probation of the direct recruits, as a result of which they became entitled, under Rule 9 of the Government Service Probation Rules.
to be confirmed as full members of the service.
They were accordingly confirmed in the 20 substantive vacancies exist in within their quota.
The Government, however, did not renew the temporary vacancies after the direct recruits had been confirmed in the permanent vacancies.
In January, 1972, a Gradation List was published in which the direct recruits (respondents) were shown as senior to the appellants.
The numbers of the respondents in the list were 214 to 236 whereas those of the appellants were 273 to 280.
The appellants challenged the seniority of the respondents in writ petitions on the ground mainly that the respondents were recruited only to the 20 temporary posts created and that the appellants and 51 others were appointed to 59 permanent vacancies.
The High Court dismissed the writ petitions.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court, ^ HELD: The contention of the appellant that the respondents were recruited to temporary vacancies is wrong.
Respondents (direct recruits ) were entitled to the vacancies within their quota which had not been filled up and they were senior to the appellants.
[821D; 825F] (1) The principles generally followed in working out the quota rule are, (i) Where rules prescribe quota between direct recruits and promotees confirmation or substantive appointment can only be in respect of clear vacancies in the permanent strength of the cadre.
(ii) confirmed persons are senior to those who are officiating; (iii) as between person appointed in officiating capacity.
seniority is to be counted on the length of continuous service: (iv) direct recruitment is possible only by competitive examination which is the Prescribed procedure under the rules In promotional vacancies the Promotion is either 4 L1127SCI/75 816 by selection or on the principle of seniority cum merit.
A promotion could be made in respect of a temporary post or for a specified period, but direct recruitment has generally to be made only in respect of a clear permanent vacancy, either existing or anticipated to raise at or about the period of probation is expected lo be completed; (v) if promotions are made to vacancies in excess of the promotional quota, the promotions may, not be totally illegal but would be irregular.
the promotees cannot claim any right to hold promotional posts unless the vacancies fall within their quota.
If the promotees occupy any vacancies which are within the quota of direct recruits, when the direct recruitment takes place, the direct recruits will occupy the vacancies within their quota.
Promotees who are occupying the vacancies within the quota of direct recruits will either be reverted or they will be absorbed in the vacancies within their quota.
in the facts and circumstance of the case and (vi) as long as the quota rule remains neither promotees can be allotted to any of ' the substantive vacancies of the quota of direct recruits nor direct recruits can be allotted to promotional vacancies.
and (vii) quotas which are fixed are unalterable according to exigencies of the situation.
They can only be altered by fresh determination of quotas under the relevant rules.
One group cannot claim the quota fixed for the other group either on the ground that the quotas are not filled up or that because there had been a number in excess of the quota the same should be absorbed depriving the other group of quota.
[822H, 823A C; 824 C&G] Bishan Sarup Gupta vs Union of India ; ; section Jaisinghani vs Union of India [1967] 2 S.C.R. 703; A.K. Subraman vs Union of India and Bachan Singh & Anr.
vs Union of India & ors.
[ ; referred to.
(2) The cadre, in the present case, consisted only of permanent posts through out the period.
After the rules came into force the promotees were in excess of ' the quota but when in 1962 direct recruitment was made there were 20 direct recruitment vacancies in the quota which were not filled up.
The promotees, however, being 2 in excess were not entitled to confirmation against the vacancies within the quota of the direct recruits.
The promotees were promoted on officiating basis.
On the completion of the period of training of the 20 direct recruits there was no renewal of the temporary posts and, therefore.
the temporary posts which were created for the direct recruits during their period of probation could not be taken into account ill working out the quota rule and for adjustment of seniority.
In fact, they were created due to certain exigencies and were outside the cadre.
[821 D G] (3) The promotees had not been deprived of their appointment and they had not been subjected to any reversion.
The implementation of the quota.
rule has resulted in the adjustment of seniority consistent with the quota.
The confirmations had been issued having regard to the permanent strength of the cadre and the quota.
[821H; 822A] (4) It is impossible to hold that the direct recruits were temporary employees outside the permanent cadre of the service.
Rule 9 of the Mysore Government Servant 's Probation Rules excludes temporary posts from the cadre.
It also provides for confirmation of a probationer as full member of the service in any substantive vacancy in the permanent cadre of such class.[822C D] Bishan Sarup Gupta vs Union of India A.T.R. G. R. Luthra Additional District Judge Delhi vs Lt.
Governor Delhi & Ors. ; and A. K. Subman vs Union of India , referred to.
(5) There was no quota rule for the period between I November.
1956 and 1 December., 1957.
During the period from 2 September, 1957 and 10 September, 1959 (the dates on which the 1957 and 1959 Rules came into force) many persons were promoted from Class II.
Since two thirds of the vacancies during this period were promotional vacancies, persons promoted to those vacancies could not be disturbed.
However, those promotees who were in excess of the two third vacancies would be pushed down to the vacancies in the subsequent 817 period Again, during the same period direct recruits equal in number to those one third vacancies should be placed next after the promotees placed in the first set of two thirds vacancies.
If the direct recruits were in excess of the quota they would be shifted to the subsequent period.
[823G H: 824A] (b) During the period II September, 1959, to 26 October, 1964, (direct recruitment vacancies became two third and the promotional vacancies one third, as a result of which the excess promotees during the previous period would be first absorbed in the promotional vacancies and subsequent promotees would hereafter be absorbed.
The resulting position was that direct recruitment vacancies between 11 September 1959 and 26 October, 1964, the date of confirmation of the respondents (direct recruits) could not be occupied by the promotees.
The fact that direct recruits were confirmed would not, therefore, rob them of their quota which remained unfilled from 2 December, 1957 onwards.
The Government, therefore, rightly confirmed the direct recruits and the appellate by adjustment of vacancies within their respective quotas and determined their seniority in accordance with Rule 2(b) of the Seniority Rules.
[824 B.D.]
