Rule 14(1) of the Railway Servants (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1968 provides that not withstanding anything contained in rr.9 to 13, where any penalty is imposed on a railway servant on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal charge, the disciplinary authority may consider he circumstances of the case ' and make such orders thereon as it deems fit, Section 12 of the Probation of ' Offenders Act, 1958, provides that not with standing anything contained in any other law a person found guilty of an offence and dealt with under the provisions of s.3 or s.4 shall not suffer a disqualification, if any, attached to a conviction of an offence under such law.
The respondents were found guilty of certain minor offences and instead of being sentenced, were released on probation under the provisions of the Probation of offenders Act.
The concerned Disciplinary Authorities however, re moved them from service on the ground of their conviction without any further opportunity to the respondents.
The respondents challenged the orders of removal and the High Court quashed the orders.
Dismissing the appeals to this Court, ^ HELD: (1) The conviction of the delinquent employee would be taken as sufficient proof of misconduct, and then, the authority will have to hold a summary inquiry as to the nature and extent of the penalty to be imposed If the authority is of the opinion that the offence is too trivial or of a technical nature it may not impose any penalty in spite of the conviction.
If the authority is of the opinion that the employee has been guilty of a serious offence involving moral turpitude, and therefore it was not desirable or conducive in the interests of administration to retain such a person in service, the disciplinary authority has the undoubted power, after hearing the employee and considering the circumstances of the case, to inflict any penalty without any further departmental inquiry.
As there was no such application of mind and consideration of circumstances the orders of removal are rightly quashed [795H 796E, H] (2) The view of the Kerala High Court, that as the Magistrate released the 7 delinquent employee on probation, no penalty was imposed and that therefore r.14 (1) did not apply, is not correct.
The word 'penalty ' in the rule is relatable to the penalties to be imposed by the Disciplinary Authorities under the Rules and not to the sentence passed by a criminal court.
Because, so far as the disciplinary authority is concerned it could only impose a penalty and not a sentence, just as a criminal court, after conviction, does not impose a penalty but passes a sentence.
Hence, the words "where any penalty is imposed" in r.14 (1) should be read as 'where any penalty is impossible ' by the Disciplinary Authority.
[787E F; 788A R; 789D H] 2 L1127SCI/75 784 (3) If the Magistrate did not choose, after convicting the accused, to pass any sentence on him but released him on probation it could not be said that, the stigma of conviction is completely washed out or obliterated or that no disciplinary action could be taken under r. 14(1).
[790B C] Sections 3, 4 and 9 of the Probation of offenders Act show that an order of ' release on probation comes into existence only after the accused is found guilty and is convicted of the offence.
Such an order is merely in substitution of the sentence from a humanist point of view.
The control over the offender is retained by the criminal court and where it is satisfied that the conditions of the bond had been broken by the offender, who has been released on probation the Court can sentence on the basis of the original conviction, showing that the guilt is not obliterated.
[790H 791D] (4) The words disqualification, if any attaching to a conviction of an offence under such law, in section 12 mean (1) that there must be a disqualification resulting from a conviction; and (ii) that such disqualification must be provided by some law other than the Probation of offenders Act.
It could not be contended that the `disqualification ' referred to is the 'liability under r. 14(1) to disciplinary action without a departmental enquiry ', and that such disqualification is removed by release on probation.
The disqualification must he an automatic disqualification; such as regarding holding of officer or standing for elections, as a consequence of ' the conviction.
Rule 14(1) incorporates the principle contained in proviso (a) to article 311(2).
But neither of these provisions contain any express provision that the moment a person is found guilty of misconduct of a criminal charge he will have to be automatically dismissed from service.
These provisions are merely enabling and do not enjoin or confer a mandatory duty on the disciplinary authority to pass an order of dismissal, removal or reduction in rank the moment an employee is convicted.
The proviso to article 311(2) was enacted because, when once a delinquent employee has been convicted of a criminal offence at a trial, where he had a full and complete opportunity to contest the allegations, that should be treated as a sufficient proof of his misconduct, and the disciplinary authority may be given the discretion to impose the penalties referred to in article 311(2), without holding a fresh full dress departmental inquiry.
If r. I ' ' of the Probation of offenders.
Act completely wipes out this liability to disciplinary action on the basis that it is a 'disqualification ' under the section then it would be ultra vires as it would be in direct conflict with the Constitutional provision.
[788G H; 789C D, 791F 792F] R. Kumaraswami Aiyar v The Commissioner Municipal council, Tiruvannamai and another [1957] Cri.
L. J. 255, 256 Om Prakash vs The Director Postal Services (posts and Telegraphs Deptt.) Punjab Circle, Ambala and others, A.I. R. 1973 Punjab 1, 4; Director of Postal Services and Anr.
vs Daya Nand, , 341, Embaru vs Chairman Madras Port Trust Akella Satyanarayana Murthy vs Zonal Manager.
Life Insurance Corporation of India, Madras.
A.I.R. 1969 A.P. 371, 373 and Premkumar vs Union of India and others, [1971] Lab. & Ind. Cases 823, 824.
approved.
(5) Therefore the Rajasthan High Court was wrong in giving 1 wide connotation to the word 'consider ' in r. 14 and holding that it requires the disciplinary authority to hold a detailed determination of the matter once again.
The rule making authority deliberately used the word 'consider ' and not 'determine ' because, the latter word has a much wider scope.
the word 'consider ' merely connotes that there should be active application of mind by the disciplinary authority after considering the entire circumstances of to case in order to decide the nature and the extent of the penalty to be imposed on the delinquent employee on his conviction on a criminal charge.
This could only be objectively determined if the delinquent employee is heard and given a chance to satisfy the authority regarding the final orders that may be passed The provision merely imports the rule of natural justice that before taking final action the delinquent employee should be heard and the circumstances objectively considered.
[795B 795D]
