During the years in question cloth was rationed at Lyallpur, then a part.
of the Punjab in undivided India, and sales could only be made to government nominees and other authorised persons.
The plaintiffs, resident in Lyallpur, were the government nominees, The 403 defendant company, with its head office at Delhi had a branch office and mills at Lyallpur, and supplied the plaintiffs with cloth from time to time in accordance with the government quota through its branch manager at Lyallpur.
Their dealings lasted some 4 or 5 years prior to 1947.
In accordance with their contract the plaintiffs left a security deposit of Rs. 1,000 with the defendant 's branch manager at Lyallpur, and deposited further sums of money with him from time to time at Lyallpur.
The defendant supplied the plaintiffs with their quota of cloth against those deposits.
There was thus a running account between the parties in which the balance was sometimes in the plaintiffs ' favour and sometimes against them; when against, they paid the defendant interest on the "overdraft".
The goods had to be supplied at Lyallpur and all moneys were paid there.
The accounts were kept at Lyallpur though copies were sent to the defendant 's head office at Delhi.
In 1947, when India was partitioned, Lyallpur was assigned to Pakistan.
The plaintiffs thereupon fled the country and entered India as refugees.
They settled in Delhi and thus became "evacuees" according to a Pakistan ordinance.
At that time there was a balance of Rs. 11,496 6 6 in the plaintiffs ' favour.
They accordingly made a demand at Delhi for payment of this sum and for return of their security deposit.
In the meanwhile the Pakistan Government issued an ordinance (1) vesting all evacuee property in the Custodian of Evacuee Property in Pakistan (2) prohibiting the 'payment of money to evacuees; and (3) requiring all moneys payable to, or claimable by, evacuees to be paid to the Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property in Pakistan.
Payments so made were to operate as a discharge from further liability to the extent of the payment.
Breach of this law was punishable as an offence.
The Deputy Custodian demanded payment from the defendant of the moneys owing to the plaintiff.
After some correspondence and demur, the payment was made as required.
The defendant pleaded this as a defence to the action.
Held: (1) Lyallpur was the place of primary obligation because under the contract the balance remaining at its termination was to be paid there and not elsewhere, accordingly the demand for payment made at Delhi before a demand and refusal at Lyallpur was ineffective; (2) That the elements out of which the contract to pay arose were most densely grouped at Lyallpur, so Lyallpur was the natural seat of the contract and the place with which it had its closest and most real connection.
Accordingly, the "proper law of the contract" was the Lyallpur Law; (3) Under the English doctrine also the situs of the debt was Lyallpur; and so 404 (4) either way, the Lyallpur law applied (5) as it obtained at Lyallpur at the time when performance was due because a " proper law" intended as a whole to govern a contract is administered as a "living and changing body of law", accordingly, effect is given to any changes occurring in it before performance is due; (6) a "debt" being a chose in action is "property" within the meaning of the Pakistan Ordinance and so, (7) the money was rightly paid to the Deputy Custodian and that operated as a good discharge and exonerated the defendant from further liability.
But quaere, whether different conditions would not arise in a case where no payment is made and the defendant has no garnishable assets in Pakistan out of which the West Punjab Government could realise the debt out of the defendant 's property there.
(8)The provisions of the Pakistan ordinance relevant to the case are not opposed to the public policy of India and so can be relied on as a defence to an action of this nature.
Appeal allowed.
Mount Albert Borough Council vs Australasian Temperance, etc.
; , Bonython vs Commonwealth of Australia at 219), Bank of Travancore vs Dhirt Ram (69 I.A. I at 8), New York Life Insurance vs Public Trustee ([1924] 2 Ch.
101 at 119), Rex vs Lovitt , Joachinsons vs Swiss Bank Corporation ([1921] 3 K.B. 110), Arab Bank vs Barclays Bank at 531), Fouad Bishara vs State of Israel ([1954] 1 A.E.R. 145).
Chesterman 's Trusts [(1923] 2 Ch.
466 at 478), Be.
Banque Des Marchands De Moscou ([1954] 2 A.E.R. 746), Odwin vs Forbes and Re. Munster ([1920] 1 Ch.
268), referred to.
