Section 12 of the Andhra Pradesh (Andhra Area) Places of Public Resort Act, 1888, empowers the District Magistrate to can for examining the record any of any proceeding taken under the Act to can for any report in connection .
therewith, to make or cause to be made any further enquiry and to pass any order which the authority holding the proceeding might have passed.
Section 7 of the Act states when the authority concerned could grant a licence Section 9 states when an authority granting a licence could revoke or suspend the same.
The appellant was granted a licence for conducting games of skill and dances and other quality performances.
Objections having been raised the Additional District Magistrate issued a show cause notice to the appellant In reply the appellant had asked for copies of certain documents on the basis of which the show cause notice had been issued.
In the meantime, however the appellant submitted a tentative explanation stating that a detailed explanation would be sent after the receipt of the copies of the documents.
Immediately thereafter the District Magistrate cancelled the licence on the ground that the explanation offered was a routine one and was not convincing.
The High, Court dismissed the writ petition of the appellant.
On appeal to this Court it was contended that (i) the order of cancellation was in violation of the principles of natural justice.
and (ii) the District Magistrate could revoke the licence under s.12 only on any of the grounds mentioned in s.9.
Allowing the appeal.
^ HELD : 1 (a) The order passed by the District Magistrate immediately after he received the appellant 's reply without either giving him the copies asked for or at least telling him that the material already furnished was sufficient to enable him to make his representation and if he and any further representation to make, he could do so, offends the principles of natural justice.
[41 F].
(b) It is now well established by decisions of this Court that an authority making a quasi judicial order should follow the principles of natural Justice before passing an order, even where the statute in question does not so provide.
It is also well established that principles of natural justice do not necessarily is l; conform to a fixed formula nor is it a procrustean bed into which all proceedings must be fitted.
The principles of natural justice will always depend upon the facts of each case.
[41 B].
In the instant case when the appellant asked for the original documents, .
he could at least have been told that he had already been given a summary of the documents which was sufficient to enable him to make his representation.
The District Magistrate 's characterisation of the interim reply of the t appellant as a routine one is not correct.
[41 D E] 2.
The revising authority under the Act is entitled on the same material, to take a view different from that of the authority whose order is revised.
" The power under section 12 is to pass any order which the authority holding the r 39 proceeding might have passed, that is an order granting, revoking or suspending a licence.
If the authority competent to grant a licence refuses, the District Magistrate, in exercise of his powers under section 12, may grant a licence and l ice versa.
Similarly, he could revoke or suspend the licence granted by the authority or where the authority has revoked or suspended the licence, cancel that order.
The reason for which this power could be exercised are not restricted to those mentioned in section 7 or 9.
The revisional power under section 12 is not a limited one.
It is as wide as that of the original authority.[40 G H].
