In the election to Parliament from a constituency in Punjab the respondent was declared elected.
The appellant filed an election petition alleging, inter alia, (i) that at least 15,000 invalid and void votes had been included and counted in favour of the respondent, and (ii) that the Chief Minister of Punjab, who was the brother of the respondent, directed, (a) the distribution to Harijans of large sums of money for construction of Dharamshalas, and (b) the issue of a large number of gun licences, as gratification for inducing voters to vote for the respondent and that thereby, the corrupt practice of bribery under section 123(1), Representation of the People Act, 1951, was committed.
The High Court dismissed the election petition Dismissing the appeal to this Court, ^ HELD: (1) On the evidence, the High Court was right in holding that the appellant had not succeeded in establishing the allegation regarding the 15,000 votes.
[889F] (a) Rule 56 of the Conduct of Elections Rules as amended in 1971, provides that only a ballot paper which did not contain both the mark and the signature of the polling officer would be invalid.
Even then it does not automatically become invalid.
If the Returning Officer was satisifed that the failure to affix the stamp or signature was due to the fault of the polling officer but the ballot paper was itself genuine he could include it among the valid ballot papers, because, under pressure of work, the polling officer might have failed either to affix the stamp or his signature.
[887F H] (b) The evidence adduced on behalf of the appellant is not consistent as to the ground of invalidity of the ballot papers; as to how the number of 15,000 was arrived at; and as to whether they were counted in favour of the respondent or both the appellant and the respondent.
[889E F] (c) There cannot be any hard and fast rule as to the circumstances when an order of recount would be permissible and it always depends upon the circumstances of the case.
On the facts of the present case, there is not the slightest justification for ordering a recount.
[889G H] (2) In the case of both the allegations regarding Dharamshalas and gun licences, there was no gratification offered and there was no bargaining for votes, and hence there was no corrupt practice.
[896B] (a) The word 'gratification ' in section 123(1) should be deemed to refer only to cases where a gift is made of something which gives a material advantage to the recipient.
There is a distinction between licences which give a material advantage and those which do not.
For example, a licence in a prohibition area to deal in liqueur confers a material advantage on the licensee, whereas a licence enabling a person to imbibe liqueur in such an area gives him no material advantage.
It is only the grant of the former that might amount to gratification.
Arms licence is a licence for regulatory purposes.
Its possession give no material advantage to its possessor.
[893C G] (b) To constitute the corrupt practice of bribery under section 123(1) there must be a bargain for votes.
But a bargain for the purposes of the section does not mean that the candidate or his agent makes an offer and the voter accepts it in the sense that he promises to vote.
It is not necessary that the 885 voter should say that he would vote and that thereafter only the candidate or his agent should pay the money.
It is enough if the candidate or his agent makes the gift or promise on that condition.
[889G 890A] (c) In the present case, the State Government had set apart a sum of Rs. 50 lacs for the purpose of construction of Dharamshalas for Harijans.
A sum of Rs. 3 lacs was spent towards the end of the financial year, in the district in which this particular parliamentary constituency was situate.
Punjab has 11 districts and it cannot, therefore, be said that, the amount is disproportionately large.
[889H 890A] (d) The anxiety to spend the money towards the end of financial year is also natural.
[890A B] (e) It may not be setting up a high standard and it may be very desirable that whatever is done for the people should be done by persons in authority throughout the period of their office and not when election time is approaching.
But where a large section of the people get an amentiy which they ought, in any case to get, and which they got probably a little more easily because it was election time, it cannot be said that the person in authority making a promise and holding out that he would carry out many remedial measures to benefit the people was resorting to bribery or bargaining for votes.
[890B D] (f) The issue of the unusually large number of gun licences may be an improper use of power.
But, there is no evidence regarding bargaining for votes by the promise of gun licences.
[890D G, 893G] (g) Maganlal Bagdi vs Hari Vishnu Kamath, Khadar Sheriff vs Munnuswami Gounder & Ors.
A.I.R. 1955 S.C. 775, Ghasi Ram vs Dal Singh ; , Radha Krsihna Shukla vs Tara Chand Maheshwar , amirchand vs Surendra Lal Dha E.L.R. 57, Om Prabha Jain vs Abnash Chand & Anr. ; ,Bhanu Kumar vs Mohan Lal ; , referred to.
