Electricity Supply Act, 1948 section 59, 64, 65, 66 67 and 68.
The Employees Provident Fund Act applies only to establishments which are factories.
The industry in question electricity including generation, transmission and distribution thereof, is one to which the Act applies.
But only a small proportion of employees connected with the generation of electricity is establishments which are factories.
To the rest the Act does not apply.
The appellant maintains a contributory provident fund for those employees who are not covered by the Act where the contribution is on the basis of basic wage the appellant and the employees contributing equally.
The contribution under the Act is 8 per cent whereas under the appellant 's scheme it is 6.25 per cent.
The workmen respondents claimed before the Industrial Tribunal in a reference made by the Govt.
Of Bihar (1) that all workmen of the appellant should have the same and the similar benefits and that, therefore.
there should be no distinction between the appellant 's contributory provident fund scheme and the scheme under the Employees Provident Fund Act.
(2) The services of the workmen of the appellant are liable to be transferred from one establishment to another both of which may not be covered by the same scheme and such anomalies can be removed by giving the same benefits to all the workmen; (3) That the State was the financier of the appellant which now charges interest at the rate of 61 per cent as against previous 4 per cent; (4) That no scheme run by the Board was running at a loss; (5) That a large amount was paid to the Government by me appellant in the shape of interest towards the loans received from the Government and that such amounts should be taken as dividends to be paid to the Government by the appellant and should not be taken into consideration while deciding the matters regarding benefits to be made available to its employees.
The appellant contended before the Industrial Tribunal that the demand of the workmen would impose additional financial liabilities which the appellant would not be able to bear The Tribunal did not consider the validity of the above submissions It merely relied on an earlier award in which it was observed that if the interest realised by the Government were excluded from consideration there would be surplus in favour or the appellant.
The Tribunal held that since the position of the appellant was not worse than what it was at the time of the earlier award, the appellant should extend the benefits of the contributory provident fund to all workmen who are not covered by the Act and that the contributions should be 6.25 per cent not on the basic wages but on the total wages.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: (1) The Tribunal has treated the whole matter in a very perfunctory manner.
The main question for consideration by the Tribunal was the financial capacity of the Board.
It has made no effort at all to analyse the balance sheet of the appellant to show the actual results of his working.
It has made no effort to work out the financial implications of its order.
It has not made it clear what exactly are the total wages.
This Court in the case of Gramophone Company.
although it was a case of ordinary commercial concern, calculated the actual burden to protect the stability of the industry and to see that the imposition of the burden does not result in loss to the employer.
43 (2) The appellant is not an ordinary commercial concern.
It is a public service institution.
lt is not expected to make any profits.
It is expected to extend the supply of electricity to unserved areas without reference to considerations of loss that might be incurred is a result of such extension.
Section 59 of the provides that as far as practicable The Board shall carry on its operations so as not to incur loss.
section 64 enables the State Government to advance loans to the Board.
section 65 authorises the Board to borrow.
section 66 authorises the State Government to guarantee loans raised by the Board.
section 67 lays down the manner in which the profits have to be distributed.
section 68 imposes obligation on the Board to make a credit to the depreciation reserve in the prescribed manner.
[46 A C].
The assessment by the Tribunal that the interest should not be taken into account in working out the profits is not borne out by the provisions of the statute.
The Tribunal did not look into the Act at all.
Whether in view of the statutory obligations laid on the appellant under the aforesaid sections whether the same considerations which apply in the case of private commercial concerns could be applied to the Board while analysing the capacity to bear the additional burden is rather a difficult question.
We do not express any view on that question.
However various sums payable under section 67 have to be deducted before the profits could be ascertained and with regard to depreciation reserve, the provision of section 68 may have to be taken into account.
[47 C E].
The matter was remanded back to the Tribunal to be disposed of in the light of the observations made in the judgment.
