The rule of law cannot be built on the ruins of democracy for where law ends tyranny begins.
If such be the keynote thought for the very survival of our Republic, the integral bond between the lawyer and the public is unbreakable.
And the vital role of the lawyer depends upon his probity and professional life style.
Be it remembered that the central function of the legal profession is to promote the administration of justice.
If the practice of law is thus a public utility of great implications and a monopoly is statutorily granted by the nation, it obligates the lawyer to observe scrupulously those norms which make him worthy of the confidence of the community in him as a vehicle of justice social justice.
The Bar cannot behave with doubtful scruples or strive to thrive on litigation.
Canons of conduct cannot be crystalised into rigid rules but felt by the collective conscience of the practitioners as right.
[55 F H].
Justice cannot be attained without the stream being pellucid throughout its course and that is of great public concern, not merely professional care.
[50 F].
The respondents, who were lawyers practising in criminal courts, were charged with professional misconduct under section 35(1) of the , in that they positioned themselves at the entrance to the Magistrates ' Courts, watchful of the arrival of potential litigants and at sight, rushed towards the clients in an ugly scrimmage to snatch the briefs.
to lay claim to the engagements even by physical fight to undercut fees, and by this unedifying exhibition sometimes carried even into the Bar Library, solicited and secured work for themselves.
The Bar Council of Maharashtra considered The complaint received from the High Court against the lawyers and referred the matter to its Disciplinary Committee for further probe.
The Disciplinary Committee of the State Bar Council held the respondents guilty of professional misconduct and suspended them from practising as advocates for a period of there years.
On appeal, the Disciplinary Committee of the Bar Council of India held that under r. 36 of the rules framed under section 49(c) of the in order to be amenable to the disciplinary jurisdiction the advocates must have (i) solicited work (ii) from a particular person and (iii) with respect to a case.
It held that unless the three elements were satisfied it could not be said that an advocate had acted beyond the standard or professional conduct and etiquette.
It therefore, absolved all the respondents of the charge cf professional misconduct.
The State Bar Council has come in appeal to this Court.
^ HELD: Rule 36 of the rules framed under section 49(c) of the , fairly construed, sets out wholesome rules of professional conduct and the dissection of the said rule, the way it has been done by the Disciplinary Tribunal, disfigure it.
[59 C].
(1) The canons of ethics and propriety far the legal profession totally taboo conduct by way of soliciting, advertising.
scrambling and other obnoxious practices, subtle or clumsy for betterment of legal business.
Law is no trade, briefs no merchandise and so the leaven of commercial competition or procurement should not vulgarise the legal profession.
[60 C] 49 (2)(a) The procedure adopted by the State Bar Council in referring the cases to its Disciplinary Committee is in due compliance with section 35(1) of the .
[51 C D].
(b) The contention that the resolution of the Bar Council did not ex facie disclose that it had reason to believe that the advocates were guilty of professional misconduct had no merit.
The requirement of "reason to believe" cannot be converted into a formalised procedural road block, it being essentially a barrier against frivolous enquiries.
lt is implicit in the resolution Of the Bar Council, when it says that it has considered the complaint and decided to refer the matter to the Disciplinary Committee, that it had reason to believe as prescribed by the statute.
[51 D E].
(3) The State Tribunal has, from a processual angle, fallen far short of norms like proper numbering of witnesses and exhibits, indexing and avoidance of mixing up of all cases together, default in examination of the respondents, consideration separately of the circumstances of each delinquent for convicting and sentencing purposes.
More attention to the specificity in recording evidence against each deviant instead of testimonial clubbing together on all the respondents, could have made the proceedings clearer, fairer and in keeping with court methodology without over judicialised formalities.
The consolidation of all cases and trying them all jointly, although the charges there different episodes, obviously violative of fair trial.
[59 D F].
(4) (a) The profound regret of these cases lies not only in the appellate Disciplinary Tribunal 's subversive view of the law of professional conduct that attempted solicitation by snatching briefs and catching clients is of no ethical moment, or contravention of the relevant provisions, but also in the naive innocence of fair and speedy procedure displayed by the State Disciplinary Tribunal in clubbing together various charges levelled against the advocates in one common trial, mixing up the evidence against many, recording omnibus testimony slipshodly, not maintaining a record of each day`s proceedings, examining witnesses in the absence of some respondents taking eight years to finish in trial involving depositions of four witnesses and omission to consider the evidence against each alleged delinquent individually in the semi penal proceeding.
True, a statutory Tribunal may ordinarily regulate its procedure without too much rigidity, subject to the rules of natural justice, but large scale disregard of well known norms of fair process makes one wonder whether some at least of the respondents had not been handicapped and whether justice may not be a casualty if the Tribunal is not alerted about its processual responsibilities.
[52 B D] (b) The Appellate Tribunal was wholly wrong in applying r. 36 which was promulgated only in 1965 while the alleged misconduct took place earlier.
What this Tribunal forgot was that the legal profession in India has been with us even before the British and coming to decades of this century, the provisions of section 35 of the , section 10 of the Bar Councils Act and other enactments regulating the conduct of legal practitioners have not turned on the splitting up of the text of any rule but on the broad canons of ethics and high tone of behaviour well established by case law and long accepted by the soul of the bar.
Professional ethics were bourn with the organised bar, even as moral norms arose with civilised society.
The exercise in discovering the three elements of r. 36 was as unserviceable as it was supererogatory.
[59 G H].
(c) It is a misfortune that a disciplinary body of a dimensionally get and growing public utility profession has lost its vision, blinkered by, r. 36 (as misconstrued and trisected by it.) [60 G].
