The respondent company imported auto cycle parts under the guise of motor vehicle parts, for which only he had a valid license under the Import laws.
In respect of certain consignments of imports from U.K the customs authorities by a single order dt.
14 11 1955 passed the following: (i) acting under section 167(8) of the Customs Act it gave an option to the respondent to pay fine in lieu of confiscation of the goods under section 182 and (ii) acting under sections 183 and 20 of the Customs Act to pay the differential duty between auto parts and the motor parts.
The respondent challenged this order before the High Court on the ground that once the power under section 183 has been exercised the authorities had no further power to levy the differential duty.
The High Court while quashing the order imposing penalty in lieu of confiscation directed payment of the import duty ordinarily livable for the auto cycle pedals imported.
Against this view of the limitation on the powers of the Collector, the Union came by way of special leave, while allowing the appeal the Court, ^ HELD: (1) It is primarily for the Import Control Authority to determine the head or entry under which any particular commodity falls.
Of course if a construction adopted by the authority regarding the concerned entry were per verse, or grossly irrational, then the Court could or would undoubtedly interfere.
[88 D]. "Ganga Setty 's case; , followed".
(ii) The scheme of the Sea Customs Act reveals that Import/export duty is an obligation/cast by section 20 of the Act.
It is a tax, not a penalty; it is an innocent levy once the eligible event occurs: it is not a punitive import for a contravention of the law.
Confiscation, penalty and fine provided for under sections 167 (Item 8) and 183 are of the species of punishment for violation of the scheme of prohibition and control [89 G].
(iii) Two legal consequences followed the importation of pedals, uncovered by any license viz. (1) the importation attracted duty which any importer licit or illicit had to pay the moment customs barrier was crossed and (ii) the commission of the offence of importing pedals without a licence trapping the respondent in the coils of section 167, entry 8 inviting the jurisdiction of the authorities to exercise their powers under sections 182 or 183.
[89 H, 90 A].
(iv) The order dual in character, although clubbed together in a single document is valid and it does not preclude the authorities levying duty under section 20, since obligation under section 20 is independent of the liability u/s 183.
Non felicitous and inept expressions used in the order are perhaps apt to mislaid, but the intendment is clear that what was done, was not confiscation, but giving an option to pay a quantified fine in a places of confiscation The order was a composite one, and is quite legal.
[90 D, 91 B D].
7 L 1276SCI/75 88 Collector of customs vs H. section Mehra A.I.R. 1964 Mad. 504: Shewpujanrai Indrasanrai Ltd. vs The Collector of Customs, ; referred to
