The legislative history in regard to the subject of capital punishment shows that there has been a significant change in thinking and approach Since India became free.
Prior to the amendment of section 367(5) of the Code of Criminal Procedure by Act 26 of 1955, the normal rule was to impose sentence of death on a person convicted for murder and if a lesser sentence was to be imposed, the Court was required to record reasons in writing.
But by Act 26 of 1955, this provision in section 367(5) was omitted with the result that the Court became free to award either death sentence or life imprisonment, and no longer was death sentence the rule and life imprisonment the exception.
Then again a further progress was made in the same direction by section 354(3) of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973.
That section provides that when the conviction is for an offence punishable with death or in the alternative with imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of years, the judgment shall state the reasons for the sentence awarded and, in the case of sentence of death, the special reasons for such sentence.
The unmistakable shift in the legislative emphasis is that for murder, life imprisonment should be the rule and capital punishment the exception to be resorted to only for special reasons.
It is only where, in view of the peculiar facts and circumstances, there are special reasons that the death sentence may be awarded: otherwise life sentence offence would certinly be "too young." [277G; E, F] The seminal trends in current sociological thinking and penal strategy tempered as they are by humanistic attitude and deep concern for the worth of the human person, frown upon death penalty and regard it as cruel and savage punishment to be inflicted only in exceptional cases.
[276G] In the instant case the appellant was charged with an offence of murder by severing the head of the deceased from the body and then carrying it away in a most brutal and inhuman manner.
The trial court convicted and sentenced him to death.
Both the conviction and sentence were upheld by the High Court.
On the question of sentence, Allowing the appeal to this Court, ^ HELD: The appellant was just around 16 years of age at the time when he committed the offence and, therefore, he would be entitled to the clemency of penal justice.
It would not be appropriate to impose the extreme penalty of death.
Taking into account the current sociological and juristic thinking as could be seen from the recommendation of the Law Commission which appears to have been incorporated in the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Bill 1972, it would be legitimate for the Court to refuse to impose death sentence on an accused convicted of murder, if it finds that at the time of the commission of the offence the appellant was under 18 years of age.
A murderer who is below 18 years of age at the time of commission of the offence would certainly be "too young." [277G; E, F] E. Anamma vs State of Andhra Pradesh, A.I.R. 1974 S.C. 799, followed.
