Under section 433(f) of the , a company may be wound up by the Court, if the Court is of opinion that it is just and equitable that the company should be wound up.
Section 44(g) of the Partnership Act also speaks of the "just and equitable clause".
One RPJ agreed with VDJ and MPJ who are carrying on the business under the name and style of "Chimanram Motilal" to start a new business of iron and steel in co partnership and for that purpose, an account was opened in the name of "Raghunath Prasad Jhunjhunwalla Ka Sir Khata" in the books of "Chimanram Motilal".
It was agreed that RPJ should have 3/8th share and VDJ with MPJ should have 5/8th share of the proposed business.
Before the said proposed business could be started, at the suggestion of VDJ, actually a limited company was formed in August,.
1956 under the with the understanding that (i) VDJ with MPJ should finance the entire business.
(ii) the share in the company should be held by RPJ, VDJ and MPJ and the members of their respective families in the proportion of 3/8th and 5/8th as agreed to before and (iii) that RPJ and his group would generally look after the day to day business of the company under the general control and supervision of VDJ.
The nominal capital of the company was Rs. 5 lacs divided into 2500 equity shares of Rs. 100/ each.
RPJ and another ACD, an employee and nominee of VDJ, became the subscribers to the Memorandum of Association of the company and also became its first directors.
On 23 8 1956, VDJ and MPJ were appointed as directors of the company.
On 23 11 1957, ACD resigned and PCJ (son of RPJ) was opted in his place.
RPJ was appointed a director in charge of the company and both RPJ and PCJ were paid monthly remunerations.
Following a family partition between VDJ and MPJ in the year 1958, the shares of MPJ were transferred in the name of the wife of VDJ and MPJ resigned from the Board of Directors on 21 1 1959.
Since that date till October, 1965 the Board of Directors were RPJ.
PCJ and VDJ, when VDJ got his son VKJ appointed as Technical Director of the company.
Though the business of the company was managed by RPJ and PCJ, the business policy, the appointment of staff, general supervision of the work of the business etc., were in the hands of VDJ.
From 1959 onwards the factory commenced its regular production and substantial profits were made between 1960 and 1965 except in the year 1961 when there was some loss.
Finding that there has been a mismanagement of affairs of RPJ and PCJ to the tune of Rs. 8 lacs the VDJ group who were holding the major shares numbering, 3125, in order to safeguard their interest and the business, called the Board 's meeting on 27 5 1966 and the Board countermanded all the previous resolutions and thus took away all the powers of RPJ.
The extraordinary general meeting called on 28 5 1966 resolved to remove RPJ and PCJ as directors of the company and to appoint persons belonging to VDJ 's group as directors.
This led to the filing of an application for winding up under section 433(f) of the by RPJ before the company Judge of the Calcutta High Court contending that the company was in the nature of a 227 partnership and is liable to be wound up in view of the loss of confidence between the two groups/members and on the alleged ouster of RPJ group.
The Petition for winding up was dismissed by the company Judge inasmuch as (i) the substratum of the company was not gone; (ii) the deadlock could be resolved by the articles; (iii) there were alternative remedies open: and (iv) lack of probity did not result in prejudice to the company 's business affecting petitioner 's rights as share holder, but only affected his right as director.
The appellate Bench, however, allowed the appeal of the respondent RPJ and ordered the winding up of the company in the facts and circumstances of the case, viz., impossibility of carrying on business by RPJ as a partner, the exclusion of RPJ from the partnership concern and loss of mutual confidence between RPJ and VDJ group.
Dismissing the appeal by certificate, the Court, ^ HELD: (1) In an application under section 433, the company Court will have to keep in mind the position of the company as a whole and the interests of the shareholders and see that they do not suffer in a fight for power that ensues between the two groups.
The court should see that a prima facie case has been made out before it is admitted on the allegations in the petition.
Even admission of a petition which will lead to advertisement of the winding up proceedings us likely to cause immense injury to the company if ultimately the application has to be dismissed.
The interest of the applicant alone is not of predominant consideration.
It is not proper principle to encourage hasty petitions under section 433 without first attempting to sort out the dispute and controversy between the members in the domestic forum in conformity with the articles of association.
There must be materials to show when "just and equitable clause" is involved, that it is just and equitable not only to the persons applying for winding up but also to the company and to all its shareholders.
[243 C D, 240 H, 241 A] (2) Section 433 of the is modelled on the English .
The Indian law is developing on its own lines and making progress of its own circle.
The courts will have to adjust and adapt limit or extend the principles derived from English decisions entitled as they are to great respect, suiting the conditions of our society and the country in general, always, however, with one primary consideration in view that the general interests of the shareholders may not be readily sacrificed at the altar of squabbles of directors of powerful groups for powerful to manage the company.
[240A, C D] Ramanandi Kuer vs Kalawati Kuer, , applied.
(3) Section 433 of the , provides six recipes so that the company may be wound up by the court.
Under section 433(f) which is identical in terms with section 222(f) of the English Act of 1948, a company may be wound up by the court if the court is of opinion that it is just and equitable that the company should be wound up.
It is now well established that the sixth clause, viz., "just and equitable" is not to be read as being "ejusdem generis" with the preceding five clauses.
The just and equitable clause leaves the entire matter to the wide and wise judicial discretion of the court.
The only limitations are force and the content of the words themselves "just and equitable".
Section 44(g) of the Indian Partnership Act also contains the words "just and equitable".
[241 B E] Section 433(f) is to be read with section 443(2) of the Act, which provides that where the petition is presented on the ground that it is just and equitable that the company should be wound up, the court may refuse to make an order of winding up if it is of opinion that some other remedy is available to the petitioners and that they are acting unreasonably in seeking to have the company wound up instead of pursuing that other remedy.
Again under section 307 and 398 of the Act there are preventive provisions in the Act as a safeguard against oppression in management.
These provisions also indicate that relief under section 433(f) based on the "just and equitable" clause is in the nature of a last resort when other remedies are not efficacious enough to protect the general interests of the company.
[241 E G] 228 Madan Lal and another vs Groin Chambers Ltd., Muzaffar Nagar and others; , and section P. Jain vs Kalinga Tubes Ltd. ; , followed.
(4) In applying the principles of dissolution of partnership to companies, the following factors must be present: Equal shareholding; complete deadlock in the administration of the company; lack of probity and mismanagement in the conduct of affairs of the company [In re Yenidje Tobacco Co. Ltd. The just and equitable clause cannot be invoked if a deadlock can be resolved by the articles and if there are alternate remedies.
(In re Cuthbert Cooper and Sons Ltd., 1937 Ch.
If there is no justifiable lack of confidence grounded on the conduct of the directors in the conduct of management of the companies affairs (Rajahmundry Electric Supply Corporation These are sound principles depending upon the nature, composition and character of the company.
The principles are good as they are their application in a given case or in all cases, generally creates problems and difficulties.
[233D E; 236 D] (5) The principle of "just and equitable" clause baffles a precise definition.
It must rest with the judicial discretion of the court depending upon the facts and circumstances of each case.
When more than one family or several friends and relations together form a company and there is no right as such agreed upon for active participation of members who are sought to be excluded from management the principles of dissolution of partnership cannot be liberally invoked.
Besides, it is only when shareholding is more or less equal and there is a case of complete deadlock in the company on account of lack of probity in the management of the company and there is no hope or possibility of smooth and efficient continuance of the company as a commercial concern, there may arise a case for winding up on the "just and equitable" ground.
In a given case the principles of dissolution of partnership may apply squarely if the apparent structure of the company is not the real structure and on piercing the veil it is found that in reality it is a partnership.
These are necessarily equitable considerations and may in a given case be superimposed on law.
Whether it would be so done in a particular case cannot be put in the strict jacket of an inflexible formula.
[247G, D F] In re Cathbert Cooper & Sons Limited, [1937] Ch. 392; and In re Yenidje Tobacco Company Limited, , discussed.
In re Ebrahimi and Westbourane Galleries Ltd. , discussed and considered.
Lackh and another vs John Blackwood Limited ; , quoted with approval.
Baird vs Lees.
and D. Davis & Co. Ltd. vs Brunswick (Australia) Ltd. and others A.I.R. 1938 PC 114, referred to.
Rajahmundry Electric Supply Corporation Ltd. vs A. Nageswara Rao and others[1955] 2 SCR [1066], Mohan Lal & Anr.
vs Grain Chamber Ltd., Muzaffarnagar and others.
; and S.P. Jain vs Kalinga Tubes Ltd., , followed.
(6) In the present case, assuming partnership had been contemplated the idea was deliberately abandoned; the company was started with one ACD who had no relation with MCJ group or the VDJ group but an employee of VDJ, which would negative the idea of partnership which connotes equal status among the partners; While it is true that a director may work in the company on remuneration.
RPJ however served like an employee on monthly salary not on his own initiative enjoying an equal partner 's freedom and prestige but directly under the supervision and control of VDJ acknowledging a status definitely of a subordinate character; The voluntary financial involvement of a large stake by VDJ carefully thought to be protected against erosion of his interests by constant vigil on the day to day working does not fit in with the 229 concept of a partnership; Even the account was being opened for the purpose of the formation of the company and the account was closed on such formation.
The shareholding is between the two family groups, it cannot be said that the company thereby takes the image of partnership.
On the other hand, the fact that after discussion, the parties deliberately abandoned the idea of farming a partnership would go to show that there was no intention to carry on business as partners.
[242E H] There are no special features which would unquestionably lead to the conclusion that the company is in substance a partnership and the principle of "just and equitable clause" cannot be therefore, extended.
[242 H, 245A]
