Under cl. 13 of the agreement between the parties the tariff and conditions of supply of electricity were subject to any revision that may be made by the supplier from time to time.
Clause 23 states that any dispute or difference arising between the consumer and the supplier shall be referred to an arbitrator.
The respondent issued a press note deciding to levy a surchage of 10 per cent on certain categories of customers, which included the appellants.
The appellants challenged the levy but the High Court dismissed their writ petitions.
On appeal to this Court it was contended that (1) the Board had no power under the Act to levy a surcharge, (2) cl.
13 of the Agreement could not take in the levy of surcharge and as such it is not a matter for reference to arbitration under cl. 23 of the agreement and (3) in exempting certain categories and imposing surcharge upon the appellants the Board was guilty of discrimination, which is impermissible under section 49 of the Act and cl. 2 of Schedule I to the Agreement.
Dismissing the appeals, ^ HELD: (1) Enhancement of the rates by way of surcharge is well within the power of the Board to fix or revise the rates of tariff under the provisions of the Act.
The word "surcharge" is not defined in the Act.
Etymologically it stands for an additional or extra charge or payment, and in the present case it is in substance an addition to the stipulated rate of tariff.
[311 A B; 310H] (2) (i) It is only where there is nothing in a special agreement with regard to revision of rates during the subsistence of the agreement that the existence of the special agreements prevents any increase of the rates stipulated in the special agreements by adding the surcharge.
In the present case cl. 13 of the agreement provides for revision of rates and the surcharge is not absolutely different from rates of tariff because the effect of the levy of surcharge would be to enhance the rate of supply of electricity stipulated under the agreement.
[312 A B] M/s.
Titagarh Paper Mills Ltd. vs Orissa State Electricity Board and Another, , followed.
Indian Aluminium Company vs Kerala State Electricity Board, ; , explained.
Therefore, the matter in dispute is covered by the arbitration clause of the Agreement.
[313 B] (ii) Although the press note did not recite any provision of the Act, mere omission to do so did not disentitle the Board to rely upon clause 13 for a claim to revision of the rates.
[314 C] (iii) This is not a fit case for the Court in its discretion, to withhold the matter from arbitration and itself deal with it merely because the Court has discretion to do so under section 34 of the Arbitration Act or under article 226 of the 308 Constitution and that the Court is better posted to decide such questions.
The arbitration clause is of wide amplitude, taking in its sweep even interpretation of the agreement and necessarily, therefore, of cl. 13.
[314 F] (3) The totality of the provisions under section 49 does not give any scope for the plea of discrimination raised in this case and in view of cl. 13 of the agreement itself.
As regards the various industries which have not been subjected to the charge, it is not known whether there is a similar provision like cl. 13 in the agreements.
[313 G H] When the law makes it obligatory for certain special agreements to continue in full force during their currency stultifying the power of the Board to revise the rates during the period, no ground of discrimination can be made out on the score of exempting such industries as are governed by special agreements.
[314 B] M/s.
Titagarh Paper Mills Ltd. vs Orissa State Electricity Board and Another, , applied.
