Appointments to the posts of sub inspectors (either to the Distt.
Police Force or the Police Force of Greater Bombay) in the State of Bombay, prior to 1st of May 1939, were after a training of 18 months at the Police Training School at Nasik.
Between the period 1st May 1939 and 1st of June 1949, a new training school at Naigaum a part of Greater Bombay was started wherein the period of training varied from 3 to 8 months and after the short training the cadets were appointed straight away as Sub Inspectors of Police in Greater Bombay.
Separate seniority lists were maintained for the Distt.
force and the city force.
The Nasik school continued to exist side by side with 18 months training.
On the general principle of fixation of seniority when the combined cadre service order came into force w.e.f. 1 8 54 the two seniority lists were maintained on the basis of their passing out the training and in order of merit obtained at the passing examination.
After the formation, when transfers were to be made, a difficulty arose in fixing the inter se seniority of the officers appointed after full 18 months training and one appointed after training for a shorter period and to avoid anomaly and hardship a provision was made in clause 7 whereby for the purpose of seniority (i) in the case of officers whose training commenced on any date from 1 5 39 to 1 6 1949, the date of commencement of the training was taken and (ii) in other cases, the dote of successful completion of such a course and inter se the place occupied in the results of the examination held at the end of such a course was taken.
When the constitutionality of Clause 7(1)(a) was challenged, the High Court of Bombay declared Clause 7(1)(a) of the order void, being violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution on three grounds: (1) That the Government had reduced the period of training at Naigaum School as against the resolution dated April 6, 1940 providing for the establishment of a Training School at Naigaum.
(2) That according to the said clause of the Order the commencement of the training period of the Mofussil officer was to be taken for determination of his seniority whereas in case of the officer belonging to the Greater Bombay Police Force, the date of his appointment was to be taken and in the opinion of the High Court, this was clearly discriminatory.
(3) That in case of a cadet whose period of training had been extended on account of his failure at the examination the impugned clause gave an advantage even to such a bad officer.
Dismissing the appeal appellant No. 3 and allowing the appeal of appellants Nos. 1 and 2.
the Court ^ HELD: (i) The High Court has committed an error in the interpretation of the provision contained in clause 7(1) (a) of the Bombay Police Officers (Combined Cadre) Conditions of Service Order.
On transfer of any police officer from Greater Bombay to the District and vice versa, if his training had com 316 menced on any date between the period of 1st May 1939 to 1st June 1949 then his seniority was to be determined vis a vis the police officer of the force to which he was transferred with reference to the dates on which their training commenced.
It is not that in one case it will be the date of commencement of the training and in the other it will be date of appointment.
[319 C D].
(ii) Ordinarily and generally method of fixation of seniority as provided in sub clause (b) of clause 7(1)(a) of the order was the correct and proper method to be followed.
But because of the special situation of appointment of some police officers during the period of 10 years on a shorter period of training, a departure was made as provided in clause (a).
There was nothing wrong, illegal or unreasonable in making a provision in sub clause (a) that in such a situation the commencement of the period of training will be taken as the date for the purposes of fixation of seniority.
There was a reasonable nexus between the object and the rule.
[319 H, 320 A B] (iii) It was for the rule making authority to decide and to choose in such a situation either the date of commencement of the training or the date of appointment.
Taking the former date in the special circumstances is reasonable and justified.
Such a provision is not violative of article 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
[320 B C] (iv) To hold clause 7(1) as ultra vires on the ground that it gives any advantage even to such a bad officer whose period of training had been extended on account of his failure in the examination may be theoretically correct.
Clause 7(1)(a) was not meant to give any undue advantage to a non deserving police officer who failed to pass the training examination at the proper time.
[320 C D] (v) Clause 7(1)(a) of the order is constitutionally valid and not discriminatory.
[320 E]
