The State Electricity Board had framed, in exercise of its power under section 49 of the , certain terms and conditions and, the procedure in regard to supply of electricity to its.
consumers.
For big consumers the system of tariff is the two part tariff system comprising of (1) Demand charge and (ii) Energy charge.
A "Demand charge" means the amount chargeable per month in respect of the Electricity Board 's readiness to serve the consumer irrespective of whether he consumes any energy or not and is based upon certain factors.
"Energy charge" means the charge for energy actually taken by the consumer and is applicable to the units consumed by him in any Month.
This was in addition to any demand charge, if applicable.
A schedule of tariff of energy was framed by the Board.
4(b) mentions how the monthly demand charge shall be calculated and sub clause (f) of this clause states that in the event of lock out, fire or any other circumstances considered by the supper to be beyond the control of the consumer, the consumer shall be entitled to a proportionate reduction of demand charges/minimum charges.
As a result of shortage of electricity the State Electricity Board considerably restricted the supply to large industrial concerns.
Because of this the Board allowed some reduction in the demand charges.
The appellant, who was a bulk consumer of electricity, could not get the full quantity as per the contract between the parties.
The appellant, therefore, filed a writ petition that there should be either no demand charge at all.
when the Board was not in a position to supply electric energy, or there should be a proportionate reduction of the demand charge.
The High Count noted the reduction made by the Board and held that the Board was entitled to the demand charge.
It did Dot, however decide as to what should be the basis for and in what proportion the demand char o should be reduced.
The appellant also contended that no duty was lovable on the demand charge, under the Punjab Electricity (Duty) Act, 1958 but only on the energy charge, for the actual amount of energy supplied but the High Court rejected this contention.
Allowing the appeal in part on the first contention, ^ HELD: (1) The circumstance of power cut which disabled the Board to give the full supply to the appellant would be a circumstance which disabled the consumer from consuming electricity as per the contract and this was a circumstance which was beyond it control and could not be considered otherwise by the Board.
It entitled the consumer to a proportionate reduction of the demand charge.
In a circumstance like this the obligation of the consumer o serve at least 3 days ' notice on the supplier as per the later part of sub clause (f) was not attracted as the requirement of the notice was only in the case of shut down of not less than 15 days ' duration [682 A, B, C] Therefore, the inability of the Board to supply electric energy due to power cut as per the demand of the consumer according to the contract will be reflected in and considered as n circumstance beyond the control of the consumer which prevented him from consuming electricity as per the contract to the extent it wanted to consume.
[682, D] 2 L159SCT/76 678 (2) A reading of the clauses of the Schedule of tariff as a whole makes it clear that the duty under the Punjab Act is chargeable on the price of energy supplied in a month.
Therefore, the duty is chargeable not only on the energy charge but also on the demand charge.
It is, however, chargeable on the actual amount of demand charge realizable from the consumer.
