The Ordinance Factory in which the petitioners were employed hold four cadres.
In the 2nd cadre of non gazetted officers there were four grades Foremen.
Assistant Foremen, Chargemen Grade I and Chargemen Grade II.
The 3rd cadre of non industrial employees had 2 grades Supervisor 'A ' Grade and 'B ' Grade, and were governed by the Indian ordnance Factories (Recruitment and Conditions of Service of Class III Personnel) Rules,1956.
Appointment was on the basis of 20% of the quota for direct recruits and 80% for promotees.
In answer to an advertisement for appointment by direct recruitment to the 4 grades of the 2nd cadre, the petitioners, all of whom except petitioner No. 12, were serving as Supervisors 'A ' Grade, applied.
Petitioner No. 12 was not in service.
They were interviewed but none of the petitioners, except Petitioner No. 12, received orders of appointment.
Petitioner No. 12 was appointed Chargeman Grade II.
Between April, 1963, and November, 1963, The other petitioners were promoted as Chargemen Grade II.
Respondents 5 to 16 who were apprentices, were also promoted as Chargemen Grade II, and were later promoted to the grade of Assistant Foremen.
Treating this order as an order of supersession, the petitioners filed a writ petition under article 32 claiming to be promotees, and seniority on the basis of statutory rules 10(1)(i) to (iv) contained in S.R.O. 4.
Dismissing the petition, ^ HELD.
(I) There was a justifiable ground for distinction between the petitioners, who were direct recruits, and the respondents who were promotees, and hence, there was no violation of article 16.
1762 G] The petitioners were really direct recruits and not promotees despite the wrong description in their service records and even wrong orders conveying the impression that they were promoters.
even though they had not received intimation of their appointment as direct recruits.
Promotions arc only made under section 8 of the Indian ordnance Factories (Recruitment and Conditions of service of Class III Personnel) Rules, 1956, as amended in 1961, to Charge men Grade II, on the basis Of a selection list prepared by the appropriate Departmental Promotion Committee.
The Committee had prescribed a normal minimum qualification of 3 years ' service in the post of Supervisor Grade 'A ' before promotion except in exceptional cases of ex apprentices.
The petitioners did not belong to the class which had any exceptional qualification, and, since they had not satisfied tho 3 years ' condition, they could not be considered for promotion in the 80% quota reserved for promotees, to the post of Chargemen, Grade Ir.
E Hl (2) The petitioners have not established that they have been denied their seniority in violation of any right under article 16 nor that the seniority list had been prepared in violation of any rule or principle of justice.
The question of inter se seniority is also based upon the 4:1 (80%: 20%) ratio and it was for the petitioners to satisfy the Court that they were not given the senior 759 grade although they satisfied all the required conditions, and that others, who A were promoted, were given unjustifiable preference over them.
[763C] Amrit Lal Berry vs Collector of Central Excise Central Revenue & ors., AIK @ 546, followed.
