Section 3 of the Drugs and Magic Remedies (objectionable Advertisements) Act provides that no person shall take part in the publication of any advertisement referring to any drug in terms which suggest or are calculated to lead to the use of that drug for the maintenance or improvement of the capacity of human beings for sexual pleasure or the diagnosis, cure or treatment of any disease or condition specified in the Schedule to the Act.
Section 7 of the Act makes it penal to contravene any of the provisions of the Act.
The appellant inserted an advertisement in a newspaper to the effect that he would treat diseases "with new methods, new machines of science and electric treatment".
He was prosecuted under section 7 read with section 3 of the Act and was convicted and sentenced.
The High Court confirmed the conviction and sentence.
On appeal to this Court.
it was contended that the particular advertisement did not refer to any "drug" and, therefore, the provisions of the Act were not attracted.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: "Machines of science" designed to confer on mankind the blessings of "New Life, New Vigour, New Spirit, New Wave" advertised by the appellant are most likely to trap the ignorant and the unwary.
The articles of commerce which the appellant had banefully advertised must be brought within the mischief of the Act.
[784 GH] (1) Any article other than food which is intended to affect or influence in any way any organic function of the body of a human being is a drug within the meaning of that provision.
The so called "machines of science" or of "electric treatment" whose magically curative properties were advertised by the appellant are articles intended to influence the organic function of the human body.
[784C] (2) A machine is a tangible thing which can both be seen and felt and as such, it answers the description of an article within the meaning of section 2(b)(iii) of the Act.
A machine is intended to be and is conceived as a useful thing and is therefore, an "article".
It does no violence either to commonsense or to rules of interpretation to say that a machine is an "article".
[784 D E]
