For the purpose of protecting the smaller manufacturers from the cometition of larger manufacturers, the Government of India, by a notification dated 21 July 1967, amended by notification dated 4 September, 1967, declared a concessional rate of duty to those manufacturers who had filed a declaration before 4 September 1967 that their estimated annual clearance would be less than 75 million match sticks.
This Court in Union of India vs Parameswaran Match Works etc. ; setting aside the judgment of the High Court holding that classification was invalid, held the classification founded on a particular date to be reasonable; and the concessional rate would be availed of even by those manufacturers who came to the field after 4 September, 1967 if they satisfied the condition in clause (d) of the notification regarding quantity of matches and are recommended by the Khadi and Village Industries Commission for exemption.
The respondent filed declarations on 22 December, 1967 that they would not produce more than 75 million match sticks during the year 1969 70 and claimed to be entitled to the concessional rate of excise duty.
In appeal to this Court the respondents sought to support the judgment of the High Court on the grounds (i) that they were entitled to the exemption on the basis of clause (d) of the notification; and (ii) that the Khadi and Village Industries Commission was not competent to make any recommendation.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: (1) The appeals are covered by the decision of this Court in Parameswaran Match Works case and no case is made out by the respondents on the basis of exemption under cl.
(d) of the notification.
There is no allegation in the petition that the respondents came into the field after 4 September 1967 or that they started manufacturing the matches after 4 September, 1967 or that they were recommended by the Khadi and Villages Industries Commission mission.
[871 D & B] (2) Under section 15(h) of the the Commission may take steps in ensuring the genuineness of, and for granting certificates to producers of, or dealers in, Khadi or the products of any village industry.
Therefore, the Commission is competent to recommend for exemptions under cl.
(d) of the Notification.
