The appellant, who fought and won the election as a Congress candidate, had applied to the Tamil Nad Congress Committee on 12 9 51 for party nomination stating his desire "to contest as a Congress candidate in the forthcoming election '? and paid a sum of Rs. 500 of which Rs. 100 was subscription for membership and Rs. 400 a deposit, liable to he refunded in case the application was refused.
On 23 9 51 he paid another gum of Rs. 500 as donation to the District Congress Committee.
On 13 11 51 he was adopted by the Congress as its candidate.
His nomination paper for the election was filed on 16 11 51.
The charge against him in the election petition was that he had failed to include these two sums in his return of election expenses and with the addition of these sums the maximum limit of election expenses prescribed for the constituency would be exceeded.
The Tribunal found that both these sums were paid for election purposes and the maximum prescribed had been exceeded and, therefore, section 123(7) had been contravened and declared the election void under section 100(2)(b) of the Act.
The Tribunal also recorded a _finding that the appellant was liable to the disqualifications specified in section 140, clauses (1)(a) and (2).
Held, affirming the decision of the Tribunal, that the exact point of time from which a person must be deemed to be a candidate within the meaning of section 79(b) of the Representation of the People Act is the time when, with the election in prospect, he himself decides to stand as a candidate and communicates such decision to others leaving no manner of doubt as to his intention.
This must be an met of his own volition and not that of other persons or bodies adopting him as their candidate.
The Lichfield case, [1895] 5 p.m. & H. 1, referred to.
That the applicant was a candidate from the date of his application to the Tamil Nad Congress Committee and the two sums were election expenses incurred by him and should have been shown in his return.
470 That the commencement of candidature in a particular case is.
a question of fact to be determined by the Tribunal and its decision in this regard is not liable to be reviewed by the Supreme Court in an appeal by special leave.
That whether a particular sum paid at the time or on the eve of the election was a donation, an act of charity or an election expense must depend on whether or not such payment was open to the charge of having been made in order to induce the voters to vote in favour of the donor.
This again is a question of fact to be decided by the Tribunal.
The Wigan case, , and The Kingston case , relied on.
The Kennington case, (1886] , held inapplicable.
That it was not necessary for the Tribunal to 'serve a notice under the proviso to section 99 of the Act on the appellant, a party to the election petition, to enable the Tribunal to record his liability to disqualification under section 140 of the Act in respect of the chargelevelled against him.
