The respondent a displace person from Pakistan had a verified claim of more than Rs. 32 lacs from compensation under the Displaced Persons (Compensation & Rehabilitation) Act, 1954.
His uncle Jai Singh had also a verified claim of about Rs. 26 lacs.
Jai Singh executed a will by which a portion of his share in the compensation was bequeathed to the respondent.
Jai Singh died.
The Assistant Settlement Officer clubbed together the individual claim of the respondent and the share of the legacy and awarded the maximum compensation of Rs. 2 lacs under rule 16.
Respondent objected to the clubbing on the ground that the character of the share Jai Singh was that of a legacy and not of compensation.
On an appeal, the Assistant Settlement Commissioner accepted the respondent 's contention.
The Regional Settlement Commissioner, however, revised the order of the Assistant Settlement Commissioner and restored the order of the Assistant Settlement Officer.
The appeal to the Settlement Commissioner filed by the respondent failed.
The High Court allowed the writ petition filed by the respondent and quashed the orders passed by the Settlement Commissioner.
In an appeal by certificate under Article 133(1) (a) it was contended by the appellant that the purpose of the Act was to compensate and rehabilitate displaced persons subject to a maximum limit.
Combined effect of rules 16 to 21 interpreted in the light of the scheme of the Act was said to be that the amount of compensation payable to an individual cannot in any case exceed Rs. 2 lacs.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD : 1.
There is nothing in the Act to prevent a claimant from making a gift or will in respect of the amount he might be entitled to get.
No provision of the Act takes away rights of transfer of or inheritance to verified claims.
Nothing like an abatement or an extinction of a claim by the death of the claimant is provided for by the Act.
The statutory rights of claimants to compensation are covered by the wide definition of "property" in section 6 of the Transfer of Property Act.
They cannot evaporate or vanish suddenly with the death of a claimant.
Rules framed under section 40 of the Act have to be and are those reasonably necessary for carrying out the purposes of the article They cannot go beyond the objects for which they can be framed.
The objects are determination and payment of compensation and do not extend to deprivation of anything acquired in India.
[990 F H, 991 A] 2.
The right of the respondent as a legatee was different in character from his claim as a displaced person.
There is no provision for clubbing together of compensation to different displaced persons each with a right of his own except as members of joint families which are treated as legal entities by themselves.
The rights of a successor of another displaced person are outside the rule.
The 989 judgment of the Punjab High Court in the case of Karam Singh vs Union of India I.I.R. [1964] 1 Punjab 742, approved.
[991 C, 992 A]
