Samples of cow 's milk were taken by the concerned officers from 6 out of several cans carried by the appellant in a truck and were sent for analysis.
Finding the samples adulterated, the appellant was prosecuted for an offence punishable under section 16 read with section 7 of the .
Both the trial Court and the first Appellate Court treated the sales of six samples as forming part of the same transaction constituting one single offence.
The High Court, in revision, held that the sale of each sample constituted a distinct and separate offence, that the appellant was, therefore, liable for 6 different offences, and remanded the case for re trial of the appellant for 6 offences.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court, ^ HELD: (a) The acts prohibited by section 7 include manufacturing for sale, storing, selling or distributing any adulterated article of food.
Hence, not only is the act of storing for sale an offence, but also the act of selling out of the adulterated article of food so stored.
The definition of "sale" in section 2(xiii) includes sale for analysis.
Therefore, where samples are taken for analysis from different receptacles, whether at one and the same time or at different times, each taking constitutes a distinct and independent sale, because, each sample would be taken for determining, by analysis, whether the article of food in a particular receptacle is adulterated or not.
The taking of each sample would be necessary and justified, because, it may be that the article of food in one receptacle is adulterated while in the other it is not, or, the nature and degree of adulteration may vary from receptacle to receptacle.
It is only where samples are taken from the same receptacle at one and the same time or within reasonable proximity of time that it may not be possible to say that the taking of each of those samples constitutes a distinct and separate sale.
[984 F, H, 985 B G] Fecitt vs Walsh , applied.
(b) In Shankar Lal Agarwalla vs Corporation of Calcutta, A.I.R. 1962 Cal.
611, the 3 prosecutions against the accused were not for three different transactions of sale constituted by taking samples from three tins of ghee, but were for three acts of storing adulterated ghee, and so the decision is not relevant.
But observations contra therein that the taking of sample from different receptacles at the same time from the same place for analysis, constitutes only one offence, are incorrect.
[986 G, 987 A D]
