One 'BC ', governed by the Mitakshra School of Hindu Law, being issueless and apprehending the claim to his property after his death as reversioners by his only brother 'RR ' and his nephew 'K ' who were inimical to him since the partition of their ancestral property in 1899, and possible harassment of his wife and 'G ', the respondent, executed a Will on September 21, 1916, in the Urdu script.
The respondent 'G ' being the son of the testator 's sister married to testator 's wife 's brother was doubly related.
As per the Will, 'G ' was to perform the obsequies and other annual death ceremonies etc.
, being his 'waris ' and the "Malik Kamil ' absolute owner" having all the proprietary powers and the power of making transfers of all sorts", while his wife was to be in possession and enjoyment of the property during her life time.
From the date of death of the testator in 1918 for about 18 years the widow and 'G ' lived in cordiality but got estranged later due to estrangement of feelings resulting in several civil and criminal litigation between them.
The widow died in 1948 executing a gift deed and a Will in respect of certain properties in favour of the appellant 'NL '. 'G ' filed a civil suit claiming his rights under the Will dated 21 September, 1916, and the appellant defendant contested it on pleas that the widow of 'BC ' having an absolute right over the property under the said Will validly made the gift deed and the Will of 1948 in his favour and that the respondent plaintiff had no locus standi to file the suit.
The suit was decreed.
On appeal to the Allahabad High Court, as there was a difference of opinion between the Judges of the Division Bench on the nature of the widow 's estate, one opining as the Will conferring a "limited estate" and the other opining as conferring an "absolute estate" the appeal was set down to a third Judge who agreed with the view that the Will conferred only a "limited estate" upon the widow and dismissed the appeal.
Confirming the decree of the courts below and dismissing the appeal by certificate, the Court, ^ HELD : (1) The following are the established principles for construing the language of the Will.
(a) In construing a document whether in English or in vernacular the fundamental rule is to ascertain the intention from the words used; the surrounding circumstances being considered to find out the intended meaning of such words employed therein.
[927F G] (b) In construing the language of the Will the court is entitled to put itself into the testator 's armchair and is bound to bear in mind also other matters than merely the words used like the surrounding circumstances, the position of the testator, his family relationship, the probability that he would use words in a particular sense all as an aid to arriving at a right construction of the Will, and to ascertain the meaning of its language when used by that particular testator in that document.
[927G H, 928A] (c) The true intention of the testator has to be gathered not by attaching importance to isolated expressions but by reading the Will as a whole with all its provisions and ignoring none of them as redundant or contradictory.
[928B] (d) The court must accept, if possible, such construction as would give to every expression some effect rather than that which would render any of 925 the expression inoperative.
The court will look at the circumstances under which the testator makes his Will, such as the state of his property, of his family and the like.
Where apparently conflicting dispositions can be reconciled by giving full effect to every word used in a document, such a construction should be accepted instead of a construction which would have the effect of cutting down the clear meaning of the words used by the testator.
Further, where one of the two reasonable constructions would lead to intestacy, that should be discarded in favour of a construction which does not create and such hiatus.
[928C E] (e) It is one of the cardinal principles of construction of Wills that to the extent that it is legally possible effect should be given to every disposition contained in the Will unless the law prevents effect being given to it.
Of course, if there are two repugnant provisions conferring successive interests, if the first interest created is valid the subsequent interest cannot take effect but a court of construction will proceed to the farthest extent to avoid repugnancy, so that effect could be given as far as possible to every testamentary intention contained in the Will.
[928E G] Ram Gopal vs Nand Lal and others ; Venkata Narasimha vs Parthasarathy, 42 Indian Appeals 51/72; Gnanambal Ammal vs T. Raju Ayyar and others, ; Raj Bajrang Bahadur Singh vs Thakurain Bakhtraj Kuer, ; Pearey Lal vs Rameshwar Das [1963] Supp.
SCR 834/839/842 and Ramachandra Shenoy and Anr.
vs Mrs. Hilda Brite and others. , applied.
(ii) The term "malik" when used in a Will or other document as descriptive of the position which a devisee or donee is intended to hold, has been held apt to describe an owner possessed of full proprietary rights, including a full right of alienation, unless there is something in the context or in the surrounding circumstances to indicate that such full proprietary rights were not intended to be conferred, but the meaning of every word in an Indian Will must always depend upon the setting in which it is placed, the subject to which it is related and the locality of the testator from which it may receive its true shade of meaning.
The intention of the testator will have to be gathered from all the relevant and material contents in the entire Will made in situation in which the testator was placed in life in the background of his property, his inclinations, wishes, desires and attitudes as can be clearly and unambiguously found either from the recitals from the instrument or from absolutely undoubted contemporaneous legally admissible evidence.
Hence, even the words "malik muakkil" can be qualified by other words and circumstances appearing in the document.
[930 B C & G H] Sasiman Chowdhurain and others vs Shib Narayan Chowdhury and others, 49 Indian Appeals 25/35; Musammat Surajmani and others vs Rabi Nath Ojha and another, 35 Indian Appeals 17; Krishna Biharilal vs Gulabchand and others, (1971) Supp.
SCR 27 and Dhyan Singh and anr.
vs Jugal Kishore and anr.
, [1952] SCR 478, discussed.
(iii) In the instant case, the testator intended a life estate for his wife so long as she lived as is clear from the reading of the present Will as a whole.
This is consistent with his description of Gokul as "my heir (waris)" after his death.
It is further consistent with the recital that "if per chance, Mrs. Jarian dies in my life time, then Gokul, aforesaid will be the absolute owner (malik kamil) of the estate left by me (matruka meri) and he shall have power of making all sorts of transfers (aurusko har qism ke aktiyarat inteqalat hasil honge)".
In obvious contrast even though Smt.
Jarian was made the malik of his entire estate after his death "having all the proprietary rights" nothing is stated about her "power of making all sorts of transfers" which power is expressly mentioned as belonging to him and also exclusively conferred upon Gokul after Smt.
Jarian 's death.
While describing his own "proprietary powers" the testator made reference to his "power of making transfers of all sorts".
This power of making transfers which was prominent in the mind of the testator at the time of execution of the Will is conspicuous by total omission in relation to Smt.
Jarian 's enjoyment of the property.
The testator has made the distinction between mere ownership of property and ownership of the same coupled with a transfer in every way.
[931 A D] 926 Further, from the recitals in the Will about his only reversioners viz., his brother and nephew "might trouble and harass my wife Mst.
Jarian and my sister 's son Gokul", it is clear that the testator never intended that his property should pass to his brother and nephew.
This intention would be achieved by holding that there was a devise of a life estate to his wife and an absolute estate thereafter to Gokul indicating a different line of inheritance in the Will on the other hand, if any absolute estate would have been conferred on the widow, then on her death the property would have passed on by inheritance to her husband 's heirs who were none else than the brother and the nephew of the testator.
There was no other heir of Mst.
Jarian to inherit the property after her death.
[931 G H, 932 A B] A plenitude of absolute estate in favour of the wife will make the absolute bequest to Gokul void in law.
No such repugnant interpretation detrimental to the interest of Gokul can be made in the light of the entire tenor of the instrument.
The testator intended to bequeath in favour of his widow only a life estate and after her death an absolute estate to Gokul.
[932B C]
