Rule 6 of the Bihar Superior Judicial Service Rules, 1951, says that of the posts in the cadre of the service, two thirds shall be filled by promotion and one third by direct recruitment.
Clause (e) of r. 16 provides that seniority of direct recruits vis a vis promoted officers shall be determined with reference to the dates from which they may have been allowed to officiate continuously in a post in the cadre of the Service.
Respondents 1, 2 and 3 who were direct recruits were appointed as Additional District & Sessions Judges with effect from April 21, 1960.
Respondents 4, 5 and 6 belonged to the judicial service of the State.
Respondents 5 and 6 were promoted as Additional District & Sessions Judges.
But despite the availability of a post from November 1, 1959, and suitability of respondent 4, he was appointed to that post only on September 19, 1960.
His representation that his seniority should be fixed below that of respondent 6 was rejected by the High Court.
But, the State Government said that in order to relieve undue hard ship to respondent 4, he should be deemed to have been officiating as Additional District & Sessions Judge with effect from November 1, 1959 and that for the purposes of seniority he should rank immediately below respondents 5 and 6 on the view that on a proper interpretation of r. 16(e) of the Rules, the Government was authorised to fix the seniority from a date from which officiation was possible on account of availability of vacancies.
Respondents 1 to 3 (direct recruits(1) in a writ petition impugned the Government 's action in fixing the seniority of respondent 4 below that of respondents 5 and 6 but above them.
Before the High Court the State contended that the meaning of the expression "might have been allowed to officiate continuously" in r. 16(e) is that a notional, continuous officiation in a post in the cadre of the service or outside it, will give preference to the promoted officers in the matter of seniority over the direct recruits provided there were vacancies, in one or which he could or might have been allowed to officiate continuously.
The High Court rejected this contention and held that this expression meant actual and continuous officiation and not a fictional or notional one.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: (1)(a) The words "may have been allowed to officiate continuously" in cl.
(e) of r. 16 mean actual and continuous officiation and not a fortuitous or fictional officiation.
A notional construction of the clause would lead to anomalous results.
The State Government, therefore, could not, on an interpretation of r. 16(e) say that for the limited purpose of seniority respondent 4 would rank below respondents 5 and 6 but above the writ petitioners (respondents I to 3(1) and will be deemed to have been officiating as Additional District & Sessions Judges with effect from November 1, 1959.
Such a deeming officiation for the purpose of determination of seniority on a construction of cl.
(e) was not permissible.
[117 H 118 B] (b) Reading cl.
(e) together with cl.
(a) and (b) of r. 16, it is clear that before fixing the seniority of direct recruits vis a vis promoted officers it will be necessary, as a preliminary step, to prepare two separate lists one of direct recruits under cl.
(a) and the other of promoted officers under cl.
(b) of r. 16 in the chronological order of their confirmation.
[117 D E] 111 (2) The power of confirmation of District Judges is a part of the power of control vested in the High Court under article 235 of the Constitution.
Since the Bihar Superior Judicial Service Rules make the chronological order of confirmation an integral part of the process of fixation of the order of seniority in the service, the inference is that both these powers were intended to be exercised by one and the same authority.
Since article 235 of the Constitution vests the power of confirmation in the High Court, the power of determining the seniority in the service is also with the High Court.
In determining the seniority the High Court is bound to act in accordance with the rules validly made by the Governor under the proviso to article 309 of the Constitution.
[117 E G] Chandramouleshwar Prasad vs Patna High Court and others ; , followed.
High Court of Punjab and Haryana etc.
vs The State of Haryana and others ; , distinguished.
