Section 45(1) of the , a general provision regulating applications for inter regional route permits within a State requires an application to be made to the appropriate Regional Transport Authority mentioned in the proviso thereto namely, either to the Regional Transport Authority of tho region in which the major portion of the proposed route or area lies or to the Regional Transport Authority of the region in which it is proposed to keep the vehicle or vehicles in case the portion of the proposed route or area in each of the regions are approximately equal.
The appellant applied for a contract carriage permit that would be valid throughout the State of Karnataka, which meant that he proposed to use his vehicle in all the nineteen regions, to the Regional Transport Authority, Mandya, who granted him on 8 2 1972 a contract carriage permit valid for the entire State of Karnataka.
The permit was granted as Mandya region has more motorable roads than any other district in the State.
On appeal preferred by the State Road Transport Corporation, taking the view that geographically Mandya region was smaller in area and, as such, the jurisdiction of the Regional Transport Authority, Mandya was ousted, the permit granted to the appellant was cancelled by the State Transport Appellate Tribunal by its Order dated 19 8 1972, resulting in a writ Proceedings before the Karnataka High Court which was dismissed.
On appeal by Special Leave, the Court, ^ HELD: (1) The word "route" which has been used in association with "area specifically notified by the State Government".
However, the terms and "a line of travel which specifies the highway which may be traversed by a motor vehicle between one terminus and another".
Section 2(1) defines "area" as "area specifically notified by the State Government".
However, the terms and expressions defined in section 2 will apply only if there is nothing repugnant in the subject or context.
Tho first proviso to section 45(1) speaks of the route or area proposed in an application for a permit and, as such, there can be no question of the State Government specifying the area.
The definition of "area" in section 2(1) has therefore no relevance in this context.
[31B D] (2) section 45 uses both the words "route" and "area" whichever is applicable in a given case.
A route as defined is a line of travel between two termini on a highway, but the idea of a route as a notional line that the definition suggests has not been consistently maintained in the Act.
[31D E] (3) A route may mean not only the notional line of travel between one terminus and another, but also the area of the route over which the motor vehicles ply, yet the two terms are not interchangeable.
"A route is an area plus some thing more." This "something" is the notional line of travel between the two termini which distinguishes a route from an area simpliciter.
The first proviso to section 45(1) speaks of "route or area" apparently making a distinction between 29 them to cover applications relatable to either.
A contract carriage does not ply along a fixed "route or routes" but over an "area" which is why an application for a contract carriage permit has to contain a statement as to the pro posed area.
[31G H] Dosa Satyanarayanamurty etc.
vs The Andhra Pradesh State Road Transport Corpn., (644).
C. P. C. Motor Service, Mysore vs The State of Mysore, [1962]Supp.
(1) S.C.R. 717 (725).
C. P. Sikh Regular Motor Service etc.
vs The State of Maharashtra, [1975] (2) S.C.R. 10, followed.
(4)The word "area" in the first proviso to section 45(1) of the Act means the area of motorable roads within the territorial jurisdiction of a regional transport authority.
Except that the territorial jurisdiction of the regional transport authority is fixed in terms of "geographical area "district wise in the State of Karnataka "area" in that wider sense is irrelevant to the purpose of the Act.
[32 B, F] (5) The jurisdiction of a regional transport authority to grant an inter regional permit depends on the existing areas of motorable roads when an application for a permit is made.
[32 G] [On the question of the reasonableness of a provision which requires an application for an inter regional permit to be made to the Regional Transport Authority of the region where the major portion of the proposed route or area lies, the Court observed that this was a matter of policy but added that the policy has not been stated very clearly, and that instead of leaving the law in such a "slippery state," the State should clarify it by appropriate legislation so that the law may be clear and easily ascertainable by the concerned section of the public.]
