During the year 1948, the respondent, workmen working with both the appellants went on illegal strike on account of Trade Union rivalry.
The workmen were not paid wages for the strike period and the appellants lost their profit during the period.
The employers and the workmen entered into an agreement during the pendency of the conciliation proceedings and referred the claims of workmen for salaries during the strike period and the claims of the employers for compensation for loss due to the strike to the joint arbitration of two retired High Court Judges and one retired Member of a Labour Appellate Tribunal under section 10 A of the .
The arbitrator delivered their award and held that the workmen participating in the strike were not entitled to wages for the strike period.
The arbitrators however, awarded huge compensation to the employers against the workmen for the losses incurred by the employers during the strike period.
The workmen challenged the award as illegal and void by filing two writ petitions in the High Court.
The High Court upheld that part of the award which directed that the workmen participating in tho strike were not entitled to wages.
The High Court however, quashed the part of the award which directed payment of compensation by the workers to the management.
In appeal by Special Leave under Article 136, the appellants contended: 1.
The award under section 10 A of the Act savours of a private arbitration and is not amenable to correction under Article 226 of the Constitution.
The award of compensation by the arbitrators suffers from no vice which can be regarded as recognised grounds for the High Court interference.
^ HELD: (1) The expansive and extraordinary powers of the High Court under Article 226, as wide as the amplitude of the language used, indicates and so can affect "any person", even a private individual and be available for "any other purpose", even one for which another remedy may exist.
The insertion of Article 226(1A) reiterates that writ power can be exercised against any person by reference to the residence of such person.
It is one thing to affirm the jurisdiction and another to authorise free exercise.
This Court has spelt out wise and clear restraints on the use of this extraordinary remedy and High Courts will not go beyond those wholesome inhibitions except where the monstrosity of the situation or other exceptional circumstances cry for timely judicial interdict or mandate.
[17C E] 2.
An arbitrator exercising powers under section 10A can bind even those who are not parties to the reference or agreement and the whole exercise under section 10A as well as the source of the force of the award on publication derive from the statute.
It is legitimate to regard such an arbitrator now as part of the methodology of the sovereign 's dispensation of justice, thus falling within the rainbow of statutory tribunals amenable to judicial review.
The award in the present case is not beyond the legal reach of Article 226.
[18B C] 13 3.
The answer to the question whether the High Court should have exercised its powers under Article 226 in the present case will depend upon whether the arbitrator has tied himself down to obviously unsound legal proposition in reaching his verdict appearing from the face of the award.
The arbitrator may not state the law such, even then such cute silence confers no greater or subtler: immunity on the award than plain speech.
The need for speaking order, where considerable numbers are affected in their substantial rights, may well be a facet of natural justice or fair procedure although in this case we do not have to go so far.
The law sets no premium on juggling with drafting the award or hiding the legal error by balancing out.
The inscrutable face of the sphinx has no better title to invulnerability than a speaking face which is a candid index of the mind.
[19D. 20F H] 4.
According to the arbitrators, the strike was illegal being in violation of section 24 of the Act.
the illegal strike was animated by inter union power struggle and that it inflicted loss on the management by forced closure and that the loss flowing from the strike was liable to be recompensed by award of damages.
In this chain of reasoning the question of law whether an illegal strike causing loss of profit justifies award of damages is necessarily involved.
The arbitrator held in the affirmative and according to us it is an unhappy error of law.
In the present case the arbitrators have made a sufficiently speaking award both on facts and on law.
After coming to the conclusion that the strike was illegal they held that compensation necessarily follows based on the rule of English common law.
The English cases laying down the rule of common law were a response to the requirement of Industrial civilization of the 19th Century England.
Trade and industry on the laissez faire doctrine flourished and the law of torts was shaped to serve the economic interests of the trading and industrial community.
Whatever the merits of the norms, violation of which constituted 'conspiracy ' in English Law, it is a problem for creative Indian Jurisprudence to consider how far a mere combination of men working for furthering certain objective can be prohibited as a tort according to the Indian value system.
Our constitution guarantees the right to form associations, not for gregarious pleasure, but to fight effectively for the redressal of grievances.
Our constitution is sensitive to workers rights.
English history, political theory and life style being different from Indian conditions where the Father of the Nation organised boycotts and mass satyagrahas we cannot incorporate English conditions without any adaptation into Indian Law.
[21B C, 22A, B C, D] 5.
Even in England, till recently it could not be said with any certainty that there was any such tort as conspiracy.
The tort is unusual because it emphasizes the purpose of the defendants rather than the result of their conduct.
Even when, there are mixed motives liability will depend on ascertaining which is the predominant object of the true motive or the real purpose of the defendant.
The motive of an illegal strike may be to advance the workers ' interest or steal a march over a rival union but never or rarely to destroy or damage the industry.
However if some individuals destroy the plant and machinery willfully to cause loss to the employer such individuals will be liable for the injury so caused.
Sabotage is no weapon in workers ' legal armoury.
It is absolutely plain that the tort of conspiracy necessarily involves advertence to the object of the combination being the infliction of damage on The plaintiff.
The strike may be illegal but if the object is to bring the employer to terms with the employees or to bully the rival trade union into submission there cannot be an actionable combination in tort.
In the present case, the arbitrators did not investigate the object of the strike.
The arbitrators assumed that if the strike is illegal the tort of conspiracy is made out.
The counsel for the appellants fairly conceded that the object of the strike was inter union rivalry.
There is thus a clear lapse in the law on the part of the arbitrators manifest on the face of the award.
[22F, 231B C, E, H. & 24A B] 6.
It is common case that the demand for the wages during the strike period constitutes an industrial Dispute within section 2(k) of the Act.
It is agreed by both the sides that section 23 read with section 24 makes the strike in question illegal.
An illegal strike is the creation of the statute and the remedy for the illegal strike and its fall, out has to be sought within the statute and not de hors 14 it.
No other relief outside the Act can be claimed on general principles of jurisprudence.
The case of Premier Automobiles followed.
[25 B C] 7.
The enforcement of a right or obligation under the Act must be by a remedy provided in the Statute.
The right of the management to claim compensation is not provided by the Act, and, therefore, the arbitrators Committed an ex facie legal error.
The consent of the parties cannot create arbitral jurisdiction under the .
The claim for compensation cannot be a lawful subject for arbitration because it is not covered within the definition of Industrial Disputes in section 2(k).
We are unable to imagine a tort of liability or compensation based on loss of business being regarded as an industrial dispute as defined in the Act.
Section 33 provides for speedy recovery of money due to a workman from an employer under a settlement or award.
It does not provide for recovery of money by the employer from the workman.
Obviously because the workman belongs to the weaker section.
Claims by employers against the workmen on grounds of tortious liability have not found a place in the pharmacopeia of Indian Industrial Law.
[26 D, 27A, C, D E]
