The appellant Manganese ore (India) Ltd. (a commercial venture where the Government of India, Government of Maharashtra and Government of Madhya Pradesh hold shares in the ratio of 17 per cent each) entered into four types of "contracts of sale" with buyers in India and outside India for selling the manganese ores extracted from the mineral mines leased out to it and situated li in the States of Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra.
They were (a) category I are the contracts where the appellant directly sent the ores to two foreign companies on f.o.b. terms; (b) category II represents contracts which were entered into by the appellant with tho Mineral and Metals Trading Corporation of India Ltd., under which the appellant despatched manganese ore of varying percentage to the M.M.T.C., f.o.b. Bombay and the M.M.T.C. in turn exported the goods to foreign buyers; (c) category III relates to the sales to M/s. Ram Bahadur Thakur & Co., Bombay and other buyers who in their turn sold the goods to M.M.T.C. for export; and (d) category IV relates to the sales in favour of the buyers within the territories of India, but outside the State.
According to section 3(a) ant 9 of the , the State of Madhya Pradesh was competent to levy tax on the sales in the course of inter state trade or commerce.
Under section 5(1) of the , sales occasioning export or in the course of export are exempt from the purview of the Act.
In respect of categories II to IV, the Sales Tax Authorities levied tax under the Central Act, holding that they were in the course of inter State trade or commerce and imposed a penalty of Rs. 1,000/ under the Madhya Pradesh General Sales Tax Act for belated filing of returns.
The writ petition filed by the assessee in the Madhya Pradesh High Court failed.
Dismissing the appeal by special leave and quashing the penalty imposed, the Court.
^ HELD: As no export was involved so far as the buyers in India are concerned, section 5(1) of the has no application at all.
This 100 point is no longer "res integra" in view of the Constitution Bench division of this Court in Md. Serajuddin and others vs State of Orissa, Where the sale Y/as not directly and substantively connected with export, and where between the seller and ultimate buyers intermediaries are involved, such a sale would not occasion any export and would not fall within the purview of section 5(1) of the .
[102 G, 103 C D] Md. Serajuddin & others vs State of Orissa, , applied.
(2) The doctrine of "Stare Decisis" is a very valuable principle of precedent which cannot be departed from unless there are extraordinary or special reasons to do so, and more so to reconsider a recent constitutional decision.
[103 G] (3) Before a sale can be said to take place in the course of inter state trade or commerce, the following conditions must be satisfied: (1) that there is an agreement to sell which contains a stipulation express or implied regarding the movement of the goods from one State to another.
(ii) that in pursuance of the said contract the goods in fact moved from one State to another.
and (iii) that ultimately a concluded sale takes place in the State where the goods are sent which must be different from the State from which the goods move.
If these conditions are satisfied, then by virtue of section 9 of the Act, it is the State from which the goods move which will be competent to levy the tax under the provisions of the Act.
[104 D F] Balabhgas Hulsachand and others vs Stare of Orissa, ; relied on.
(4) So far as section 3(a) of the is concerned, there is no distinction between unascertained and future goods and goods which are already in existence, at he time when the sale takes place these goods have come into actual physical existence.
[108 Bl Balabhgas Hulsachand and others vs State of Orissa, ; applied.
(5) In the absence of any provision for penalty under the itself it is not open to the Sales Tax Authorities to press into the service the provisions of the State Sales Tax.
[108 G] (6) In the instant case, a careful perusal of the agreements would clearly show that what the buyers wanted and what was actually sold to them was manganese are and after all the goods were stocked together, the required percentage under the contracts of sale automatically come into existence.
The word "oriental mixture" is merely a technical terminology or just another name for what is known in the commercial world as manganese ore.
therefore, It is clear that it was manganese ore and manganese ore alone which was sought to be sold by the appellant to various buyers in India.
The mere fact that certain specific contracts have been mentioned does not alter the character and quality of the goods that are actually supplied by the appellant to its various purchasers.
In these circumstances, therefore, the theory of the ore supplied by the appellant being only one constituent and not the entire goods sold is illusory.
[105 D F, 107 B D] Central Provinces Manganese ore Co., Ltd. vs The State of Maharashtra, S.T. Ref.
17 20/1964 decided on 7 4 1969 by Bombay High Court, Commissioner of Sales Tax, Eastern Division Nagpur vs Hussenali Adamji and company and another, 10 S.T.C. 297, (Distinguished).
