The appellant company, a registered partnership firm, filed its income tax returns for the years 1956 57 and also for 1957 58 respectively showing a total income of ' Rs. 7,44,551/ , after claiming a deduction of a sum of Rs. 43,116/ , being the amount of interest paid by the assessee on the debts incurred for the partnership business along with the balance sheet in support of the said deductions.
The Income Tax officer accepted the claim on the basis of the balance sheet.
When the assessee filed his return for the year 1958 59, the Income Tax officer discovered that the deduction claimed by the appellant was not correct and called upon the assessee to prove its plea.
But, the assessee did not lead any evidence before him.
The Income Tax officer finding that the deduction of interest claimed was utilised for giving interest free loans to the partners for clearing their income tax dues and, as such, it could not be said to be a loan incurred for the expenses of the partnership firm, not only disallowed the deduction claimed for that assessment year, but also issued a notice under section 34 (1) (b) for the re opening of the original assessment of the previous years on the ground that the deduction having been wrongly allowed, taxable income escaped assessment.
Accordingly, the Income Tax officer re assessed him by including Rs. 43,116 to the total income.
The appeal to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner failed.
However, on second appeal, the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal "B" Bench, Calcutta, set aside the order of the reassessment opining that the information resulting in the reassessment notice under section 34(1)(b) was not based on any fresh facts, but was derived from the materials on the record of the original assessment amounting to a change of opinion and, as such, was not sufficient to attract the provisions of section 34(1)(b).
On the application of the respondent Revenue, the Tribunal made a reference under section 66(1) of the Act framing a question, namely, "Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case the Tribunal was right in holding that the reassessment made by the Income Tax officer under section 34(1)(b) of the Indian Income Tax Act (1922) was incompetent ?" to the High Court, which answered it in the negative and held that the case squarely fell within the ambit of section 34(1)(b) of the Act inasmuch as the information on the basis of which the Income Tax officer sought to reopen the original assessment, was based on subsequent facts ' as also on the materials of the original assessment revealed by more careful and closer circumspection of these materials.
Negativing the following three contentions of the assessee appellant, namely, (i) The information relied upon by the Income Tax officer not having been derived from external sources, it amounted to a mere change of opinion on the very facts and materials that were present on the record of the original assessment not attracting the provisions of section 34(1)(b) of the Act.
967 (ii) It was not open to the Income Tax officer to have reopened the original assessment merely because he took a different view of the matter in the assessment year 1958 59.
(iii) That the High Court has not appreciated the ratio laid down by the Supreme Court in Commissioner of Income tax, Gujarat vs A. Raman and Company, , and dismissing the appeal by special leave, the Court ^ HELD: (1) section 34(1) contemplates two categories of cases for reopening the previous assessment (1) where there has been an omission or failure on the part of the assessee to make a return of his income under section 22 or to disclose fully and truly all materials facts necessary for his assessment; and (ii) where there has been no such omission on the part of the assessee but the Income Tax officer, on the basis of the information in his possession, finds that income chargeable to tax has escaped assessment for any year.
The first category deals with cases where an assessee is himself in default and the second category deals with cases where there is an default on the part of the assessee but where the income chargeable to tax has actually escaped assessment for one reason or the other and the Income Tax officer comes to know about the same[1971 E F] (2) The word "information" which has not been defined in the Act is of the widest amplitude and comprehends a variety of factors.
Nevertheless, the power under section 34(1)(b), however, wide it may be, is not plenary because the discretion of the Income Tax officer is controlled by the words "reason to believe".
[973 C & E] Bhimraj Pannalal vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bihar and Orissa, an Bhimraj Panna Lal vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bihar & Orissa, , followed.
(3) Since the Income Tax officer was to see that the tax collecting machinery is made as perfect and effective as possible so that the tax payer is not allowed to get away with escaped income tax, in view of the difficulty in laying down any rule of universal application, the following tests and principles would apply to determine the applicability of section 34(1)(b) to the following categories of cases: (i) Where the information is as to the true and correct state of law derived from relevant judicial decisions; (ii) Where in the original assessment the income liable to tax has escaped assessment duel to oversight, inadvertence or a mistake committed by the Income Tax officer on the principle that the tax payer would not be allowed to take advantage of an oversight or mistake committed by the taxing authority; (iii) Where the information is derived from an external source of any kind.
Such external source would include discovery of new and important matters or knowledge of fresh, facts which were not present at the time of the original assessment; and (iv) Where the information may be obtained even from the record of the original assessment from an investigation of the materials on the record or the facts disclosed thereby or from other enquiry or research into facts of law.
If these conditions are satisfied, then the Income Tax officer would have complete jurisdiction to reopen the original assessment.
It is obvious that where the Income Tax officer gets no subsequent information, but merely proceeds to reopen the original assessment without any fresh facts or materials or without any enquiry into the materials which from part of the original assessment, section 34(1)(b) would have no application.
[973 C, D, 976 A E] Maharaj Kumar Kamal Singh vs The Commissioner of Income tax, Bihar & orissa [1959] Supp.
(1) S.C.R. 10; Commissioner of Wealth tax, West Bengal vs Imperial Tobacco Company of India Ltd. [1966] Supp.
S.C.R. 174; Commissioner of Income tax.
Excess Profits Tax.
Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh vs V. Jagan Mohan Rao and ors.
and Commissioner of Income tax Gujarat vs A. Raman and Company, , discussed.
968 (4) In the instant case the subsequent information was the discovery by the Income Tax officer the deduction was wrongly claimed and the consequent disallowance of that deduction and the conduct of the assessee itself in not adducing any evidence or materials to prove its stand that the claim was validly made which led to the issue of the notice under section 34(1)(b) for reopening the assessment [978 H] (5) The case really fell within the tests and principles laid down in A. Raman Company 's case and within the ambit of section 34(1)(b) inasmuch as the Income Tax officer proceeded on the basis of the information which came to him after the original assessment, by fresh facts revealed in the assessment for the year 1958 59 and consisted of the conduct of the assessee in not adducing any evidence to support its plea.
It was not a case of a mere change of opinion by the Income Tax officer on the materials which were already on record.
[1979 B C] Commissioner of Income tax, Gujarat vs A. Raman and Company, , applied.
Bankipur Club Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bihar and Orissa, , 834, distinguished.
[On the question "Whether it is open to the I.T.O. to change his opinion subsequently on the same materials and reopen the original assessment" which arose in the decision in Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay City 2 vs H. Holck Larsen, , 479, relied on by the appellant assessee and also on the contention that in fact the amount sought to be deducted was paid towards the income tax liabilities of the partners, the Court applied "Non liquet"]
