As a result of negotiations between the respondent Bank and its employees (appellants) an industrial dispute with regard to bonus for the years 1956 to 1964 was settled on an ad hoc basis.
By the time of the settlement however the came into force.
In respect of the accounting year 1964, though the bonus formula was applicable, no separate computation was made in accordance with that formula since it was settled on an ad hoc basis as a part of an omnibus settlement.
The Bonus Act provides a statutory formula for the computation of bonus.
Section 2(13) defines an 'employee ' to mean any person employed on a salary or wage not exceeding one thousand and six hundred rupees per mensem.
Section 4(a) provides that the gross profits shall be calculated in the manner specified in the First Schedule.
Item 2 of the First Schedule deals with "add back" in respect of (a) bonus to employees, (b) depreciation (c) development rebate reserve and (d) any other reserves.
Item 3(a) deals with "add back" of bonus paid to employees in respect of previous accounting years.
Item 6(e) deals with deduction in the case of foreign banking companies of proportionate administrative (overhead) expenses of head office allocable to Indian business.
The concept of "available surplus" is defined in section 2(6) to mean available surplus computed under section 5 and that section lays down that the available surplus in respect of any accounting year shall be the gross profit for that year after deducting therefrom the sums referred to in section 6 which, under clause (a) include "any amount by way of depreciation admissible in accordance with the provisions of section 32(1) of the Income Tax Act" and under clause (d) "such further sums as are specified in respect of the employer in the Third Schedule.
" Clause (iv) of the proviso to item 2 of the Third Schedule provides that in the case of a banking company any sum which, in respect of the accounting year, is deposited by it with the Reserve Bank of India under section 11 (2)(b)(ii) of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 not exceeding the amount required under this provision to be so deposited shall be deducted from the gross profits as prior charge.
Section 15 provides for what is liable to be carried forward for being set on and set off out of allocable surplus in the succeeding year or years.
An industrial dispute having arisen between the parties in regard to the computation of bonus for the accounting year 1966, it was referred to an Industrial Tribunal for adjudication.
The Tribunal 's award was assailed by the workmen on the following grounds: (a) that there was an excess of allocable surplus over the amount of maximum.
bonus for the accounting years 1964 and 1965, which, by reason of section 15(1), was liable to be carried forward for being set on in the succeeding accounting year 1966; (b) that while the object of "add back" was that the entire amount set apart as provision for bonus should be added back in determining the available surplus.
in spite of making a provision of a much larger amount as bonus, the Bank had added back only a small amount representing the bonus of those workmen who were employees falling within the meaning of section 2(13) and there by failed to take into account bonus in respect of those workmen who are not such employees; the word 'employee ' in items 2(a) of the First Schedule was not limited to employees as defined in section 2(13) but was used, in a wider sense to include all employees, that is, employees drawing more than 1600 rupees or less; 131 (c) that the Tribunal was wrong in allowing the Bank to deduct a much A higher sum by way of depreciation than was shown in the profit and loss account, that the burden of showing what the amount of depreciation admissible under section 32(1) of the Income Tax Act was, was on the Bank which it had failed to discharge and that, at any rate the certificate issued by the Income Tax officer was no evidence and could not be taken into account; (d) that the balance sheet of the Bank for the year 1966 showed a much lesser amount than what the Bank claimed to have deposited with the Reserve Bank under section 11 (2)(b) (ii) of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 and it was this sum which was liable to be deducted under this head and not the larger sum which it actually deducted.
The Industrial Tribunal 's calculation of proportionate administrative (over head) expenses of head office allocable to the Indian business which are deductible in computing the gross profits, both the Bank and the employees assailed it as being incorrect, For the bank, it was contended, (a) that borrowings from other banking companies, the amount of bills issued by the bank and the balance of profit and r loss account constituted part of its "working funds" and that the Industrial Tribunal was wrong in rejecting this interpretation of "working funds" and in limiting it to 'paid up capital, reserves and deposits only".
(b) that the Tribunal was wrong in refusing to permit the Bank to add back the sum falling under item 3(a) of the First Schedule. ^ HELD. 1.
The workmen are rot entitled to contend that though the claim for bonus for the year 1964 was settled on an ad hoc basis without making computation under the provisions of the Act, such computation must now be made, not for the purpose of determining the bonus payable to them, but for the purpose of determining whether there is any amount liable to be carried forward and set on.
Section 15(1) can have no application where no computation is made under the Act and bonus is paid, not in accordance with the statutory formula, but on an ad hoc basis.
Then it is not possible to say what was really the bonus payable under the Act.
It may be less or more than the bonus in fact paid.
That enquiry being rendered irrelevant by the ad hoc settlement, there can be no question of carry forward and set on of any amount, unless specifically agreed upon as part of the settlement.
[137 F 138 G] 2.
The workmen cannot be permitted to raise a new contention for the first time in this Court that the provision for bonus liable to be added back was not merely the provision for bonus payable to employees as defined in section 2(13) of the Act but also the provision for bonus payable to workmen who are not such employees.
What is liable to be added back under item 2(a) of the First Schedule is not the amount of bonus payable to the workmen nor the amount of bonus in fact paid, but the provision for bonus made in the profit and, loss account, 3(a) Though the amount of depreciation calculated in accordance with account.
[139 B C] 3.
(a) Though the amount of depreciation calculated in accordance with methods known to accountancy practice may be unexceptionable from the point of view of commercial accountancy, it would not necessarily be admissible as a deduction from gross profits under section 6(a).
What is allowable as a deduction from the gross profits under that clause is not depreciation calculated according to any recognised method but only such depreciation as is admissible in accordance with the provisions of section 32(1) of the Income Tax Act, 1961.
[139 E F] (b) The burden of providing that the depreciation claimed by the Bank was the correct amount admissible under section 32(1) of the Income Tax Act, 1961 was on the Bank and that burden had to be discharged by the Bank by producing proper and satisfactory evidence.
[141 C] (c) A certificate issued by the Income Tax officer was not admissible in evidence to prove the depreciation admissible under section 32(1).
It is the Industrial Tribunal which must, in the exercise of its quasi judicial duty, calculate the amount of depreciation by adopting the method set out in section 32(1).
The Tribunal cannot say that it would accept the figure of depreciation arrived at br another authority charged with the function of determining depreciation under 132 a different statute.
There is nothing in the Income Tax Act or in the or in any other provision of law which attaches a presumption of accuracy to the determination of the Income Tax officer in ' this matter or invests it with probative or evidentiary value in the proceedings before the Industrial Tribunal.
[142 F 143 C] In the instant case, however, there is no reason to interfere with the decision of the Tribunal in regard to the amount of depreciation deductible under section 6(a).
The certificate of the Income Tax officer was admitted in evidence without any objection by the workmen.
Had the workmen objected to its admissibility before the Tribunal the Bank could have led other evidence to substantiate its claim for depreciation.
Since no such objection was taken before the Tribunal the Bank contented itself by tendering in evidence only the certificate of the Income Tax officer.
[143 C D] 4.
No reliance can be placed by the workmen on the balance sheet for 1966 for repelling the Bank 's claim to deduct from the gross profit the amount deposited with the Reserve Bank of India under section 11(2) (b)(ii) of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949.
The balance sheet for the accounting year 1966 would not show the amount deposited by the Bank with the Reserve Bank in respect of that accounting year, because that amount would ordinarily be deposited only after the expiration, and not during the currency of that accounting year [144C F] 5.
(a) The Industrial Tribunal had committed a manifest error.
in regards to the calculation of Proportionate Administrative (overhead) Expenses of head office allocable to Indian business.
Although item 1 of the First Schedule requires the Industrial Tribunal to take as the starting point of computation "net profit as shown in the profit and loss account after making usual and necessary provisions", The fact that item 6(e) provides for deduction of proportionate administrative expenses of head office allocable to Indian business in arriving at the gross profit for the purpose of bonus under item 7 shows that the net profit contemplated in the item 1 is the net profit arrived at without deducting proportionate administrative expenses of head office allocable to India business.
The amount in respect of the actual head office administrative expenses allocable to Indian business should be added back in arriving at the figure of net profit for the purpose of item 1.
[145 D 146 B] .
(b) In computing the Indian gross profit the Industrial Tribunal added back only the amounts representing bonus to employees and depreciation as set out in item 2 of the First Schedule.
Foot note 3 requires that the Indian gross r profit should be determined as shown in item 7 and, therefore, it was necessary to add back not only amount under item 2 but also item 3 and 4 and to deduct amounts under item 6 for the purpose of arriving at the Indian gross profits under item 7.
[146 A B] (c) In calculating the total gross profits the Industrial Tribunal committed an error by adding back merely the provision made under the profit and lass account of the Indian business for bonus to employees and depreciation.
Foot note 3 requires that the total world gross profit should be as per consolidated profit and loss account after adjusting as in item 2 which means that the provision made in the consolidate profits and loss account for bonus to employees; depreciation, development rebate reserve and any other reserves should be added back to the net profit as shown in the consolidated profit and loss account for the purpose of arriving at the total world gross profit.
The Industrial Tribunal did not explained what was the provision made in the consolidated profit and lost; account of the Bank under this head.
If any provision were made in the consolidated profit and loss account for bonus to employees, which would mean employees of the Bank throughout the world, depreciation on world assets and development rebate and other reserves such provision would have to be added back to the net profit as shown in the consolidated profit and loss account 6 (a) The Industrial Tribunal was right in its interpretation of the term "working funds" occurring in cl.
(ii) and (iii) of the proviso to item 2 of the Third Schedule.
The term must be construed to Mean paid up capital, reserves 133 and average deposits for 52 weeks of each year for which weekly returns of deposits are submitted to the Reserve Bank of India.
It could hardly be disputed that borrowings from other banking Companies, the amounts of bills issued by the Bank and the balance of profit and loss account are neither reserves nor deposits and they are not liable to be shown in the weekly returns of deposit submitted to the Reserve Bank of India.
[147 F H] (b) The term "working funds" was first defined in the award of Mr. K. C. Sen in 1919 in regard to Banks, and it was also used ill the Shastri award made in 1953 in regard to industrial disputes between certain banking companies and their workmen.
These words have always been understood in the above sense and that is the sense in which they must be deemed to have been used by the legislature when it enacted clauses (ii) and (iii) of the proviso to item 2 of the Third Schedule.
[147 D F] 7.
The Industrial Tribunal was wrong in refusing to permit the Bank to add back the sum of Rs. 13.27 lacs on the ground that "a sum out of 1965 account must not be allowed to adulterate the amount of 1966.
" This sum paid to the employees in respect of bonus for the accounting year 1965 was, on the plain terms of item 3(a) of the First Schedule, liable to be added back.
[143 F H]
