Section 11 of the Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) Act, 1941 as extended to the Union Territory of Delhi provides for assessment of tax.
Section 11A provides for assessment or reassessment in case of escaped or under assessment.
Section 20 provides for appeals and revision.
In 1959 the assessee was assessed by the Sales Tax officer for the assessment year 1955 56.
The appellate authority remanded the matter holding that the assessment for the first two quarters was invalid having been made out of time.
The Sales Tax officer passed a fresh assessment order in respect of the third and fourth quarter of the assessment year.
In July, 1960, the Commissioner under section 20(3) revised the appellate order holding that no part of the assessment was barred by limitation and directed fresh assessment.
Appellant 's challenge to the order of tho Commissioner and the assessment order by the assessing authority was unsuccessful in the High Court.
On appeal to this Court, it was contended: (1) that the revisional authority must exercise his powers within the period of four years prescribed under section 11(2) (a) whether the order was a final order of assessment by him or a remand order for fresh assessment by the assessing authority; (ii) while exercising the power of revision the Commissioner cannot ignore the period of limitation of three years provided in section 11A; (iii) even when the Commissioner was exercising the revisional power under section 20(3), his power is subject to the periods of limitation provided because.
in sections 11 11A and 20, the authority mentioned is the Commissioner and (iv) the Revisional authority in the exercise of his power suo moto must exercise it within a reasonable time and not after a long lapse of lime.
Dismissing the appeals, ^ HELD: The Legislature has not provided any period within which an order is to be made by an appellant or revisional authority or a court.
[250 E] F (1)(a) If the appeal is filed in time for the exercise of the appellate power either to assess or to direct assessment under section 20(2), there is no limitation of time.
The limits of the revisional power in section 20(3) are akin to the power of the appellate authority in section 20(2).
[250 F H] (b) No limitation has been provided for the suo moto exercise of the re visional power similar to the one provided in rule 66(2) of the Delhi Sales Tax Rules for filing an application in revision.
[251 D] (c) It will be wholly unreasonable almost impossible to say that all orders in appeal, revision or reference must be passed within four years of the end of the period of assessment and that otherwise they would be barred.
The contention that there would be anomaly because of section 11(2a) in that if the appellate or revisional authority made a remand order, the assessing authority could pass a fresh assessment order within four years of the remand order whereas if the appellate or revisional authority itself passed an order of assessment, it should be done within four years.
and that such an anomaly would be avoided if it was held that the revising authority must exercise its powers within four years in all cases is not warranted by the language of the provision.
Further, it does not solve the anomaly because even if the order 248 of remand is made just on the last day of the period of four years it would be competent to the assessing authority to make a fresh assessment within the further period of four years.
[252 D; B C] (d) The State of Orissa vs Debki Debi [15 STC, 153 (SC] is distinguishable because the period of limitation in that case applied to assessment made i exercise of the appellate or revisional power also whereas in the present case there is no period of limitation for the exercise of appellate or revisional power While correcting a mistake in exercise of his revisional power the Commissioner was merely setting right the illegality in the appellate order, and was not doing anything which the Sales Tax Officer was empowered to do under section 11A and so was not bound by the period of limitation mentioned in that section.
[253] The State of Kerala vs K. M. Cheria Abdulla and Company, 16 Sales Tax Cases, 875, referred to.
(3) The order of assessment was that of the Sales Tax officer action as an officer to assist the Commissioner for the purpose of assessment.
The term "Commissioner" is merely descriptive and includes the various officers appointed under section 3 to assist the Commissioner.
There is a hierarchy of officers and all cannot be treated as "Commissioner" for the purpose of different powers exercised by them.
[253 G Hl (4) Assuming that the revisional power could not be exercised suo moto after a long and unreasonable delay, in the instant case there was no undue delay.
What is reasonable time will depend upon the facts of each case.
[254 A B]
