The plaintiff appellant had business dealings with the joint family of the defendants.
He had instituted a suit claiming a certain sum of money from the defendants, one of the grounds being that even if the defendants proved that there had been a partition in the family, the family was still liable for the dues pertaining to the ancestral business carried on by all the defendants either as members of the joint Hindu family or as partners of a firm.
Defendant 3 (respondent) stated that there was disruption of the joint family status on November 4, 1945.
when defendants 1 and 2 and his deceased father unequivocally expressed their intention to separate and divided their movables.
He denied that defendants 1 and 2 had ever acted as managers of the joint family.
The trial Court and the High Court concurrently found that the joint family of the defendants had disrupted on November 4, 1945 and that no joint family business was in existence on the date when the last dealing of the plaintiff with the defendants took place.
On appeal to this Court, it was contended that even if the joint family stood disrupted from November, 1945, in the absence of public notice by defendants 1 and 2 regarding the disruption of the joint family, the acknowledgements made by them as karta of the joint Hindu family would be binding on the erstwhile joint family under section 45 of the Partnership Act, 1932.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: (1) It is the duty of the creditor to ascertain whether the person making the acknowledgement still holds his representative capacity as karta of the family.
The law does not cast any duty upon the members of the family to inform the creditors by a general notice about the disruption of the family.
If the creditor fails to make an enquiry and satisfy himself about the capacity of the executant to represent the family at the time of making the acknowledgement, he does so at his own peril.
Disruption of the joint family status puts an end to the representative capacity of the karta and any acknowledgement of a debt made by him after such disruption cannot save the creditor 's claim from becoming time barred against the other members.
[298B C] Pramod Kumar Pati vs Damodar Sahu, ILR 1953 Cuttack 221; Rengaswami Ayyangar vs Sivprakasem Pillai, ILR ; Mutayala Ramachandrappa vs Mutayala Narayanappa, AIR 1940 Mad. 339, approved.
Kashiram Bhagshet Shete vs Bhaga Bhanshet Redij A.I.R. over ruled.
(2)(a) The Legislature has excluded the joint Hindu trading families from the operation of the Partnership Act.
Section 4 defines partnership as a relation between persons who have agreed to share the profits of a business, and according to section 5 the Act governs only that relation of partnership which arises from contract and not from status such as the one obtaining among the members of a joint Hindu family ' trading partnership, [297C D] 288 (b) The words "manager of a family for the time being" occurring in section 21(3)(b) of the Limitation Act.
indicate that at the time when the acknowledgement was made and signed, the person making and signing it, must be the manager of a subsisting joint Hindu family.
If at the relevant time the joint Hindu family, as such, was no longer in existence, any acknowledgement made by the erstwhile karta of such family cannot keep the debt alive and extend limitation as against all the members of the family, his representative capacity as karta being co terminus with the joint status of the family.
[297F G] (c) Coparceners do not derive their title through the karta of the coparcenaty.
In the instant case defendants 1 and 2 did not fulfil the requirements of sub section
(1) of section 21 of the Limitation Act.
[298A]
