There is no presumption in Hindu Law that a business standing in the name of a member of the Hindu joint family is joint family business, even when that member is the manager or the father.
There is this difference between the position of the father starting a new business and a mere manager doing so that while the debts contracted by the father in such business are binding on the sons on the theory of a son 's pious obligation to pay his father 's debt, those contracted by the latter are not binding on the other 478 members of the family unless, at least, it can be shown that the starting of the business was necessary.
Ram Nath vs Chiranii Lal, ([1934] I.L.R. 57 All. 605), Chhotey Lal Chaudhury vs Dalip Narain Singh, ([1938] I.L.R. 17 Patna 386), Hayat Ali Shah vs Nem Chand (A.I.R. , referred to.
But this distinctive position of the father does not by itself make the new business started by him a joint business of the undivided family.
The question of benami is a question of fact and where there is evidence to support a finding that a person is a benamidar for another, the Supreme Court in a Special appeal will not interfere with it.
Consequently, in a case where an election was challenged on the ground that the candidate returned was interested in a contract entered into by his father, benami in the name of another, with the Government for felling trees and transporting timber and as such disqualified to stand for election under section 7(d) read with section 9(2) of the Representation of the People Act and the Tribunal found on evidence that the father was the real contracting party but without considering the evidence on the other point which, if believed, might sustain a finding that the father was meting on behalf of the family, presumed as a matter of law that the ion had interest in the contract and declared the election void, Held, that the Tribunal took an erroneous view of the law and made a wrong presumption, so its decision must be set aside, and as the findings are not sufficient for disposal of the matter the case must be remitted back for rehearing on the evidence on record.
