Even when a bonus dispute was pending adjudication before the Industrial Tribunal, the workmen of the appellant resorted to rude tactics to press their earlier charter of demands, which took the turn of an illegal and disorderly strike.
The management declared a lockout.
On the day following the declaration of lockout, the workmen requested the management to lift the lockout proferring peaceful resumption of work and asking for an interim relief on their economic demands.
The management did not agree to lift the lockout.
Eventually however, The lockout was lifted and the strike called off.
On the question of wages during the strike period, the Industrial Tribunal, apportioning fault to both the parties directed that the management should pay half the wages to the employees during the strike period.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: (1) There is much to be said in favour of the view of the Tribunal that the blameworthiness may be equally apportioned between the parties.
Where the strike is illegal and sequel of a lockout legal, the Court has to view the whole course of developments and not stop with examining the initial legitimacy.
If one side or other behaves unreasonably or the overall interests of good industrial relations warrant the Tribunal making such directions regarding strike period wage as will meet with justice, fairplay and pragmatic wisdom, there is no error in doing so.
The power of the Tribunal is flexible.
D E] India Marine Service, , followed.
In the instant case there was a pending industrial dispute when the Unions sprang a strike notice.
The strike being illegal, the lockout that followed, be came a legal, defensive measure.
But the management could not behave unreasonably merely because the lockout was born lawfully.
by subsequent conduct, the Unions had shown readiness to resume work peacefully, the refusal to restart the industry was not right and the initial legitimacy of the lockout lost its virtue by this blemished sequel.
[232 G Hl (2) In an appeal under Article 136 of the Constitution, this Court would interfere with the Award under challenge only if extraordinary flaws or grave injustice our other recognised grounds are made out.
[231 E F] Bengal Chemical.
[1959] Suppl.
2 SCR 136, 141; and Associated Cement Companies Ltd. AIR 1972 SC 1552.
1554, followed.
In the instant case the direction of the Tribunal that the Company should pay tiffin allowance at the rate of 50 paise on working days to the employees in the staff canteen and that the members of the subordinate staff should be sup plied with warm coats did not call for interference.
