Under section 172 of the U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950, when a bhumidar who has, after the date of vesting, inherited an interest in any holding, dies, the holding or the part thereof shall devolve upon the nearest surviving heir (such heir being ascertained in accordance with the provisions of section 171).
Section 174 provides that when a bhumidar who is a woman dies, her interest in the holding shall devolve in accordance with the order of succession given in the section.
The appellant was the grandson (son 's son) of one brother while respondent No. I was the only daughter of another brother.
On the death of the(1)respondent 's father, her mother continued in possession of the lands as heir of her husband under the provisions of the Oudh Land Act, 1886.
U.P. Act 4 of 1921 which replaced the 1886 Act, conferred the status of a statutory tenant upon a person in possession of lands on the date of the amendment.
Section 29 of the U.P. Tenancy Act, 1939, which was a consolidating Act, conferred the status of a hereditary tenant on any person who was a tenant .
of the land at the commencement of the Act and so the mother acquired the status of a hereditary tenant.
The 1939 Act.
was replaced by the U.P. Zamindari Abolition & Land Reforms Act.
1950 under which she became a bhumidar.
The mother died in 1952.
On the death of the respondent 's mother the appellant got his name mutated in the revenue records as the nearest heir of the mother.
The respondent Sled a suit under section 21 of the Abolition Act 1950 claiming to be the sole legal heir to the property.
She also field an application before the Consolidation officer under the U.P. Consolidation of Holdings Act for mutation of her name in a place of the appellant 's, which was accepted.
On appeal to this Court it was contended that it was the appellant 's father who would succeed to the property in preference to the respondent and it was contended for the respondent that when the respondent 's father died, the tenancy was heritable and so the tenancy acquired by her mother was in her own right as self acquired property.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: (1) Section 172A which was introduced in 1954 has no application to this case because the mother died two Years before the amendment came into force and the question of succession to her estate would be governed by section 172 or section 174 of the Abolition Act.
[274 A] (2) The statute seeks to make a clear cut distinction between a widow who has inherited an interest from her husband dealt with in section 172 and widow who had acquired an independent interest in the holding covered by section 174.
[272 C] Mst.
Jaini & Ors.
vs Ram Prasad, A.I.R. 1952 All. 852, approved.
(3) (a) Section 172 uses the word 'holding or the Dart shall devolve ' to denote that if it was found that a widow had inherited an interest in the holding from her husband then it was the holding that devolved and not interest of the widow, which ceased after her death.
The High Court had overlooked the fact that merely because the mother having initially inherited possession or 263 occupation of the holding from her husband acquired other types of interest A by operation of law that could not destroy the origin or the source of her title which was inheritance from her husband.
Nor did the conferment of the status of a statutory tenant under the various laws passed by the legislature amount to an acquisition of a self acquired interest by the widow.
[272B, D) (b) The words "inherited an interest" occurring in section 172 are not defined in the statute and, therefore, they must be deemed to be of the widest possible amplitude.
[272F] (4) Section 174 applies only to such cases where the widow did not inherit an interest from her husband but had an independent interest in the holding which she possessed as her self acquired property Under section 174 it is the interest in any holding which devolves and not the holding.
The language used in Ss. 172 and 174 of the Abolition Act unmistakably brings forth the distinction between the two contingencies in which the two sections are to apply.
[273E F] (5) The High Court having found as a fact that the mother had inherited the property initially from her husband erred in law in not applying the provision of section 172 read with section 171 of the Abolition Act as a result of which her husband 's brother 's son was entitled to succeed to the estate left by her in preference to her daughter (respondent).
[271H] (6) The origin of the title of the mother lay in inheritance of the estate of her husband however limited or precarious it might have been.
The succession to the estate of the mother would have to be governed by the provisions of section 172 of the Abolition Act.
In the order of succession given in section 171 brother 's son was a preferential heir.
Before the amendment of the Abolition Act in 1954, married daughter was completely excluded from inheritance.
[274G H] In the instant case the respondent having married on the death of her mother in 1952 the holding held by the mother would devolve on the appellants father and thereafter, on the appellant as heir to his father.
(7) The expressions 'heir of a tenant ' and 'shall be entitled to retain occupation ' occurring in section 48 of the Rent Act 1886 before its amendment in 1921 clearly postulate that the right to retain the occupation of the lands in dispute was given to the heirs of the deceased tenant, which clearly indicated that the person who retained occupation would inherit or succeed to a limited right which the deceased tenant possessed under the Act.
[273A] In the instant case on the death of her husband occupation of the.
tenancy by the mother was by no way other than as heir of her husband.
It cannot be said that the occupation of the lands by the mother on her husband 's death was purely in her individual or independent capacity or that her possession of the lands amounted to her self acquired property.
[273D E] (8) Whether a decision is given in appeal from an original suit or in a writ petition the ratio is binding on the subsequent Division Bench and merely because the previous Division Bench judgment was given in a suit the subsequent Division Bench cannot refuse to follow the same on the ground that it was hearing the proceeding in a Writ petition.
The rule of judicial precedent is a salutary one and is aimed at achieving finality of judgments.
In case the Division Bench under appeal wanted to differ from the previous decision of the Division Bench of the same court it ought to have referred the matter to a large bench.
[271F G]
