The respondent "OP" inflicted five stab wounds on the appellant "S" on 19 4 1973 but the appellant survived thanks to prompt medical attention and are immediate operation.
The trial court convicted "OP" under section 307 I.P.C. by its judgment dated 26 2 74 and sentenced him to 10 years rigorous imprisonment and also to a fine of Rs. 200/ The accused "OP" filed a Criminal Appeal No. 442/74) in the Punjab High Court on the ground that he was entitled to set off u/s 428 of the Crl.
P.C. 1973 (Act 2 of 1974), the period of his detention as an under trial prisoner against the period of imprisonment imposed upon him.
The appellant "S" also filed a Criminal Revision No. 606/ 74 74 in the High Court for enhancement of the sentence against the accused.
Since there was no opposition from the State to the plea in the criminal appeal, the High Court accepting the appeal, reduced the sentence of the term of imprisonment to that already undergone by him.
Against the said appeal, there was no further appeal either by the State or by "S" and therefore the orders became final.
The criminal revision filed by "S" was however dismissed separately by the High Court for the "reasons recorded in Criminal Appeal No. 442/74".
Unable to obtain leave under article 134(1)(c) of the Constitution, "S" obtained special leave after notice to the accused "OP" and the State.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: (1) It is clear from section 428 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 (Act 2 of 1974) itself that even though the conviction was prior to the enforcement of the code of criminal procedure benefit of Section 428 would be available to such a conviction.
Indeed section 428 does not contemplate any challenge to a conviction or a sentence.
It confers a benefit on a convict reducing his liability to undergo imprisonment out of the sentence imposed for the period which he had already served as an under trial prisoner.
[301H, 302A] (2) The procedure to invoke Section 428 Criminal Procedure Code could be a Miscellaneous application by the accused to the court at any time while the sentence runs for passing appropriate order reducing the term of imprisonment which is the mandate of the section.
[302A] (3) In the instant case, in the absence of an appeal against the judgment of the High Court in Criminal Appeal No. 442/74 either by the State or by the injured, that judgment has become final.
The scope of criminal revision before the High Court was whether the sentence of ten years should be further enhanced, but that sentence itself disappeared by virtue of the judgment of the High Court in the Criminal Appeal.
The criminal revision therefore became infructuous and the Supreme Court can do nothing about it while the judgment of the High Court remains operative.
1302D, E P] Obiter: The order of the High Court was clearly unsustainable even in terms of section 428 Criminal Procedure Code as the only set off which was 300 urged for under the section and which was admissible, was a period of about nine months of pretrial detention.
[The Court disapproved of such a grossly lenient sentence imposed by the High Court and deprecated that the State ignored to take notice of such a grossly lenient sentence and for not preferring an appeal to the Court.]
