In respect of an area of 18.34 acres in Mulligoor village, Nilgiris District belonging to the respondents and acquired by the appellant for the purpose of hydro electric scheme at Kundah in May 1957 the land acquisition officer awarded a compensation of Rs. 500 / per acre as against its purchase price of Rs. 230/ per acre in February 1951; but on a reference the Subordinate Judge raised it to Rs. 1800/ per acre.
On appeals by the Appellant/State and the Respondent/Claimant, while dismissing the State appeal and partly allowing the respondent 's appeal, the High Court of Madras by its common judgment raised the rate of compensation to Rs. 3000/ per acre.
In the two appeals by certificate, the appellant State contended (i) that raising the rate of compensation was without any basis and merely on speculation, (ii) that the rates at which the adjoining lands were sold for house sites cannot be safe guides; (iii) that allowing flat rate of Rs. 3000/ per acre with out due regard to the quality or classification of the land is bad in principles of fixing compensation.
Negativing the contentions of the State and dismissing the appeals, the Court ^ HELD: (1) The awards given by the Land Acquisition Collector are at least relevant material and may be in the nature of admission with regard to the value of the land on behalf of the State and if the land involved in the awards is comparable land in the reasonable proximity of the acquired land, the rates fund in the said documents would be a reliable material to afford a basis to work upon for determination of the compensation on a later date.
The awards can be taken as safe guides.
and are admissible in evidence for the determination of compensation.
[358EF] (2) In the instant case, from an examination of the evidence and the documents and having regard to the location, advantages and facilities of the land and the admitted rise of price of the land between the years 1951 and 1957, it cannot be said that the High Court either departed from any well recognised principle in determining or committed an error in raising the amount of compensation.
[359A B]
