The respondent company manufacturing tyres in Bombay, due to the general strike in its factory between the period 3rd March 1967 and 16th May 1967 and again from 4th October 1967 and due to the consequent short supply of tyres had to lay off 17 out of its 30 workmen in the Delhi distribution office and also some out of its 33 workmen in its Madras distribution office.
The workmen in the Delhi and Madras offices were called back to duty on 22nd April 1968 and 29th April 1968 respectively.
The workmen were not given their wages or compensation for the period of lay off.
An industrial dispute was raised and referred to the tribunal by the Delhi Administration even when the lay off was in operation.
The Presiding officer of the Additional Industrial Tribunal, Delhi held that the workmen were not entitled to any layoff compensation.
The workmen in Madras filed petitions under section 33C(2) of the for computation of their wages for the period of their lay off.
The Presiding officer of the Additional Labour Court, Madras, holding that the lay off was justified, dismissed their applications.
on appeal to this Court by special leave, ^ HELD: (I) The simple dictionary meaning according to the concise oxford Dictionary of the term "lay ofF ' is "period during which a workman is temporarily discharged".
Lay off means the failure, refusal or inability of employer on account of contingencies mentioned in cl.
(kkk) of section 2 of the , to give employment to a workman whose name is borne on the Muster Rolls of his Industrial Establishment.
It has been called a temporary discharge of the workmen or a temporary suspension of his contract of service.
Strictly speaking, it is not so.
It is merely a fact of temporary unemployment of the workman in the work of the lndustrial Establihment.
Mere refusal or inability to give employment to the workman when he reports for duty on one or more grounds mentioned in cl.
(kkk) of section 2 is not a temporary discharge of the workman.
[372A, 374A, B, G] Gaya Cotton & Jute Mills Ltd. vs Gaya Cotton & lute Mills Labour Union [1952] II Labour Law Journal 37, referred to.
(2)(i) That the power to lay off a workman is inherent in the definition in cl.
(kkk) of section 2 is not correct, since no words in the definition clause to indicate the conferment of any power on the employer to lay off a workman can be found.
His failure or inability to give employment, by itself militates against the theory of conferment of power.
No section in Chapter VA in express language or by necessary implication confers any power, even on the management of the Industrial Establishment to which the relevant provisions are applicable, to lay off a workman.
There is no provision in the Act specifically providing that an employer would be entitled to lay off his workmen 370 for the reasons prescribed by section 2 (kkk).
Such a power, therefore, must be found out from the terms of contract of service or the Standing orders governing the Establishment.
[374 B G] (ii) In the instant case, the number of workmen being only 3, there being no Standing orders certified under the Industrial Employment (Standing orders) Act (Act 20 of 1946), 1946, and there being no contract of service conferring any such right of lay off, the inescapable conclusion is that the workmen were laid off without any authority of law or the power in the management under the contract of service.
[374 G H] The Management of Hotel Imperial New Delhi & others vs Hotel Workers Union ; and V. P. Gindroniya vs State of Madhya Pradesh & ors.
[1970] 3 S.C.R. 448, referred to.
Veiyra (MA ) Fernandez (CP.) and another [1956] 1 Labour Law Journal.
547, reversed.
Workmen of Dewan Tea Estate and ors.
vs The Management [19641 S S.C.R. 548, applied.
Sanghi Jeevaraj Ghewar Chand & ors vs Secretary Madras Challies Grains Kirana Merchants Workers Union and Anr. , distinguished.
(3) If the terms of a contract of service or the statutory terms engrafted in the Standing orders do not give the power to lay off to the employer, the employer would be bound to pay compensation for the period of lay off which ordinarily and general would be equal to the full wages of the concerned V workman.
If, however, the terms of employment confer a right of lay off on the management then in the case of an Industrial Establishment which is governed by Chapter VA, compensation will be payable in accordance with the provisions contained therein.
But compensation or no compensation will be payable in the case of an Industrial Establishment to which the provisions of Chapter VA do not apply and it will be so as per the terms of employment.
[377 B D] Kanhaiya Lal Gupta vs Ajeet Kumar Dey and others [1967] II Labour Law Journal.
761 and Steel and General Mills Co. Ltd v Additional District judge Rohtak and others [1972] 1 Labour Law Journal, 2847 approved.
K. T Rolling Mills Private Ltd. and another vs M R Meher and others A.I.R. 1963 Bombay 146.
reversed.
(4) In a reference under section 10(l) of the Act.
it is open to the tribunal or court to award compensation which may not be equal to the full amount of basic wages and dearness allowance.
But no such power exists in the Labour Court under section 33C(2) of the Act.
Only the money due has to be quantified.
If the lay off could be held to be in accordance with the terms of contract of service.
no compensation at all could be allowed under section 33C(2) of the Act, while in the reference some compensation could be allowed.
[378 B Cl [In the instant case as regards the workmen in the Delhi case.
the court held 75% of the basic wages and dearness allowance would be the adequate compensation for the lay off period.]
