On August 23, 1969, the respondent accused came in a tractor and stopped it on the highway.
Seeing the parked truck GTF 904 which he used to drive previously, the accused used the key of his tractor to start the same and drove it with the head lights on in full speed.
The conductor of the truck owner was also in the tractor at that time.
The tractor while being driven by the field and while he was trying to turn towards the kutcha road hit against the cot in which the village Sarpanch who was resting on it and taking with three policemen.
The policemen jumped from the cot and sustained injuries, while the Sarpanch who was thrown away by the impact of the tractor to a distance of about ten feet from the cot, had grievous injuries to which he succumbed later.
Since there was enmity between the deceased and the accused over the Panchayat elections, the prosecution put up a case of deliberate and willful driving of the vehicle towards the cot with the intention of causing death of the deceased Sarpanch.
The Sessions Judge convicted the accused (i) under section 304 Part IT, I.P.C. for causing the death of the Sarpanch and (ii) under section 326 and 323, I.P.C. for causing injuries to the two other persons and sentenced him for rigorous imprisonment for seven years and two years respectively for the said offences.
On appeal to the High Court the conviction was altered to one under section 304A only and the respondent was sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for 18 months and to a fine of Rs. 500/ .
Dismissing the State 's appeal by special leave, the Court, ^ HELD .
(1) Section 304A carves out a specific offence where death is caused by doing a rash or negligent act and that act does not amount to culpable homicide under section 299, I.P.C. or murder under section 300 I.P.C. Each case will depend on the particular facts established against the accused.
[305A B] (2) Section 304A, by its own definition totally excludes the ingredients of section 299 or section 300, I.P.C. Doing an act with the intent to kill a person or knowledge that doing of an act is likely to cause a person 's death are ingredients of the offence of culpable homicide.
When intent or knowledge is the direct motivating force of the act complained of, section 304A has to make room for the graver and more serious charge of culpable homicide.
[306 GH, 307A] (3) In the instant case, the tangential track of the speeding truck coming in contact with the corner of the steel cot throwing it over the wooden cot and thereby throwing tho deceased out of it resulting in fatal injuries, would not reveal the accused 's intention or any deliberate act with the requisite knowledge for an offence of culpable homicide.
The facts and circumstances disclosed in this case fit in more reasonably with the theory of loss of control by the accused of the vehicle in high speed trying to take a turn for the kutcha road.
The case falls under section 304A, I.P.C. and not under 3. 304 Part 11, I.P.C. [307 A C]
