The appellants, two of the electors of the Akola Constituency of the Madhya Pradesh State Assembly, filed an Election Petition against Respondent No. 1, the successful candidate in the election held on December 13, 1951, and the three other respondents who having been validly nominated went to the polls but were defeated.
The Election Petition, under Section 80 of the Representation of the People Act of 1951, was admittedly time barred by one day.
The Election Commission condoned the delay under the proviso to Section 85 of the Act and constituted a Tribunal for the trial of the petition.
On pleadings of the parties, nine issues were framed by the Tribunal which are covered by the following questions: (1) Whether the election petition was presented by a properly authorised person.
(2) Whether there was sufficient cause for presentation of the petition one day out of time.
(3) Whether the petition was defective for non joinder of certain parties as respondents.
(4) Whether the petition was defective for want of proper verification.
(5) Whether,the petition was defective for vagueness of the particulars relating to the corrupt practices set out in Schedule A thereto.
The Tribunal found only the first of the above points in favour of the petitioners by a majority.
But in respect of the other four points, it held against the petitioners unanimously.
As a result of the adverse findings on these four points, the petition was dismissed without any trial on the merits.
It is against this dismissal that the appellants have now come up to this Court on obtaining special leave.
When the delay in submitting an election petition is condoned 429 by the Election Commission in exercise of its power under the proviso to Section 85 of the Representation of the People Act (Act XLIII of 1951), it is not open to the Election Tribunal, under Section 90(4) of the Act, to reconsider the question of limitation.
Even if, according to the requirement of Section 82 of the Representation of the People Act, any of the necessary parties other than the returned candidate has not been impleaded, the petition is not liable to be dismissed in limin on that sole ground; but it is a matter to be taken into consideration at the appropriate stage with reference to the final result of the case.
Section 83(1) of the Act provides that an election petition has to be verified in the manner provided for verification of pleadings under the Code of Civil Procedure.
Clauses (2) and (3) of rule 15 in Order VI of the Code lay down the procedure for verification of pleadings.
Apart from those cases where the date of the pleading and the verification may be relevant and important, it would be a wrong exercise of discretionary power to dismiss an application on the sole ground of the absence of the date of verification.
In such a case the applicant should normally be called upon to remove the lacuna by adding a supplementary verification indicating the date of the original verification and the reason for the earlier omission.
The requirement of "full particulars" of corrupt practices in Section 83(2) of the Act, is one that has got to be complied with, with sufficient fullness and clarification, so as to enable the opposite party to meet the allegations against him fairly, and so as to prevent the enquiry from being turned into a rambling and roving inquisition.
The primary responsibility for furnishing full particulars of alleged currupt practices and for filing a petition in full compliance with Section 83 (2) of the Act is that of the petitioners.
If they fail to do so initially it is their duty and responsibility to remove the defects when opportunity is available.
Tribunals, however, should not take an all too narrow view of their function in dealing with the various alleged defects in the petition and dismiss it on the ground of want of particulars.
They should call for better particulars and if that order was not complied with strike out such of the charges as are vague.
The petitioners also alleged that the returned candidate was disqualified to stand because he had interest in contracts with the Government.
But the Tribunal ignored these allegations and without enquiring into their truth dismissed the petition on the ground that the allegations relating to the charge of corrupt practices were vague, Held that it was not in the interest of purity of elections that such allegations of disqualification should be ignored and that it was a matter which called for enquiry.
Case remitted for enquiry with reference to the allegations that the returned candidate was disqualified and the charge of corrupt practice, which was held to be not vague.
Dinabandhu vs Jadumoni ( ; and Jagan Nath vs Joswant ([1954] S.C.R. 892), followed, 430
