In February, 1971 the Director of Enforcement made a complaint against 4 accused for violation of certain provisions of the Foreign Exchange Regulations Act, read with section 120 B of the Indian Penal Code.
The appellant herein who was accused No. 2 made an application before the Trial Court raising two preliminary objections to the maintainability of the complaint and prayed for its dismissal.
The Trial Court by its judgment dated 5 9 1973 dismissed the application holding that the points raised would be considered after recording the evidence.
The appellant filed a Revision Application to the Sessions Court under section 435 of the Code of Cr.
Procedure 1898, which was dismissed in August, 1974.
The appellant filed a Revision Application to the High Court which was dismissed by the High Court on the ground that it was not maintainable in view of section 399(3) of the new Code.
In an appeal by Special Leave, the appellant contended: At the time when the Revision petition was filed before the Sessions Judge the old Code was in force and in view of section 484 of the new Code the application had to be disposed of in accordance was the old Code.
The respondents on the other hand, contended that the word 'application ' in section 484(2) of the new Code is a word of limited import and that it would include only those applications which could be finally disposed of by the Sessions Judge.
^ HELD: The word 'application ' in the saving provision immediately follows the term 'appeal '.
It, therefore, takes some colour from the collection of words in which it occurs.
It is synonymous with the term 'petition ' which means a written statement of material facts, requesting the Court to grant the relief or remedy based on those facts .
is a peculiar mode of seeking redress recognised by law.
There is no doubt that the word 'application ' as used in clause (a) of section 484 of the new Code will take in a revision application made under section 435 of the old Code.
The Revision Application made by the appellant was pending before the Sessions Judge when the new Code came into force.
Therefore it was required to be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of the old Code.
[534D F, G H]
