The respondent landlord filed a petition under section 10 of the Andhra Pradesh Building (Lease, Rent and Eviction) Control Act, 1960, for the eviction of the appellant tenant.
There was a compromise.
Since the tenant defaulted in payment of the rent thereafter, a registered notice terminating the tenancy issued by the landlord, came back with an endorsement that the appellant had refused to accept it.
Later.
the tenant was ordered to be evicted. 'The tenant 's appeal to the appellate court and then his revision application to the High Court were rejected.
Relying upon an earlier Division Bench decision of that Court, the High Court held that the Act provided a self contained procedure for eviction of tenants, and therefore, compliance with the provisions of section 106, Transfer of Property Act was unnecessary.
Dismissing the tenant 's appeal, ^ HELD: The High Court has correctly applied the principle laid down by a Division Bench of that court in Mohan & ors.
vs section Mohan Rao & Ors.
[1969] An.
P.R. Law Journal 351.
[553 E] Raval & Co. vs K. C. Ramacharndran & ors.
[19741 2 SCR 629 @ 634 and Shri Hern Chand vs Shrimali Sham Devi.
ILR 1955 Puni.
36, referred to.
In Mangilal vs Sugan Chand Rathi [AIR 1955 SC 101] this Court was considering an entirely different kind of provision of another Act in another State, and this case is distinguishable.
In the context of the remedy of ejectment by an ordinary civil suit it was held in that case that the usual notice of termination _ of tenancy under section 106.
Transfer of Property Act was necesary.
[553F & D] boiler [In cases where a party denies receipt of registered notice it is not always necessary to produce the postman who tried to effect service.
Denial of service by a party may be found to be incorrect from its own admissions or conduct.
The decision of the Bombay High Court in M. K. Patel vs Kundan Mal Chamanlal and that of the Calcutta High Court in Nirmal Bala Devi.
vs Provar Kumar Basu are reconcilable.
The Calcutta High Court applied a rebuttable presumption under section 114, Evidence Act, that the letter was received by the addressee in the ordinary course of blazons was refused by him because the presumption from the endorsement made upon it had not been repelled by any , evidence.
In the Bombay case, the presumption had been held to have been `J rebutted by the evidence of the defendant on oath so that it meant that the plaintiff could not succeed without further evidence.] [554C E]
