on the coming into force of the Bombay Merged Territories and Areas (Jagirs Abolition) Act 1953, on and from August 1, 1954, the jagirs were abolished and certain properties comprised therein vested in the State.
Some compensation was awarded by the Jagir Abolition officer to the jagirdars on their application, in respect of certain items.
On, appeal by the jagirdars, the Revenue Tribunal modified the award.
Aggrieved by the decision, both the State and the jagirdars filed petitions and the High Court decided some points against the State and some against the jagirdars and remanded the matter to the Tribunal.
Both side appealed to this Court under article 136.
on behalf of the State it was contended that: (1) compensation for the unbuilt village site lands.
(2) solatium of 15% on the amount of compensation.
and (3) interest on the amount of instalments of compensation, which were delayed, should not have been awarded.
The jagirdars contended that (1) the expression 'three multiples ' in section 11(2) means six times and so the compensation should be six times the assessment and not three times as held by the High Court; (2) the Bagyat Kas should have been included in the assessment for the purpose of assessing the compensation; and (3) the Tribunal had no power and was not justified in reducing the rates of the value of the village site lands. ^ HELD: The appeals of the State are partly allowed on its 2nd and 3rd contentions and the appeals of the jagirdars are dismissed.
(1) The jagirdars are entitled to compensation for all unbuilt village site lands.
[572F] Section 11(3) provides that any jagirdar having any right or interest in any property referred to in section 8 shall, if he proved to the satisfaction of the Collector that he had any such right or interest, be entitled to compensation in the manner provided in clauses (1) to (iii).
In these clauses there is reference only to 3 kinds of property, but there are numerous other properties mentioned in section 8.
The unbuilt village site land is one such.
The jagirdar would be entitled to compensation for rights or interests in them under section 11(3), but no manner of awarding compensation is indicated therein.
Literally the language of sub section
(3) does not make sense, and so, it should be understood as providing that the person whose rights had been extinguished is entitled to compensation, in respect of the properties in which he had an interest, in accordance with the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, but subject to the exceptions provided in clauses (1) to (iii).
[572C F] (2) The Legislature did not intend nor did it provide for the payment of any solatium on the amount of compensation awardable to the jagirdars.
[574C] The concept of compensation means just equivalent or market value of the property acquired.
Section 23(1), Land Acquisition Act provides that in deter 566 mining compensation various factors over and above the market value are to be taken into account.
Section 23(2) provides for the payment of 15% of the market value as solatium in addition to the market value.
That the legislature did not intend to give any solatium to the jagirdars as compensation is clear from (a) the Explanation to section 11 of the Jagirs Abolition Act, which defines market value, refers only to section 23(1) and not section 23(2), Land Acquisition Act.
(b) Section 15, Jagirs Abolition Act, provides that every award under section 13 or ors.
14 shall be in the form prescribed in section 26(1), Land Acquisition Act but solatium is not mentioned in the prescribed form of the award under section 26(1).
and (c) solatium is awarded as a special compensation in consideration of the compulsory nature of the acquisition.
But when Jagirs are abolished and acquired as a measure of agrarian reform even without payment of market value as compensation, the Legislature could not have intended to award any solatium in addition.
[573H 574C] Stare of Gujarat etc.
vs Vaktsinghji Sursinghji Baghela R. D. Suryanarayana Rao vs The Revenue Divisional officer, Land Acquisition officer, Guntur, A.I.R. 1969, A.P. 55 and Kesireddi Appala Swamy and ors.
vs Special Tehsildar.
Land Acquisition officer, Central Railway, Vijayawada, A.I.R. 1970 A.P. 139 (approved) (3) Section 22, Jagirs Abolition Act, provides that the amount of compensation shall be payable in transferable bonds carrying interest at 3% per annum from the date of the issue of such bonds and shall be repayable during a period of 20 years from the date of the issue by equated annual instalments of principal and interest as provided in the Tables to the Act.
Rule 4 of the Rules framed under the Act, provides that the date of the coming into force of the Act shall be the date of issue of the bond.
The ascertainment of the amount of compensation is bound to take time and so, the proviso to r. S made the instalments which had fallen due before the delivery of the bond payable immediately after its delivery.
[574E 575A] In the present case the Jagirdar was deprived of his property on August 1, 1954, but the bonds were delivered ten years later.
The High Court following Satinder Singh vs Amrao Singh and others ; , rightly allowed interest but erred on two aspects: (a) It awarded interest on the entire amount of instalments, principal and interest, paid after the lapse of ten years.
Interest is payable only on the principal amount of instalments but not on the amount of instalments of interest.
(b) The jagirdar would not be entitled to interest on the total instalments of the principal for 10 years.
On the first instalment he will get interest for 9 years only, on the second for 8 years only and on the last instalment for one year only.
[575D F; 576B D] (4) The High Court rightly held that there was no difference between '3 times ' and '3 multiples '.
[576G] Although the Legislature has used the two expressions, one in some places and the other in other places, it was done without any significance or variation.
The expression 'equivalent to 3 multiples ' is used in the sense of common parlance and not in a technical, mathematical or.
scientific sense.
[576F G] (5)(a) Bagyat Kas is not a part of the assessment fixed for the land within the meaning of section 11(2). 'Kas ' means tax.
Bagyat lands are those which have irrigational facilities of water from wells etc.
On such land, apart from the assessment fixed, Bagyat kas was also levied.
It could not be contended by the jagirdar that Bagyat kas was a part of the land assessment, because, in the records of the jagirdars, Bagyat kas was shown separately from the amount of assessment on land.
If it was only a different kind of assessment fixed for a different type of land, then there was no necessity of showing it as a separate item.
[577B E] (b) No separate compensation has been provided for the loss of the Bagyat kas which the jagirdars were realising, but it is for the Legislature to provide and Courts cannot help.
[577F] 567 (6) Taking the totality of the circumstances the jagirdar 's appeal on the last point, is not a fit case for interference by this Court under article 136.
Under section 16 read with section 17, Jagirs Abolition Act, the State has no right of appeal to the Tribunal.
The State could not, also have challenged under o. 41, r. 22.
C.P.C. the rates of compensation given by the Jagir Abolition officer.
But in appeal filed by the jagirdar the State persuaded the Tribunal to reduce the rates of compensation in some cases.
Since, however, the area of the village site lands was increased by the Tribunal, as it was of the opinion that certain lands were wrongly excluded by the jagir Abolition officer, the net result was that in spite of the reduction of rates, more compensation was payable to the jagirdars for the village site lands.
[577G 578C] The Management of Itakhoolie Tea Estate vs Its Workmen, A.I.R. 1960 S.C. 1349, referred to.
