A considerable number of workmen were employed by a large number of small businessmen in a locality in the city.
Prior to 1965, the employers made ex gratia payment to the workers by way of bonus which they stopped from that year.
A Board of Arbitrators appointed under section 10A of the Industrial Disputes Act, to which the bonus dispute was referred, rejected the workers demand for bonus.
The dispute was eventually referred to an Industrial Tribunal which in limine dismissed the workers ' demand as being barred by res judicata, in view of the decision of the Arbitration Board.
The Tribunal in addition.
held that bonus so far paid having been founded on tradition and custom, did not fall within the four corners of the Bonus Act which is a complete code and came to the conclusion that the workers were not entitled bonus.
On appeal to this Court it was contended that (i) the appellant Union not being a party to the dispute had no locus standi, (ii) the claim of the workmen not being profit based bonus, which is what the Bonus Act deals with, the Act has no application to this case; and (iii) since no case of customary or contract bonus was urged before the Arbitration Board such a ground was barred by the general principles of res judicata.
Dismissing the appeal.
^ HELD: 1(a) In an industrial dispute the process of conflict resolution is informal, rough and ready and invites a liberal approach.
Technically the union cannot be the appellant, the workmen being the real parties.
There is a terminological lapse in the cause title, but a reading of the petition, the description of the parties, the grounds urged and grievances aired, show that the battle was between the workers and the employers and the Union represented the workers.
The substance of the matter being obvious, formal defects fade away.
[596H] (b) Procedural prescriptions are handmaids, not mistresses of justice and failure of fair play is the spirit in which Courts must view processual deviances.
Public interest is promoted by a spacious construction of locus standi in our socio economic circumstances, conceptual latitudinarianism permits taking liberties with individualisation of the right to invoke the higher courts where the remedy is shared by a considerable number, particularly when they are weaker.
[597B; D] Dhabolkar ; and Nawabganj Sugar Mills ; held inapplicable.
(e) In industrial law collective bargaining, union representation at conciliations, arbitrations, adjudications and appellate and other proceedings is a welcome development and an enlightened advance in industrial life.
[597G] In the instant case the union is an abbreviation for the totality of workmen involved in the dispute.
The appeal is, therefore, an appeal by the workmen compendiously projected and impleaded through the union.
[598D] 592 2(a) The demands referred by the State Govt.
under section 10(1) (d) of the Industrial Disputes Act, specifically speak of payment of bonus by the employers which had become custom or usage or a condition of service in the establishments.
The subject matter of the dispute referred by the Govt.
dealt with bonus based on custom or condition of service.
The Tribunal was bound to investigate this question.
The workers in their statements urged that the demand was not based on profits or financial results of the employer but was based on custom.
[599 D E] (b) The pleadings, the terms of reference and the surrounding circumstances support the only conclusion that the core of the cause of action is custom and/or term of service, not sounding in or conditioned by profits.
The omission to mention the name of a festival as a matter of pleading did not detract from the claim of customary bonus.
An examination of the totality of materials leads to the inevitable result that what had been claimed by the workmen was bonus based on custom and service condition, not one based on profit.
[600E; 601B] Messrs. Ispahani Ltd. vs Ispahani Employees ' Union [1960] 1 S.C.R. 24, Bombay Co. ; , Jardine Henderson [1962] Supp.3 S.C.R.382, Howrah Amta Light Rly.
[1966] II LLJ 294, 302, Tulsidas Khimji [1962] I LLJ 435 and Tilak Co. A.I.R. 1959 Cal.
797 referred to.
(c) When industrial jurisprudence speaks of bonus it enters the area of right and claim to what is due beyond strict wages.
Viewed from this angle prima facie one is led to the conclusion that if the Bonus Act deals wholly and solely with profit bonus it cannot operate as a bar to a different species of claim merely because the word 'bonus ' is common to both.
[604G] (d) The welfare of the working classes is not only a human problem but a case where the success of the nation 's economic adventures depends on the cooperation of the working classes to make a better India.
Against such a perspective of developmental jurisprudence there is not much difficulty in recognising customary bonus and contractual bonus as permissible in industrial law.
[605B] Churakulam Tea Estate , Ispahani [1960] 1 S.C.R. 24, Bombay Co. , Jardine Henderson [1962] Supp.
3 S.C.R. 382, Howrah Amta Light Rly.
[1966] II LLJ 294, 302 and Tulsidas Khimji [1962] I LLJ 435 referred to.
3(a) It is true that if the Bonus Act is a complete code and is exhaustive of the subject whatever the species of bonus, there may be a bar to grant of bonus not covered by its provisions.
But it is quite conceivable that the codification may be of everything relating to profit bonus in which case other types of bonus are left untouched.
Merely calling a statute a code is not to silence the claimant for bonus under heads which have nothing to do with the subject matter of the code.
[605D] (b) The history of the Act, the Full Bench formula, the Bonus Commission Report and the statutory milieu as also the majuscule pattern of bonus prevalent in the Indian industrial world, converge to the point that the paramount purpose of the Act was to regulate profit bonus.
If such be the design of the statute, its scheme cannot be stretched to supersede what it never meant to touch or tackle.
[607C D] (c) The objects and reasons of the Bonus Act indicate that the subject matter of the statute was the question of payment of bonus based on profit to employees employed in establishments.
Schematically speaking, statutory bonus is profit bonus.
To avoid an unduly heavy burden under different heads of bonus it is provided in section 17 that where an employer has paid any puja bonus or other customary bonus, he would be entitled to deduct the amount of bonus so paid from the amount of bonus payable by him under the Act.
If the customary bonus is thus recognised statutorily and, if in any instance it happened to be much higher than the bonus payable under the Act, there is no provision totally cutting off the customary bonus.
The provision for deduction 593 in section 17 on the other hand, indicates the independent existence of customary bonus although, to some extent, its quantum is adjustable towards statutory bonus.
Section 34 does not mean that there cannot be contractual bonus or other species of bonus.
This provision only emphasises the importance of the obligation of the employer, in every case, to pay the statutory bonus.
The other sub sections of section 34 also do not destroy the survival of other types of bonus than provided by the Bonus Act.
The heart of the statute, plainly read, from its object and provisions, reveals that the Act has no sweep wider than profit bonus.
[607E G; 608 B D] (d) The fact that certain types of bonus which are attended with peculiarities deserving all special treatment have been expressly saved from the bonus Act did not mean that whatever had not been expressly saved was by necessary implication included in the Bonus Act.
[608D] (e) The long title of the Bonus Act seeks to provide for bonus to persons employed "in certain establishments" not in all establishments.
Moreover, customary bonus does not require calculation of profits, available surplus, because it is a payment founded on long usage and the Act gives no guidance to fix the quantum of festival bonus.
It is, therefore, clear that the Bonus Act deals with only profit bonus and matters connected therewith and does not govern customary, traditional or contractual bonus.
[608G H] (f) The Bonus Act speaks and speaks as a whole code on the sole subject of profit based bonus but is silent on and cannot therefore annihilate by implication, other distinct and different kinds of bonus such as the one oriented on custom.
[609D] Ghewar Chand 's case ; distinguished and held inapplicable.
(g) The principle that a ruling of a superior court is binding law is not of scriptural sanctity but is of ratio wise luminosity within the edifice of facts where the judicial lamp plays the legal flame.
So there is no impediment in reading Ghewar Chand 's case as confined to profit bonus, leaving room for non statutory play of customary bonus.
That case relates to profit bonus under the Industrial Disputes Act.
The major inarticulate premise of the statute is that it deals with and only with profit based bonus.
There is no categorical provision in the Bonus Act nullifying all other kinds of bonus, nor does such a conclusion arise by necessary implication.
The core question about the policy of the Parliament that was agitated in that case turned on the availability of the Industrial Disputes Act as an independent method of claiming profit bonus de hors the Bonus Act and the Court took the view that it would be subversive of the scheme of the Act to allow an invasion from the flank in that manner.
A discerning and concrete analysis of the scheme of the Act and the reasoning of the Court leaves no doubt that the Act leaves untouched customary bonus.
[609E H; 611D E] (4) So long as Pandurang stands industrial litigation is no exception to the general principle underlying the doctrine of res judicata.
But the case of Pandurang is distinguishable.
In that case there was a binding award of the Industrial Tribunal relating to the claim which had not been put an end to and so this Court took the view that so long as that award stood the same claim under a different guise could be subversive of the rule of res judicata.
In the present case the Arbitration Board dealt with one dispute; the Industrial Tribunal with a fresh dispute.
The Board enquired into one cause of action based on profit bonus; the Tribunal was called upon to go into a different claim.
[612D F] [The court expressed a doubt about the extension of the sophisticated doctrine of constructive res judicata to industrial law which is governed by special methodology of conciliation, adjudication and considerations of peaceful industrial relations where collective bargaining and pragmatic justice claim precedence over formalised rules of decision based on individual contests, specific causes of action and findings on particular issues.]
