Appellant Natha Singh was recorded as a land owner in revenue records.
Under the Punjab Security of Land Tenures Act, 1953, the Collector, Ferozepore, declared an area of 63 standard acres and 4 units, as surplus land in his hands.
The sons of Natha Singh appealed to the Commissioner, Jullundur division, who remanded the case for fresh determination of "surplus area".
On a re examination of facts, the Collector, Ferozepure, overruled the pleas of the appellants.
Their appeal to the Commissioner, Jullundur division, and a further revision petition to the Financial Commissioner, Taxation, Punjab, were also dismissed.
All these orders were challenged before the High Court under article 226.
The High Court dismissed the matter in limine, but granted a certificate under article 133(1)(a).
The appellants contended before this Court that in the facts and circumstances of the case, the High Court could not dismiss the writ petition in limine, as the revenue authorities had wrongly computed the 'surplus area '.
They further contended that appellants No. 2 and 3 were not afforded proper and adequate opportunity by the Collector to prove their claims.
The appellants also applied for permission to adduce additional documentary evidence.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: (1) In dealing with a petition under article 226 of the Constitution, the High Court cannot exercise the jurisdiction of an appellate court, and cannot re examine or disturb the findings of fact arrived at by an inferior Court or a tribunal in the absence of an error of law.
[622E F] (2) In the instant case, the orders passed by the revenue authorities did not suffer from any error of law so as to warrant interference in writ proceedings and the High Court was justified in dismissing in limine the writ petition preferred by the appellants.
[623F] (3) The application of the appellants for additional evidence cannot be allowed in view of the well established principles of law that the discretion given to the appellate court to receive and admit additional evidence is not an arbitrary one but is a judicial one circumscribed by the limitations specified in order 41 rule 27 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
The true test to be applied in dealing with applications for additional evidence is whether the appellate court is able to pronounce judgment on the materials before it, without taking into consideration the additional evidence sought to be adduced.
[623G H, 624A] Arjun Singh alias Puran vs Kartar Singh & Ors. ; referred to.
