The non delivery of the goods booked by the respondent on September 5, 1955 to several destinations under "Railway Risk" due to the sinking of "Barge No. 6, carrying the wagons containing the goods" led to the filing of four suits which were dismissed by the Trial Court holding that the accident was not due to the negligence of the Railway employees.
The High Court, accepting the appeal of the respondent by its judgment dated April 13, 1966 held that the sinking of Barge was not due to "inevitable accident" but due to the serious negligence of the Railway employees and their failure of duty to take due care which it was required to take as a bailee as revealed by their own Enquiry Committee held with reference to Ss. 83 and 84 of the Railways Act read with section 2 of the Indian Railways Board Act (4 of 1905) and rule 18 of the Railway Board Rules.
The High Court remanded the suits for determination of the quantum of the decretal amount due to the respondent.
The trial court after remand gave decrees in favour of the respondent on 10th September, 1966 without interest claimed up to the date of filing of the suit and interest "pendent lite".
The High Court, on appeal by the respondent by its judgment dated 3 9 1968 allowed interest "pendent lite" and future interest at the rate of 4 1/2% per annum.
Dismissing the two sets of appeal by the Union, one by Special Leave against the order dated 13 4 1966 determining the liability and another by certificate against the judgment dated 3 9 1968 awarding interest the High Court.
^ HELD: (1) The liability of the Railway was that of a bailee.
The consignments were booked at Railway risk.
The onus of proving that the Railway employees took the necessary amount of care and they were not guilty of negligence rested on the Railway Authorities.
The question of onus is not important when the entire evidence is before the court.
In the instant case there was no legal evidence to prove "inevitable accident" but suppression of important documents and non production of important witnesses in charge of the Barge.
The Barge sank because of the serious and gross negligence of the railway employees and the railways did not take due care which it was required to take as a bailee.
[617B D; 618F G] (II) The Enquiry Committee, in the instant case, is a Joint Enquiry, under the rules and the report is admissible under Ss. 5, 7 and 9 of the Evidence Act.
The claim for privilege is not admissible because no such claim was made before the Courts below and there was no affidavit of the Minister incharge or the Secretary of the Department to support a claim for privilege.
[616G H] (III) One of the principles for award of damages is that so far as possible he who has proved a breach of a bargain to supply what he has contracted to get is to be placed as far as money can do it, in as good a situation as if the contract had been performed.
The fundamental basis thus is compensation for the pecuniary loss which naturally flows from the breach.
Therefore, 615 the principle is that as far as possible the injured party should be placed in as good a situation if the contract has been performed.
In other words, it is to provide compensation for the loss which naturally flows from the breach.
The market rate is a presumptive test because it is the general intention of law that in giving damages for breach of contract, the party complaining should, so far as it can be by money, be placed in the same position as he would have been in if the contract had been performed.
The rule as to market price is intended to secure only an indemnity to the purchaser.
The market value is taken because it is presumed to be the true value of the goods to the purchaser.
In the instant case, the High Court correctly applied these principles and adopted the contract price in the facts and circumstances of the case as the correct basis of compensation.
[619 D]
