The appellant and V, father of respondents, were brothers.
They, together with their cousin, formed a joint Hindu family.
In a partition in 1929 between the two branches, certain properties were given to V for discharging some family debts.
V took over the management of his branch of the family and after discharging the debts, filed in 1956 a suit for partition against the appellant claiming, inter alia, that one of the items earmarked for the discharge of the debts which remained undisposed of, was his exclusive property as it was given to him absolutely; and also for accounts on the ground that the appellant took over the management from 1938.
The trial court negatived the claim in respect of the property, but directed the appellant to give accounts from 1947 when admittedly he took over management.
On appeal, the High Court upheld V 's claim with respect to the property and gave modified directions for accounts by the parties.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court, ^ HELD: (1) The properties given to V became his separate properties from the date of the partition deed of 1929 and were not liable to partition.
[643A] (a) The salient features of the deed are, (i) the sole responsibility for discharge of the debts was placed on V; (ii) V 's liability was not to the extent of the properties but was irrespective of the sufficiency or otherwise of the properties and any deficit or surplus was to be met or enjoyed by him exclusively; (iii) the cousin was no longer liable for the debts; (iv) in case there was a default on V 's part, and if, any loss was caused to the cousin he was to be indemnified by V; and (v) exclusive dominion and control over, and enjoyment of, the properties was vested in V in consideration of the obligation undertaken by him to discharge the debts.
The properties were thus given to V in view of his personal undertaking to discharge the debts, and, the conveyance was in the nature of remuneration for services to be rendered by him.
[642 C G] Raj Kumar Singh Kukam Chandji vs Commissioner of Income tax Madhya Pradesh referred to.
(b) The arrangement was valid because it was bona fide and its terms were fair.
[643E] Sahu Madho Das vs Pandit Mukand Ram ; , Maturi Pullaiah vs Maturi Narasimham AIR 1966 SC 1836 and section Shanmugam Pillai & Ors.
vs K. Shanmugam Pillai & Ors. ; referred to.
(c) There was no blending of the properties by V with other joint family properties.
There was no evidence of any intention on V 's part to abandon his separate rights over the properties.
The mere fact that they were not separately entered by him in the account books or that no separate account of the earnings from them was maintained by him cannot rob them of their separate character.
[644B C] Lakkireddi Chinna Venkata Reddi & Ors.
vs Lakkireddi Lakshmama ; and G. Narayana Ram vs C. Chamaraju & Ors. ; referred to.
638 (d) If any amount of the joint family funds was used by V for the discharge of the debts, the respondents (legal representatives of V) would be liable for them, but that would not affect the character of the properties.
[644 C D] (2) It is well settled that in the absence of proof of misappropriation or fraudulent or improper conversion by the manager, a coparcener, seeking partition, cannot call upon the manager to account for his past dealings with the family property.
Since there was no evidence of any misappropriation by V, he was not liable for accounts during his period of management.
[644E F]
