The appellant and four others were charged with offences under sections 302/149 I.P.C., the appellant with having shot at the deceased and the other accused with giving blows to the deceased with a sharp edged weapon.
The trial court acquitted the four accused but convicted the appellant under section 302 read with section 34, I.P.C. The High Court dismissed the appeal of the State against acquittal as also the appellant 's appeal against conviction.
In appeal to this Court, it was contended for the appellant that it was not permissible to take the view that a criminal act was done by the appellant in furtherance of the common intention of the other accused when those accused who had been named had all been acquitted and that all that was permissible for the High Court was to convict the appellant of an offence which he might have committed in his individual capacity.
Allowing the appeal in part, ^ HELD: It was not permissible for the High Court to invoke section 149 or section 34, I.P.C. [659D E] (1) In a given case even if the charge disclosed only the named persons as co accused and the prosecution witnesses confined their testimony to them, it would be permissible to conclude that others, named or unnamed, acted conjointly with one of the charged accused if there was other evidence to lead to that conclusion, but not otherwise.
[657D] The charge in the present case related to the commission of the offence of unlawful assembly by the appellant along with four named co accused, and with no other person.
The trial in fact went on that basis throughout.
There was also no direct or circumstantial evidence to show that the offence was committed by the appellant along with any other unnamed person.
So when the other four co accused had been given the benefit of doubt and acquitted, it would not be permissible to take the view that there must have been some other person along with the appellant in causing injuries to the deceased.
The appellant would accordingly be responsible for the offence, if any, which could be shown to have been committed by him without regard to the participation of others.
[659C E] Dharam Pal vs The State of U.P., ; explained and followed.
The King vs Plummer, ; Topandas vs The State of Bombay, ; Mohan Singh vs State of Punjab, [1962] Supp.
3 S.C.R. 848; Krishna Govind Patil vs State of Maharashtra, ; ; Ram Bilas Singh vs State of Bihar, and Yeswant vs State of Maharashtra; , referred to.
(2) The appellant was guilty of voluntarily causing grievous hurt to the deceased by means of an instrument for shooting and was, therefore, guilty of an offence under section 326 I.P.C. From the medical evidence, it is not possible to say that the death of the deceased was caused by gun shot or by blunt weapon injuries.
It however proved that the appellant inflicted gun shot in juries on the deceased, one of the injuries being grievous.
[659H] 652
