Under section 3 of the , the respondent passed the Andhra Pradesh Procurement (Levy) order 1959, requiring every miller and dealer of rice (including the appellants) to sell to the respondent certain specified varieties and quantities of rice at controlled price on requisition being served on him.
Clause 2(a) of the order defined "controlled price" as the maximum price fixed by the Central Government from time to time under section 3 of the Act for the sale of rice.
On December 19, 1963, the Central Government Passed the Rice (Andhra Pradesh) Price Control order 1963, fixing the maximum price of akkulu rice at Rs. 46.89 per quintal.
The appellants sold several quantities of akkulu rice to the respondent from January 26, 1964, to February 21, 1964, and were paid at the controlled rate.
On March 23, 1964 the Central Government issued the Rice (Andhra Pradesh) Price Control (3rd amendment) order 1964, and substituted Rs. 52.28 for Rs. 46.89 as the maximum price per quintal, of akkulu rice.
The appellant 's claim for the benefit of the enhanced price for the earlier sales was rejected by the Government of Andhra Pradesh.
The appellants succeeded before the Subordinate Judge, Machilipatnam in their suits for recovery of the difference between the two controlled prices but lost before the High Court, in appeals preferred by the State of Andhra Pradesh.
It was contended before this Court that the prices fixed by the Government are for the entire season, and the appellants are entitled payment at the amended rates, regardless of the dates when the supplies were made, and that the word "substitute" infers retrospective effect.
Dismissing the appeals, the Court.
^ HELD: In the absence of express words or appropriate language from which retrospectivity may be inferred, a notification takes effect from the date it is issued and not from any prior date.
Statutes should not be construed so as to create new disabilities or obligations or impose new duties in respect of transactions which were complete at the time the Amending Act came into force.
[778B C] (2) The property in the goods having passed to the Government of Andhra Pradesh on the dates the supplies the made, the appellants had to be paid only at the controlled prices obtaining on the dates the sales were effects and not at the increased price which came into operation subsequently.[778 D] K. Appayya Shanbhague & Co. vs The State of Mysore and Anr.
(Unreported decision S.C. dated 20 4 1962); The Union of India.
represented by the Secretary Ministry of Food & Agriculture, Government of India, New Delhi vs Kanuri Damodariah & Co. Alluri Venkatanarasiah (1968) 1 An.
W.K. 81 and Mani Gopal Mitra vs The State of Bihar (1969) 2 S.C.R. 411, followed.
