The appellants, all science graduates with laboratory training were the successful candidates for twelve vacancies of Drug Inspectors advertised by the Bihar Public Service Commission.
Respondent No. 1, Pharmacy graduate whose application was rejected on the ground of his unsuitability for being appointed to the post challenged the selection by a writ on the ground that the appellants were unqualified under Rule 49(c) of the Drugs (and Cosmetics) Rules 1945 in as much as they did not have a systematic training in a post graduate institution.
The High Court accepted the contention and set aside the selection.
On appeal by special leave he Court, ^ HELD: (1) The expression "post graduate training" is used in Rule 49(c) in the sense of training received by a person holding a degree in medicine or science and not in the sense that such training ought to be received in or through a post graduate institution imparting instruction or education in the particular discipline.
The object of clause (c) is to ensure that to be eligible for the post of a Drugs Inspector the person concerned must have received training under any of the authorities mentioned therein after graduation in medicine or science.
Pregraduation training is often not as efficacious as post graduate training, for a person holding a higher educational qualifications is in a better position to imbibe the training which he receives.
The expression "post graduate training" is used in order to signify the point of time after which the training ought to be received and not to limit the eligibility to those who have received training after enrolment in an institution imparting post graduate training.
[772D F] (ii) Clause (c) of Rule 49 specifies that the training has to be received in a laboratory under a Government Analyst or a Chemical Examiner amongst others.
It is difficult to conceive in the present educational set up that a student who has enrolled himself in a post graduate institution would receive training in a laboratory under a Government Analyst or a Chemical Examiner.
A fair indication of the true intendment of Rule 49(c) is also furnished by the requirement that one year 's post graduate training is enough to confer eligibility on a candidate applying for the post of a Drugs Inspector.
It could not have been intended that it would be enough to make a candidate eligible for the post of a Drugs Inspector if, after graduation in medicine or science he enrolled himself for a post graduate course and just took one years ' training as part of that course.
If enrolment in an institution imparting post graduate instruction was the object of rule (c), the minimum qualification prescribed would at least have been the successful completion of the post graduate course.
[772F H] Rule 44(a) throws useful, light on the interpretation of Rule 49.
Post graduate experience stipulated in Rule 44(a) and "post graduate training" cannot basically and for practical purposes identical qualifications.
For both posts, what is required in addition to other qualifications mentioned in the respective rules is post graduate experience or training in the sense, namely that the experience or training has to be gained or received after obtaining graduation.
[773 B C] 770 In matters involving considerations of questions regarding adequacy or sufficiency of "training" the Public Service Commission having the benefit of expert opinion, is better situated to judge whether the particular candidate is qualified for a particular post and courts should hesitate to interfere with the discretion of the appointing authority so long as it is exercised bona fide.
[773 G H] [Their Lordships considered that, in view of the conclusion that the appellants were duly qualified it was unnecessary to go into the question of "Locus Standi" of respondent No. 1 a rejected candidate on the ground of his unsuitability to file the writ petition.]
