To provide medical facilities to the workers in factories a statutory body called the Employees State Insurance Corporation has been established by an Act of Parliament.
Under the Act financial resources of the Corporation come from contributions and other monies specified in the Act and an Employees State Insurance Fund had been created.
The State Government, to which an obligation to provide medical treatment for insured persons had been entrusted, may employ private medical practitioners who run clinics as doctors under the scheme.
For inclusion of a name in the medical list of insurance medical practitioners a doctor has to apply to the Administrative Medical Officer.
His application is considered by an allocation committee which recommends his name to the Director, Employees State Insurance Scheme and ultimately on approval by the Surgeon General, his name is included in the medical list.
The doctor whose name is included in the medical list has to abide by the duties and conditions prescribed, is under the control of the Medical Services Committee and may even be removed or resign from the panel.
The appellant, who was a private medical practitioner and whose name was included in the panel of doctors maintained by the Corporation and the respondent, were contestants in an election for the presidentship of a municipal council.
At the time of scrutiny of the nomination papers no objection was raised to the appellant 's nomination and in the election that ensued the appellant was declared elected.
The respondent challenged the election on the ground that the appellant was disqualified under section 16(1) (g) of the Maharashtra Municipalities Act, 1965 which debars a person who holds an office of profit under Government from becoming a councillor, because on the date of nomination he was holding an office of profit under the Government by reason of his being a panel doctor under the Employees State Insurance Scheme.
Between the date of nomination and the date of election, however, the appellant had resigned from the scheme.
The election tribunal allowed the respondent 's petition and declared the appellants ' election void.
At the same time the respondent was declared as the President.
On appeal it was contended that a doctor on the medical list prepared by the Surgeon General of the State does not hold an office of profit within the meaning of section 16(1)(g) of the Act.
Allowing the appeal ^ HELD: (1) The legislative end for disqualifying holders of office of profit under Government from seeking elective offices is to avoid the conflict between duty and interest, to cut out the misuse of official position, to advance private benefit and to avert the likelihood of influencing Government to promote personal advantage.
At the same time the Constitution mandates the State to undertake multiform public welfare and socio economic activities involving technical persons, welfare workers and lay people on a massive scale so that participatory government may prove a progressive reality.
Therefore experts may have to be invited into local bodies, legislatures and the like political and administrative organs based on elections.
[842 E G] (2),a) The appellant suffered no disqualification on the score of holding an office of profit under Government.
The legal provisions under the Act and the rules make of an insurance medical practitioner a category different from one who runs a private clinic and enters into contractual terms for treatment of patients sent by Government, nor is he a full fledged government servant.
833 He is a tertium quid.
[842 A] (b) The doctor under the scheme has obligations of a statutory savour.
He is appointed on his application which is processed by the appropriate body, removed if found wanting obliged to discharge duties, make some reports and subject himself to certain discipline while on the panel.
[844 F G] (3) (a) For holding an office of profit under Government one need not be in the service of Government and there need be no relationship of master and servant.
One has to look at the substance, not the form.
[851 D E] Gurugobinda ; referred to.
(b) In the present case the capitation fee is the remuneration the doctor is paid and this came not from Government direct but from a complex of sources.
The power to appoint, direct and remove, to regulate and discipline, may be good indicia but not decisive.
Government had partly direct and partly indirect control but the conclusion is not inevitable because the doctor is put in the list not by Government directly but through a prescribed process where the Surgeon General has a presiding place.
How proximate or remote is the subjection of the doctor to the control of the Government to bring him under Government is the true issue.
The appellant was not a servant of Government, but a private practitioner, was not appointed directly by Government but by an officer of Government on the recommendation of a Committee, was paid not necessarily out of Government revenue and the control over him in the scheme was vested not in Government but in an administrative medical officer and director whose position is not qua Government servant but creatures of statutory rules.
The ultimate power to remove him did lie in Government even as he enjoyed the power to withdraw from the panel.
The mode of medical treatment was beyond Government 's control and the clinic was a private one.
The insurance medical practitioner is not a free lancer but subject to duties obligations, control and rates of remuneration under the overall supervision and powers of Government.
[851 F G; 852 A C] Deorao vs Keshav, AIR 1958 Bom.
314 p. 318, para 12 and Manipopal vs State AIR 1970 Cal.
1, 5 para 20 referred to.
(c) The appellant is not functioning under the Government in the plenary sense implied in electoral disqualification.
The ban on candidature must have a substantial link with the end viz: the possible misuse of position as Insurance Medical Practitioner in doing his duties as Municipal President.
[852 D] (4) (a) The first step is to enquire whether a permanent, substantive position which had an existence independent from the person who filled it can be postulated in the case of insurance medical practitioner or is the post an ephemeral, ad hoc, provisional incumbency created, not independently but as a List or Panel distinguished from a thing that survives.
The distinction, though delicate, is real.
An office of insurance medical practitioner can be conjured up if it exists even where no doctor sits in the saddle and has duties attached to it qua office.
The post of insurance medical practitioner cannot be equated with the post of a peon or a security gunman who too has duties to perform.
Viewed from this point Kanta and Mahadeo are reconcilable in the former an ad hoc Assistant Government Pleader with duties and remuneration was held to fall outside office of profit in the latter a permanent panel of lawyers maintained by the Railway Administration with special duties of a lasting nature constituted an office of profit.
[852 G H; 853 A] (b) Had there been a fixed panel of doctors with special duties and discipline, a different complexion could be discerned.
No rigid number of insurance medical practitioners is required by the rules or otherwise.
If an insurance medical practitioner withdraws there was no office sticking out even thereafter called office of Insurance Medical Practitioner.
The critical test of independent existence of the position irrespective of the occupant is just not satisfied.
Likewise it is not possible to conclude that these doctors though subject to responsibilities, eligible to remuneration and liable to removal cannot squarely fall under the expression holding under Government.
Enveloped though the 834 insurance medical officer is by governmental influence and working within the official orbit it is not possible to hold that there is an office of profit held by him and that he is under Government.
[853 C E] [Obiter: On a close study of sections 21 and 44 and in the light of the ruling of this court in the election petition under section 21 is all inclusive and not under inclusive, even if the invalidation of the election is on the score of the disqualification under section 16 it is appropriate to raise that point under section 21 which is comprehensive.
All grounds on the strength of which an election can be demolished can be raised in a proceeding under section 21.
The language of the provision is wide enough.
It is not correct to say that section 44 cuts back on the width of the specific section devoted to calling in question an election of a councillor (including the President).
[854 D F] If the appellant 's election were invalid there was only a single survivor left in the field.
Naturally in any constituency where there was only one valid nomination that nominee gets elected for want of a contest.]
