Held, per section B. DAs ACTING CHIEF JUSTICE, BHGWATI,JAFER IMAM and CHANDRASEKHARA AIYAR JJ.
(JAGANNADHADAS J. 484 dissenting).
The bans imposed by Article 286 of the Constitution on the taxing powers of the States are independent and separate and each one of them has to be got over before a State Legislature can impose tax on transactions of sale or purchase of goods.
The Explanation to Article 286(1)(a) determines by the legal fiction created therein the situs of the sale in the case of transactions coming within that category and once it is determined by the application of the Explanation that a transaction is outside the State it follows as a matter of course that the State, with reference to which the transaction can thus be predicated to be outside it, can never tax the transaction.
The ban under Article 286(1)(a) read with the Explanation is effective independently of the fact that the transaction may have taken place in the course of inter State trade or commerce or with reference to goods as have been declared by Parliament by law to be essential for the life of the community.
The ban imposed under Article 286(2) is an independent and separate one and looks at the transactions entirely from the point of view of their having taken place in the course of inter State trade or commerce.
, Even if such transactions may also fall within the category of transactions covered by Article 286(1)(a) and the Explanation thereto or Article 286(3) the moment Article 286(2) is attracted by reason of the transactions being in the course of inter State trade or commerce, the ban under Article 286(2) operates and such transactions can never be subjected to tax at the instance of a State Legislature except in so far as Parliament by law may otherwise provide or such power of taxation is saved by the President 's order contemplated in the proviso.
The ban under Article 286(2) may be saved by the President 's order but that does not affect or lift the ban under Article 286(1)(a) read with the Explanation.
Apart from the aforesaid construction put upon the several clauses of Article 286 in The Bengal Immunity Co. case the terms of the proviso to Article 286(2) itself make it abundantly clear that the proviso is meant only to lift the ban under Article 286(2) and no other.
It is a cardinal rule of interpretation that a proviso carves out an exception to the main provision to which it is enacted as a proviso and to no other.
This is made further clear by the nonobstante clause which states in express terms that it is enacted only with reference to "this clause" i.e. Article 286(2).
The proviso cannot be extended to any of the other provisions of Article 286 and it has.
therefore, not the effect of lifting the ban which is imposed by Article 286(1)(a) and the Explanation thereto.
Therefore, so far as the post Constitution period is concerned the ban imposed by Article 286(1)(a) and the Explanation thereto could not be removed by the President 's order which was issued under the proviso to Article 286(2) in the present case.
Explanation 11 to Section 2(g) of the Central Provinces and Berar Sales Tax Act, 1947 offended Article 286(1)(a) road with the 485 Explanation to the same and the State of Madhya Pradesh was therefore, not entitled to tax the transactions of sale in which goods had actually been delivered as a direct result of such sale for purposes of consumption outside Madhya Pradesh and the said Explanation was riot protected by the President 's order issued under the proviso to Article 286(2).
Where an assessment consists of a single undivided sum in respect of the totality of the property treated as assessable, the wrongful inclusion in it of certain items of property which by virtue of a provision of law were expressly exempted from taxation, renders the assessment invalid in toto.
Bennett & White (Calgary) Ltd. and Municipal District of Sugar City No. 5 (1951 Appeal Cases 786 at p. 816), referred to.
JAGANNADHADAS J. (Dissenting) 'The two bans under Articles 286(1)(a) and 286(2) are overlapping and the fact that they are imposed from different angles cannot obscure the result, viz., that the bring about the demareation of the same or substantially the same field of no taxation.
To construe the two bans as independently and cumulatively operative is to impute to them some kind of picturesque potency and is to miss the reality, viz., that all the bans under Article 286 are meant to serve the same purpose, viz., that of imposing restrictions and thereby demarcating the fields of no taxation.
The bans and the proviso are part& of the same Article and have to be harmoniously construed.
The unequivocal and positive language of one part, cannot be taken to have been obliterated by the negative language of ,the other part so as to result in futility.
The result of construing the proviso and by parity of reasoning the saving clause, as merely removing the ban of a particular nature leaving another overlapping ban to operate, would be to reuder both the saving clause in,.
and the proviso to, Article 286(2) virtually nugatory.
A non obstante clause does not normally add to or subtract from the main provision of which it is a part, It is often enough inserted by way of extra caution.
But it does not have the effect of limiting the operation of the main provision, The suggestion that the Presidential action lifts the ban only as regards the inter State sales would be to read the phrase "notwithstanding that" as meaning "in so far".
There is no warrant for any such reading.
