On the strength of entries in the (wajib ul arz) (village administration papers) of some villages the State Government considered itself to be the owner of saltpetre deposits.
By a notification it declared saltpetre as a minor mineral and auctioned the mines in accordance with the Punjab Minor Minerals Con Cessions Rules, 1964 made under the provisions of the Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act 67 of 1957.
In a writ petition the High Court held that, unless the mineral deposits were specifically mentioned in the Wajib ul arz of a village, as having vested in the State, their ownership would still remain vested in the former proprietors according to the record of rights.
To meet this situation, the State legislature passed the Haryana Minerals (Vesting of Rights) Act, 1973.
Since the owners of the lands had haphazardly created lessee rights in contravention of the Punjab Rules, 1964, two notifications were issued with the object of the conservation as well as of scientific exploitation of mineral resources.
By one notification the State Government purported to acquire rights to saltpetre in the lands and by the second it announced that certain saltpetre bearing areas would be auctioned.
In a writ petition under article 226, the High Court held (i) that in view of the declaration contained in section 2 of the Central Act the field covered by the impugned Act was already fully occupied by the Central legislation so that the State Act was inoperative and void for repugnancy and quashed the two notifications; and (ii) that rights in such lands had continued to vest in the former owners of estates despite acquisitions of other parts of their estates.
The respondents in the appeals containded that the declaration in section 2 of the Central Act that it was expedient in the public interest that the Union should take under its control the regulation of mines and the development of minerals would become unworkable if the provisions of the State Act were permitted to operate.
While the appeals were pending writ petitions were filed in this Court under Article 32.
The petitioners in the first batch of writ petitions have asserted rights as holders of mining lesses granted by persons who had been entered as proprietors of estates in the record of rights and that the State under the State Act had wrongly acquired the right to mineral deposits in their former lands.
It was contended that the effect of the State Act was only to change the ownership without interfering with the regulation of leasehold or licensee rights in minerals under the Central Act.
Allowing the appeals of the State and dismissing the writ petitions, ^ HELD: (i) The Haryana Minerals (Vesting of Rights) Act.
1973, is valid, as it is not, in any way, repugnant to the provisions of the Mines and 689 Minerals (Regulation of Development) Act 67 of 1957, made by Parliament.
Ownership rights could be and have been validly acquired by the State Government under the State Act.
[710G] (ii) No rights are shown by any petitioner to have been conferred upon him under any lease or licence executed in accordance with the provisions of the Central Act, but, any petitioner, either before the High Court or in this Court, who can establish any such right governed by the provisions of the Central Act 67 of 1957 may take such proceedings before an appropriate court, as may still be open to him under the law, against any such action or Government notification as is alleged to infringe that right.
[710H] (iii) Any petitioner who applied for a writ or order in the nature of a mandamus should, in compliance with a well known rule of practice, ordinarily, first call upon the authority concerned to discharge its legal obligation and show that it had refused or neglected to carry it out within a reasonable time before applying to a court for such an order even where the alleged obligation is established.
[711B] 1.
(a) It is difficult to sustain the respondents ' contention that the provisions of the Central Act would be really unworkable by mere change of ownership of land in which mineral deposits were found.
The character of the State Act has to be judged by the substance and effect of its provisions and not merely by the purpose given in the Statement of Objects and Reasons.
[706C] (b) The provisions of the Central Act show that subject to the overall supervision of the Central Government the State Government has a sphere of its own powers and can take legally specified actions under the Central Act and rules.
Thus, the whole field of control and regulation under the provisions of the Central Act cannot be said to be reserved for the Central Government.
[698B] (c) The stated objects and reasons of the State Act showed that the acquisition was to be made to protect the mineral potentialities of the land and to ensure their proper development and exploitation on scientific lines.
If this was the actual purpose behind the Act it did not materially differ from that which could be said to lie behind the Central Act.
[692E] (d) The provisions contained in section 16(1)(b) show that Parliament itself contemplated state legislation for vesting of lands containing mineral deposits in the State Government.
It only required that rights to mining granted in such land should be regulated by the provisions of Act 67 of 1957 as amended in 1972.
This feature could only be explained on the assumption that Parliament did not intend to trench upon powers of State legislatures under entry 18 of List II read with entry 42 of List III.
Again, section 17 of the Central Act shows that there was no intention to interfere with vesting of lands in the States by the provisions of the Central Act.
[707B C] (e) There is no force in the contention of the respondents that the vesting contemplated by section 16(1)(b) as it now stands must be of "estates" of proprietors or lands of tenureholders under some legislation for agrarian reform.
Agrarian 31A of the Constitution is not confined to legislation for agrarian reform.
Agrarian reform is only one of the possible or alternative objects of such acquisition.
It need not be the exclusive or only purpose of State legislation contemplated by section 16(1)(b) of the Central Act.
Power to legislate for the acquisition of the whole of an estate or 'tenure ' would include the power to legislate for any part of it.
[707 D E] Hingir Rampur Coal Co. Ltd. & Ors.
vs The State of Orissa & Ors.,[1961] 2 S.C.R. 537; State of West Bengal vs Union of India,[1964] 1 S.C.R. 371; State of Orissa vs M. A. Tulloch & Co.; , & Baijnath Kedia vs The State of Bihar,[1970] 2 S.C.R. 100, held inapplicable.
(2) The lessee and licensee rights governed by the Central Act or rules are not covered by the State Act.
It is clear from section 3(2) of the State Act that the provisions of this Act were to be read subject to the provisions made by or under the Central Act.
The State Act did not and could not upso facto 690 terminate either lessee or licensee rights which were subsisting on the date when the State Act came into force.
On the other hand.
section 9 of the Central Act 56 of 1972, which amended section 16 of the principal Act, made it imperative for such lessee rights as existed in estates (which had vested in a State Government) to be brought into conformity with the Central Act.
Therefore, if there were no lessee or licensee rights of mining in minor minerals on land which were actually regulated by the provisions of the Central Act they would continue.
[708H] In the instant case, however.
it was not shown how the notification of auctions of mining rights affected any subsisting rights of any alleged lessee or licensee.
It has not been shown that any lessee or licensee asked the State Government to carry out any statutory or contractual obligation before he invoked the writ jurisdiction of the High Court or this Court.
The essential averments to disclose subsisting rights or the locus standi of the petitioners were wanting in these petitions.
[709A] (3) In the second batch of petitions, the only dispute between the parties related to the vesting of ownership rights in minor minerals in those plots.
The petitioners have come to this Court as lessees and not as owners.
Rights of former owners have been validly terminated by the State Act.
It is difficult to make out from these petitions how any lessee rights acquired by the petitioners themselves under any law subsisted or were affected by the notifications.
[710E F] (4) The statement of objects and reasons is relevant when the object or purpose of an enactment is in dispute or uncertain.
It can never override the effect which follows logically from the explicit and unmistakable language of its substantive provisions.
Such effect is the best evidence of intention.
A statement of objects and reasons is not a part of the statute, and, therefore, it is not even relevant in a case in which the language of the operative parts of the Act leaves no room whatsoever, to doubt what was meant by the legislators.
[706D E] In the instant case it is not disputed that the object and effect of the State Act was to acquire proprietary rights to mineral deposits in "land".
Its provisions however, do not mention leasehold or licensee rights.
This is so because these rights were governed by the Central Act 67 of 1957.
(5) It is not correct to say that any new question was allowed to be raised simply because the parties were permitted to place their points of view on the same question after taking into account the changes brought about in Act 67 of 1957 by Act 56 of 1972 and how earlier decisions of this Court, which were given before the amendments came into force, could be at all helpful in deciding the questions.
The Court is bound to take judicial notice of the law as it exists and not the law as it once was.
[706G]
