Previous enmity between the appellant Ramaswami Ayyangar and the deceased Kaliaperumal resulted in an occurrence, in which Kaliaperumal got seriously injured and died in the hospital.
Various charges were framed against the six accused, including those of murder and rioting.
The Trial Judge acquitted three of the accused persons, convicted two under section 302 I.P.C. and one under section 324.
Cross appeals were preferred in the High Court; one by the three accused against their convictions, and another by the State, against the acquittals.
The High Court convicted all the six accused of the offence of rioting.
A 2 to A 6 under section 302 read with section 34, A 1 under Ss. 302/149 and 302/109, and A 2 under section 324.
It was contended before this Court that on the facts of the case, the High Court was not justified in interfering with the acquittal of A 1.
A 5 and A 6, and that A 2 who did not physically participate in the fatal beating of the deceased, could not be held vicariously liable for the acts of others, and that section 34 was not applicable to him.
Partly allowing the appeals, the Court ^ HELD: (1) In the case of an offence involving physical violence, it is essential for the application of section 34 that the person who instigates or aids the commission of the crime must be physically present at the actual commission of the crime for the purpose of facilitating or promoting the offence, the commission of which is the aim of the joint criminal venture.
[881 C D] (2) The "act" spoken of in section 34 includes a series of acts as a single act.
It follows that the words "when a criminal act is done by several persons" in section 34, may be construed to mean "when criminal acts are done by several persons".
The acts committed by different confederates in the criminal action may be different but all must in one way or the other participate and engage in the criminal enterprise.
Such presence of those who in one way or the other facilitate the execution of the common design, is itself tantamount to actual participation in the 'criminal act '.
[881 A B & D] (3) The essence of section 34 is simultaneous consensus of the minds of persons participating in the 'criminal action ' to bring about a particular result.
Such consensus can be developed at the spot and thereby intended by all of them.
[881 D E]
