The appellant is a dealer and exporter in coir yarn.
On its behalf a shipp ing bill for export of 150 bales of coir yarn to a port in Italy was filed, but the consignee was shown to be a firm of Yugoslavia.
The invoice and the form of declaration prescribed under the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act.
1947, were drawn up by the appellant on rupee terms in accordance with the contract with the Yugoslav firm.
The Collector of Customs, after issuing a show cause notice to the appellant and considering the explanation of the appellant, held that the appellant had misdeclared the material particulars regarding the prescribed manner of payment, and that there was a contravention of section 12(1), Foreign Exchange Regulation Act read with section 11 Customs Act, and ordered the confiscation of the goods under section 113 and imposed a penalty of Rs. 25.000/ under section 114, Customs Act.
The High Court upheld the order.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court, ^ HELD: In the circumstances of the case, the quantum of penalty is reduced to Rs. 15,000/ .[912 F] (1) By virtue of section 23A, Foreign Exchange Regulation Act the prohibition imposed under section 12(1) of the Act becomes a prohibition imposed under section 11, Customs Act.
Section 11, Customs Act, empowers the Central Government to prohibit the export of goods absolutely or conditionally and section 113, Customs Act, provides for confiscation of goods exported contrary to any prohibition imposed, and the person attempting to export is liable to penalty under section 114.
[908 D, F G] (2) Section 12(1), Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, as amended by Act 40 of 1969, consists of 3 parts: (a) Issuance of a notification by the Central Government prohibiting the export of certain goods to any place specified in the notification.
(b) The prohibition is relaxed and export is permitted when the exporter furnishes a declaration in the prescribed form which must be true in all material particulars including the amount representing the full export value of the goods or the expected exported value of the goods.
(c) Apart from furnishing the declaration containing the true statements in all material particulars, the exporter is also required to affirm in the said declaration, that is, in the document or paper containing the declaration, that the full export value of the goods will, within the prescribed period be paid in the prescribed manner.
This affirmation is not required to be in any prescribed form.
Until and unless the exporter so affirms, he cannot, in the interests of conserving the foreign exchange, be allowed to export the goods.
[910 B D] (3) In the present case there was no affirmation that the full export value of the goods has been or will, within the prescribed period, be paid in the prescribed manner, and, the absence of the affirmation is tantamount to failure on the part of the appellant to comply with the requirements of law engrafted in section 12(1), Foreign Exchange Regulation Act.
[912 D] (a) The declaration of the buyer 's name as the Yugoslav firm was found to be wrong, but that did not attract the provisions of section 12(1), because, in the prescribed form, the buyer 's name was not to be inserted.
[910 G H] 906 (b) The High Court was wrong in holding that because the mode of payment mentioned in the declaration is contrary to r. 7 of the Foreign Exchange Rules, 1952.
there was a misdeclaration of material particulars.
The appellant has managed to get the payment in Indian rupees through the Yugoslav firm.
Therefore, even after the statement that the country of destination was Italy, the statement that the payment was to be received in India in Indian rupees was not unture, although it was contrary to the mode prescribed in r. 7.
But the absence of the affirmation is significant.
[911 E G; 912 B] (c) Rule 7 provides that the amount representing the full value of the goods exported to the countries specified in the 2nd schedule shall be paid through an authorised dealer and unless authorised by the Reserve Bank, shall be paid in the manner specified in the schedule.
The approved methods of payment in the case of Italy, which is in Group A of the schedule, are : (i) currency of any country in the sub group; (ii) sterling from an 'External Account ' as defined under the U.K. Exchange Control Regulations; and (iii) Rupees from the accounts of a bank in any country in the Convertible Account group.
[911 G 912 A] (d) The appellant could not have affirmed that the full export value of the goods would be paid in one of the prescribed modes.
If such affirmation was made it would have been false because of the statement in the declaration that the value of the goods was to be received in India in Indian rupees.
If in the affirmation the appellant had stated that for the value of the goods exported to Italy it was to receive payment in Indian rupees, then the affirmation would have violated section 12(1) as it would not have been an affirmation stating that the export value would be paid in the prescribed manner.
Hence, the decision of the High Court that the appellant had attempted to export goods in violation of section 12(1) is correct, though it is upheld on a different basis.
[912 B E] (4) Though it is an economic offence and relates to the law of foreign exchange since the law was not clear either to the Customs authorities or the High Court and has resulted in the recording of finding against the appellant on a wrong basis, although not affecting the substance of the view that the appellant violated section 12(1), the quantum of penalty is reduced.[912 F G]
