As per the directions of the appellant and on receipt of the requisite licence under the cotton Transport Act 1923, for transport of cotton, the Bombay seller despatched cotton to the ultimate buyer mills at Madurai and sent the Railway Receipts to the appellant who endorsed the same in favour of the Mills after collection of the substantial portion of the sale price.
The sales Tax authorities treated the transaction as intra sales and assessed the Mills as the last purchaser under the Madras General Sales Tax and assessed the appellant u/s 3(b) of the .
The question is whether in the circumstances the transaction is one of inter state sales falling u/s 3(a) or second sales under state sales u/s 3(b) of the .
The contentions of the appellant in this court were: (1) The sale of cotton by the appellant assessee to the buyer mill fell within the scope of section 3(a) of the Central Act as there was movement of goods from Bombay to Madras as a result of covenant in or incidental to the contract of sale and therefore u/s 9(1) of the Central Sales Tax the jurisdiction lay with Bombay state from where the goods moved from and (ii) Since the sale being in respect of declared goods, is exempt by the terms of notification of Order No. 3602 dated 28 12 63 issued u/s 8(5) of the C.S.T. and (ii) the turnover was exempt u/s 6(2) of C.S.T. Dismissing the appeal the court, ^ HELD: (1) The significant feature of the transaction viz. sending of the Railway Receipts by the Bombay seller to the appellant who thereafter endorsed the same to the mills, shows that (a) there could not be any unconditional appropriation of the goods at Bombay towards the contract entered into between the appellant; (b) It was an inter state sales to the appellant and the sale by the appellant to the mills is an intra state sales in as much as, the mere fact that the goods were consigned by the Bombay seller to the mills in accordance with the direction will not make the transaction inter state sales.
[718G H, 719A B] (ii) The State sales Tax authorities, (respondent) had jurisdiction to assess the transaction for sale by the appellant to the mills u/s 3(b) of the Central Act.
[719C] (iii) The exemption u/s 8(5) applies only to cases where the claimant had paid tax himself u/s 4 of the Madras Act in respect of local sales preceding the inter state transactions.
In the instant case, as the appellant did not pay tax u/s 4 of the Madras Act, he was not entitled to claim exemption under the Government order.
[719 E F] (iv) A dealer claiming exemption for subsequent sale during the movement of goods from one state to another is required by section 6(2) of the Central Act to furnish to the prescribed authority in the prescribed manner a certificate 718 duly filled and signed by the registered dealer by whom the goods were purchased containing the particulars.
In the instant case, the appellant produced the form from the Bombay seller but did not prove that his buyer was a registered dealer in cotton which disentitled him to exemption u/s 6(2) of the Act.
[720 B C]
