Under Section 5.32(c) (i), a retiring pension is granted to a Government Servant, other than a Class IV Government servant, who is retired by the Appointing Authority on or after he attains the age of 55 years by giving him not less than three months ' notice.
The appellant who was served with an order on September 2, 1967, retiring him from service with effect from the date of communication to him of the order on payment of three months ' salary and allowances in lieu of notice required by rule 5.32(c)(i) of the Punjab Civil Service Rules Vol.
II challenged the order on the ground that the State Government was competent to retire him only with three months ' notice but not with salary and allowances in lieu of the notice under the rules.
The Writ Petition was accepted by a single judge and in Letters Patent Appeal by the State, the Division Bench referred it to the Full Bench.
The Full Bench by majority answered the question referred to it in the affirmative and in favour of the State.
Dismissing the appeal by special leave the Court, ^ HELD: Rule 5.32 merely provides for a contingency in which a retiring pension is to be granted to a Government servant.
Even assuming that the rule by implication requires three months ' notice to be given to a Government servant of the description referred to therein before retiring him from service the requirement of the rule cannot be said to be violated if instead of three months ' notice, payment of three months salary and allowance is made.
The object of the notice being to give sufficient time to the Government servant whom it is intended to retire from service to find employment elsewhere and to prevent him from his being suddenly left in lurch without any means of livelihood, no prejudice can be said to be caused to the Government servant if in lieu of three months ' notice, he is given three months salary and allowances.
In fact he is put in a more advantageous position by being paid three months ' salary and allowances instead of the notice for that period as he is thereby relieved of the obligation to spend his time in the office attending to his duty and gets all the time to himself which he can utilize in finding an alternative job or setting his affairs.
Therefore if the appointing authority wants to exercise its right to retire a government servant who has attained the age of 55 years, there is nothing to debar it from validly doing so by payment to him of a sum equivalent to the amount of his pay and allowances for the period of notice.
[895 F H, 896 A B]
