When the bus in which the deceased and P.Ws. 1 to 3 were travelling, along with other passengers, halted at a bus stop, a number of persons surrounded the bus, forced all the passengers out of the bus except the deceased, and inflicted multiple stabs on the deceased causing his death.
Thirteen persons were charged with offences under section 302, 34 and 149 I.P.C.
The trial court convicted some and acquitted the others.
In appeals against the conviction and acquittal, the High Court acquitted all the accused.
In appeal to this Court against the acquittal of seven accused, including A 7, ^ HELD: Confirming the acquittal of others, A 7 is guilty of an offence under section 302, read with section 34, I.P.C. (1) The evidence of the interested eye witnesses PWs 2 and 3 was sufficiently corroborated as against A 7 by the testimony of PWs 9 and 11 the conductor and driver of the bus.
They had identified A 7 at an identification parade.
It is true that while picking out this accused at the parade these witnesses did not say anything with regard to the specific part played by him in the commission of the crime.
That, however, does not render the evidence of such identification inadmissible.
From the fact that PW 9 while testifying as to the fact of identification was referring to this accused as A 7 implies that he had identified him in court.
He had in that connection elucidated why he had picked out A 7 at the identification parade.
The evidence given by the witness in court was substantive testimony, while the identification made by him at the parades was confirmatory of that fact.
As regards PW 11 his evidence was more clear.
The Magistrate who held the parade had mixed up 12 other persons at this parade with the four accused, including A 7.
It could not therefore be said that the number of other persons mixed with the accused was inadequate.
[936H; 937F; 938B F, G H; 939C] (2) The result is that excepting A 7, the participation of the other 12 named accused in the commission of the crime has not been established.
There is also no evidence to show as to which of the assailants dealt the fatal blow on the deceased.
The medical evidence, however, shows that there were not less than 44 incised injuries including penetrating wounds upon the body of the deceased.
The extremely large number of injuries on the body of the deceased lends assurance to the testimony of PWs 2 and 3 that the number of assailants was more than 13 including some unnamed and unidentified persons.
Therefore, apart from the accused named in the charge, there were at least one or more unidentified person who participated in the fatal assault on the deceased conjointly with A 7.
A 7 can, therefore, be convicted under section 302 read with section 34, I.P.C. [940B, G 941B] Maina Singh vs State of Rajasthan ; , followed.
