The appellant in this appeal was convicted by the Presidency Magistrate, Bombay, of an offence under section 66(b) of the Bombay Prohibition Act (Act XXV of 1949) and sentenced to undergo imprisonment till the rising of the court and to pay a fine of Rs., 250 or in default to undergo rigorous imprisonment for one month.
He preferred an appeal to the High Court at Bombay, which was summarily dismissed.
After the dismissal of that appeal, the State of Bombay made a revision application to the High Court praying for enhancement of the sentence.
Notice was issued to the appellant under section 439(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure to show cause against enhancement.
95 Held that the summary dismissal of the appeal preferred by the appellant did not preclude him from taking advantage of the provisions of section 439(6) of the Code of Criminal Procedure and showing cause against his conviction when he was subsequently called upon to show cause why the sentence imposed on him should not be enhanced.
Per DAS J. Sub section (6) of section 439 of the Code of Criminal Procedure confers a new and a valuable right on the accused.
The language used in sub section (6) does not, in terms, place any fetter on the right conferred by it on the accused.
This new right is not expressed to be conditioned or controlled by anything that may have happened prior to the revision application under sub section (1) for enhancement of sentence.
Therefore, whenever there is an application for enhancement of sentence, a notice must issue under sub section (2) to the accused person to show cause and whenever such notice is issued, the accused person must, under sub section (6), be given an opportunity, in showing cause against enhancement, also to show cause against his conviction.
It is not correct to say that sections 421, 435 & 439 of the Code give the court a discretion not to decide the appeal or revision brought before it.
The discretion conferred on the High Court does not authorise it to say that it will not look at the appeal or revision.
The Court 's bounden duty is to look into the appeal or revision and decide it, although in the process of arriving at its decision it has a very wide discretion.
There is no reason for holding that there is a merger or replacement of the Judgment of the trial Court into or by the Judgment of the High Court only when the appeal or revision is heard on notice to the respondent and either allowed wholly or partially or dismissed but not when it is heard without notice to the respondent and dismissed summarily; for this purpose it makes no difference whether the dismissal is summary or otherwise, and there is a judgment of the High Court in all the three cases.
The only difference in substance is that in the first two cases the judgment is final qua both parties while in the third case, i.e., when an appeal or revision by the accused is summarily dismissed without issuing notice to the State, the judgment is final only qua the accused who preferred the appeal or revision.
This is based not on any technical doctrine of res judicata, for there is none in criminal cases, but on the general principle of finality of judgment.
In the first two cases there can, after the judgment, be no further application by the State for enhancement of sentence and therefore no question of the application of section 439(6) can arise.
In the last case, i.e., in case of summary dismissal the Judgment not being final qua the State, the State may apply for enhancement of sentence and if it does the accused becomes entitled again to show cause against his conviction also by reason of the special provisions of section 439(6).
Per BHAGWATI and IMAM JJ.
A Judgment pronounced by the High Court in the exercise of its appellate or revisional 96 jurisdiction after issue of a notice and a full hearing in the presence of both the parties would certainly be arrived at after due consideration of the evidence and all arguments and would therefore be a final judgment and such judgment when pronounced would replace the judgment of the lower court, thus constituting the only final judgment to be executed in accordance with law by the court below.
When however a petition of appeal presented by a convicted person from jail is summarily dismissed under section 421 or a revision application made by him is dismissed summarily or in limine without hearing him or his pleader what the High Court does in such a case is to refuse to entertain the petition of appeal or the revision application and the order passed by the High Court dismissed or rejected" cannot be said to be an expression of the opinion of the court arrived at after due consideration of the evidence and all the arguments.
No notice for enhancement of sentence can be issued by the High Court when a judgment is pronounced by it after a full hearing in the presence of both the parties either in exercise of its appellate or its revisional jurisdiction.
Such notice for enhancement of sentence can be issued by it either suo motu or at the instance of an interested party when the judgment of the lower court subsists and is not replaced by its own judgment given in the exercise of its appellate or revisional jurisdiction.
When the Judgment of the lower court has been under its scrutiny on notice being issued to the opposite party and on a full hearing accorded to both the parties notice for enhancement of sentence can only be issued by it before it pronounces its judgment replacing that of the lower court.
When such hearing is in progress it is incumbent upon the High Court or the opposite party to make up its mind before the judgment is pronounced whether a notice for enhancement of sentence should issue to the accused.
Case law discussed.
