The appellant was the intermediary in respect of vast forest and other lands in the State of Orissa.
The estates vested in the State in April 1960 by force of the Orissa Estates Abolition Act, 1951.
The appellant submitted necessary return for compensation as provided by the Act.
The Compensation Officer passed an order adverse to the appellant whereupon the appellant filed an appeal to the Collector which was rejected.
A second appeal filed before the Board of Revenue was dismissed.
Later on, Revision Petitions were filed in the High Court.
The High Court set aside the order and directed remand to the Compensation Officer.
Thereafter, the District Forest Officer made his appraisal of the annual income and submitted to the Chief Conservator of Forests who altered the actual yield and reduced it substantially.
Both the State and the appellant filed appeals to the Collector which were dismissed.
A second appeal was filed by the appellant before the Board of Revenue without success.
In the Revision Applications filed before the High Court which led to the remand now challenged in the present appeals the appellant contended before this Court: (1) The interest ought to have been awarded at 12 per cent as against the statutory rate of 2 1/2 per cent from the date of the vesting till payment.
(2) Compensation money should be so calculated that the purchasing power of the amount of compensation to be paid on the date of actual payment will not be less than the purchasing power on the date of vesting.
(3) The slab system of calculation of compensation in the Act providing smaller multiples for estates yielding larger income is unconstitutional.
(4) Unlike in case of fisheries etc., where the actual income is to be included in the gross assets, in the case of forests, the assumed income and not the actual income is to be included.
During the agricultural year immediately preceding the abolition, the petitioners had not actually derived any income from the forests and as such they were under no obligation to pay any income tax on such income.
Therefore, deduction of income tax from the gross assets is illegal and unwarranted.
(5) The compensation has not been computed in accordance with the scheme of the Act.
(6) The date of vesting is the last date by which the calculation of compensation should have been made and since that had not been done the Compensation Officer had become functus officio in awarding compensation.
Dismissing the appeals, ^ HELD: 1.
The policy of the law of agrarian reforms postulates the extinguishment of ancient privileges and cornering of land resources and the socio economic yardstick is different from what applies to ordinary purchases of real estate and this is manifest in the special provisions contained in Article 31A and 31B of the Constitution.
A similar principle applies to the award of interest which may sometimes be notional when feudal interests are puffed out.
The 920 dynamic rule of law with a social mission makes a meaningful distinction between rights steeped in the old system and compensation for deprivation of those interests on the one hand and the ordinary commercial transactions on the other.
[923 F G] 2.
It is more or less a world phenomenon that the erosion in value of the unit of currency has been taking place.
But this invisible devaluation owing to the inflationary spiral does not affect the quantum of monetary compensation prescribed by statute.
For the purposes of the law, the rupee of long ago is the same as the rupee of today although for the purposes of the, market place and cost of living, the housewife 's answer may be different.
[924B C] 3.
Article 31(3) read with Article 31(2) bars any challenge to the amount of compensation on acquisition by the State subject to the compliance with the prescriptions in the said sub articles on the ground that the amount so fixed or determined is not adequate.
Presidential assent has been accorded to this State Act and so the ban operates.
[924C D] 4.
The submission of the appellant proceeds on a misreading of section 27.
In the case of forests it is the assumed and not the actual income that forms the basis for calculation of compensation.
Similarly an assumed income tax also has to be worked out and deducted.
[924F G] 5.
The scheme of the Act is that the compensation must be calculated on the basis of appraisal of the annual yield of the forests on the date of vesting firstly by a Forest Officer and secondly by the Chief Conservator of Forests,screening it and approving it.
In the present case, the Chief Conservator had substituted his appraisement which was accepted by the statutory Tribunal.
There was a fundamental difference in the basis adopted by the Forest Officer and the Chief Conservator of Forests in the matter of assessing in the income of the Forest in question.
What the Chief Conservator did was not to approve wholly or in a modified form what the Forest Officer did but to make his own appraisal independently and without reference to the report of the statutory functionary.
This was wrong and contrary to section 26.
This Court is in agreement with the course adopted by the High Court and the reasoning which has prevailed with it.
[925C, 927A B] 6.
Before the date of vesting the State never can nor does fix the compensation through the Compensation Officer in any of the agrarian reform laws and these compensation operations are post statutory exercises.
Therefore, there is no substance in the funtcus officio argument.
If the officer had no jurisdiction the land would be gone because of the vesting provision and no compensation would be forthcoming for want of jurisdiction; a consequence the appellant never wants.
Technicality can be frightened away by technicality.
[927D E] 7.
After remand the Forest Officer will do the appraisement of the annual income, forward his report to the Chief Conservator of Forests who will take the said report into consideration and, if necessary, make the modifications therein or approve it with such changes as he deems fit.
Certainly, the Chief Conservator cannot be ignored by the Compensation Officer nor can the Chief Conservator ignore the assessment made by the Forest Officer and go through an independent exercise.
The take over of the forest of the appellant was effected as early as in 1960.
The High Court has stated that a large part of the delay has been due to laches committed from time to time by the officers charged with the duty to calculate the compensation.
It is therefore directed that the proceedings before the Compensation Officer shall be completed within six months from today.
[927F H, 928A B]
