The scheme of Ss. 78 to 84 of the Bombay Municipal Boroughs Act, 1925, shows that the official year is the unit of time for the levy of rates on buildings and lands.
Under these provisions the provisional assessment list is prepared for the official year, either before the commencement or in the course of the official year, objections are invited, and amendments consequential upon the decisions on the objections are carried out in the list.
The assessment list is then authenticated.
The process of assessment and levy of tax which begins with the preparation of the provisional assessment list is thus completed when the assessment list is authenticated.
The assessment list, when authenticated, becomes effective from the first day of the official year and gives rise to the liability or the rate payers to pay the tax levied.
[889 C] For the assessment year 1951 52, the appellant followed the procedure but the authentication was on July 24, 1952, after the expiry of the official year on March 31, 1952.
Since property tax in accordance with the revised rates was sought to be levied, the respondents filed a suit for a declaration that the appellant was not entitled to recover any property tax at the revised rates.
The suit was decreed and the decree was affirmed by the High Court.
In appeal to this Court, it was contended that, (1) the authentication of the assessment list in order to be valid and effective, need not be made before the expiry of the official year to which the assessment list relates; and (2) the suit was barred under section 206A of the Act.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: (1) The assessment list in order to be effective in levying the tax must be authenticated before the expiry of the official year and if it is not, the assessment list would be void and inoperative and would not give rise to any liability in the rate payers to pay tax.
[891 H] (a) Once the view is taken that the process of levying the tax is complete only when the assessment list is authenticated and it is only then that the tax is levied on the rate payers, it follows that the authentication must be made within the official year.
The tax being a tax for the official year must obviously be levied during the official year and since the levy of tax is complete only when the assessment list is authenticated it must follow a fortiori that the authentication must take place in the official year.
Otherwise, the tax for an official year would be leviable at any time, without any time limit, even years after the expiration of the official year, which could not have been the intention of the legislature, since it is an annual tax intended to be levied for each official year.
[889 D F] (b) Section 84 provides that it shall not be necessary to prepare a new assessment list every year but subject to the condition of revision once in every four years, the Chief Officer may adopt the assessment list for any year, with necessary alterations for the year immediately following.
The provision 884 postulates that there would be an assessment list, that is, the authenticated assessment list, for each official year before the close of that official year so that it can be adopted by the Chief Officer for the immediately following year.
Otherwise, he would have to prepare a new provisional assessment list every time when the Assessment List for the preceding year is not finalised and authenticated, and this might lead to the starting result of there being more than one provisional assessment list in the process of finalisation at the same time.
[889 G 890 C] (c) In interpreting a provision of a statute the court is entitled and indeed bound to consider any other parts of the Act which throw light on the intention of the legislature.
The statute must, therefore, be read as a whole and every provision in it must be construed with reference to the context and other clauses so as, as far as possible, to make a consistent enactment of the whole statute.
Section 82(1) provides for making of an amendment in the assessment list by insertion or alteration of an entry in certain events, after hearing any objections to the amendment, Section 82(3) makes the amendment effective from 'the earliest day in the current official year in which the circumstances justifying the entry or alteration existed. ' The expression clearly signifies the earliest day in the official year which is current when the amendment in the assessment list takes place, that is, the official year which is running at the time when the amendment is made by insertion or alteration of an entry.
Therefore, a combined reading of section 82(1) and (3) shows that an amendment, in order to be effective in levying tax for an official year, must be made during the currency of the official year.
The scheme of sections 78 to 81 is identical with section 82 and in both cases what is contemplated first is a proposal to which objections are invited and after the objections are investigated and disposed of, the assessment list in one case, and the altered entry in the other, are authenticated, giving rise to liability in the rate payer.
It must follow a fortiori that if an alteration in the assessment list in order to fasten liability on the rate payer, is required to be made during the currency of the official year equally, the assessment list, in order to give rise to liability in the rate payer, must also be authenticated before the expiry of the official year.
[890 C 891 B] Sholapur Municipality vs Governor General, 49 Bom.
L.R. 752 and Sholapur Municipal Corporation vs Ramchandra 74 Bom.
L.R. 489 referred to.
(d) Three High Courts having jurisdiction over the territories in which the Act is in force have all taken this view over a course of years and this Court will not be justified in departing from it, merely on the ground that a different view is possible.
This Court is ordinarily loathe to interfere with the interpretation of a State statute which has prevailed in the State for a long number of years and which the State Legislature has chosen not to disturb by legislative amendment.
[891 C D] (e) In the present case, the Bombay Legislature has accepted the interpretation of sections 78 to 81 by the three High Courts and given legislative recognition to it by introducing section 84A by Bombay Act 53 of 1954.
This provision makes it clear that the legislature not only did not amend the Act for the purpose of removing the time limit of the official year as interpreted by the High Courts or enlarging such time limit, but on the contrary, made the time limit more stringent by providing that the authentication shall be made by the Municipal Borough not late than July 31, of the official year, and that if the authentication is not made within that time, the State Government shall be entitled to appoint a person for the purpose of authenticating the assessment list and that the authentication by such person shall not, in any event, be later than the last day of the official year.
[891 D H] (2) Section 206A provides, inter alia, that no suit shall lie against a municipality in respect of any act done in pursuance of execution or intended execution of the Act unless it is commenced within 6 months next after the accrual of the cause of action.
It could not, however, be contended that the cause of action for the suit in the present case arose in favour of the respondents and other rate payers on July 24, 1952, when the list was authenticated and that the suit, not having been filed within 6 months of that date, is barred.
The assessment list in the present case was authenticated after the expiry of 885 the official year and was void and inoperative and the respondents and other rate payers were entitled to ignore it as a nullity.
Their cause of action arose only when the appellant sought to recover the amount of tax from them on the strength of that assessment list.
In the absence of material to show when the notices demand requiring the respondents and other rate payers to pay the amount of tax were issued, or which rate payers paid and when it is not possible to say whether the cause of action for filing the suit arose to the respondents within six months before the filing of the suit or earlier.
[892 A E]
