The respondent by virtue of the sanad granted to his ancestors by the British Government, claimed, in respect of certain lands situated in village Shiramba Taluka Koregaon, District North Satara, compensation under section 6(2) of the Bombay Paragana and Kulkarni Watans (Abolition) Act.
1950, for the resumption of the lands by the appellant.
The suit claim of Rs. 15,074 4 0 being "a sum equal to ten times the amount of such land revenue" was decreed by the trial court.
On appeal by the State, the High Court affirmed the same.
after construing the sanad granted by the British Government in favour of the respondents ' ancestors and other relevant records, as it was a watan of land revenue and not in respect of the soil.
Dismissing the State 's appeal by special leave to this Court, ^ HELD: (1) The High Court was right in holding that the grant in favour of the ancestors of the respondent was a grant of land revenue only and not a grant of the soil and since the watan held by the respondent at the date of the coming into force of the Act was a watan of land revenue the respondent was entitled to compensation in the sum of Rs. 15,074 4 0 under section 6(2) of the Bombay Paragana and Kulkarni Watan (Abolition) Act, 1950.
[982B C] (2) The sanad undoubtedly used the words "lands" to describe the subject matter of the grant, but the word "land" is defined in Bombay Act II of 1863 [The Exemption From Land Revenue (No. 1 ) Act 1863], to include share of land revenue and this meaning would apply in the construction of the word "land" in the sanad since the sanad was apparently granted pursuant to the enquiry made under Bombay Act II of 1863.
The description of the subject matter would not, therefore, necessarily indicate that it was a grant of the soil.
In fact, this description standing alone would rather indicate that it was a grant of land revenue only, since grant of the soil would ordinarily be accompanied by words such as 'Darobast ' or 'Jal ', 'Taru ', 'Truna ', 'Kastha ' and 'Pashan '.
[981F H] [Their lordships deprecated the litigious approach adopted by the State Government and observed "State Governments which have public accountability in respect of their actions should not lightly rush to this Court to challenge a judgment of the High Court which is plainly and manifestly correct and drag the opposite party in unnecessary expense.]
