Under section 5(2)(a)(iv) of the Punjab Sales Tax Act "taxable turnover" meant that part of a dealer 's gross turnover during any period which remains after deducting therefrom, his turnover during that period on sales to any undertaking supplying electrical energy to the public under a licence or sanction granted under the , of goods for use by it in the generation or distribution of such energy.
Under section 8 of the Central Sales Tax, every dealer.
who in the course of inter state trade or commerce sells to the Government any goods: or sells to a registered dealer other than the Government goods of the description referred to in sub section (3) shall be liable to pay tax under the Act, which shall be three per cent of his turnover.
Section 8(2A) reads as follows: "Notwithstanding anything contained in sub section (1A) of section 6 or sub section (1) or sub section (2) of this section, the tax pay able under this Act by a dealer on his turnover in so far as the turn over or any part thereof relates to the sale of any goods, the sale or, as the case may be, the purchase of which is, under the sales tax law of the appropriate state, exempt, from tax generally, or subject to tax generally at a rate which is lower than three per cent.
(whether called a tax or fee or by any other name), shall be nil or, as the case may be shall be calculated at tho lower rate.
Explanation: For the purpose of this sub section or sale or purchase of any goods shall not be deemed to be exempt from tax generally under the sales tax law of the appropriate state, if under the law the sale or purchase of such goods is exempt only in specified circumstances or under specified conditions or the tax is levied on the sale or purchase of such goods is exempt only in specified circumstances or under specified conditions or the tax is levied on the sale or purchase of such goods at specified stages or otherwise than with reference to the turnover of the goods.
" The appellants were suppliers of poles and cables to the Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking and the sales were in the course of inter state trade or commerce and admittedly exempt under the state sales tax u/s 5(2) (a) (iv).
The state assessed tax u/s 8 of tho on the ground that the exemption granted u/s 5(2)(a)(iv) of the state Act fell under Explanation to section 8(2A) of the .
The High Court held that the sales by the undertaking supplying electrical energy were not exempt from tax generally within the meaning of section 8(1A) of the Central Act read with Section 5(2)(a)(iv) of the State Act.
Dismissing the appeal, by special leave, the Court.
^ HELD: (I) General exemption means that goods should be totally exempt from tax before similar exemption from the levy of central sales tax can become available.
Where the exemption from taxation is conferred by conditions or in certain circumstances there is no exemption from tax generally.
Section 6 of the State Act does not speak of exemption but deals with tax free goods.
Section 6 deals with specified goods on which no tax is payable.
993 Section 5 of the State Act deals with what has to be excluded from taxable turnover of the dealer.
Both the sections deal with goods which do not suffer from Sales tax.
Section 8(2A) of the Central Act exempts goods from inter State Sales tax where a tax law of the state has exempted them from sales tax.
The explanation to section 8(2A) of the Central Act takes away the exemption where it is not general and has been granted in specified circumstances or under specified conditions.
The provisions contained in section 5(2) (a) (iv) of the state Act exclude sales which are made under specified circumstances or specified conditions.
The specified circumstances are that the sale must be to an undertaking engaged in supplying electrical energy to the public under a licence or sanction granted under the .
The specified condition is that the goods purchased by the undertaking must be used for the generation or distribution of electrical energy.
If the circumstances do not exist or if the conditions are not performed then the sales of goods cannot be exempted from tax.
The expression "generation or distribution of such energy" specifies the condition under which exemption is granted.
[996H, G97A D] Commissioner of Sales Tax, M.P. vs Kapoor Dari Niwar & Co., Gwalior 22 STC p. 152; Hindustan Safety Glass Works (P) Lrd.
vs The State of U.P. and Anr.
34 STC 209, discussed.
