Section 2(c), Suppression of Immoral Traffic in Women and Girls Act, 1956, defines a Magistrate to mean a District Magistrate, a Sub Divisional Magistrate of the First Class specially empowered by the State Government by notification in the official Gazette, to exercise jurisdiction under the Act.
The appellant State issued a notification under the section empowering all the Judicial Magistrates of the 1st Class to exercise jurisdiction to try certain offences under the Act.
The High Court held that the notification did not have the effect of making a Magistrate one specially empowered within the meaning of section 2(c).
Allowing the appeal to this Court, ^ HELD: It is not necessary that the State Government should pick and choose individual Magistrates and confer special power on them.
The notification had the effect of making every Judicial Magistrate of the First Class in the State, within the area of his respective jurisdiction, a Magistrate specially empowered to try those offences.
[1083E; 1084C] Mohd. Qasim & Anr.
vs Emperor, AIR, ; Emperor vs Udho Chandumal, AIR 1943 Sind 107; Polubha Vajubha vs Tapu Buda, AIR 1956 Sau.
73 and Sabuddin Sheikh Mansur vs J. section Thakkar & Anr.
ILR [1968] Guj. 4, disapproved.
K. N. Vijayan vs State, AIR 1953 Tr.
Co. 402.
State vs Judhabir Caetri AIR 1953 Assam 35; (F.B.); State of Mysore vs Kashambi & Anr: ; Ashaq Hussain Khan vs S.D.O. Manghir.
ATR 1965 Pat 446 and C. V. Madhava Mannadiar vs Distt.
Collector & Ors., AIR 1970 Kerala 50.
approved.
(1) Where the language of a statutory provision is susceptible of two interpretations, the one which promotes the object of the provision.
comports best with its purpose and preserves its smooth working, should be chosen in preference to the other which introduces inconvenience and uncertainty in the working of the system.
This rule will apply in full force where the provision confers ample discretion on the Government for a specific purpose to enable it to bring about an effective result.
[1079G 1080A] (2) The word "specially" has reference to the special purpose of the empowerment and is not intended to convey the sense of a "special" as Contrasted with a "general" empowerment.
"Specially" qualifies the word "empowered" and not the person on whom the power is conferred.
In this view the State Government is within its competence to confer powers under the section on some or all of the Magistrates of the First Class in the State in any of the modes known to law and the Magistrate or Magistrates.
On whom Powers are so conferred, will be "specially empowered" within the meaning of the section.
This broad view keeps in focus the special purpose of the empowerment and must be preferred to the narrow view, namely.
That the word "specially" stands in contrast to the word "generally".
According to 1077 the narrow view if powers to try certain offences are conferred on a class of officials by their official title, they are "generally empowered '; but if the powers are conferred on particular individuals by name or by virtue of their office, as a result of selection by the Government, they are 'specially empowered".
This view which reads into the expression "specially empowered" a restriction as to the mode or manner of empowerment, is neither congenial to the special purpose of the provision, nor conducive to the main object of the Act, and tends to reduce its efficacy and to impede the exercise of the discretionary power which the legislature has confided in full measure to the Government.[1079B D, E G; 1080B C, H; 1082G] (3) The word "specially" signifies the investment of some or all the Magistrates of the First Class with powers which are "special ' and are not part of the "ordinary" or "additional" powers which can be conferred on a Magistrate of the First Class under the Code of Criminal Procedure.
The fallacy in the narrow view stems from the undue stress it lavs on the mode empowerment at the cost of the special purpose of the empowerment ignoring the fact that the Act is a code by itself which creates new offences triable only by those Magistrates of the First Class who are specially empowered under section 2(c) of the Act, and not under the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Power may be conferred under section 39 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, corresponding to section 32 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, on any person either by name or in virtue of his office or on classes of officials generally by their official title.
The special mode or the general mode of conferring the power applies to the conferment of power both for a general purpose or a special purpose.
The mode of conferring power is not to be confused with the purposes of the power.
[1082H; 1083B D] (4) A person can be specially empowered even by virtue of his office.
If empowering a Magistrate of the First Class to try offences under the Act by virtue of his office satisfies the requirement of section 2(c), there is no reason why the empowerment of all the Magistrates of the First Class in the State under the notification by virtue of their office to try offences under the Act in the areas of their respective jurisdictions should not be held to be special but treated as general.
The Government could have issued separate notifications for each Magistrate.
Instead of doing so if one notification were to be issued authorising each of them to perform those functions, there could be no valid objection.
[1081F G; 1083E F, G 1084B] Sindhi Lokana Chajthram vs State of Gujarat, ; and Abdul Hussain Tayabali and ors.
vs State of Gujarat and ors.
; , followed.
