The respondent plaintiffs instituted a suit in 1961 in accordance with the Portuguese law then in force in those territories for ejectment of the defendant appellants from the suit property.
It was alleged in the plaint that on the death of father of the plaintiff No. 1.
Sadashiva the suit land was assigned to Sitabai mother of plaintiff No. 1 and that on the death of Sitabai the property devolved on the respondent No. 1 and his 6 sisters.
It was also contended that the house built on a portion of the land in dispute and occupied by the defendants should be removed by the defendants and the defendants should be directed to hand over vacant possession of the plot to the respondents.
The appellants in their written statement pleaded that the suit property was given on perpetual lease to the ancestors of the appellants and that no rent was paid for over 40 years.
The appellants further contended that the suit property was in their open peaceful and continuous possession including that of their predecessors in interest as owners for a period of more than 50 years and that the have acquired a title by prescription.
The trial court decreed the suit.
An appeal filed by the appellants before the learned Additional Judicial Commissioner was dismissed.
When the matter came up before this Court by special leave this Court remanded the matter to the court of the Judicial Commissioner for a finding on the plea of prescription raised by the appellants.
The learned Judicial Commissioner after remand came to the conclusion that the appellants have failed to prove the acquisition of full title to the suit property by prescription under the law in force at the relevant time.
The learned Judicial Commissioner also held that the appellants failed to establish their plea of perpetual lease.
Partly allowing the appeal.
^ HELD: (1) In view of the earlier decision of this, Court this Court would be justified in deciding the appeal only on the question of plea of prescription.
The appellants had been in continuous possession of the entire plot of land described in para 1 of the plaint which has a larger area including the portion where the house of the appellant stands.
In the year 1920, the respondents sought to make their construction on the vacant portion of the land close to the appellants ' house which led to opposition and obstruction from the appellants.
Later on, the appellants agreed to the construction by the respondents.
However, so far as the land on which the appellants had their house is concerned there was no proof nor any evidence of any change on the part of the appellants to their open hostility to the respondents ' title to the same.
The respondents did not give any evidence of any such amicable solution.
On the other hand, it is admitted that they had reported to the Administrator without even caring to know the result of such action against the appellants.
The further fact that the respondents annexed to the plaint a certified copy of the partition deed of 1920 which was obtained as early as in 1920 goes to show that they were fully cognizant of the public assertion by the appellants of their own title, to the land on which their house stands repudiating that of the respondents.
The learned Judicial Commissioner has erred in holding that the appellants have not been able to prove an overt act of possession to the knowledge of the respondents.
According to article 474 of the Portuguese Civil Code possession is defined as holding or fruition of anything or right.
The acts done by licence or permission do not constitute possession.
According to Article 505 things and rights are acquired by virtue of possession, just as obligations are extinguished by reason of not demanding their fulfillment.
The law lays down conditions and the period of time 1068 that are necessary for one as well as for the other thing and that is called prescription.
Under Article 528 of the Portuguese Code in the absence of registration of possession or title of acquisition prescription with respect to immovable property or rights to immovable will operate by virtue of possession for 15 years.
Under article 529 when the possession of immovable property or rights to immovable property has lasted for a period of 30 years prescription will operate.
Under the Portuguese law what appears to be clear is that permissive possession is not sufficient to prescribe title of the owner of the land.
There is no evidence whatsoever for the conclusion of the Judicial Commissioner that the possession of the appellants was permissible under the respondents.
On the other hand, evidence is against recognition by the appellants of any title in the respondents.
We are, therefore, left with the long continuous and peaceful, possession by the appellants of the land with the residential house thereon since the time of their ancestors after a clear repudiation of the title of the respondents to the land in 1920.
The fact that the appellants set up title in Vishnu Narcornim describing him as respondents ' ancestor does not affect the position in view of the respondents ' denial that Vishnu had anything to do with the land.
The Judicial Commissioner fell into an error by not keeping the distinction between Vishnu 's title and the respondents ' title.
The origin of ownership of land being dipped in the misty past what emerges from the evidence in the absence of proof of lease or permission by the respondents ' own ancestors is that the appellants have been in long and open possession of the land over which they have constructed their house for a period long enough for that possession to ripen into ownership.
The appellants have acquired title to the said land by prescription.
Since there is no proof of permissive possession under the respondents or their ancestors there is no question of application of Article 510.
The learned counsel for the appellants has confined his claim in this case only to the land on which appellants have their house.
The suit of the respondents so far as it relates to the portion of the land on which the appellants have their house is dismissed and in respect of the remaining portion of land is decreed.
[1070G, 1072A D, 1073A H, 1074A C, 1075D E]
