The first respondent, an importer and dealer in sewing machines, was granted an import licence for importing industrial sewing machines and spare parts.
After importing some goods through the Bombay port, the first respondent was permitted by the Customs Authorities to import the rest through the Calcutta port, and the first respondent entered into contracts with Japanese companies for supply of a certain number of industrial sewing machines and oscillating rock shafts.
Being in some financial difficulty the first respondent approached the 2nd respondent, and the latter stood guarantee to Bankers at Delhi enabling the first respondent to open the necessary letter of credit.
Thereafter, while the goods contracted for from the Japanese companies were on the high seas, there was an agreement by which the first respondent agreed to sell to the second respondent at a future date, certain quantities of sewing machines, heads and oscillating rock shafts.
When the goods arrived at Calcutta, the Customs authorities took the view that the goods were ascertained and specific goods, that the property in them had passed to and vested in second respondent by reason of the agreement to sell, so that at the time of importation the goods were not covered by the licence in favour of the first respondent and ordered confiscation of the goods and the imposition of a penalty.
The first respondent thereupon moved the High Court and the High Court held against the appellant.
In appeal to this Court, the appellant Collector of Customs, also raised the contentions that though everything ostensibly was done by the 1st respondent the real importer was the 2nd respondent and that, therefore, the importation was unauthorized; and that the High Court had no jurisdiction to interfere Under article 226, with the order of the Customs authority.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: (I) It is not possible to hold on the facts of this case, that the property in the goods passed to the second respondent at the time of the agreement, and the High Court was right in holding that the property in the goods did not pass to the buyer till the time of delivery of the goods in Bombay., [977E, G H] (a) The agreement to sell related not to the entire consignment of the goods which were being imported by the first respondent but only to part of those goods even though it was a major part.
Out of 208 dozen rock shafts which were imported, 200 dozen were to be sold to the 2nd respondent.
There was nothing to prevent the first respondent from selecting for itself any 8 dozen rock shafts out of the consignment.
The Place of delivery was the second respondent 's godown in Bombay, and therefore, the property in the goods could not pass in favour of the second respondent until after the arrival of the goods in Bombay and the 200 dozen rock shafts to be delivered to the 2nd respondent were separated.
So far as the sewing machines were concerned, the property in them could also not pass to the buyer before the passing of the property in rock shafts as the contract was one indivisible contract.
No specific goods in a deliverable state were attached to the contract when it was made.
[977E G] 972 (b) [n many genuine commercial transactions guarantee can be arranged by a party importing or exporting goods under a valid licence.
The mere fact of financial guarantee by the second respondent to a banker for the purpose of enabling the first respondent to open a letter of credit, without anything more, would not convert the guarantor (2nd respondent) to be the owner of the property, the moment the contract was entered into, if the terms therein pointed to the contrary.
[978A B] (2) It was never the contention of the Customs authorities that the importation of the goods was not done by the 1st respondent or that the 1st respondent 's contracts with the Japanese suppliers were sham.
Therefore the appellant cannot be permitted to raise the contention that the real importer was the 2nd respondent.
[977E G] (3) The 1st respondent 's licence was not an Actual User Licence and there fore the 1st respondent could sell the imported goods to others.
The legal issue in the case was whether property had passed to the 2nd respondent at the time the agreement was entered into between the respondents and if on the terms of the agreement along with relevant facts and circumstances, the customs authorities had committed a manifest error of law apparent on the face of the order the High Court 's jurisdiction to interfere under article 226 is attracted.
[978G 979B]
