Indian Railways Establishment Code, Vol.
I r. 1730 Right of delinquent officer to services of on advocate or another Railway offcial.
The appellant was a railway official of the Indian Railways, in London.
In connection with the purchase of stock from a West German firm three charges were framed against him that he obtained illegal gratification from the proprietor of that firm and that he had used official influence for personal advancement.
A board of enquiry as set up by the Government of India and the enquiry was held in London and West Germany.
The board held that two of the charges were proved and the appellant was dismissed from service.
He filed a writ petition in the High Court which was dismissed.
In appeal to this Court, it was contended that the enquiry was held in gross violation of the principles of natural justice and requirements of article 311 of the Constitution; that the proprietor of the German firm made the false accusation against him in order to escape payment of damages; that the chairman of the board of enquiry was biased against him, and that the appellant was denied the services of a professional lawyer or a railway official of his choice from India for conducting his defence and for cross examining the proprietor of the German Firm.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: (1) The correspondence that passed between the board and the appellant snows that there was no violation of any principle of natural justice, that the appellant was given inspection of all necessary documents; that he was given adequate and reasonable opportunity to defend himself and that the allegation that the chairman of the board was biased against the appellant was totally false.
[46 B C] (2) No principle of natural justice was violated in not making available to the appellant the services of a professional lawyer or of another railway official from India.
[51 B] (a) The enquiry was conducted in accordance with r. 1730 of the Indian Railways Establishment Code, Vol.
I, which prescribes the procedure for holding a departmental enquiry.
There is nothing in the rule about engagement of a lawyer but the note appended to the rule provides that in a departmental enquiry the accused may, if he so desires, be accompanied by another railway officer, provided he is approved by the competent authority, and provided that the person so nominated shall not be a professional lawyer.
[50 F G] (b) The notes are promulgated with the rules.
Their function is to provide procedure, to control discretion, and to fill up gaps when rules are silent.
Under the rule, the appellant was not entitled to the services of a professional lawyer.
[51 F G] Tara Singh etc.
vs State of Rajasthan and ors.
, [1975]3 SCR 1002, followed.
(c) Even if the note is treated as an executive instruction and not part of the rule itself, there is no reason why the authority should not follow the note.
The authority would still have a discretion in the matter.
In the present case, the question involved was a simple one whether he had taken money from the 40 proprietor of the German firm.
No prejudice was caused to the appellant, because the proprietor was only a lawyer in name but was actively in business and the services of a professional lawyer were not necessary to cross examine him.
[51 B] (d) The appellant wanted an officer from India to assist him in the conduct of his defence.
Under the rule, he was not entitled, as a matter of right, to have the services of any railway officer stationed in India.
He was in fact given a choice to choose either one stationed in London or on the Continent.
[51 G H] C. L. Subramaniam vs Collector of Customs, Cochin, [1972]3 SCR 485, explained and distinguished.
R. vs Secretary of State for the Home Department ex parte Mughal [1973] All England Law Reports, 796, referred to.
