The Government of Gujarat issued a notification under section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894.
The validity of the said notification was challenged by the owners of the land.
The Government later issued a notification under section 6 of the Land Acquisition Act after holding enquiry under section 5A.
The owners of the land challenged the said notification under section 6 by filing another Writ Petition.
Thereafter the award was made by the Land Acquisition Officer.
The Government sanctioned a sum of Re. 1/ towards cost of acquisition.
The acquisition was for the purpose of a Cooperative Housing Society.
Later on, the Government passed a resolution in supersession of the earlier resolution and sanctioned a sum of Rs. 500/ toward cost of acquisition.
The Government considered section 6 notification to be illegal and invalid and cancelled the same and issued a fresh notification under section 6 in respect of the same land.
The owner of the land filed a further Writ Petition challenging the notification by which the earlier section 6 notification was cancelled and a fresh section 6 notification was issued.
The High Court dismissed the Writ Petition against the first section 6 notification as infructuous.
The High Court allowed the other Writ Petition against the second section 6 notification and quashed it on the ground that the cancellation of the first section 6 notification would in any event, tantamount to withdrawal from acquisition and secondly since section 4 notification was exhausted by the first section 6 notification no subsequent notification under section 6 of the Act could thereafter be issued.
Allowing the appeal by certificate ^ HELD: 1.
Acquisition of land for Cooperative Housing Society is for public purpose as laid down by this Court in Ratilal Shankarbhai and Ors.
vs State of Gujarat A.I.R. 1970 SC 984.
[31 C] 2.
The contention that the cancellation of the first section 6 notification amounts to withdrawal from acquisition and no subsequent notification under section 6 of the Act can thereafter be issued without a fresh notification under section 4 of the Act cannot be countenanced in view of the decision of this Court in Girdhari Lal Amratlal Shodan and Ors.
vs State of Gujarat reported in ; , when a notification under section 6 of the Act is invalid the Government may treat it as ineffective and issue in its place a fresh notification under section 6 and that nothing in section 48 of the Act precludes the Government from doing so.
The cancellation of the earlier notification is only a recognition of the invalidity of that notification and does not amount to withdrawal from acquisition.
[31 C D]
