Section 47(2) of the Jammu & Kashmir Representation of the People Act enacts that the Returning Officer shall examine the nomination papers and shall decide all objections which may be made to any nomination and may, either on such objection or in his own motion, after such summary enquiry, if any, reject any nomination on the ground, among others, that the signature of the candidate or the proposer on the nomination paper is not genuine.
For the general election to the State Assembly the appellant and the respondent (petitioner) filed nomination papers.
The nomination paper of the respondent was rejected by the Returning Officer on the ground that when his nomination was called neither he nor anyone on his behalf was present.
After the words 'Hence rejected ' recorded on the nomination paper the Returning Officer had also added that the signature of the proposer was not genuine.
In the election that ensued the appellant was declared elected.
The respondent in his election petition alleged (i) that though at the time of scrutiny the Returning Officer was informed by his proposer that the respondent had gone out to ease and requested him to wait for a while, the Returning Officer rejected the nomination paper and refused to reopen the matter even on the respondent 's request immediately thereafter and (ii) that the Returning Officer committed forgery by subsequently adding certain words in the order of rejection and by over writing the signature of the proposer on the nomination paper.
The High Court held (i) that the Returning Officer was not justified in law in rejecting the nomination paper of the respondent on the ground that he was not present at the time of scrutiny, and (ii) that the Returning Officer having become functus officio any subsequent observations which he might have made was irrelevant and since the nomination paper was illegally rejected the election was void and was liable to be set aside under section 108(1)(c) of the Act.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, ^ HELD: The judgment of the High Court is erroneous both on fact and in law and is against the weight of evidence on record and preponderance of probabilities.
[27 D] (1) Although the appellate Court should be slow to disturb a pure finding of fact based on appreciation of evidence by the Trial Court, it is well settled that the sanctity and purity of electoral processes must be maintained.
The election of a duly elected candidate cannot be set at naught on the basis of interested on partisan evidence not backed by cogent circumstances or unimpeachable documents.
[6 H] Rahim Khan vs Khurshid Ahmed & Ors.
[1975] 1 S.C.R. 643, 656 and D. Venkata Reddy vs R. Sultan & Ors.
; , referred to.
In the instant case the approach of the High Court was not correct.
It had overlooked many essential features.
Secondly the High Court had observed that issue No. 1 was wide enough to include the appellant 's plea that even if the order of the Returning Officer in rejecting the nomination paper on the ground of absence of the candidate or his proposer was wrong, it could 2 still be supported on the ground that the signature of the proposer was not genuine.
Yet it had not determined this aspect of the matter.
[27 C] (2) The order of the Returning Officer read as a whole clearly shows that the nomination paper was rejected not only on the ground that the candidate or his proposer was not present but also on the ground that the signature of the proposer on the nomination paper was not genuine.
It is true that the Returning Officer had not given any clear finding on this point but section 47 of the Act did not require a well reasoned decision.
All that was necessary was that the Returning Officer should apply his mind and determine the question in a summary manner.
Even if the ground on which the nomination paper had been actually rejected was not a permissible ground, if the successful candidate could make out a case that the nomination paper could have been properly rejected on one of the grounds mentioned in section 47 the rejection would not be improper and the election would be upheld.
[22 D H] N. T. Veluswami Thevar vs G. Raja Nainar & Ors.
[1959] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 623 followed.
(i) In the instant case the fact that P.W. 4 had stated in his evidence that when the Returning Officer called the name of the petitioner no one on his behalf responded knocks the bottom out of the respondent 's story that the proposer had been instructed to request the Returning Officer to wait or that the Returning Officer had not acceded to his request.
[8 D] (ii) On a perusal of the Returning Officer 's original order it was clear that the entire order had been written in the same ink, with the same pen and appears to have been written in one sitting.
There is nothing to show that the second part of the order was added subsequently because the strokes of the letters, the ink used and the general tenor of the writing are the same throughout.
[20 B] (iii) As regards that portion of the Returning Officer 's order written by him after writing "Hence rejected" his explanation was that while he was writing his order and had not completed the same, objection was taken by the appellant regarding the genuineness of the proposer 's signature and since the clerk had by then put the seal, he had recorded the appellant 's objection in this space left and completed his order and signed above the seal.
This was corroborated by independent witnesses and there is no reason why the Returning Officer should have added a part of the order subsequently.
[20E, 21 A] (iv) The Returning Officer, while indicating the appellant 's objection regarding the genuineness of the signature of the proposer also observed that it was not possible to verify the signature of the proposer in the absence of the candidate as well as the proposer.
Thus the absence of the candidate and the proposer had been used, not for the purpose of rejecting the nomination paper, but for the purpose of supporting the conclusion of the Returning Officer that the signature was not genuine.
[22 F] (v) It has been satisfactorily proved that the signature of the proposer which contained overwriting was not his genuine signature and, therefore, the nomination paper had been properly rejected and the election could not be assailed under section 108(1)(c) of the Act.
From the facts found it was clear that the over writing present in the signature at the time of scrutiny threw considerable doubt on the genuineness of the proposer 's signature.
The fact that the proposer and the respondent were absent at the time of scrutiny lends sufficient support to the inference that the signature of the proposer was not genuine.
[26 C D]
