The appellant, a registered partnership firm, was the managing agent of (he respondent.
After submitting its resignation to the board of directors of the respondent company, the appellant filed a suit claiming a sum of money in accordance with an agreed scheme.
The appellant firm consisted of 5 partners with effect from April 1, 1949, and in addition, a minor was entitled to a 4 anna share in the profits of the partnership but was not liable for the losses.
The minor was represented by his mother as guardian.
On October 24, 1949, another partnership deed was executed wherein the mother was shown as a partner of the appellant firm with a 4 anna share and the minor 's name was omitted.
The respondent contended that the suit was not maintainable.
because the constitution of the old firm had been changed on October 24, 1949, and that the newly constituted firm consisting of 6 partners had not been registered.
The trial court held that the new partnership deed was not acted upon and decreed the suit for a part of the amount claimed.
There were appeals by both sides.
The High Court disagreed with the finding of the trial court that the later partnership deed had not been acted upon and held that the mandatory condition of section 69(2), Indian Partnership Act, was not fulfilled as the name Of the mother.
who was a partner in the reconstituted firm and in whose favour cause of action had accrued, was not shown in the register of firms, and that this defect was fatal to the suit.
Allowing the appellant 's appeal to this Court and remanding the appeal to the High Court for disposal on merits, ^ HELD: The trial court took the correct view of the matter in so far as it held that the later partnership deed was not acted upon and that the mother did not become a partner of the appellant firm.
[1028B] (1) The question as to when it was decided not to act upon the later deed is not material.
The evidence of one of the partners of the appellant firm that it was not acted upon and that the mother was not a partner is admissible and is fully corroborated by the documentary evidence.
It is a statement made by him against his own Pecuniary interest, because, if the mother was a partner, the loss of the other partners would extend only to 12 anna share in the rupee; whereas if she was not a partner then they would have to bear losses to the full extent of 16 annas in the rupee.
[1029G H; 1030H 1031D] (2) In the register relating to the registration of firms kept under the Indian Partnership Act, an entry relating to the registration of the appellant firm dated May 5, 1952.
reveals that even in the year 1952, the stand of the partners of the appellant firm was that the mother was not a partner and that it was only her minor son who was entitled to a share in the profits of the partnership.
[1028G 1029A] (3) In the statement of accounts of the appellant firm it is only the minor that is shown to have a 4 anna share and not his mother.
[1030B C] (4) Applications in connection with the registration of that firm were pre rented to the Income Tax Authorities under section 26A, Indian Income Tax Act, 1922.
All there applications were signed by the mother and they show that the mother never claimed to be a partner of the appellant firm and that, on the contrary.
she acknowledged that it was her minor son who was entitled to the 4 anna share in the profits.
[1029E G] 1023 (5) The directors of the respondent company had passed a resolution in 1950 referring to the two partnership deeds.
But the entry which was made in the register of the respondent company regarding the partners of its managing agents as required by section 87, Indian Companies Act, 1913, shows that after April 1, 1949, there were only 5 partners, besides the minor under the guardianship of his mother of the appellant firm.
If the mother had become a partner since October 24, 1949, it is unlikely that an entry to that effect would not have been made in the register of the defendant company, because, under section 87, a return has to be sent to the Registrar of Firms regarding any change in the particulars required to be contained in the register and non compliance with the requirement would entail imposition of fine.
[1029A E] (6) The letter of resignation sent by the appellant firm was signed by the mother also, but there was no indication whether she signed in her capacity as partner or as the guardian of her minor son.
[1028F G] (7) Soon after the presentation of the suit, on an application under order XXX, r. 2, C.P.C., filed by the respondents, the appellant firm declared the names of its partners and the declaration did not show the mother as one of the partners.
The question as to who should share the profits of the appellant firm and should be otherwise entitled to its assets is essentially a matter for the partners of that firm.
Unlike the case of a defendant firm from which money is claimed where each partner may be personally liable, in the case of the plaintiff (appellant) firm claiming money, it would be a wholly untenable plea for the defendants, from whom money is claimed, to urge that even though the mother as well as other partners claimed that it was not she but her minor son that was entitled to the 4 anna share in the partnership, the Court should hold that it was the mother who was entitled to that share.
[1030C G]
