Section 20(3) of the Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) Act, 1941 provides that the Commissioner, Upon application or of his own motion, may revise why assessment made or order passed under the Act or the Rules thereunder by a person appointed under section 3 to assist him and the Board of revenue may, in like manner, revise any order passed by the Commissioner.
At the time of assessment of the appellant 's sales tax return the Commercial Tax officer enhanced the gross turnover and charged the enhanced amount to tax and in addition imposed a penalty.
On appeal under section 20(1) of the Act, the Assistant Commissioner reduced the enhancement of gross turnover is as well as the penalty.
The appellant filed a revision application before the Commissioner of Commercial Taxes.
Before the filing of revision application, under orders of the Additional Commissioner an enquiry was conducted by a Commercial Tax officer who detected numerous discrepancies of a serious nature in the accounts.
On the basis of this report, the Additional Commissioner enhanced the assessment by a huge sum and charged the entire enhanced amount to tax.
On further revision to the Board of Revenue, the appellant contended that while exercising his power of revision under section 20(3) of the Act, the Commissioner had to confine himself to an examination of the mate rial before the assessing officer and could not take additional facts into consideration which plea was rejected by the Board.
The High Court held that (1) under section 20(3) the Additional Commissioner as competent to reassess the gross turnover by taking into consideration additional material which had not been made available to the assessing officer and (ii) the Additional Commissioner was vested with authority under.
section 20(3) read with r. 80A to rely on the report under section 14(1) initiated long before the filing of the revision petition.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: The Commissioner or Additional Commissioner can.
in exercise of his revisional power, re assess the turnover and while doing so, rope in the escaped items of turnover and thereby enhance the gross turnover [116G] (1) The word "Revise", the dictionary meaning of which is 'to re examine, to review, to correct or to amend the fault", is not hedged or.
qualified by any condition or limitation.
The controlling expressions like "for the purpose of satisfying himself as to the legality or propriety of the order passed ed" or "regularity of flue proceedings" which are susceptible of being construed as restricting the revisional power to rectification of an illegality or impropriety of the order or of ' irregularity in the proceeding are also not be found therein There is also nothing in the Bengal Sales Tax Rules.
1941 to cir circumscribe or limit the power.
It is not, therefore, unreasonable to infer that the amplitude of the power conferred on the Commissioner or the Additional Commissioner is more extensive than the power exercisable by the High Court under section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
It can be eerily equated with the power exercisable be the appellate authority in an appeal under sub.
2 of section 20 of the Act.
[115F H] 111 Indira Sohanlal vs Custodian of Evacuee Property Delhi and Others ; East Asiatic Co. (India) Ltd. vs The State of Madras 7 S.T.C. 299, State of Kerala vs K. M. Cheria Abdulla & Co. [1965] 16 S.T.C. 875, Swastik.
Oil Mills Ltd. vs H. B. Munshi Deputy Commissioner of Sales Tax.
Bombay ; , State of Madras vs The Madura Knitting Co Ltd. (1959) 10 S.T.C. 155, referred to.
Deputy Commissioner of Agricultural Income Tax and Sales Tax , Quilon and Anr.
vs Chanalakshmi Vilas Cashe w Co. (1969) 24 S.T.C. 491, The State of Kerala vs M. Appukutty (1963) 14 S.T.C. 242 and Commissioner.
(of income.
tax, Bombay vs Shapoorji Pallonji Mistry (1962) 44 I.T.R. 891, distinguished.
(2) on a combined reading of section 20(3) and rule 80A of the Rules it is immaterial whether the Commissioner proceeds to make the enquiry before or after tho filing of a revision petition so long he affords to the person likely to be adversely affected by his action an opportunity of being hearer [119 H] In the instant case, the Commercial Tax officer called upon to make on enquiry, gave adequate opportunity to the appellant to explain the discrepancies And the suspicious circumstances, relating to the alleged suppression bn of the turnover and the Additional Commissioner gave notice to the former and furnished him with a full copy of the report.
It cannot be said that the Commercial Tax officer and Additional Commissioner committed any illegality or breach of any statutory provision or rule or transgressed the limits of their jurisdiction.
1120 A C
