Entries in record of rights Presumptive value of Presumption if applies to forged or fraudulent entries Effect of fraud or forgery on a document.
Mahant Bharati of temple of Shankarji Maharaj gave lands belonging to the temple on Theka to one Sukai for a period of 10 years.
The Mahant obtained a decree for eviction against Sukai but it could not be executed because of the objections raised by the respondents on the ground that they have been cultivating the lands for several years and they were entitled to continue in possession as Sirdars in spite of the decree against Sukai.
The lessor, therefore, instituted two separate suits under order 21 Rule 103, C.P.C. Respondents contended inter alia, that they had become hereditary tenants and they must be deemed to have become Adhivasis of the land.
The trial court dismissed the suit.
The district court reversed the finding of the trial court in appeal and held that the appellant being the Bhumidar of the lands was entitled to recover possession thereof from the respondents.
The district Judge held that the entries in the record of rights showing the occupation of the respondents were fraudulent.
The High Court in second appeal upset the decree of the district court.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: (1) The only question before the High Court was whether the entries on which the respondents relied were genuine or fraudulent.
This is as question of fact and the High Court had no jurisdiction to set aside the finding on that question in second appeal.
The High Court erroneously assumed that the district Court had not given any finding on the question of fraud.
The district Court had given at least half a dozen reasons for holding that the entries were fictitious and were made surreptitiously and fraudulently.
[521H; 522A H] (2) If the High Court thought that the district court had not recorded a clear finding on that issue and if the High Court were to determine under section 103 C.P.C. the issue under whether the entries were fraudulent or not it was necessary for it to discuss the evidence.
But, the High Court instead placed blind and easy reliance on the entries which are utterly uninspiring.
[523A B] (3) Entries in the revenue record ought generally to be accepted at their lace value and courts should not embark upon an appellate enquiry into the correctness.
But the presumption of correctness can apply only to genuine, not formed or fraudulent entries.
The distinction may be fine but it is real.
Fraud and forgery rob a document of all its legal effect and cannot found a claim lo possessory title.
[523B C]
