After holding a departmental enquiry on certain charges of contravention of Government Servants ' Conduct Rules, the appellant was reduced in rank.
His suit for a declaration that the impugned action was void and inoperative was dismissed.
The High Court dismissed his appeal.
On appeal, it was contended that the departmental enquiry was vitiated on account of material irregularities, and that, as a result of excessive delay, between the date of hearing and delivery of judgment by the High Court, it did not deal with a number of submissions made by him and thereby caused prejudice.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court, ^ HELD: (1)(a) The question whether the appellant was given a reasonable opportunity to lead evidence and was sufficiently heard or hot is largely a question of fact.
It is only when an opportunity denied is of such a nature that the denial contravenes mandatory provision of law or a rule of natural justice that it could vitiate the whole departmental trial.
Prejudice to the Government servant from an alleged violation of a rule must be proved.[583C] (b) The plea that the appellant had been subjected to trial on allegations which had been the subject matter of previous enquiries overlooks that no charge was framed as a result of any previous enquiry.
If an enquiry was held at a particular stage, possibly to determine whether regular proceedings should be drawn up or started, it did not debar a departmental trial.
[583D] State of Assam & Anr.
vs J. N. Roy Biswas ; and R. T. Rangachari vs Secretary of State, AIR 1937 PC 27, held inapplicable.
(c) It was not shown whether any evidence which the appellant tried to produce was really wrongly excluded and at what stage and for what reasons.
All these are questions of fact which should be raised in the departmental trial.
After that if there was any patent error a writ petition lay.
[584A] (d) A suit challenging a departmental proceeding cannot be treated as an appeal from the findings in those proceedings or against a punishment inflicted upon the Government servant even if these were erroneous.
A question which could affect the result in a civil suit has to be of such a nature that it goes to the root of the jurisdiction that the conduct of the departmental trial illegally and vitiates the result.
It is only if the departmental proceeding is null and void that a plaintiff could obtain the reliefs he had asked for.
[584E F] Smt.
Ujjam Bai vs State of U.P. & Anr.
[1963] 1 S.C.R. 778 @ 835, 836, referred to.
(e) Unless a point could be raised on behalf of an appellant which is capable of vitiating the departmental proceedings there could be no declaration that the departmental proceedings were null and void.
[585H] 581 (2) The Civil Procedure Code does not provide a time limit for the period between the hearing of arguments and the delivery of a judgment.
Nevertheless, an unreasonable delay between the hearing of arguments and delivery of judgment, unless explained by exceptional or extraordinary circumstances, is highly undesirable even when written arguments were submitted.
It is not unlikely that some points which the litigant considered important might have escaped notice.
But, what is more important is that litigants must have complete confidence in the results of litigation.
This confidence tends to be shaken if there excessive delay between hearing of arguments and delivery of judgments.
