The respondent was the tenant of the suit premises and Dilip Narayan Roy Choudhury was his sub tenant.
The tenant instituted a suit against the subtenant when the West Bengal Premises Rent Control (Temporary Provisions) Act, 1950 was in force seeking to evict the sub tenant on the ground that he was a defaulter in payment of rent.
After the suit was instituted.
West Bengal Premises Tenancy Act, 1956, was brought into operation.
Section 40 of the subsequent Act repealed the 1950 Act and further provided that not withstanding the repeal of the said Act any proceedings pending on the date of the repeal may be continued as if the said Act had been in force and had not been repealed or had not expired.
Section 16 of the 1956 Act confers on the sub tenant, on his complying with certain conditions the right to become a tenant directly under the landlord and authorise the Rent Controller to pass necessary orders directing that the sub tenant shall become tenant directly under the landlord from the date of the order.
The sub tenant adopted proceedings under section 16 of the Act against the superior landlord and in February, 1957, the Rent Controller held that the sub tenant was entitled to the declaration asked for over ruling the objections raised by the tenant.
An appeal filed by the tenant against the said order was dismissed.
Thereafter, the sub tenant amended his written statement in the suit for eviction filed by the tenant against him and pleaded that the relationship of the landlord and tenant between the tenant and the sub tenant no longer subsisted.
The Munsiff dismissed the application for eviction filed by the tenant on the ground that in view of he order passed under the 1956 Act declaring the sub tenant to be a direct tenant under the landlord the relationship of landlord and tenant between the parties ceased.
In a revision, the High Court maintained the order rejecting the application for eviction but set aside the finding that the relationship of the landlord and tenant between the tenant and the sub tenant ceased.
The High Court held that in spite of section 40 of the repealing Act, section 16(3) of the Repealing Act must be given effect to.
The High Court, however, took the view that the proceedings under section 16(3) having been initiated during the pendency of the suit the principle of lis pendens would apply and, accordingly, the order under section 16(3) would not govern the suit.
In an appeal by special leave by the heirs of the sub tenant, the counsel for the respondent did not rely on section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act but sought to support the decree on the ground that in view of section 40 of the Repealing Act the entire proceedings under section 16 was without jurisdiction.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: (1) The doctrine of lis pendens can have no application to this case.
The doctrine of lis pendens means that no party to the litigation can alienate the property in dispute so as to affect the other party and rests upon the foundation that it would plainly be impossible that any action or suit could be brought to a successful termination after alienation pendente lite.
Section 596 5 of the Transfer of Property Act defines transfer of property as an act by which a living person conveys property to another.
When the Legislature in exercise of its sovereign powers regulates or alters the rights of landlord and tenant, what it does is not transfer of property attracting the doctrine of lis pendens.
[599B, C F] (2) It is true that in view of section 40 of the Repealing Act a pending proceeding may be continued as if the Repealing Act was not passed.
This, however, does not mean that even if the 1956 Act created a new right in favour of the tenant, he would be denied this right because a suit for ejectment was pending against him when the Act came into force.
The intention of the Legislature, which is paramount, is clear to upgrade the sub tenant and make him a tenant directly under the superior landlord.
A sub tenant is a tenant within the meaning of section 2(h) of the Repealing Act.
Thus, the suit must continue under the 1950 Act but the right acquired by the sub tenant under 1956 Act has to be given effect to and the suit decided accordingly.
Therefore, the relationship of landlord and tenant ceased between the parties on the date when the order under section 16 was made.
[599F H, 600B C]
