The petitioners, who are jagirdars of Marwar, sought to impugn the constitutional validity of sections 81 to 86 of the Marwar Land Revenue Act which embody a scheme for fixing fair and equitable rents payable by cultivating tenants on the ground that they infringed their fundamental rights under articles 14, 19(1)(f) and 31(2) of the Constitution.
Their contentions were that after the merger of Marwar in the State of Rajasthan the Act had become discriminatory as it applied only to the jagirdars of Marwar and not to the entire body of jagirdars of the State of Rajasthan, that settlement of rents made with reference to different areas on different dates on the basis of previous ten years ' average of collections might result in different rates of rent and lead to inequality such as is prohibited by article 14, that the Act deprived the landlords of their right to realise rents from the tenants freely and without hindrance and invaded their right to hold property guaranteed by article 19(1)(f) of the Constitution, that the power conferred on the Settlement Officer by section 86 of the Act to enforce the rates of rent retrospectively is an invasion of their right to hold property and amounts to acquisition of property without compensation and that it confers absolute and uncontrolled discretion on the Settlement Officer and is an encroachment on the right to hold property.
Held, repelling these contentions, that article 14 only prohibits unequal treatment of persons similarly situated and a classification might properly be made on territorial basis, if that was germane to the purposes of the enactment and no tenancy legislation can be held to contravene the article solely on the ground that it does not apply to the entire State.
Before the petitioners could succeed it was 532 incumbent on them to show that conditions obtaining in other parts of the State were similar to those in Marwar and this they had failed to do.
Bowman vs Lewis ; , referred to.
That the provision in the Act for assessment of rents with reference to a portion of the area to which the Act applies is not a contravention of article 14.
To hold otherwise would be to make it impossible for any State to carry on its settlement operation.
Biswambhar Singh vs The State of Orissa and others; , , and Thakur Amar Singhji vs State of Rajasthan, ; , applied.
That the fundamental right to hold property in the case of a, landlord in respect of his tenanted lands is no more than the right to receive reasonable rents and no legislation which has for its object the settlement of fair and equitable rents can contravene article 19 (1)(f) of the Constitution even though it may give such rents retros pective operation.
That the provision in section 86 of the Act empowering the Settlement Officer to give retrospective operation to the rates of rent does not contravene article 19(1)(f) and, therefore, no question as to whether such a provision is not of a regulatory character and as such prohibited by article 19(5) can at all arise.
That it is well settled that a law which regulates the relation of a landlord with his tenant is not one which takes property within the meaning of article 31(2) even though it has the effect of reducing his rights.
Consequently, there is no contravention of article 31(2) of the Constitution.
Thakur Jagannath Baksh Singh vs United Provinces, [1943] 6 F.L.J. 55: A.I.R. 1943 F.C. 29 and Thakur Jagannath Buksh vs United Provinces, L.R. 73 I.A. 123, relied on.
That section 86 of the Act does not confer an absolute and uncon trolled discretion on the Settlement Officer and such power as it gives does not constitute an encroachment on the right to hold property within the meaning of article 19(1)(f) of the Constitution.
Thakur Baghubir Singh vs Court of Wards, Ajmer and another; , , explained and distinguished.
