The respondent was convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for life by a court in the State of Madhya Pradesh.
At his request he was transferred to a jail in the State of Punjab, to which State he belonged.
He applied to the Government of Punjab that under the Punjab Jail Manual he is entitled to be released since he had completed more than 20 years of imprisonment.
The application was sent to the Government of Madhya Pradesh, which rejected it.
In a writ petition filed by him the High Court of Punjab and Haryana held that the State of Punjab was the appropriate authority to release him and directed the State of Punjab to consider the matter.
In appeal to this Court, the State of Madhya Pradesh contended: (i) that since the sentence was of imprisonment for life, it would not expire automatically at the expiry of ' 20 years including remissions: and (ii) that as the prisoner was convicted by a court in the State of Madhya Pradesh the appropriate Government the exercise discretion under sections 401 and 402 Cr.
P.C. was the State of Madhya Pradesh and not the State of Punjab., Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: The High Court was in error in holding that the respondent was entitled to be released as of right on completing the term of 20 years including remissions.
[556] Gopal Vinayak Godse vs State of Maharashtra and Others, ; and Pandit Kishori Lal vs King Emperor, L.R. 72 I.A.1, followed.
(1) A sentence of imprisonment for life does not automatically expire at the end of 20 years including remissions because the administrative rules framed under the various Jail Manuals or under the Prisons Act cannot supersede the statutory provisions of the Indian Penal Code.
A sentence of imprisonment for life means a sentence for the entire life of the prisoner unless the appropriate Government chooses to exercise its discretion to remit either the whole or a part of the sentence under section 401 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
[559G] (2) The appropriate Government has the discretion to remit or refuse to remit the sentence and where it refuses to remit the sentence no writ can be issued directing the State Government to release the prisoner.
[560A] (a) The appropriate Government which is empowered to grant remission under section 401 of the Code of Criminal Procedure is the Government of the State where the prisoner had been convicted and sentenced, that is, the transferor State and not the transferee State where the prisoner may have been transferred at his instance under the Transfer of Prisoners Act.
[56B] (b) Where the transferee State feels that the accused had complected a period of 20 years it has merely to forward the request of the prisoner to the Government of the State where the prisoner was convicted and sentenced and if this request was rejected by the State Government the order of the Government cannot be interfered with by a High Court in its writ jurisdiction.
[550D] 553 [Since the respondent was released in pursuance of the order of the High Court, the release order was allowed to stand.]
