Schedule II, Article 11 of the Court Fees prescribes a sum of Rs. 2/ as court fees in the case of a memorandum of appeal presented to a High Court when the appeal is not from a decree or order having the force of a decree.
The Tribunal appointed under the dismissed the petition filed by the appellant claiming certain sums from the respondents.
In appeal to the High Court from the decision of the Tribunal did not amount to a decree within the meaning of section 2(2) of the Code of Civil Procedure.
The taxing Judge, to whom question of payment of court fees was referred, came to the conclusion that the appellant should pay ad valorem court fees under Schedule I, Article 1 of the Court Fees Act.
On the question whether the decision of the Tribunal was a decree within the meaning of section 2(2) C.P.C. Allowing the appeal to this Court, ^ HELD: The memorandum of appeal in the instant case falls within the ambit of Schedule II, Article 11 of the Court Fees Act and the view of the taxing Judge that ad valorem court fees were payable under Schedule I Article 1 was legally erroneous.
[683C] (1) (a) In the definition of "decree" contained in section 2(2) of the Code of Civil Procedure, three essential conditions are necessary: (i) that the adjudication must be given in suit; (ii) that the suit must start with a plaint and culminate in a decree; and (iii) that the adjudication must be formal and final and must be given by a civil or revenue court.
[677E F] Under the 1951 Act, special Tribunal was created to enquire into the claims of displaced debtors or creditors.
It cannot be called a court in any sense of the term because the legislature had made a clear distinction between a Tribunal and a courts.
Secondly, since proceedings before a Tribunal statute with an application and not with a plaint the other important ingredient of a decree is wholly wanting.
Thirdly the claim before the Tribunal had been described as a preceding rather than a suit.
Therefore, none of the requirements of a decree is to be found in the decision given by the Tribunal even though the legislature may have described the decision given by the Tribunal even though the legislature may have described the decision as a decree.
A mere description of the decision of the Tribunal as a decree does not make it a decree within the meaning of the Court Fees Act.
[677G H] (b) The term "decree" used in Schedule II, Article 11, is referable to a decree as defined in section 2(2) of the Code of Civil Procedure.
As the decision of the Tribunal in the instant case does not fulfil the requirements of a decree, 665 it is not a decree within the meaning of Schedule II, Article 11 of the Court Fees Act.
[678D] Mannan Lal vs Mst.
Chhotaka Bibi ; Ram Prasad vs Tirloki Nath, ; Dawood Karim Ashrafi vs City Improvement Board.
; Antala Gope vs Sarbo Gopain, AIR [1962] Pat. 489; Mrs. Panzy Fernadas vs Mrs. M. F. Cusoros & others AIR [1963] All. 153; Dundoppa vs
S G. Motor Transport Company.
AIR [1966] Mys,. 150; Irshad Husain vs Bakshish Hussain ; Harrish Chandra Chatteree vg.
Bhaoba Tarini Debi, 8 C.W.N. 321; Taxing Officer, High Court Appellate side vs Jamnadas Dharamdas ILR ; Barras vs Aberdeen Steam Trawling and Fishing Company ; 411; Parmanand Lokumal and others vs Khudabadi Bhaibund Co operative Credit Bank Ltd. and others, AIR [1958] Raj. 146; The Punjab National Bank Ltd. vs The American Insurance Company Ltd. ILR and section Sohan Singh vs Liverpool and London and Globe Insurance Co. Ltd. AIR , referred to.
Parmanand Lokumal and others vs Khudabadi Bhaibund Co opertive Credit Bank Ltd. and others, AIR [1958] Cal.
675; Punjab National Bank Ltd. vs Firm Isardas Kaluram AIR ; Kishandas vs Parasram AIR and Sita Ram vs Mool Chand, ,. not approved.
(c) Where a legislature uses an expression bearing a well known legal connotation it must be presumed to have used the said expression in the sense in which it has been so understood.
Therefore, when the Court Fees Act uses the word "decree" which had a well known legal significance, the legislature must be presumed to have use this term in the sense in which it is which it is understood in the Civil Procedure Code.[678F; 679B] Barras vs Aberdeen Steam Trawling and Fishing Company ; , 411.
referred to.
There is no force in the contention of the respondent that under section 5 of the Court Fees Act the decision of the taxing Judge was final and could not be re opened in any court and as such no appeal under Article 136 was maintainable.
Even though the order of the taxing Judge may be final under section 5, the power of this Court under Article 136 will over ride any stamp of finality given by a statute.
The finality under section 5 cannot derogate from the power conferred by the Constitution on the Supreme Court.
[683E] section Rm Ar.
section Sp.
Satheppa Chettiar vs section Rm.
Ramanathan Chettiar , held inapplicable.
