The two appellants and three others were tried by the Additional Sessions Judge, Nellore, under Ss. 147, 148, 302/149 and 302/34 I.P.C. for having committed the murder of Venugopal Reddy.
The Session Judge recorded the prosecution evidence, heard the arguments, and acquitted the accused, holding that the prosecution had failed to prove the case against them.
On appeal by the State under Sec.
417 Cr.
P.C. the High Court reversed the acquittal order in respect of the appellants and convicted them under Sec.
302/34 l.
P.C solely on the basis of a dying declaration allegedly made by the deceased before a Magistrate.
In the present appeal filed under Sec.
2A of the Supreme Court (Enlargement of Criminal Appellate Jurisdiction) Act of 1970, it was contended before this Court firstly that the High Court had wrongly interfered with an order of acquittal in a case where two views are possible, and secondly, that the dying declaration was not a voluntary or true disclosure but was the result of tutoring and prompting.
Allowing the appeal the Court, ^ HELD: ( 1 ) The Magistrate appears to have committed a serious irregularity in not putting a direct question to the injured whether he was mentally capable of making any statement.
The doctor 's certificate that the deceased was in fit state of mind to make statement by itself would not be sufficient to dispel the doubts created particularly by the omission by the Magistrate, when he was satisfied that the injured was suffering severe pain and was not able to speak normally.
[550A B, E F] Khushal Rao vs State of Bombay ; , followed.
Harbans Singh & Anr.
vs State of Punjab, [1962] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 104.
Lallubhai Dev Chand Shah vs State of Gujarat and Tapinder Singh vs State of Punjab ; , referred to.
(2) Even if the High Court was in a position to take a view different from the one taken by the Sessions Judge on the same evidence, this would not be a ground for reversing the order of acquittal.
Thus as two views were possible, the High Court was in error in disturbing the order
