The appellant company carried on the business of manufacture, storage and sale of liquors Between June 1967 and April 1969 it transported various quantities of liquor from its distilleries in Uttar Pradesh to its bonded warehouse at Chandigarh On arrival the consignments were examined by the Officer in Charge of the warehouse and a shortage was found exceeding the wastage allowance permissible under rule 8 of the Punjab Bonded Warehouse Rules 1957 and April 1969, it Transported various quantities of liquor from its distilleries in Uttar Pradesh to its bonded warehouse at Chandigarh.
On arrival, the consignments were examined by the Officer in Charge of the warehouse, and a shortage was found, exceeding the wastage allowance permissible under rule of the Punjab Bonded Warehouse Rule, 1957.
The Excise and Taxation Commissioner, exercising the power of the Financial Commissioner, issued a show cause notice and then ordered the appellant to pay duty on the wastage in excess.
The appellant 's petitions to the High Court under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution, were dismissed.
It was contended before this Court, firstly that Rules 8 and 9 of the 1957 Rules under which the duty was sought to be imposed, were ultra vires the rule making power of the Financial Commissioner, and secondly, that these rules were invalid as they went beyond the scope of Ss. 16, 23 and 31 and Entry 51 List II, 7th Schedule of the Constitution, by imposing excise duty or counter vailing duty on articles which neither existed in the State nor were removed from the warehouse.
Dismissing the appeals the Court, ^ HELD .
(1) The impugned rules do not impose any duties or prescribe the rates thereof or create `any liability in respect thereof.
They are in essence and substance of a regulatory character rent to guard against perpetration of fraud or deception on the revenue.
They provide for and regulate the storage and subsequently the Removal of liquor from the bonded warehouse, on payment or otherwise of the duty which is chargeable under the Fiscal Rules of 1937, issued be the State Government.
The power exercised by the Financial Commissioner were clearly available to him under Sections 59 and 22 of the Act and he has not overstepped the same.
1513G H; 514A] (2) According to Section 31 of the Act read with Entry 51 of list II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, countervailing duty can be imposed on liquor meant for consumption which is manufactured or produced elsewhere in India.
It is immaterial whether the liquor of which permits were obtained was consumed within the union territory of Chandigarh or was in existence in that territory or not.
Duty is sought to be charged on liquor which was actually manufactured and left Uttar Pradesh but was found short beyond the permissible limit and no reasonable explanation was tendered by the appellant in respect thereof.
[517D G] Kalyoni Stores vs The State of Orissa & ors.
[1966] I S.C.R. 865 referred to.
