The appellant and respondent No. 8 applied for the vacant post of Professor of Anthropology in the Faculty of Arts, in answer to an advertisement put up by the Lucknow University.
A selection committee of five persons including three experts, interviewed them and recommended respondent No. 8 for the post.
The appellant 's writ petition challeng ing the recommendation was dismissed by the High Court.
The appellant contended before this Court that two of the expert members of the selection committee were unduly biased against him and in favour of respondent No. 8.
The appeal was contested on two grounds.
Firstly, that by submitting to the jurisdiction of the selection committee, the appellant had waived his right to denounce its constitution and sec ondly, that the impugned recommendation being an interlocu tory proceeding against which remedies were available, the writ petition was not maintainable.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, HELD: 1.
Despite the fact that the appellant knew all the relevant facts,he seems to have voluntarily appeared before the committee and taken a chance of having a favourable recommendation from it Having done so it is no now open to him to turn round and question the constitution of the committee.[70 A B] Manak Lal vs Prem Chand ; 1957 S.C. 425, applied.
Linahan 650; A. K. Karipak vs Union of India ; Nageshwar Rao vs State of A.P. ; 1959 SC 1376; section Partha rarathi vs State of Andhra Pradesh ; Farooq Ahmad Bandey and Ors.
vs Principal Regional Engineering College & Anr.
[1975] I&K L.R. 427; Principles of Adminis trative Law by I.A.G. Griffith and H. Street (4th edition) and Judicial Review of Administrative Action ' (3rd Edition) by Prof. S.A. De Smith, referred to. 2.
The recommendation of the selection committee has still to be scrutinised by the Executive Council of the University and either accepted or rejected by and other remedies by way of representation to the executive council and an application for reference of the matter under section 68 of the Uttar Pradesh Universities (Reenactment and Amendment) Act, 1974, to the Chance or are till open to the appellant and have not been exhausted The writ petition or he present appeal before us is not maintainable.
[70 C D]
