Section 284 (1) of Chapter VI of the Bombay Provincial Municipal Corporations Act, 1949, as applied in Gujarat, provides that if the Corporation is satisfied that within any area in any part of a city under the Act it is expedient to provide housing accommodation for the poorer classes, it shall cause such area to be defined on a plan and pass a resolution authorising the Commissioner and the Commissioner shall thereupon be empowered to provide such accommodation.
Section 284J(a) provides that the Commissioner may, for such purposes, acquire any land including any buildings thereon.
Section 284K( 1 ) provides that the Commissioner may, with the sanction of the Standing Committee, be authorised to acquire the land by means of a compulsory acquisition order made and submitted to the State Government and confirmed by it in accordance with the provisions of Schedule C to the Act; and section 284K(3) provides that the provisions of Schedule B to the Act shall have effect with respect to the validity and date of operation of the compulsory acquisition order.
Clause 2, Schedule C, provides that before submitting the order to the State Government the Commissioner has to pub lish the order in the Official Gazette and in three or more newspapers.
The Commissioner has also to serve on persons specified in el.
2(b) notices calling for objections etc.
Clause 3 provides that upon compliance with the provisions of cls.
1 and 2 the Commissioner shall submit to the Stand ing Committee any objections received under el. 2 and any suggestions he may wish to make in that respect.
Under cl. 4, the Standing Committee shall, after consideration of any such objections and suggestions, make such modification in respect of such order as it may think fit and the Commis sioner shall thereafter submit the order, as modified by the Standing Committee, to the State Government for confirma tion.
Clause 2 of Schedule B provides for an appeal to a Judge of the City Civil Court in Ahmedabad and elsewhere to a Judge of the District Court against the order of acquisi tion confirmed by the State Government.
Section 284N refer entially incorporates in the Bombay Act certain provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, as detailed in Appendix I to the Bombay Act.
Accordingly all the sections in Part H of the Land Acquisition Act, except section 4(1), section 6 and section 17(2) are bodily incorporated in the Bombay Act.
Hence, section 5A of the Land Acquisition Act, which provides for personal hearing of the objectors to an acquisition, forms part of the Bombay Act.
In pursuance of the authority of the Corporation of the City of Ahmedabad the Commissioner passed an order of com pulsory acquisition under s.284J. published it in the Offi cial Gazette and in local newspapers, and served individual notices on the concerned parties.
The appellants, who objected to the acquisition were however, not given any personal hearing by the Commissioner inspite of a request by them.
The Commissioner submitted the objections with his suggestions, to the Standing Committee, and the Committee approved the order of compulsory acquisition.
The State Government thereafter confirmed the order.
The appellants preferred an appeal to the City Civil Court on the basis, inter alia, of the denial of personal hearing to them; but the Court held that the principles of natural justice were satisfied, and the High Court confirmed the order of the City Civil Court.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, 72 HELD: Section 5A, Land Acquisition Act, is applicable in the present case.
It is not a case of failure of the rules of natural justice but one of noncompliance with the manda tory provision in section 5A; and since no personal hearing had been given to the appellants by the Commisisoner, the order of acquisition, and the confirmation by the State Government are invalid.
[78 G H] (1) The incorporated provisions of the Land Acquisition Act are subject to the provisions of Chap.
XVI of the Bombay Act; that is, if there is any inconsistency between a provi sion in Chap.
XVI of the Bombay Act, and that of the Land Acquisition Act, the former will prevail.
But there is no express provision of the Chapter ousting the application of section 5A of the Land Acquisition Act.
[76 D E] (2) Schedule C does not, even by necessary implication, rule out the right to personal hearing.
On the other hand, since the Standing Committee is entitled to have the Commis sioner 's properly considered suggestions which may enable it even to modify the order of acquisition, it is necessary that the Commissioner gives a personal hearing to the objec tors before he makes his suggestions worthy in the context of the objections lodged, for otherwise, his.
suggestions will be devoid of much practical utility to Committee.
[77 C D] (3) The appeal provided for under Schedule B is not a substitute for the right to personal hearing.
The applica bility of section 5A is therefore not impliedly ousted by the provision for appeal.
[78 D] The appeal contemplated under Schedule B is only with regard to the, examination of two aspects, namely, whether the order or approval of the plan is within the powers of the Bombay Act; and whether the interests of the appellant have been substantially prejudiced by any requirement of the Bombay Act not having been complied with.
But there may be other relevant objections which a person may be entitled to take before the Commissioner when the whole matter is at large, such as, that the land is not suitable for the par ticular purpose, that he himself belongs to a poor class and would suffer disadvantage by the acquisition, or that there is a good alternative land available which can be acquired without causing inconvenience to the occupants of land sought to be acquired.
Hence, a personal hearing is neces sary.
The appellate court is not required to entertain such objections in view of its truncated scope and,, even assum ing that all such objections could be entertained by it, the duty of hearing objections under the Bombay Act is of the Commissioner and he alone can hear them and not a Judge of the Civil Court.
The acquisition order must be a valid order and the question of appeal arises only after, confir mation of such an order by the State Government.
[77 G H; 78 A D] Shri Mandir Sita Ramji vs Lt. Governor of Delhi, ; referred to.
(4) Merely because under section 284N(4) of the Bombay Act, the acquisition is treated to be under section 17(1), Land Acqui sition Act, and since section 17(4) is also applicable it could not be said that section 5A is excluded by necessary implication; because, even under section 17(4) of the Land Acquisition Act the appropriate Government has to direct, in a case of urgency, that the provisions of section 5A shall not apply.
There is no automatic exclusion of the section even under the Land Acquisition Act.
[78 E F] (5) If the order of acquisition is, at inception in valid, its invalidity cannot be cured by its approval by the Standing Committee or by its confirmation by the State Government.
[79 A] (6) The end does not always justify the means, and even beneficial schemes under welfare legislation have to be executed in accordance with the appropriate law.
It is no answer that the object of the scheme is such that it justi fies the implementer of the law to be absolutely oblivious of the manner of enforcement even though the manner is an integral part of the scheme, imposing under law, restric tions on the rights of individuals.
[79 C] [Beneficial laws have to be simple and self contained.
The introduction of provisions of another Act referentially in vital matters creates avoidable difficulties and Irrigation.
[79 D]
