Section 5 of the , authorises the levy of duty upon all property which passes on the death of a person.
Section 9 provides that property taken under a disposition made by the deceased purporting to operate as an immediate gift whether by way of transfer, delivery etc., which shall not have been bona fide made two years or more before the death of the deceased shall be deemed to pass on the death.
Explanation 2 to section 2(15), which defines 'prope rty ', provides that the extinguishment at the expense of the deceased of a debt or other rights shall be deemed to have been a disposition made by the deceased in favour of the person for whose benefit the debt or right was extinguished and in relation to such a disposition the expression 'property ' shall include the benefit conferred by the extin guishment of a debt or right.
Section 27 deems all disposi tions made by the deceased person in favour of his relations as gifts, for the purposes of the Act, unless such disposi tion was made for full consideration or the deceased was concerned in a fiduciary capacity with the property.
A member of a joint Hindu family, within two years before his death entered into a partition of family proper ties bona fide, not as a colourable or sham transaction, whereby, he received towards his share an allotment substan tially lower in value than would be his legal entitlement, with a view to relieve himself of a part of his wealth and 7 3 who is a relative within the meaning of the Act.
HELD: The relative, as the accountable person under the Act, is liable to pay estate duty, on the difference between the share that the deceased was legally entitled to and the share that the deceased actually took, that is, to the extent of the benefit received by the accountable per son.
[14 G, 12 .A.] (1) Death duties are imposed on richer estates, the fiscal policy being, (a) collection of revenue, and (b) reduction of the quantum of inheritance on a progressive basis towards equalisation by diminishing glaring dispari ties of wealth.
Therefore, the Act uses words of the widest import, legal fictions and deeming devices to.
rope in all kinds of dealings with property for inadequate or no consid eration within the statutory proximity of death.
If the words, however cannot apply to a particular species of property, courts.
cannot supply words to fulfil the unex pressed wishes of the legislature.
In a taxing statute one has to look merely at what is clearly said.
There is no room for any intendment.
There is no equity about a tax.
[13 D] (2) The definition of 'property ' in section 2(15) has to inform and must be read along with sections 9 and 27.
It is not a substantive rule of law operative by itself.
Similarly, the expression 'disposition ' in section 9 must be read with the definition in Explanation 2 to section 2(15) since that is the whole purpose of a 'deeming provision ' is the shape of a definition.
[17 B C] 3 1003 SC1/76 10 (3) The definition of 'property ' in section 2(15) is not exhaustive but only inclusive and the supplementary opera tion of Explanation 2 takes in what is not conventionally regarded as 'disposition '.
The expression "other right" in the Explanation is of the widest import and cannot be read ejusdem generis with 'debt '.
The process of extinguishment of a right and the creation of a benefit thereby is statuto rily deemed to be a disposition in the nature of a transfer.
Therefore, the definition of 'disposition ' covers the diminution in the share taken by one coparcener and augmentation of the share taken by the other and impresses the stamp of property on this process by the deeming provi sion.
[18 F G; 19 C] (4) The case of Getti Chettiar [(1971) dealt with the expression 'transfer of property ' in section 2(xxiv) of the Gift Tax Act, 1958.
This Court held that 'transaction ' 7 3 and it must be a 'transfer ' of property; and that since a partition is not a transfer in the ordinary sense of law, a mere partition with unequal allotments cannot be covered by section 2(xxiv).
But the language of Explanation 2 to section 2(15) of the is different and wider and so the reasoning of this case cannot control its amplitude.
[20 C] (5) This Court in Kancharla Kesava Rao [(1973) placed on 'disposition ' in section 24 of the the same interpretation as was put in the case of Getti Chettiar.
But, whatever might be the interpretation of 'disposition ' in section 24, under section 27, a disposition in favour of a relative not for full consideration, shall be treated as a gift and under section 9 if the disposition made by the deceased is more than 2 years before death, the property covered thereby shall not pass on the death unless it shaH: not have been bona fide to say, even if the transaction were more than 2 years before the death, if it were entered into in bad faith, estate duty may Still attach to that property.
But so far as dispositions made within two years of the death of the deceased are concerned there is no question of mala fides or, bona fides, and all such transactions would be liable to estate duty.
[22 G; 23 F G] Valliammi Achi , approved.
In re.
Stration 's Disclaimer applied.
Grimwade vs Federal Commissioner of Taxation ; referred to.
[Principles for awarding costs in matters of general public importance where there is conflict in the High Courts on a question of Law, reiterated.]
