The proviso (v) to section 3(1) of the Bihar Electricity Duty Act, 1948 provided that no duty shall be leviable on units of energy consumed by, or in respect of, or sold for con sumption in any mine or industrial undertaking except to the extent specified in the Second Schedule.
In 1963 section 3 of the Act was amended and a new section 3 was.
substituted for the old section 3.
Sub section (2)(e) of the new section states that no duty shall be leviable on units of energy consumed by the Damodar Valley Corporation for the generation, trans mission or distribution of electricity by that Corporation.
Item A of the First Schedule, as amended in 1963 states that for a mine or an industrial undertaking the duty leviable shall be at such rate or rates not exceeding 2 naya paise per unit of energy fixed by the State Government with, the previous consent of the president.
The Amending Act re ceived the assent of the President.
In response to notices issued by the Superintendent of Commercial Taxes calling upon the appellant to pay elec tricity duty under the Act as amended, the appellant contended that it enjoyed immunity from payment of tax under cl.
(1) of article 288 of the Constitution, no law satisfying the requirement of cl.
(2) of article 288.
having been made.
warranting the levy of such duty.
The High Court dismissed the appellant 's writ petition.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court, HELD: (1) What is required by cl.
(2) of article 288 is that the law made by the State legislature for imposing, or authorising the imposition of tax mentioned in cl.
(1) shall have effect only if (i) after having been reserved for the consideration of the President, it receives his assent, and (ii) that if such law provides for the fixation of the rates and other incidents of such tax by means of rules or orders to be made under the law by any authority, the law shall provide for ,the previous consent of the, President being obtained to the making of any such rule or order.
It is, however, not the effect of that clause that even if these two requirements are satisfied, the provisions which merely deal with the mode and manner of the payment of the tax should also receive the assent of the President and that in the absence of such, assent, the provisions dealing with the incidence of tax, which have received the assent of the President, would remain unenforceable.
[123 H; 124 A B] (2) The contention of the appellant that the amending Act did not contemplate or contain any indication regarding the, imposition of electricity duty upon the appellant is plain ly, untenable, for it would have the effect of rendering section 3(2)(e) to be wholly redundant.
Under proviso (v) to section 3(1) of the Principal Act, mines and industrial undertakings were exempt from levy of duty.
This exemption stood with drawn as a result of substitution of new section 3 for the old section by the amending Act.
The new charging section 3(1) roped in all industrial undertakings, including the Damodar Valley Corporation, for the purpose of levy of duty.
Section 3(2)(e), introduced by the Amending Act of 1963, expressly granted exemption from levy of electricity duty on units of energy consumed by the appellant for the, generation, transmission or distribution of electricity by that Corpora tion.
This provision, containing express reference to the appellant Corporation, dearly warrants the inference that in respect of units of energy not covered by section 3(2)(e) the exemption would not be available to the appellant.
[123 A B] 119 (3) There is no substance in the contention that unless section 4 of the principal Act was also re enacted with the assent of the President, the liability for payment of duty cannot be fastened upon the appellant.
Section 3 of the Amending Act which deals with the incidence of duty makes it clear that such duty has to, be paid on the units of energy consumed or sold and at the rate or rates specified in the schedule.
As the duty is to be levied on the units of energy consumed or sold, it would follow that the duty would have to be paid by the consumer or seller as the case may be.
Section 4 of the.
principal Act merely provides for the manner and mode of payment of the duty.
[123 F G]
