While assessing the income of the assessee under the head 'property ' the Income Tax Authorities allowed for one year.
deduction of a part of a large sum of unrealised rent but rejected the claim for exclusion of the remainder during the three subsequent assessment years.
Before the Tribunal the authorities contended that no deduction could be claimed by the assessee for more than one assessment year.
The Tribu nal held that to the extent the irrecoverable rent had not been exempted in the previous assessment year, should be exempted in the subsequent years from the income from property of the assessee.
The High Court answered the refer ence in favour of the assessee.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court, HELD: There is no reason why the assessee should become disentitled claim the benefit of the exemption in respect of the balance of the irrecoverable rent in subsequent years subject to the condition that in no 'year the deduction would exceed the amount of rent payable for a year.
[206 B] Section 9 of the Indian Income Tax Act, 1922 provides for computation of income from property on a notional basis.
While computing the income from the property the tax Author ities have to take into account its bona fide annual value.
The fact that the rent due from the tenant had become irre coverable would be known only in subsequent years.
Section 9(1) of the Act does not deal with deductions in respect of irrecoverable rent.
Item 38 in Notification No. 878F dated March 21, 19.22 exempts from, payment of tax such part of the income in respect of which tax is payable under the head 'property ' as is equal to the amount of rent payable for a year but not paid by a tenant of the assessee and so proved to be lost and irrecoverable.
[205 B D] The underlying object of the exemption granted by item 38 is that the assessee shall be entitled to claim deduction under the head 'property ' in respect of the notional rental income which, it subsequently so transpires, was never received by him but on which he had to pay tax.
Although item 38 fixes the limit of deduction which is permissible in one year, there is nothing in the language of that item to warrant the inference that the benefit of the exemption can be claimed only once.
There is also nothing in the language of that item to indicate that in respect of the balance of the irrecoverable rent.
no relief is permissible even though tax on that balance amount too had been paid by the asses see.
[208 C D] Daljit Singh vs Commissioner of Income tax, Delhi, not approved.
