The petitioners who carried on their business as stage carriage operators of Madhya Pradesh for a considerable number of years challenged the constitutional validity of the C.P. & Berar Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1947 (Act III of 1948) which amended the (Central Act IV of 1939) and conferred extensive powers on the Provincial Government including the power to create a monopoly of the motor transport business in its favour to the exclusion of all motor transport operators.
In exercise of the powers conferred by new section 43(1)(iv) a notification was issued on the 4th of February, 1955, declaring the intention of the Government to take up certain routes.
The case of the petitioners was that the passing of the Constitution and the grant of fundamental rights rendered the Act void under article 13(1) being inconsistent with the provisions of articles 19(1)(g) and 31(2), and reliance was placed on the decision.
of the Supreme Court in Shagir Ahmad vs The State of U.P. & others.
On behalf of the respondents it was contended that although as a result of the said decision the impugned Act was rendered void, the Constitution (First 'Amendment) Act, 1951, and the Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1955, bad the effect of removing the inconsistency and the Amending Act (III of 1948) became operative again.
It was, however, contended on behalf of the petitioners that the impugned Act being void under article 13(1) was dead and could not be revivified by any subsequent amendment of the Constitution.
It must be re enacted.
Held that Shagir Ahmad 's case had no application and the contentions put forward by the respondents were well founded and must be accepted.
That it is well settled: that the word 'void ' In article 13 means void to the extent of the inconsistency with a fundamental right and the language of the article makes it clear that the entire operation of an inconsistent Act is not wiped out.
It applies to past transactions and the rights and liabilities accruing therefrom and continues even after the commencement of the Constitution to apply to non citizens.
Keshavan Madhava Menon vs The State of Bombay [1961] S.C.R. 288, relied on.
The true effect of article 13(1) is to render an Act, inconsistent with a fundamental right, inoperative to the extent of the 'inconsistency.
It is overshadowed by the fundamental right ' and remains dormant but is not dead.
With the amendment made in cl.
(6) of article 19 by the first Amendment Act the provisions of the impugned Act were no longer inconsistent therewith and the result was that the impugned Act began to operate once again from the date of such amendment with this difference that, unlike amended clause (2) of article 19 which was expressly made retrospective, no rights and obligations could be founded on the provisions of the impugned Act from the date of the Commencement of the Constitution till the date of the amendment.
The notification declaring the intention of the State to take over the bus routes to the exclusion of all other motor transport operators was, therefore, perfectly valid.
Shagir Ahmad vs The State of U.P. & Others, ; and Behram Khurshed Pesikaka vs The State of Bombay, [1965] 1 S.C.R. 613, distinguished and held inapplicable.
American authorities held inapplicable.
Nor can the impugned Act, on a parity of reasoning be held to infringe, any longer the fundamental rights of the petitioners under article 31(2) in view of the amendment effectd there in by the Constituation (Fourth Amendment) Act of 1956 which came into force on the 27th April, 1955, these petitions having been filed thereafter, and the petitioners could not be allowed to challenge the validity of the impugned Act on that ground.
Semble.
It is not clear at all that the impugned Act was in conflict with section 299 of the Government of India Act, 1935, before the advent of the Constitution.
