Section 22B of the Electricity Act, 1910, authorises the: State Government if it is of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient so to do for maintaining the supply and securing equitable distribution of energy to provide by an order for regulating the supply, distribution, consump tion or use of the electricity.
Section 18 of the Electricity Supply.
Act, 1948 provides that it shall the duty of the Board to provide electricity as soon as practicable to persons requiring such supply.
Under section 49 subject to the provisions.
of the Act and the regulations if any made, the Board may supply elec tricity to any person upon such terms and conditions as the Board thinks fit.
It further provides that in fixing the tariffs and terms and conditions for the supply of electric ity the Board shall not show undue preference to any person.
Under the prescribed agreement the Board is given unilateral right to vary from time to time the terms and conditions of supply under the agreement by special or general proceedings.
The State Government made an order under section 22B provid ing that the maximum demand limit will he 75 per cent of the average monthly maximum demand over a certain period.
It further provided that the supply to consUmers who violated the restrictions was liable to be cut off without notice.
Without prejudice to the right to disconnect the supply the Board was also authorised to bill the energy and maximum demand utilised in excess of the limits prescribed at double the tariff rates.
The order of the State Government was occasioned because the water position in the Hydro Electric Reservoirs in the State became very unsatisfactory because of failure of monsoon.
Secondly, sufficient power was not available to meet the needs of the State and thirdly it became necessary to conserve available water with a view to ensure regular and uniform supply of electrical energy during the coming months.
The State Electricity Board fixed quotas for consump tion because power generated was not adequate to meet the requirements.
An extra charge for consumption of energy beyond the limits of quotas was also introduced by the Board.
The Board further cut the quota and enhanced the extra charges.
Thereafter, the Board passed an order increasing the power cuts at different percentage in different industries.
The Board also increased charges to be paid for the excess consumption.
This action of the Board was necessitated because of great depletion of levels in the Hydel reservoirs and because no assistance was forthcoming from the neigh bouring States and because there was a heavy increase of agricultural loads.
The appellants filed writ petitions in the High COurt praying for a writ or direction that the respondent should be ordered not to collect from the appellants more than normal charges for consumption of electricity and not to disconnect their supply and for a declaration that the restrictions with regard to the imposition of quota and the levy of penalty charges was illegal.
134 The High Court held that the Board has power to fix quotas or otherwise to restrict consumption of electrical energy and collect charges at 4 times the normal rates.
The appellants obtained special leave limited to the question whether under section 22B of the Electricity Act, 1910 ', it is open to the Board to reduce the supply to anything less than 75 per cent and levy extra charges for excess supply.
In an appeal by special leave the appellants contended: 1.
Section 22B of 1910 Act empowers the State Govt.
to control the distribution and consumption of energy.
The State Government exercised its powers and reduced the quota to 75%.
Therefore, any further reduction by the Board would be ille gal.
Section 49 of the 1948 Act does not confer power on the Board to effect rationing of supply because that would involve excessive delegation of legislative power.
There is no guideline in section 49.
to reduce the supply and therefore, section is bad.
In the alternative, the contention was that unless the Board made regulations under section 79(j) it could not ration the supply in exercise of powers under section 49. 4.
The Board cannot fix different percentages of cuts in the supply to different consumers nor can the Board impose penalty.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD .
: (1) Section 49 which requires the Board not to show undue preference to any person embodies the principle enumerated in Article 14 of the Constitution.
It is the principle of equity or non discrimination.
However, it is fairly settled that equality before law does not mean that the things which were different will be treated as though they were the same.
It does not mean an economical equal treatment.
It would be justifiable to treat different industries and institutions with reference to their urgencY, social utility and also the impact on the conservation and economies in the available supply of electric power.
[142 B E] (2) The recognition of the fact that the Board can introduce rationing by making a regulation under section 79(j) of the 1948 Act necessarily involves a concession that the Board has a power to enforce rationing and to enunciate the principle and scheme.
of such rationing.
The making of a regulation is not a new source of power but is the exercise of power which exists.
The language of section 48 " 'if any" shows that the power can be exercised without making any regulation.
The powers conferred on the State Government under section 22B do not exhaust the power of the Board under section 49 of the 1948 Act.
There is no conflict in the existence of power at different levels.
The higher authority may have the power to override the order of the lower authoritY. Powers under section 22B of the 1910 Act and section 49 ' of the 1948 Act may have some overriding features.
Section 49,, howev er, contains a much larger power because the Board is the authority primarily charged with all aspects of development and supply under the 1948 Act.
[142 E G, 143 A D] (3) The appellants cannot be allowed to raise the con tention which was not raised in the High Court that the cut imposed by the State Government under section 22B was effective throughout.
If such facts were pleaded in the High Court, the Board could have produced materials denying such allega tions.
[143 D F] (4) The orders of the Government and the Board were cumulative ,and not contradictory.
The Board is empowered to fix different rates "having regard to" the geographical position of any area, the nature of the supply and purpose for which supply is required and any other relevant factors.
The expression "any other relevant factors ' is not to be construed ejusdem generis because there is no germs of the relevant factors.
[144 B D, E F] 135 (5) If there is shortage of electricity there has to be restriction on supply.
The Board can disconnect supply if the quota is exceeded.
The Board can also impose higher rates if the quota is exceeded.
The imposition of higher rates is only to sanction the rigour of ration by making persons who exceed the quota liable to pay higher rates.
[144 G H, 145 A]
