Section 40(1) of provides that no transfer of any property belong ing to an evacuee, which may subsequently be declared to be evacuee property, shall be effective unless the transfer was confirmed by the Custodian.
Sub section (4)(a) provides that where an application had been made to the Custodian for confirmation, he may reject the application if he is of opinion that the transaction had not been entered into in good faith or for valuable consideration.
In 1949 the respondent purchased house property from an evacuee and paid the consideration.
She made an application under section 40 to the Assistant Custodian for confirmation of the sale.
The application was rejected by him on the ground of want of good faith on the part of the vendor in entering into the transaction.
Her appeal to the Custodian and revision to the Custodian General were dismissed.
In the meantime, under r. 22, of the Administration of Evacuee Property (Central Rules) 1950, the respondent registered her claim for the return of the sale consideration to her.
Thereafter r. 22 was deleted.
She was informed by the Deputy Custodian that no third party claim against immovable property was payable since r. 22 was deleted.
In 1966 the Government transferred to Compensation Pool the 'surplus balance ' of the evacuee pool lying in the personal deposit account of the Custodian.
The respondent later made a petition to the Custodian, which was rejected mainly on the ground that the sale proceeds had been credited to the compensation pool, that there was no amount in the bands of the Custodian from which her claim could be paid and ' that the words "out of funds in his possession" occurring in section 10(2)(n) of the Act showed that the clause would be attract ed only where funds were lying with the Custodian.
The High Court held that payment made by the respondent to the evacuee in pursuance of the infructuous sale, was not vitiated in any manner as the sale was refused confirmation, not because of want of bona fides in the transferee, but on account of want of bona fides in the transferor, and as such the Custodian was under a statutory obligation to refund the sale price paid by her and that the Custodian was competent to transfer only surplus fund left with him, in excess of what was required by him for meeting the outstanding claims registered under r. 22.
In appeal to this Court it was contended that (i) the order of the Assistant custodian registering the claim was a nullity because since the sale was not confirmed under section 40(4)(a) it could not be deemed to be a bona fide transac tion for the purposes of registration of claim under r. 22; (i;) registration .
was an administrative act required to be done for statistical purposes; and (iii) as a result of the deletion of r. 22 the Custodian was no longer under an obligation to meet the claim and no part of the compensa tion pool was available to satisfy the claims of third parties who were neither displaced persons nor evacuees.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: (1 ) The High Court was right in directing the Custodian is refund the sale price to the respondent in payment of her claim and in further directing 256 the Central Government to place at the disposal of the Custodian the said sum for the purpose of refund.
[268 A B] (1)(a) Under r. 22, before a claim for refund.
of money paid as consideration for the transfer by an evacuee of any property is registered by the Custodian, he should be satis fied: (i) that such transfer has not been confirmed under section 40 of the Act, (ii) that such transfer is a bona fide trans action; (iii) that the amount for which the claim is being registered is proved to have been paid as consideration for the transfer of the property.
[262 G] In the instant case, the validity of the, Assistant Custodian 's order registering the respondent 's claim is unassailable because all the three conditions aforesaid to give authenticity to the registration of her claim were satisfied.
The sale was not confirmed by the Custodian but he found that the whole of the price had actually been paid by the claimant.
[263 A] (b) In order to qualify for confirmation under section 40(4)(a) on the ground of good faith, a sale has to pass a much more stringent test than the one required to hold it "a bona fide transaction" for the purposes of r. 22.
While under section 40(4)(a), lack of good faith either in the trans feror or the transferee would be sufficient to disqualify the transfer for confirmation, the position under r. 22 is different.
Under r. 22 it is the character of the conduct of the claimant which primarily determines the character of the transaction.
Therefore, if the vendee claimant in purchasing the property acted in good faith, for the pur poses of r. 22, the sale would be a bona fide transaction, notwithstanding the fact that there was lack of good faith on the part of the vendor.
Again, the test of the vendee 'section bona fides under this Rule would be, whether he had pur chased the property for adequate valuable consideration.
[264 A B] Rabia Bai vs Custodian General of Evacuee Property ; followed.
In the instant case, the Assistant Custodian found that this test was amply satisfied.
This finding of fact was not challenged before the High Court.
It is therefore too late in the day to urge that the respondent 's claim was not duly registered in accordance with r. 22.
[264 C] (2) Registration of claim of a vendee under r. 22 amounts to a, preliminary adjudication as to the genuineness of the claim and its eligibility for discharge under the relevant substantive provisions of the Act.
While mere registration of a claim under this rule does not ipso facto confer a right to payment, it is not correct to say that the only purpose served by such, registration is statistical and nothing else.
Before registering a claim the Custodian is required to determine objectively that the transaction is bona fide the claimant having entered into it in good faith on payment of adequate valuable consideration.
The determi nation of this preliminary fact, which is an essential pre requisite of registration, is a judicial function enjoined on the Custodian by the statutory provision.
[264 E F] (3)(a) The words "out of the funds in his possession" in section 10(2)(n) have reference only to the funds relatable to the particular evacuee against whom or against whose proper ty, the claim for refund was made by a claimant.
The use of the expression 'in the opinion of the Custodian ' in section 10(2)(m) was not intended to invest the Custodian with arbitrary authority.
In forming his opinion, he was bound to act judicially.
[266 A B] Raja Bhanupratap Singh vs Custodian ; fol lowed.
In the instant case, the Custodian had formed an opinion about the respondents claim being genuine.
In the exercise of that power the only thing that remained to be done by the Custodian was to ascertain whether there were adequate 'funds in his possession ' to meet the respondent 's claim.
The property was ' sold by the Government for a consideration which had been far in excess of her claim, and the sale proceeds were credited to the compensation pool.
It could not be said that at the material time the Custodian was not in .
possession of sufficient funds to meet the respondent 's claim.
[266 B] (b) The expression 'such cash balances ' used in section 14(1)(b) of the Rehabilitation Act cannot be interpreted to cover total cash deposits with the Custodian.
257 The expression has to be construed as the excess of credits over debits.
The word 'balances ' had been advisedly used in preference to 'deposits ' because the intention was that only that much amount in deposit with the Custodian should be transferred to the Compensation Pool which would be in excess of the amounts required for meeting the due claims against the evacuees or their properties.
What can be di rected to be transferred to the Compensation pool by the Government under section 14(1)(b) is the 'cash balances ' and not the total cash deposits with the Custodian [267 A B] (c) The Custodian bad neither the power nor the authori ty to transfer the entirety of funds to the Compensation Pool.
The word 'surplus, ' used in the Government order puts the matter beyond doubt that only those balances which were surplus or in excess over what was required to meet the liabilities of the evacuees, were to be transferred to the Compensation Pool.
It was the duty of the Custodian, there fore.
to keep back with him so much of the funds in his deposit as were necessary to.
meet the verified claims against evacuees or their properties.
Such a course would have been perfectly legal and also in conformity with the final directions issued for transfer of 'surplus balances ' by the Central Government.
Only the 'cash balances ' which were validly transferred could legally form part of the Compensation Pool.
[267 E G]
