The City of Bangalore Improvement Act, 1945, is con cerned with the improvement and future expansion of the city, and for the appointment of a Board of Trustees with special powers to carry out that purpose.
an incident of such improvement and expansion, it provides for acquisi tion of land also.
.Section 16 of the Act provides for the publication of a notice so that any representations which objectors may make may be considered by the Board itself under section 17.
The object of the two sections is to provide for the notification similar to that under 5.
4(1), Mysore Land Acquisition.
1894, and for hearing of objections as under section 5A, of that Act.
Section 18 of the Bangalore Act provides for the publication in the Gazette of the declaretion that the land is acquired for a public; purpose.
Section 27 provides that acquisitions otherwise than by agreement, shall be regulated by the provisions of the Acquisition Act in so far as they are applicable and by certain further provisions in the section.
Section 27(1) provides that upon the passing of a resolution by the Board that an improvement scheme under section 14 is necessary in respect of any locality, it shall be lawful for any person, authorised by the Board to do all such acts in respect of the land as it would be lawful for an officer duly autho rised by the Government under section 4(2) of the Acquisition Act; and under section 27(2) the publication Of a declaration under section 18 shall be deemed to be the publication of a declaration under section 6, Acquisition Act In the present case, the notifications under section 16 of the Bangalore Act were issued in 1960 and the notifications under section 18 were published in 1967.
On the question as to which date was to be taken for the determination of the market value for the purpose of awarding compensation, the High Court held that the date of notification under section 18 is the relevant date.
The High.
Court held that decision of Full Bench of the High Court in Venkatamma vs Special Land Acquisition Officer (AIR covered the ques tion: and it also relied on another decision of the Court, determining compensation with respect of the acquisition of certain other lands, as relevant evidence for the purpose of determining compensation in the instant case.
In appeal to.
this Court the respondent also supported the judgment of the High Court on the ground that section 23(1) of the Acquisition Act which provides that the determination of the market value should be as on the date of the publication of a notification under section 41(1), would not apply, because, (a) No. principle o.r procedure governing award of compensation is specified in the Bangalore Act, (b) the words "so far as applicable", used in section 27, are equivalent to "in so far as they are specifically mentioned"; and section 23(1) is not so specifically mentioned; and, (c) since No. procedure or principle is laid down for the= award of compensation in the Bangalore Act, it would be equitable to hold that the market value should be determined with reference to the late.r date of.
the notification under s 18 of the Act.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: The matter should be remanded to the High Court for determination of the market value of the land as on the date of the notification under 179 section 16 of the Bangalore Act, which corresponds to.
the notification under section 4(1 ) of the Acquisition Act, after affording opportunities to the parties whether the judgment sought to be offered as additional evidence could be so admitted shall be decided.
[193 E F] (1)(a) The Full Bench of the High Court, while inter preting the City of Mysore Improvement Act, 1903, observed that the Acquisition Act had been amended in 1927 so as to make compensation payable as on the date of the notification under section 4(1) of that Act instead of the date of notifica tion under section 6 according to the unamended law and but that, in the Mysore Act, there was no corresponding amendment.
Therefore, the Mysore Act had to be construed with refer ence to the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act as it stood in 1903.
[182 F G] But, the Bangalore Act, even though its corresponds substantially with the provisions of the Mysore Act of 1903, should be interpreted with reference to the Acquisition Act as it stood in 1945, because, the Bangalore Act was, enacted in 1945.
[182 H] (b) The Full Bench also held that if there was long delay between the two notifications, the acquisition itself would be unconstitutional, and the.re.fore the date of notifica tion under section 18 would be the relevant date.
The delay between the dates of notification under section 16 and under section 18 would not have any bearing on the question of the date on which the market value is to, be determined, because, if a particular acquisition becomes unconstitutional due to an unreasonable mode.
of exercising the statutory powers of acquisition, the meaning of provisions, which are relevant for determining the date of market value, could not be affected.
[183 F H, 184 A] (2) Under section 43, Evidence Act, judgments other than those falling under sections 40 to 42, Evidence Act are irrele vant unless they fall under some other provisions of the Evidence Act.
In the present case, the earlier judgment of the High Court cannot operate as resjudicata because it is not between the same parties.
Such judgments are also not judgments in rem.
However, in Khaja Fizuddin vs State of Andhra Pradesh (CA.
No. 176 dt. 10 4 1963) this Court held that such judgments would be relevant if they relate to similarly situated properties and contain determinations of value on dates fairly proximate to the relevant date in a case.
BUt, in the present case, the appellant was not given any opportunity of showing that the earlier judgment related to dissimilar land.
The High Court also did not comply with the provisions of 0.41 r. 27, C.P.C. before admitting the earlier judgment as additional evidence.
It had recorded no 'reasons to show that it had considered the requirements or ' the rule and why it found the admission of such evidence to be necessary.
[191 G H, 192 B H 193 A B] Special Land Acquisition Officer, Bombay vs Lakhamsi Ghelabhai, , referred to.
(3)(a) Section 27 of the Bangalore Act enables the procedure in the Acquisition Act to be utilised except tel the extent to which the procedure in the bangalore Act may differ from that in the Acquisition act.
These difference section 27(2) and (2); are: (i) that the Board of Trustees could do the: things provided for in section 4.(2) of the Acquisition: Act without a notification under section 4(1); and (ii) the notifica tion under section 18 of the Bangalore Act is equated to the one under section 6 of the Land Acquisition Act.
Therefore, even though section 23 of the Acquisition Act is ' not specifically mentioned in the Bangalore Act, the obvious purpose of the opening words of section 27 of the Bangalore Act, and the effect of non specification of a different principle in the Banga lore Act, is that the award of compensation, which is a necessary part of any law providing for acquisition must be governed by section 23 of the Acquisition Act, which is the only provision applicable; for determining the date of market value.[189 D G] (b) The words "so far as they are applicable" cannot be equated to in so far as they are specifically mentioned.
" The words are used to exclude only those provisions of the acquisition Act which become inapplicable, because 180 of the special procedure prescribe.d by the Bangalore Act.
They cannot be construed as excluding the application of general provisions such as section 23 of the Acquisition Act.
They amount to stating that what is not either expressly or by necessary implication excluded must be applied.
[190 H, 191 A B] (c) Equity supplements but does not supplant law.
If, in the face of the provision that the notification under section 18, Bangalore Act is equated with a notification under section 6 of the.
Acquisition Act for the purpose of determining the market value for awarding compensation, some transcendental principle of ' equity is applied, then, it would be supplant ing the law laid down in section 27 of the Bangalore Act read with section 23 of the Acquisition Act.
It would also be absurd to hold that a notification under s.18, Bangalore Act, could be equated with a notification under section 4(1) Acquisition Act.
Therefore, the relevant date would be the date of notification under section 16, because, the objects achieved by a notification under section 16, Bangalore Act, and one under section 4, Acquisition Act are identical.
In the Full Bench decision of the High Court, it was held.
relying on section 23 of the City of Mysore Improvement Act, 1903 that section 14 of that Act should be equated to section 4(1) of the Acquisition Act.
But in view of the provisions of r. 27 of the Bangalore Act, the only result of equating a resolution under section 14 of the Bangalore Act with a notification under section 4(1) of the Acquisition Act would be to shift the date of ascertaining of market value still further back which is not the conten tion of the respondents.
[191 A, F] OBITER: An additional compliance with section 4(1) of the Acquisition Act is not necessary in view of the special procedure unders.
16 of the Bangalore Act: and, it would be reasonable for the authorities to exercise the powers pro vided for by section 27(1) of the Bangalore Act, corresponding to those in section 4(2) of the Acquisition Act, only after the notification under section 16 of the Bangalore Act.
[185 B.C] M. Manicklal vs The State of Mysore approved.
