Section 42, Income tax Act, 1922, provides for assessing the income, profits gains deemed to accrue or arise in the taxable territories to a person not resident in the taxable territories.
RuLe 33 of the 1922 Rules is made for comput ing the profits and gains of business deemed to accrue or arise in India in cases where the income tax officer finds that the provisions of section 42 do not provide sufficient criteria.
The rule mentions three methods and it would be open to the income tax officer to select and apply one of the three methods mentioned in the rule.
The assessee respondent in the present case, is a non resident company carrying on business as construction engi neers both in India.
and in other parts of the world.
The Income tax Officer found that section 42 of the 1922 Act did not provide sufficient criteria for computing the profits and gains of the assessee deemed to accrue or arise in India and, therefore, assessed the income applying one of the three methods mentioned in r. 33.
As it resulted in lower tax liability, his successor initiated proceedings under section 147(b), Income tax Act, 1961, adopted another method contem plated by r. 33.
and assessed the income at a higher figure.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner, the Tribunal and High Court held that in making the reassessment the Income tax Officer could not depart from the method of computation followed in the original assessment, and adopt an alterna tive method of computation though permitted by the rule.
In appeal to this Court, it was contended that the lower tax liability in the original assessment showed that it was a case of escaped assessment and as such section 147 of the 1961 Act was attracted.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: It is open to the Income tax Officer at the time of making the original assessment to adopt one of the three methods mentioned in r. 33 for computing the taxable income of the assessee.
From the mere fact that the method select ed by him resulted in lower tax liability compared to the liability which would have resulted from the adoption of another method under the rule, it would not follow that the discretion was not exercised by the Income tax Officer in a proper and judicious manner, and that it would be a case of income escaping assessment.
[212 E F] (1) The discretion to choose one of the methods in r. 33 ought to be exercised by the Income tax Officer in a proper and judicious manner.
In the present ease, there is nothing to show that the discretion was not so exercised by the Income tax Officer, nor was it suggested that he was actuat ed by any oblique motive.
The Income tax Officer ordering reassessment does not sit as a Court of appeal over the officer making the original assessment, nor is it open to him to substitute his own opinion regarding the method of computation of the income especially when the method of computation adopted at the time of original assessment was permissible in law.
The taxing authorities exercise quasi judicial powers, and in doing so, they must act in a fair and not a partisan manner.
Although it is part of their duty to ensure that no tax, which is legitimately due from an assessee, should remain unrecovered, they 208 must also at the same time not act in a manner which indi cates that the scales are weighted against the assessee.
It is not correct to say that unless.
the authorities exercise the power in a manner most beneficial to the revenue and consequently most adverse to the assessee, they should be deemed not to have exercised their discretion in a proper and judicious manner.
[213C, 212G] (2) The original order of the first Income tax Officer was a legally correct order and was not vitiated by any error.
The absence of an error would justify the inference that it is not a case of income escaping assessment.
There is necessarily an element of error which becomes in cases of income escaping assessment mentioned in section 147(b) of Act of 1961 manifest in the light of subsequent information re ceived by the Income tax Officer.
In the present case, no income has escaped assessment due tO oversight, inadvertence or a mistake committed by the first Income Tax Officer.
Therefore, the case would not fall within the ambit of section 147(b) of the 1961 Act or section 34(1)(b) of the 1922 Act.
[213A B]
