The plaintiff respondent is one of the co owners of the premises which were let out to the appellant tenant.
The plaintiff filed a suit for eviction under section 13(1)(f) of the West Bengal Premises Tenancy Act 1956.
The grounds for eviction were the non payment of the rent and the reasonable requirement of the premises for the landlord.
The trial court held that the plaintiff being only a co sharer cannot be said to be the owner within the meaning of section 13(1)(f).
The trial court, however, held that the plaintiff succeeded in proving the reasonableness of the requirement of the members of the family for whose benefit the premises were held by him and, therefore, granted a decree for eviction.
An appeal filed by the appellants failed.
In the second appeal filed by the appellants it was contended that al though reasonable requirement of the premises were estab lished, the respondent was not entitled to a decree for eviction since he was only a co sharer and, therefore, not the owner of the premises.
The single Judge of the High Court held that it will not be sufficient if the reasonable requirement is of all the members of the family of the co owners but such owners must again be the landlords who only are entitled to a decree for recovery of the possession under section 13(1)(f).
A Division Bench set aside the decision of the Single Judge on the ground that a co owner is as much as absolute owner as a sole owner.
In appeal by special leave, the appellant contended: A landlord to be able to evict a tenant under Section 13(1)(f) must be an absolute owner of the premises from which eviction is sought.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: The contention of the appellant that the co sharer plaintiff must be the absolute owner and a co owner cannot without impleading all the owners of the premises ask for eviction cannot be accepted because the plea pertaining to the domain of the frame of the suit should have been raised at the earliest opportunity and it was not done.
Secondly, the relation between the parties being that of landlord and tenant only the landlord could terminate the tenancy and institute the suit for eviction.
The tenant in such a suit is estopped from questioning the title of the landlord under section 116 of the Evidence Act.
Under the general law, in a suit between the landlord and tenant, the question of title to the lease property is irrelevant.
The plaintiff is one of the co owners of the premises.
The other co sharers being his mother and married brother who reside in the same prem ises along with him.
Jurisprudentially, it is not correct to say that a co owner of a property is not an owner.
He owns every part of the composite property along with others and it cannot be said that he is only a part owner or a fractional owner of the property.
The position will change when partition takes place.
It is, therefore, not possible to accept the submission that the plaintiff who is admitted ly the landlord and co owner of the premises is not the owner of the premises within the meaning of section 13(1)(f).
[399 A C. 401 B & 402 A B] Bollye Satee and Anr.
vs Akram Ally and Anr.
[1879] ILR (4) Calcutta 961; Kattusheri Pishareth Kanna Pisharody vs Vallotil Manakel Narayan Somayajipad and Ors., [1878] 81 ILR (3) Madras 234; Balkrishna Sakharam vs Moro Krishna 396 Dabholkar [1897] ILR (21) Bombay 154; and Dwarka Nath Mitter and Ors.
vs Tara Prosunna Roy & Ors.
[1890J/LR (27) Calcutta 160, distinguished.
Mclntyre and Anr.
vs Hardcctstle; [1848] (1) All England Law Reports 696; followed.
Kanika Devi and Ors.
vs Amarendra Nath Roy Choudhury and Ors; 65 Calcutta Weekly Notes 1078; Tarak Chandra Mukherjee vs Ralanlal Ghosal; ; Taherbhai Hebtullabhai and Anr.
vs Ambalal Harilal Shah and Anr.; 1966(7) Gujarat 963 LLR; and Deb Ranjan Chatterjee vs Swarnarani Biswas & Anr.
78 Calcutta Weekly Notes 1034; approved.
Nanalal Girdharlal and Anr.
vs Gulamnablti Jamalbhai Motorwala and Ors.
; distinguished.
