The appellants ' applications for grant of mining leases were rejected by the State Government on the ground that the areas for exploitation of which they had .
applied, had been reserved for exploitation in the public sector.
The Central Government dismissed the revision applications pointing out that since the minerals vested in the State Government it had inherent right to reserve any particular area for exploitation in the public sector.
In writ petitions challenging the orders of the State Government the appellants contended before the High Court that the State Government had no authority to reserve any area for exploitation of minerals in the public sector and its action had no support under the .
The High Court dismissed the petitions.
Dismissing the appeals, HELD: The State Government was well within its rights in rejecting the applications of the appellants under r.60 as premature and the Central Government was justified in rejecting the revision applications.
[376 B] (i) ,The 1957 Act declared that it.
was expedient in the public interest that the Union should take under its control the regulation of mines and the development of minerals.
The State Legislature 's power under Entry 23 of List II was thus taken away .so that regulation of mines and mineral development had to be in accordance with the Act and the Rules.
[374 C] (ii) The State Government is the owner of the minerals within its territory, and the minerals vest in it, and no person has any right to exploit them otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of the Act and the Rules.
[374 D] (iii) There is nothing in the Act or the Rules to re quire that the restrictions imposed by the Rules would be applicable even if the State Government itself wanted to exploit the minerals.
There is no reason why the State Government could not reserve any land for itself for any purpose and such reserved land would then not be available for the grant of prospecting licence or a mining lease.
[374 H] (iv) The State Government 's power under section 10 of the Act to entertain applications includes the power to refuse to grant a licence or a lease on the ground that land was not available for such grant by reason of its having been re served by the State Government for any purposes.
[375 B] (v) The authority to order reservation flows from the fact that the State is the owner of the mines and the miner als within its territory.
Rule 59 clearly contemplates reservation by an order of the State Government.
[375 E] (vi) Under rr.
58, 59 and 60 it is not permissible for any person to apply for a licence or lease in respect of a reserved area until after it becomes available for such grant and the availability is notified by the State Govern ment.
The State Government in the present case reserved the areas for the purpose stated in the notifications and as these lands did not become available again for grant of a prospecting licence or a mining lease, it was well within its rights in rejecting the applications of the appellants under r. 60 as premature.
[375 H; 376 A] State of Orissa (1) vs Union of India, A.I.R. 1972 Orissa 68 and M/s. section Lal and Co. Ltd. vs TIre Union of India and others held inapplicable.
