The respondent was Head Assistant in the Panchayat Department of the Punjab Government.
While he was officiating as Superintendent in the Department, he was appointed Panchayati Raj Election Officer, which was an ex cadre post.
On the reorganisation of the State, the respondent was allocated to the appellant State and he continued to work as Panchayati Raj Election Officer in the appellant State.
In 1972, the State Government abolished the post of Panchayati Raj Election Officer and the services of the respondent were dispensed forthwith.
He challenged the order and it was quashed by the High Court.
In appeal to this Court, ^ HELD: Since the order of the appellant abolishing the post of Panchayati Raj Election Officer did not suffer from any infirmity, the High Court was in error in quashing it; but on the abolition of that post, under r. 3.14 of the Punjab Civil Service, Rules, the lien of the respondent on the post of Head Assistant stood revived.
[1040 F G] (1)(a) Whether a post should be retained or abolished is essentially a matter for the Government to decide, and as long as the decision is taken in good faith, it could not be set aside by the Court but, if it is found that the abolition was not in good faith, but was a cloak or device to terminate the services of an employee, then the abolition of the post may be set aside.
[1037 H 1038 C] M. Ramanatha Pillai vs The State of Kerala & Anr. ; , followed.
(b) In the present case, the decision to abolish the post was taken because of administrative reasons.
The Government re organised the Panchayat Department, and all those duties which had nothing to do with the job of Panchayati Raj Election Officer were given to other officers.
The only work left with the Panchayati Raj Election Officer was that of conducting elections of Panchayat Raj Bodies, and, as this work was of a periodical nature, the appellant abolished that post because of financial stringency.
[1038 G 1039 C] (c) Whether greater economy could have been brought about by adopting some other course is not for the Court to go into.
The fact that some of the functions which were being previously performed by the respondent are now being performed by others, whose posts have not been abolished, would not show that the decision to abolish was not taken in good faith.
In deciding which post to abolish, the appellant took into account the relative usefulness of each post, and as this matter was within the administrative discretion of the appellant and as the decision was taken in good faith, the Court cannot interfere with it.
[1039 C 1039 F] (d) The fact that the post which was abolished was held by a person who is confirmed in that post and the posts which were not abolished were held by persons who were not permanent would not also affect the legality of the decision to abolish the former, if the decision was taken in good faith.
[1039 F G] 1035 (2) Under r. 3.14(a), a competent authority shall suspend the lien of a Government servant on a permanent post which he holds substantively, if he is appointed in a substantive capacity, to a permanent post outside the cadre on which he was borne; and under r. 3.15, in the absence of the written request by the employee, the lien cannot be terminated.
Under r. 3.14(e), the Government servant 's lien which has been so suspended shall revive as soon as he ceases to hold a lien on the ex cadre post.
In the present case, since there was no request by the respondent for terminating his lien on the post of Head Assistant, his lien on that post should be held to have immediately revived as soon as the post of Panchayati Raj Election Officer which was an ex cadre post was abolished.
[1039 H 1040 C] T. R. Sharma vs Prithvi Singh & Anr.
[1976] 2 S.C.R. 716, followed.
[It was for the Government to pass all consequential orders regarding his seniority, pension etc.] [1040 C]
