Under s.5 of the , all property, including agricultural land situate in the States specified in the First Schedule to the Act, which passes on the death of the owner is subject to estate duty.
The State of Madras was added in the First Schedule with effect from 6th June, 1955.
The assessee claimed that large tracts of land, covered with wild and natural forest growths situate in the Malabar District of the Madras State, were agricultural lands and that they were not liable to estate duty because the former owners died before 6th June, 1955.
The High Court held that the property was agricultural land and not liable to estate duty, because, (1) the words 'agricultural land ' should be interpreted in their widest significance, so that.
in the absence of exceptional circumstances such as the land being entirely rocky or barren for other reasons, all forest lands in the State of Kerala in which the District of Malabar was since included, are agricultural lands in the sense that they can be prudently and profitably exploited for agricul tural purposes; and (2) although the burden rested upon an assessee to establish an exemption from liability to estate duty in respect of any part of his estate, yet, if he claimed immunity on the ground that the subject matter does not fall within the ambit of the taxing power of the legis lature imposing the duty, the Revenue had to establish that the subject matter involved is taxable.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, HELD: (1) The expression 'agricultural land ' has to be given a restricted meaning and not the wide meaning given by the High Court.
The question whether land is agricultural land has to be decided on evidence of actual or intended user for an agricultural purpose for which the land may have been prepared or set apart.
[352 F] Commissioner of Wealth tax, Andhra Pradesh vs Officer in Charge (Court of Wards) Paigah, [1977] 1 S.C.R. 146 followed.
(a) The land in the present case was covered by sponta neous or natural growth of forests.
It was not shown that the assessee or his predecessor in interest did anything to develop the forest in the sense that any particular trees were planted deliberately.
The exploitation of the forest lands was simply to give contracts for cutting trees.
It must, therefore, be treated prima facie as non agricultural land.
[353 E] (b) The decision in State of Kerala vs Gwalior Rayon Silk Manufacturing (Wvg) Co. Ltd. ; depended upon the special facts of that case and the provisions of the Kerala Private Forests (Vesting and Assessment) Act, 1971, interpreted therein.
This Court, in that case ex plained, why for certain special reasons and m an unusual context, certain land described as 'forest land ' was to he treated as 'agricultural '.
Forest land ordinarily means non arable, that is, non agricultural land.
[351 C & E] Rajah Anand Brahma Shah vs State of U.P. & Ors. ; followed.
347 (c) Assuring that the forest land subsequent to the levy of estate duty had been acquired by the State to be converted and used for agricultural purposes, there being no evidence or finding of such a character before the events which attracted the estate duty, it is an irrelevant circum stance of which the Court cannot take notice.
[351 G] (2) (a) The burden of establishing the exemption lay upon the assessel.
The High Court was not correct in placing the burden upon the Revenue when it was admitted that the land was forest land.
The reason given by the High Court, that a question of immunity of the subject matter from taxation by Parliament arose here, and that, therefore, the onus lay on the Department mixes up the questions of legis lative competence and of taxability.
Even if there could be such an onus, it was, sufficiently discharged in the present case by the admission of the assessee that the land was forest land covered with natural or wild growths.
[352 A C] (b) The assessee, was given due opportunity to lead evidence to show, that what was prima facie non agricultural land, was really agricultural land but he led no evidence to prove his intention to put the land to agricultural use or purpose.
On the other hand, he contended that the mere possibility of using such land for agricultural purposes in future was enough.
Therefore, he had not discharged his onus, and no case is made out for sending the case back to the Tribunal for any fresh decision.
[353 D F]
