The respondent, who was an unsuccessful candidate in the general election to the State Assembly, impugned the appel lant 's election on the ground that he had committed a cor rupt practice within the meaning of section 100(1)(b) of the Representation of the People Act, 1950, in that he had printed and circulated a pamphlet maligning the respondent.
Allowing the petition, the High Court set aside the elec tion.
In appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant as a preliminary objection (i) that since the election petition served on the appellant was not accompa nied by a copy of the impugned pamphlet, the petition _was liable to be dismissed and (ii) that the evidence of the Manager (P.W. 24) of the Press in which the pamphlet had been printed, being that of an accomplice could not be relied upon.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: (1) (a) The petition could not have been dismissed in view of section 99 of the Code of Civil Procedure which clear ly says that a defect which does not affect the merits of the case or the jurisdiction of the Court cannot invalidate the decision.
[529 D] (b) It is well settled that failure to give particulars of printing of the pamphlet is not detrimental and cannot lead to the dismissal of the petition.
[529 D] Prabhu Narayan vs
A.K. Srivastava; , re ferred to.
In the instant case, the allegations of corrupt practice and particulars thereof given in the election petition were sufficiently clear and precise.
The affidavit conforms to the form prescribed for the purpose.
Moreover, the appel lant had an easy access to the Court record and could have no difficulty in gathering the necessary material to meet the case set up by the respondent by a reference to the leafet.
[529 C] (2) (a) The mere fact that P.W. 24 printed the offending leaflet could not clothe him with the character off a guilty associate or partner in the crime of corrupt practice within the meaning of section 123(4) of the Act.
[530 D] (b) Moreover, the omission on the part of P.W. 24 to send to the concerned District Magistrate a copy each of the declaration and the printed material as required by section 127 A(2) of the Act may lay him open to prosecution for art offence under sub section
(4) of that section but would not make him an accomplice or render his statement untrustworthy.
[530 F] In the instant case, P.W. 24 was neither an election agent of the appellant nor was there any allegation that he published the offending leaflet.
Despite the searching cross examination to which he was subjected, his credit had remained unshaken.
[530 E]
