The proprietor of large tracts of laud leased blocks of land to.
the lessees at a stipulated rate of royalty and rent.
The lessees sub leased the land to the appellant who undertook to pay the lessees the same royalty and rent.
payable by them to the proprietor.
They also agreed to pay an additional royalty to the head lessee.
The sub lease gave an option to the appellant to make payment of royalty directly to the head lessor in terms of the head lease.
The lessees transferred their rights, title and interest in the head lease and sub lease to the respondent.
By virtue of a notification under section 3 of the Bihar land Reforms Act, 1950 the estate belonging to the head lessor passed to and became vested in the State.
Another notifica tion issued under section 3A of the Act declared that all inter mediary interests in certain districts had passed to and became vested in the State.
In exercise of its option under the sub lease the appel lant paid rent a.nd royalty directly to the head lessor and the additional royalty to the head lessee (respondent) but stopped payment of additional royalty to the respondent in terms of the sub lease, from July 1, 19.58.
On August 8, 1959 Controller of Mines and Leases for India passed an order enhancing the royalty payable to the State and in c1.(9) of the order it was stated that "royalty will be.
payable to State Government by the appellants in accordance with section 9 of the Mines and Minerals (Regulation & Develop ment) Act, 1957 and dead rent according to the order passed in these proceedings.
" The respondent filed a suit claiming arrears of additional royalty.
The High.
Court decreed the suit.
In appeal to this Court, it was contended that (i) since the respondent was merely a tenure holder and all its rights, title and interest as such extinguished alongwith the interest of the erstwhile proprietor with the coming into force of the 1950 Act it was the appellant as a sub lessee that became a direct lessee of the State and, there fore, the respondent was not entitled to claim additional royalty.
(ii) since the enhanced royalty was payable by the respondent which was paid by the appellant, the appellant was entitled to reimbursement to the extent it paid the amount as agent of the respondent.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD :(1)(a) A combined reading of sections 4(a) and 10 of the 1950 Act leaves no room for doubt that the interests of the head lessee were left unaffected by the notifications.
[369 D] (b) The respondent could not be said to be a tenure holder as contemplated by the 1950 Act as it had neither acquired from the head lessor by virtue of the lease a right to hold the land for the purpose of collecting rent nor a right to hold the land for bringing it under cultivation by estab lishing tenants on it.
The right of the respondent as a head lessee of the mines and minerals also did hot cease and the appellant did not acquire the status lessee.
According to section 4(a) of 1950 Act on the publication of the notifications the interests of the proprietor or tenure holder comprised in such estate or tenure inclu sive of such right of a lessee of mines and minerals com prised 7 1104 SC I/76 360 in such estate or tenure vest absolutely in the State free from encumbrances and such proprietor or tenure holder has to cease to have any interest in such estate or tenure other the interest expressly saved by or under the provisions of the Act.
The last words of section 4(a) of the Act, namely, "other than the interest expressly saved by or under the provisions of the Act" unequivocally show that those inter ests which are expressly saved are= not ' affected or im paired by the notifications.
According to 9.10 which itself is in the nature of a non obstante provision overriding other provisions of the Act, every lease of mines and miner als comprised in the notified estate or tenure or any part thereof which may be subsisting immediately before the date of vesting has to be treated, with effect from the date of vesting, as a lease from the State Government to the holder of the said subsisting lease for the residue of the term of that lease and such holder acquires the right to retain possession oF the leasehold property for that period.
In other words, in place of every contractual lease which might have been subsisting immediately before the date of vesting of the estate or tenure a statutory lease on practi cally identical terms and conditions came into being.
[368 F H, 369 A C] Bihar Mines Ltd. vs Union of India ; , Chhatu Ram Horil Ram Private Ltd. vs State of Bihar & Anr. ; ; , M/s. Hindustan Steel Ltd., Rourkela vs Smt.
Kalyani Banerjee & ; and State of Bihar& Anr.
vs Khas Karsmpura Collieries Ltd. etc.
[1977] I SCR. 157 followed.
(c) The introduction of s.10A in the 1950 Act indicates that the law as it obtained prior to the amendment was not intended to have the effect of divesting a lessee of his interests in a lease of mines or minerals which subsisted immediately before the vesting of a notified estate or tenure.
[369 F] (2) In view of the order passed by the Controller that the appellant agreed to say the enhanced royalty the burden of payment is to be borne by the appellant and the question of its being reimbursed by the respondent does not arise.
[371 D] (3) The contention that it is not permissible to inter pret a statute by reference to what has been said in subse quent statutes with reference to the situation obtaining before the introduction of the amendment is not well found ed.
Sometimes light may be thrown upon the meaning of an Act by taking into consideration 'Parliamentary expositions ' as revealed by the later Act which amends the earlier one to clear up any doubt or ambiguity.
This principle has to be followed where, a particular construction of the earlier Act will render the later incorporated Act ineffectual or otiose or inept.
[370 A] Krikness vs John Hudson & Co., , Yogendra Nath Naskar vs
C.I.T. Calcutta, , Cape Brandy Syndicate vs
I.R.C. referred to.
In the instant case resort can be had to the provisions of section 10A introduced in 964 while interpreting section 10 of the 1950 Act with reference to the situation obtaining at the relevant time before the introduction of section 10A.
The estate comprised in the head lease which was assigned to the re spondent notionally stood leased by the State from the date of vesting to the holder of the subsisting lease and the respondent became entitled to retain possession of the leasehold property.
[370D]
