Section 23(1) of the Land Acquisition Act originally provided that the date for Section 23 (1) of the market value for purpose of compensation is the date of the notification under section 6.
In 1927, section 23(1) was amended making the date of section 4(1) notification as the relevant date.
With respect to certain acquisitions under the City of Mysore Improvement Act, 1903.
(Mysore Act) the notifica tion under section 16 of the Act was published in May 1965 and the notification under section 18, which corresponds to section 6 of the Acquisition Act, was published some, time later.
On the question of the date for the determination of market value for purposes of compensation under the provisions of section 23(1), Acquisition Act, the High Court followed the Full Bench decision of that court in Venkatamma vs Special Land Acquisition Officer (AIR and held that the date of section 18 notification is the relevant date, on the ground that section 23(1), Acquisition Act, as it stood in 1903 should be applied, since its amendment in 1927, has not been made specially applicable to acquisitions after that date.
Allowing the appeal to this Court and remanding the case to the High Court for determination of the market value as on the date of section 16 notification.
HELD: (1) Section 23, Mysore Act, applied the provisions of the Acquisition Act to acquisitions under the Mysore Act, except to the extent of any express deviation by the Mysore Act from the general procedure in the Acquisition Act.
It is a fair interpretation of section 23, Mysore Act, to hold that it means that, whatever may be procedure with regard to matters regulating compensation under the Acquisition Act, at the time of acquisition proceedings, will apply to acqui sitions under the Mysore Act.
The procedure, contained in the Acquisation Act for the time being need not be expressly applied once again after each amendment of the Acquisition Act, and such procedure in the Acquisition Act would apply if it is capable of application, since no one has a vested right in a particular procedure.
[552 A F] Therefore: section 23(1) of the Acquisition Act, which lays down the procedure for awarding compensation, has to be followed as it exists at the time of requisition proceed ings.
[552H 553A] (2) the 927 amendment of section 23(1), Acquisition Act, meant a legally valid substitution of the notification under section 4(1) for the one under section 6 of the Acquisition Act, that is, an effective repeal and replacement.
In such a situation, according to section 6, Mysore General Clauses Act, only proceedings commenced before the repeat would be governed by the unamended procedure.
[552 F G] (3) The date of notification under section 4(1) of the Acquisition Act would thus be the relevant date, for determining market value.
Although the procedure laid down in section 16, Mysore Act, is more elaborate than the proce dure under section 4(1), Acquisition Act, the purpose of section 16, Mysore Act is the same as that of section 4(1) Acquisition Act.
Therefore, the date of s 16 notification would be the rele vant date.
[553 B F] 550 Land Acquisition Officer, City Improvement Trust Board vs
H. Narayanaiah etc., etc.
; , followed.
Venkatamma vs Special Land Acquisition Officer (AIR overruled.
