The appellant 's election to the State Assembly was set aside by the High Court on the ground of corrupt practice falling under section 123(S) of the Representation of People Act.
The appellant, it was alleged, hired and procured vehicles for the free conveyance of voters.
This was however denied by the appellant.
The High Court allowed amendment of the election petition by inserting a new sub paragraph 12(d), stating that the names of the persons who hired or procured the vehicles for carrying the voters to the polling station were given in schedule lII(i) of the petition, on the view that the information given was a necessary particular to allege and prove that the vehicle was used for the conveyance of the voters.
It was contended in this Court.
(i) that the tractor in which the voters were alleged to have been carried to the polling station, was taken there in some other connection and that though the tractor was in the name of his wife as benamidar.
it really belonged to the appellant and, as such, no question or hiring or procuring it, whether on payment or otherwise, arose so as to make it fall within the purview of section 123(5) of the Act.
and (ii) that the High Court had committed a serious.
error of law in allowing the election petition to be amended after the expiry of the period prescribed for its presentation.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD : The finding of the High Court that the appellant procured the tractor with trolly and used it for the purpose of transporting the voters to the polling station and thereby committed a corrupt practice within the meaning of section 123(5) of the Act is correct.
[348E] (1) (a) There is no justification for contending that there could be no question or occasion for hiring or procuring the tractor because it belonged to the appellant.
It cannot be urged that the tractor, which belonged to his wife mutt be deemed to belong to the appellant or that it should be inferred that she was a mere benamidar when that was not the appellant 's case anywhere The tractor belonged to the wife of the appellant and was not his own property [341E F1 (b) It would amount to "procuring" the tractor if it could be shown that r the appellant obtained or got or acquired the tractor from his wife The dictionary meaning of the word "procure" is "to obtain as by request loan effort, labour; get, gain, come into possession of".
This is the correct meaning of the word used in section 12(5).
[341G H] (c) It is not always possible for an election Petitioner to adduce direct evidence to prove that a particular vehicle was hired or procured by the candidate or his agent or by any other person with the consent of the candidate or his election agent, but this can be inferred from the proved circumstances where such inference is justifiable.
[348B] 336 Bhagwan Datta Shastri vs Badri Narayan Singh and others A.I.R. 1960 S.C. 200: Shri Umed vs Raj Singh and others.
R. 1975 S.C. is; Ram Awadesh Singh vs Sumitra Devi and others.
; ; Rahim Khan vs Khurshid Ahmed and others; , Baburao Ragaji Karemore and others vs Govind and others ; and Smt.
Indira Nehru Gandhi vs Raj Narain.
; referred to.
(2) It is futile to contend that a new corrupt practice was allowed to be.
inserted by the High Court 's order of amendment.
The schedule was an integral part of the election petition and the original election petition contained what was required to be stated by section 83 of the Act and the amendment was meant to furnish some further particulars in regard to the same corrupt practice When issue No. 2 was framed by the High Court, the appellant was fully aware that the election petitioners had alleged the user of the vehicles also and that was why he joined issue for the trial of that allegation.
[340B C] (3) There is no obligation on the part of the election petitioners to examine themselves at the trial in the High Court.
The evidence which they were able to produce at the trial could not have been rejected for any such fanciful` reason when there was nothing to show that the election petitioners were`able to give useful evidence to their personal knowledge but stayed away purposely [349F]
