Mauza Chowkri Mubarakabad was included within the limits of Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 by a notification dated 7th January, 1960.
By a notification dated 12th April 1962, the provisions of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 was extended to the localities mentioned in the schedule to the, notification dated 7th January 1960.
The respondent landlord who purchased a house situated in Khasra No. 203, Khewat No. 1 situated at village Chowkri Mubarakabad, Delhi Province within the Abadi of Onkar Nagar II, filed a suit for ejectment of the appellant tenant of a room in the said house and for recovery of rent.
The trial court and the first appellate court held that the juris diction of the civil court was barred by the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958.
However on second appeal, a single judge of the High Court disturbed the findings of fact and re versed the judgments of the courts below.
Dismissing the appeal by special leave the Court, HELD: (i) There cannot be any doubt, that, in the in stant case, by deciding to set aside the concurrent findings of fact, ignoring the law laid down by this Court, and, before that by the judicial committee of the Privy Council, the High Court, patently exceeded its jurisdiction under section 100 .C.P.C. without considering the objects of the notifications or discussing any principle of construction of documents which could indicate that a point of law had really arisen for decision.
[673 D F] Deity Pattabhiramaswamy vs
section Hanyamayya & Ors., AIR 1959 SC 57; Sri Sinha Ramanuja Jeer & Ors.
vs Shri Ranga Ramanuja Jeer & Anr.
1962(2) SCR 509; Nedunuri Kameswaramma vs Sampati Subba Rao, 1963(2) SCR 208; Bhusawal Borough Municipality vs Amalgamated Electricity Co. Ltd. & Am '.
1964(5) SCR 905; Secy.
of State vs Rameswaram Devasthanam & Ors.
, AIR 1934 PC 112; Anup Mahto vs Mita Dusadh & Ors.
AIR 1934 PC 5 and Narayanrao Deshmukh vs Jaiwantrao Yadaorao Deshmnkh & Anr., AIR 1933 PC 171; applied (ii) The well known principles of interpretation of documents are: (a) firstly, a document must be construed as a whole; (b) secondly, it has to be so construed as not to reduce what was meant or being done by it to a patent ab surdity; and (c) thirdly, if any entry of a column.
appears to have been carelessly made, so as not to give a correct indication Of what was otherwise clearly capable of being inferred from the objects and.
rest of the contents of such a notification, the slight error.
, due obviously to inadver tance, would not matter on an application of the principle: Falsa Demonstrated non nocet." [675 B C] 671 (iii) Unless interpretation of a document involves the question of application of a principle of law, mere infer ences from or the evidentiary value of a document generally raises only a question of fact.
[674 C] Nedanuri Kameswaramma vs Sampati Subba Rao, ; ; explained.
Meenakshi Mills, Madurai vs The Commissioner of Income Tax, Madras, ; ; referred to (iv) In the instant case, it is evident that the proviso does not require the mention of anything more than the urban areas which is to be included or excluded from the limits of the Municipal Corporation.
That area was sufficiently clearly indicated by entries in columns 2 and 3 meant, for the Revenue Estate or Mauza and for the colony or the vil lage.
The whole of Mauza Chowkri Mubarakabad and the whole of Onkar Nagar and Lekhupura were meant to be noti fied.
The mere fact that the last column was not filled up in such a manner as to show precisely where each Khasra number lay did not affect the question whether the area to be included was sufficiently indicated or not.
The provi sions of Section 1(2) of the Delhi Rent Control Act as wellas of Section 507(a) and (b) of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act refer only to "areas" and not to mere Khasra nos.
which are convenient divisions for the purpose of indicating what lay within each area.
[674 H, 675 A B, GH]
