The respondents Nos. 1 to 10 who were Writ PetitiOners in the High Court, were appointed as clerks between June, 1963 to January, 1967 on temporary basis and were promoted to higher posts thereafter.
They contended that at the rele vant time there was, no rule or order requiring that ap pointments to their posts shall be made through Public Service Commission.
The Gujarat Government issued Gujarat Non Secretariat Clerks, Clerk Typists and 'Typists (Direct Recruitment Procedure) Rules, 1970.
Thereafter, by resolu tion dated 15 4 1971, it was stated that seniority of the candidates who were to be selected for the posts of Clerks, Clerk typists and typists shall be determined as if their allotment or appointment was from 17 4 1970 irrespective of the question whether they were in service or not, and that their names shall be arranged in a common seniority list in order of merit in accordance with the principles laid down in the Rules.
The Writ petitioners filed a Writ Petition in the Guja rat High Court feeling aggrieved by the said 1970 Rules and the 1971 resolution.
The Writ Petitioners contended that the Government should be directed to treat their entire service as regular and that their seniority should be fixed on the basis of the dates on which they had joined their respective posts.
The State Government in its counter affidavit pointed out that the Writ Petitioners were not recruited through proper channel; that even though the centralised recruitment scheme was in existence and was applicable with effect from January, 1963, the Writ Petitioners did not come through the employment exchanges that their appointments were by way of a stop gap arrangement.
The State, however, admitted in its affidavit that the Writ Petitioners were not under the purview of the Gujarat Public Service Commission at the time of their appointment.
The State contended that the Writ Petitioners were irregularly appointed and that 1970 Rules were framed on humanitarian considerations to regularise their appointments and that, their seniority could not be counted from the dates of their appointment and could be counted only from 17th April, 1970.
The High Court came to the conclusion that the Centra lised Recruitment Scheme was not applicable when the Writ Petitioners were appointed and that the posts were also not within the purview of the Gujarat Public Service Commission until March, 1969.
The High Court therefore, held that the appointments of the petitioners were regular and were not required to be regularised under the 1970 Rules.
It also held that the State Government had no power to issue the circular under rule 30 of the Rules for allotment and fixa tion of a seniority and that the instructions contained in the resolution of 1971 were not applicable to the Writ Petitioners.
The High Court allowed the Writ Petition, struck down the seniority list, and directed the State Government and the Director of Civil Supplies to treat the services of the petitioners as regular from the dates when they were appointed initially and not to apply the instruc tions contained in the resolution of 1971 to compute their seniority.
The appellants, who claimed to have been appointed regularly from the beginning and who contend that the ap pointments of the writ petitioners were irregular filed appeal by Special Leave.
The appellants contended: 1.
That the initial appointment of the Writ Petitioners was irregular, being in violation of the centralised recruitment scheme, since the office 678 of the Director of Civil Supplies became a part and parcel of the Directorate of Civil Supplies, and that the centralised recruitment scheme was ap plicable to the recruitment of the Writ Petition ers.
The appointment to the posts held by the Writ Petitioners were required to be made through Public Service Commission, but as they were not made through P.S.C. the appointments were irregular.
Dismissing the appeal with a modification, HELD: 1.
The High Court has rightly negatived both the contentions of the appellants.
The State in its affidavit had admitted that the posts, the Writ Petitioners were not within under the purview of the Public Service Commission at the time of their appointment.
The High Court has also rightly held ' that by describing the cadre in question as a "State Cadre", it could not be said that the modified scheme was made applicable to the Directorate.
It is clear from the scheme that it governed the recruitment to the regional offices and not to the offices of the Directorate.
[680 C E, F G] 2.
Rule 29 of the 1970 Rules can apply only if the initial appointment was irregular, i.e., if the Public Service Commission was not consulted when the consultation was required and if the recruitment had not taken place through the Centralised Recruitment Scheme when it was necessary to do so.
In the ' present case Rule 29 cannot apply because the appointments of the Writ Petitioners were regular.
[681 G H] 3.
The view taken by the High Court is quite justified and does not call for interference.
[681 F] 4.
The High Court, however, was not justified in direct ing that the seniority should be counted from the respective dates of the appointment of the Writ Petitioners. 'the High Court ought to have left the matter to the State Government to re examine the question of fixing the seniority to give effect to their intention of ameliorating the lot of the writ petitioners.
[682 A B]
