Section 8 of the , deals with rates of tax on sales in the course of inter State trade or commerce.
Section 8(1)(b) provides that every dealer, who in the course of inter State trade or commerce sells to a registered dealer goods of the description referred to in sub section
(3) shall be liable to pay tax at 3% of his turnover.
Section 8(3)(b) refers, inter alia to goods of the class or classes specified in the certificate of registration of the registered dealer purchasing the goods as being intended for re sale by him, or subject to any rules made by the Central Government in this behalf,, for use by him in the manufac ture or processing of goods for sale.
Rule 13 of the Cen tral Sales Tax (Registration and Turnover) Rules, 1957, framed under the Act, provides that the goods referred to in section 8(3)(b) which a registered dealer may purchase shall be goods intended for use by him inter alia as raw materials and processing materials in the manufacture or processing of goods for sale.
The appellant owned tea estates in the respondent State and was also maintaining factories for the manufacture of tea.
It prayed for inclusion in its Certificate of regis tration, ( 1 ) fertilisers, chemicals, weedicides, insec ticides, fungicides and pesticides for use in tea cultiva tion; and (2) weighing and measuring and packing equip ments for use in tea estates.
The Department refused to include them and the Tribunal and the High Court confirmed the orders.
In appeal to this Court it was contended that, (1) cultivation and the growing of tea leaves was so integrally connected with the manufacture of tea that it could be taken to be a part of the process of manufacturing tea, and since fertilisers etc. were needed for tea cultivation, the same should be held to.
be intended for use in the manufacture or processing of tea for sale; and (2) since weighing equipment used in the factories had been included in the certificate, the weighing equipment used for the purpose of cultivation should similarly be included.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: (1) The goods in item (1) are intended for use not in the manufacturing process in respect of tea meant for sale but are only needed for the cultivation and growth of tea plants and leaves.
There is no direct relationship between the use of fertilisers etc.
and the manufacturing process and hence, they were rightly not included in the registration certificate.
[761 G] (a) Cultivation and growth of tea plants result in the production of raw material in the form of green tea leaves which are ultimately processed into tea meant for sale.
But such cultivation and growth are, in the very nature of things, prior to the manufacturing process and do not answer to the description of manufacture and processing of tea meant for sale.
There is a vital difference between an agricultural operation and a manufacturing process.
What is needed for use purely in an agricultural operation cannot be held to be required for use in a manufacturing process.
[762 D] (b) The fact that the time lag between the plucking of tea leaves and their being subjected to the manufacturing process is very little would not detract 756 from the conclusion that the cultivation and growth of tea plants is distinct and separate from the manufacturing process.
[761 C] (c) Rule 24 of the Income Tax Rules, 1922, and r. 8 of the Income Tax Rules, 1962, prescribe the formula which should be adopted for apportioning the income realised as a result of the sale of tea after it is grown and subjected to the manufacturing process in the factory, thus recognis ing the difference between the agricultural income which is yielded in the form of green leaves purely by the land over which tea plants are grown, and the non agricultural income which is the result of subjecting the green leaves plucked to a particular manufacturing process.
[761 E] (2) The same reasoning holds good in respect of weighing machines used, not in the factories but, in the tea fields.
[762 E] J.K. Cotton Spinning & Weaving Mills Co. Ltd. vs The Sales Tax Officer 16 STC 563.
and Indian Copper Corporation Ltd. vs Commission of Commercial Taxes 16 STC 259 fol lowed.
Tea Estate India (P) Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax referred to.
