The respondent filed a Writ Petition in the High Court questioning the inclusion in the list of Deputy Tahsildars eligible for promotion to the post of Tahsildars of the names of 63 persons who were impleaded as respondents 4 to 66, in the Writ Petition.
The 63 persons were working as Upper Division Clerks in the erstwhile State of Hyderabad.
The State Government in consultation with the Government of India issued an order on 7 4 1960 stating that the first stage promotion of the employees of the erstwhile Government of Hyderabad should be governed by the Hyderabad Cadre and Recruitment Rules for promotion which were applicable to them before that date.
The subsequent promotions after the first stage of promotion would be governed by the relevant rules in force in the newly formed State.
By virtue of this order the aforesaid 6 employees were promoted to the post of Deputy Tahsildars which was the first stage promotion for them.
In 1962, Andhra Pradesh Civil Services (Coopera tion Branch ) Special Rules were framed, but were made effective retrospectively from 1st November, 1956.
Under rule 4(a) the State Government has to prepare in consulta tion with the Public Service Commission a list of persons eligible for appointment as Tahsildars.
The 63 erstwhile employees of the Government of Hyderabad did not have the opportunity to acquire the qualifications prescribed under rule 4(a) of the Special Rules on their promotion as Deputy Tahsildars.
The Government felt that they should not be left out of consideration for appointment, as Tahsildars and asked the Public Service Commission to consider the names of such Deputy Tahsildars for inclusion in the list of eligible candidates assuring the Public Service Commission that the Government would relax the requirements as to qualification in favour of such Deputy Tahsildars provided they were otherwise found suitable by the Commission.
By order dated 30 6 1971 the Governor relaxed the provisions of rule 4(a) of the Special Rules in exercise of powers under section 47 of the Andhra Pradesh State and Subordinate Services Rules 1962.
The respondents filed a Writ Petition for quash ing the order dated 30 6 1971 in the High Court.
The re spondents contended that as a result of the said order their claims for appointment to the posts of Tehsildar had been passed.
over in favour of unqualified persons.
The High Court allowed the Writ Petition.
The High Court held that rule 47 did not confer any power to relax a rule retrospec tively.
It was also held that under rule 47 power was given to Governor personally and therefore the exercise of it by the Governor was invalid.
In an appeal by special leave the appellant contended: 1.
That rule 47 did not confer any power to relax a rule retrospectively.
The power was given to the Governor personally to relax the rules and since the impugned order was not passed by the Governor but by the Govt.
of Andhra Pradesh it was invalid.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: 1.
The view taken by the High Court that the power conferred by rule 47 is exercisable by the Governor personally is based on the judgment 703 in Sardarilal vs Union of India, [1971] 3 S.C.R. 461.
The said decision stands overruled by the later decision of this Honble Court in Shamsher Singh vs State of Punjab, ; [706 E F] 2 Rule 47 empowers the Governor to relax the general rules in such manner as may appear to him to be just and equitable.
It is clear that power under rule 47 is to be exercised in the interest of justice and equity.
It is not difficult to see that the occasion for acting under rule 47 arises after the attention of the Government is drawn to a case where there has been a failure of justice.
In all these cases justice can be done only by exer cising the power under rule 47 with retrospective effect otherwise the object and purpose of the rule will be largely frustrated.
Such a provision is not unique and is to be found in several statutory rules.
[707 A C] R.P. Khanna & Ors.
vs S.A.F. Abbas & Ors., ; , followed. '
