The Bill which came to be enacted as the Rajasthan Land Re forms and Resumption of Jagirs Act was prepared in the Ministerial Department of the Government of Rajasthan.
It was approved by the Rajpramukh on 8 2 1952, and reserved for the consideration of the President, who gave his assent to it on 13 2 1952.
By notification issued on 16 2 1952, the Act came into force on 18 2 1952.
In pursuance of section 21(1) of the Act, the State of Rajasthan issued notifications resuming the jagirs specified therein, whereupon petitions under article 226 of the Constitution were filed by the persons aggrieved challenging the validity of the Act before the Rajasthan High Court.
The petitions were dismissed and thereupon they filed petitions before the Supreme Court under article 32 of the Constitution of India, impugning the Act.
They contended inter alia that the Rajpramukh had no competence to enact the law, that the Bill was not prepared by the Rajpramakh as required by article 212 A(2), that resumption was not one of the topics of legislation enumerated either in the State List or in the Concurrent List in the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution and that the Act was therefore ultra vires the powers of the State, that the Act did not provide for adequate compensation nor was there any public purpose involved in it and therefore it contravened article 31(2), and that as the Act was discrimi natory it contravened article 14.
There were some special contentions that the Act was not saved by article 31 A, because the lands resumed were neither estates nor jagirs nor grants similar to jagirs, inams or muafi and that some of the properties sought to be resumed were not jagirs as defined in the Act and therefore the notifications under section 21 of the Act in so far as they related to them were illegal.
39 304 Held that, (1) the Rajpramukh was competent to enact the im pugned law, under article 385, as he was the authority functioning immediately before the commencement of the Constitution as the legislature of Rajasthan under article X (3) of the Covenant of the United State of Rajasthan.
The expression "Ordinance" in article X (3) must be construed as meaning "Law".
Article VII (3) of the Covenant has reference to the executive power which the Rulers had to resume jagirs and does not operate as a restriction on the legislative powers under article X (3).
The Legislature of the corresponding State mentioned in article 385 refers not to the legislature under the Constitution, but to the body or the authority which was functioning as the legislature of the State before the commencement of the Constitution and under article X (3) of the Covenant of the United State of Rajasthan, that authority was the Rajpramukh.
Article 385 does not require that that authority should have had absolute and unlimited powers of legislation.
If it was functioning as the legislative authority before the Constitution, it would, under the article, have all the powers conferred by the Constitution on the House or Houses of legislature of the States.
(ii) Article 212 A(2) which provides that the Rajpramukh should prepare the Bill, does not require that he should himself draft it.
It is sufficient if he decides questions of policy which are of the essence of the legislation.
It is open to the Rajpramukh to adopt a Bill prepared by his ministers and the only matter that will have to be con sidered is whether in fact he did so.
There is no provision in article 212 A(2) for the Rajpramukh approving of a Bill and an endorsement of approval on the Bill prepared in the ministerial department must therefore signify its adoption by him.
When the Bill is produced with an endorsement of approval under his signature, the question must be held to be concluded and any further discussion about the legislative or executive state of mind of the Rajpramukh must be ruled out as inadmissible.
(iii) The impugned Act is not ultra vires the powers of the State Legislature as the subject matter of the legislation is in substance acquisition of properties falling under entry 36 of List II of the Seventh Schedule.
Resumption and acquisition connote two different concepts, but whether the impugned Act is one for acquisition of jagirs or for their resumption must be determined with ref erence to the pith and substance of the legislation, the name given to it by the legislature not being decisive of the matter.
The resumption for which the Act provides is not in enforcement of the rights which the Rulers had to resume jagirs in accordance with the terms of the grant or the law applicable to it, but in exercise of the sovereign rights of eminent domain possessed by the State.
Under the circumstances, the taking of the properties is in substance acquisition notwithstanding that it is labelled as resumption.
The payment of compensation to the Jagirdars is consistent only with the taking being an acquisition and not resumption in 305 accordance with the terms of the grant or the law applicable to it.
Though the legislation also falls under entry 18 of List II of the Seventh Schedule, there being an entry 36 dealing with acquisition, it must be held that the Act falls under that entry and is valid.
(iv) The word 'jagir ' connoted originally grants made by Rajput Rulers to their clansmen for military services rendered or to be rendered.
Later on grants made for religious and charitable purposes and even to non Rajputs were called jagirs, and both in its popular sense and legislative practice, the word jagir came to be used as connoting all grants which conferred on the grantees rights in respect of land revenue, and that is the sense in which the word jagir should be construed in article 31 A.
The object of article 31 A was to save legislation which was directed to the abolition of intermediaries so as to establish direct relationship between the State and the tillers of the soil.
Construing the word in that sense which would achieve that object in full measure, it must be held that jagir was meant to cover all grants under which the grantees had only rights in respect of revenue and were not tillers of the soil.
Maintenance grants in favour of persons who were not cultivators such as members of the ruling family would be jagirs for purposes of article 31 A. (v) Bhomicharas.
The Bhomicharas are the representatives of Rajput Rulers who conquered the. country and established their sovereignty over it in the thirteenth century.
Later on the Ruler of Jodhpur imposed his sovereignty over the territory but permitted the previous rulers to continue in possession of the lands on payment of an annual sum.
The question was whether they held the lands as jagirs.
Held that, there could be a jagir only by grant by the Rul ing power but that such a grant need not be express, and could be implied and when the Ruler of Jodhpur imposed his sovereignty over the territory of the Bhomicharas but recognised their possession of the lands, it is as if there was annexation by him and re grant to them of these lands.
Vajesinghji Joravar Singji and Others vs Secretary of State [(1924) L.R. 51 I.A. 357] and Secretary of State vs Sardar Bustam Khan [(1941) L.R. 68 I.A. 109], referred to.
Though the Bhomicharas enjoyed large powers, their status was only that of subjects.
The status of a person must be either that of a sovereign or a subject.
There is no tertium quid.
The law does not recognise an intermediate status of a person being partly a sovereign and partly a subject.
And when once it is admitted that the Bhomicharas had acknowledged the sovereignty of Jodhpur, their status can only be that of a subject.
Even if the Bhomicharas did not prior to the enactment of the Marwar Land Revenue Act XL of 1949 hold the lands as grantees 306 from the State, they must be deemed to have become such grantees by force of section 169 of the Act which provides that all lands in the State vest in the Maharajah and all proprietary interests therein are deemed to be held under a grant from him.
The Bbomicharas bad by long usage and recognition and by the legislative practice of the State come to be recognised as jagirdars and their tenure is a jagir within the intendment of section 169.
For the purposes of article 31 A, it would make no difference whether the grant is made by the sovereign in the exercise of his prerogative right or by the legislature in the exercise of its sovereign rights, Grants which are the creatures of statutes called legislative grants are equally within the operation of that article.
Bhomicharas are, accordingly, within the operation of article 31 A. (vi) The position of Bhumias in Mewar is similar to that of Bhomicharas in Marwar and in addition it was a condition of the terms on which their title to the lands was recognised by the rulers of Chittoor and Udaipur, that they had to render military service when called upon and also pay quit rent.
Their title to the lands therefore rested on an implied grant and their tenure would be jagir even in its stricter sense.
Section 27 of the Mewar Government Kanoon Mal Act (V of 1947) enacts that all lands belong to His Highness and that no person has authority to take possession of any lands unless the right is granted by His Highness.
Section 106 (1) of the Act declares that a Tikanadar, Jagirdar, Muafidar or Bhumia shall have all such revenue rights in the lands comprised in his jagir, muafi, or Bhom under this Act, as are granted to him by His Highness".
The effect of these provisions was to impress on the Bhom tenure the charac teristics of a grant.
Article 13, Clause (1) of the Constitution of Mewar provided that, "no person shall be deprived of his life, liberty or property without due process of law, nor shall any person be denied equality before the law within the territories of Mewar".
It was contended for the petitioners that the impugned Act was void as contravening the above provisions.
Held that, as the authority which enacted the Constitution of Mewar was His Highness, it could be repealed or modified by the same authority, and the impugned Act must be held to have repealed the Constitution to the extent that it was in consistent with it.
(vii) The Tikanadars of Shekwati got into possession of lands as ijaradars or lessees and were subsequently treated as jagirdars.
Their tenure was, if not jagirs, at least other "similar grants" within article 31 A.
It is included in Schedule I to the impugned Act as item 6.
The nature of the tenures of lands held by Subeguzars, Mansubdars, maintenance holders (Lawazma and Kothrikarch), Tikanadars and of Naqdirazan, Sansan grants, etc., considered, 307 (viii) The Khandela estate was granted in 1836 on a permanent lease.
The definition of jagir in section 2(h) includes the tenures mentioned in Schedule I to the Act and Istimrari tenure is item 2 therein.
The question was whether the Istimrar ijara was within item 2.
Held that, the essential features of Istimrari tenure are that the lands are assessed to a nominal quit rent, and that it is permanent.
The amount of Rs. 80,001 fixed as assessment under the deed of 1836 cannot be said to be nominal.
The grant is, therefore, not an Istimrari tenure, but a permanent Izara.
(ix) Objections raised as to the validity of the Act on the ground that it did not provide for payment of compensation, that there was no public purpose involved in the resumption and that therefore it contravenes article 31(2) or that the provisions of the Act offend article 14, are barred by the provisions of article 31 A of the Constitution.
Even apart from article 31 A, the impugned Act must be held to be supported by public purpose and is not in contravention of article 31(2).
Nor is there a contravention of article 14, as under the Act all jagirs are liable to be resumed, no power having been conferred on the Government to grant exemption.
State of Bihar vs Maharajadhiraja Sir Kameshwar Singh of Darbhanga and Others ([1952] S.C.R. 889) and Biswambhar Singh vs The State of Orissa and Others ([1954] S.C.R. 842), referred to.
The true scope of the rule of ejusdem generis is that words of a general nature following specific and particular words should be construed as limited to things which are of the same nature as those specified and not its reverse, that specific words 'which precede are controlled by the general words which follow.
