Section 9(12) of the Madras Hindu Religious Endowments Act, 1926, defines 'temple ' as a place, by whatever designa tion known, used as a place of public worship and .dedicated to, or for the benefit of, or used as of right by the Hindu community, or any section thereof, as a place of religious worship Section 9(11) provides that all property belonging to, or given or endowed to the support of a temple or for the performance of any service or charity connected with the temple will constitute its endowment, including the premises of the temple.
Section 2 provides that the Act applies to all Hindu public religious endowments.
The Section, the Explanation to the section, and section 3(b) shown that Hindu public religious endowments ' do not include private endow ments and Jain religious endowments.
Dharmasthal, in which the temple in dispute was situate has a number of institutions which were under the management of a person known as Heggade who was a Jain.
The Religious Endowments Board, after an enquiry, held that the Act ap plied to the temple.
On application made under section 84(2), the District Judge held that it was a private temple, and that, therefore, the Act did not apply to it.
On appeal, the High Court did not .consider whether it was a private temple, but held that the temple was an adjunct to the composite insti tution of Dharmasthal, that, according to the customs and usages of the institution, the temple could not.be separated from the rest.
of the institutions, that Dharmasthal was both a religious and charitable institution, that the deity in the temple was worshipped both by .the Hindus and the Jains in accordance with their respective faiths, that the deity was .neither an exclusively Hindu deity not an exclu sively Jain deity, that the institution.
of Dharmasthal was rounded by the Jain, that its administration remained exclu sively Jam since its inception, that it could not be in ferred that there was an implied dedication to the Hindus exclusively, and that therefore the temple, was not a temple as defined in the Act, and that the Act did not apply to it.
The High Court also held that its property was also an adjunct to the composite institution consisting of Hindu Gods, Jain Gods and Daivas, worshipped by Hindus and Jains.
Dismissing the appeal by special leave to this Court, HELD: (Per A.N. Ray, C.J., and P.N. Shinghal, J): (1) Section 9(12) of the Act only requires that the temple should be dedicated for public religious worship, as of right by Hindus, but it would not detrace from its char acter of a temple as such if Jains also worship there.
The pro visions of the Act will however not be attracted to it in the absence of and evidence to prove the existence of an endowment for it, as the Act applies only to Hindu public religious endowments.
[899 H, 900 A] (2) The evidence in the case shows that the institution of Dharmasthal was originally a Jain religious and charita ble restitution to which property was endowed by the ances tors of the present Heggade who was himself a Jain.
It was that endowment which spread and gained more and more impor tance over the years because of the offerings made largely by Hindu and Jain devotees and worshippers.
A lingam was installed in the temple by a Hindu Sanyasi only in the 16th century; but, it has not been established that there is any endowment which could be said to belong exclusively to the temple.
Even if any such 890 endowment was made by some one in the name of the temple it was taken to be an endowment for the entire institution known as Dharmasthal and was treated as such.
The temple cannot therefore be said, to be a Hindu religious endowment within the meaning of section 2 and the provisions of the Act are not applicable to it.
[896 F H: 897 A] (3) The evidence also shows that the temple is part and parcel of the composite institution known as Dharmasthal and is so inseparably connected with it that it is its integral part, and it cannot therefore be held to be an endowment within the meaning of section 9(11).
It has not been proved that any property belongs to the temple or has been given or endowed for its support or for the performance of any serv ice or charity connected therewith, or that it has any such premises of its own as could be said to form its own endow ment.
The mere installation of the idol in the temple could not be said to bring into existence any such property as could be said to belong to the deity or given or endowed for the support of its temple or for the performance of any service or charity connected therewith.
The temple does not have even a separate prakararn.
The shrine of the adja cent shrine is in dose proximity of the temple and within the same prakaram.
The existence of other shrines of Jain Daivas in the same prakaram as the temple, therefore, shows that this temple cannot even claim to have any exclusive premises of its own so as to constitute an endowment within the meaning of section 9(11) of the Act.
[897 A, F] (4) In a given case, it may be difficult to prove the original dedication because of the lapse of considerable time and its user by Hindus as of right may be enough to prove an initial dedication.
But, in the present case, it would not be possible to conclude that there was any such dedication because there is nothing to show how the Hindu Sanyasi, who installed the lingam in the temple in the 16th century, could be.
said to be a donor when the property did not belong to him.
[900 ,F G] (5) The facts that the temple was not shown to be a Jain endowment, and hat it possesses the characteristics of a Hindu temple will not make, any difference because, there is no evidence to show that there is any endowment ' to the temple, as such, and the temple is a part and parcel of Dharmasthal.
[900 A_B] Per Beg, J. (1) In order to decide a dispute under section 84(1)(a) it is necessary to.
decide whether a particular place is a temple as contemplated by the Act.
But, that is not enough for the decision of the whole issue to be decided.
For that purpose attention has also to be directed towards deciding the question whether the institution to be considered is a temple and nothing more.
If the temple, as a place of worship, is an integral part of an institution so that it is not separable as an institution in itself, the mere fact that there is a temple as defined by the Act, where Hindu members of the public worship as a matter of right, will not go.
In such a case, the institution is not the temple, although a temple can by itself, be an institution.
There is thus a distinction between the meanings of temple ' merely as a place of worship as defined in section 9(12) and a 'temple ' as an institution.
It is therefore, necessary to consider the history, the beliefs underlying at the inception and sought to be propagated the forms of worship meant to be kept alive, the prevalent customs and practices, the exact nature and process of the endowments connected with the institution, the established rules for its management, the objects to be carried out by those in charge of the endow ment, and whether all these taken together justify the inference.
that a particular temple, as defined by the Act, is also a separate or separable institution by itself, or is just an integral and organically inseparable part of an institution or an organisation outside the Act, [903 A B, 906E,H 907 A C] (2) A consideration of the property which belongs to or is endowed for the support of temples or for performance of any service or charity connected therewith including the premises of temples may also become necessary so as to determine the character of an endowment as a part of the institution and the process by which it took place. [907 F G] (3) The origin ,and process of dedication is not always found embodied in document.
Where the dedication itself is evidenced by a document, its objects, 891 such as they may be, can be determined by interpreting the document.
There are, however, many cases in which dedica tion or endowment of property for a particular purposes has to be inferred from immemorial or long user of a property in a particular manner or from the conduct of a party.
Neither a document nor express words are essential for a dedication for a religious or public purpose in our country.
Although religious ceremonies of Sankalpa and Samarpanam are relevant for proving a dedication, yet, they are not indis pensable.
[907 G H; 908 A B] Bholanath Nandi vs Midnapora Zamindary Co. Ltd. 31 I.A. 75, Lakshmidhar Misra & Ors.
vs Rangalal & Ors.
AIR 1950 PC 56, Manohar Gandhi vs Lakhmiram, ILR @ 263, Deoki Nandan vs Murlidhar, [1956] S.C.R. '756 and Puajri Lakshmana Goundan vs Subramaniya referred to.
All that section 9(12) requires is that the place should be a place of worship either dedicated for the benefit of or used as of right by the Hindu community or a section thereof as a place of religious worship.
The word 'exclusively ' is not there at all so as to justify any exclusion of a place of worship from the definition of a temple on the ground that Jains worship together with Hindus of 'other sects.
But, the issue to be decided is whether the 'institution ' is a temple as defined in the Act.
It is not whether a particu lar place is a temple, in the sense that it is set apart for worship by the Hindu public in general or a section of it, but it is whether an institution itself is a temple as defined by the Act.
[905; D G, 906 F H, 907 A D].
(5) In the present case, the findings of the High Court show that the institution or organisation of which the temple is an inseparable part, is predominantly Jain in character.
In view of the well established doctrine of implied endowment of property, by its long user for a par ticular religious or public purpose, based on a presumed consent, it could be said that the temple had become a separate institution with an endowment of its own consisting at least of the land over which the temple had been built, the building and the idol installed with free access to it by the Hindu public in general which made offerings even though Jains also worship there.
But, in view of the general rule of practice under article 136 of the Constitution that this Court does not disturb findings of the final court of fact where two views are possible, this Court would not differ from the conclusion reached by the High Court that the temple was not a separate institution.
On such a finding it would be exempt from the operation of the Act by reason of the Explanation to section 2 excluding Jain religious endowments from the benefits of the Act.
[905 E H, 907 D F] (6)In the present case, neither the District Judge nor the High Court had given any findings whether any endowment whatsoever of the temple existed.
The extent of property covered by an endowment was also not really investigated as no issue was framed on it.
At least the structure of the temple with the idol installed and the ground upon which the temple stands must be deemed to be dedicated even though these may not for purposes of management, form separable units.
When a religious institution becomes a means of obtaining money or material benefits, in the form of offer ings or donations or gifts, as it generally does, from members of the public, a danger of its misuse can only be effectively averted by appropriate supervision.
The powers of the Government, .under the relevant Act to extend the provisions of the Act to Jain public religious institutions which are not affected by the dispute brought before the Court, are however, adequate to deal with such situation.
[912 A H, 913A]
