Messrs.John & Co. were in financial difficulties and, therefore, entered into a financial agreement with Sethia & Co. a partnership firm of the plaintiff and Seth Sugan Chand.
On 6th July, 1948 Messrs. John & Co. obtained anoth er financial accommodation from Sethia & Co. Messrs. Tejka ran Sidhkaran had also given some advances to Messrs. John & Co. The liability to the firm of Messrs. Tejkaran Sidhkaran was transferred to Sethia & Co. Seth Loonkaran Serbia filed a suit against John & Co. and his partners (defendants first set) as well as Messrs. John, Jain, Mehra & Co. and its partners.
(defendants second set) for recovery of Rs. 21,11,500/ with costs and future interest and for a declaration that the plaintiff had a prior and floating charge on all the business assets of Messrs. John & Co. It was alleged by the plaintiff that the defendants (second set) entered into partnership with the defendants (first set ) under the name and style of Messrs. John Jain, Mehra & Co and maliciously induced them to commit breach of the agreement dated 6 7 1948 by forcibly turning out his representatives who used to remain in charge of the stocks, stores.
coal, waste, etc., of the mills and making them enter into a financial agreement contrary to the terms of the agreement with his firm.
The plaintiff also alleged that accounts were again settled on 4 4 1949 and a sum of Rs. 47,23,738/ was found due to him from the defend ants.
The defendants (first set) contended that there was no settlement of accounts; that the accounts were tainted with fraud and obvious mistakes and that on a true and correct accounting a large sum of money would be found due to them; that the plaintiff and said Sugan Chand obtained various documents, agreements, vouchers, receipts etc., and that the same were of no legal value as they were secured by the former by practising undue influence, fraud, coercion and misrepresentation; that the plaintiff had illegally and contrary to the agreement dated 6 7 1948 debited them with huge amounts which were not really due to them; that the cotton supplied by the plaintiff was of inferior quality and that the rates charged were exorbitant.
It was also denied that the plaintiff had floating or prior charge on any of their stocks, stores, etc; that the suit was barred by the provisions Of section 69 of the Partnership Act and that the agreement dated 6 71948 which was insufficiently stamped could not form the basis of the suit.
The defendants.
(second set) also denied the claim of the plaintiff.
The Trial Court held that the suit was maintainable; that the firm of Messrs. Sethia & Co. was dissolved before the institution of the suit; that the suit being one for the recovery of the assets due to a. dissolved partnership firm from a third party, was not barred by section 69 of the Partnership Act: that Seth Sugan Chand was not a necessary party to the suit; that the agreement dated 6 7 1948 was duly stamped and that no undue influence etc., was exercised by the plaintiff on the defendants; that there was no ac counting on 4 4 1949 as alleged by the plaintiff and that both the plaintiff and the defendants (first set) committed a breach of the agreement dated 6 7 1948.
The Trial Court also held that a charge was created in favour of the plain tiff in respect of the entire business assets and that the defendants (second set) were liable to satisfy the plain tiff 's claim.
The Trial Court decreed the plaintiff 's suit to the extent of Rs. 18,00,152 but rejected his claim for specific performance and injunction.
The Trial Court accord ingly passed a preliminary decree against both the sets of defendants directing them to deposit 854 the said amount in the court within the prescribed time and in default gave the plaintiff a right to apply for a final decree for the sale of all the business assets, goods, stocks, stores, etc.
The decree also gave a right to the plaintiff to apply for a personal decree against the defend ants for the balance of his claim in case the net sale proceeds of the property of the firm were found insufficient to discharge his claim.
The plaintiff filed an appeal in the High Court of Allahabad and the defendants also filed an appeal against the judgment of the Trial Court.
The High Court allowed both the appeals partially holding that no fraud, undue influence, coercion or misrepresentation was practised by the plaintiff; that the agreement dated 6 7 1948 was neither insufficiently stamped nor did it require registration; that the deed of dissolution dated 22 7 1948 was prepared for the purpose of the case but there was sufficient evidence on the record to indicate that said Sugan Chand had withdrawn from the partnership carried on in the name of Serbia & Co. with effect from 30 6 1948; that Seth Sugan Chand was not a necessary party to the suit; that the suit was not barred.
by section 69 of the Partnership Act; that the alterations in the deed dated 6 7 1948 were not material alterations and did not render the agreement void; that the plaintiff had a floating charge over the business assets of John & Co.; that it was defendants (first set) and not the plaintiff who committed breach of the ' agreement.
The High Court, there fore, passed a preliminary decree for Rs. 11,33,668/ in favour of the plaintiff and against the defendants (first set) but dismissed the suit with costs as against the de fendants (second set).
The High Court granted certificate under Article 133 in both the appeals.
Dismissing the plaintiff 's appeal and allowing the appeal of the defendants (first set) held: (1) Section 69 of the Partnership Act is mandatory in character and its effect is to render a suit by a plaintiff in respect of a right vested in him or acquired by him under a contract which he entered into as a partner of an unregistered firm, whether existing or dissolved, void.
[869 A] (2) A partner of an erstwhile unregistered partnership firm cannot bring a suit to enforce a right arising out of a contract failing within the ambit of section 69 of the Partnership Act.
The suit out of which the appeals arise was for enforcement of the agreement entered into by the plaintiff as partner of Serbia & Co. It was never pleaded by the plaintiff not even in his replication that he was suing to recover the outstanding of a dissolved firm.
Thus the suit was clearly hit by section 69 ' and was not main tainable.
[869 B C] (3) A close scrutiny of the document and other evidence clearly negatives the plaintiff 's claim that the firm was dissolved with effect from 30th June 1948.
[865 C] (a) The agreement dated 6th July 1948 itself is signed by the plaintiff as a partner and the, expression partner also appears in the body of the agreement.
[865 D] (b) The alleged deed of dissolution dated 22nd July 1948 between the plaintiff and Seth Sugan Chand was prepared on a stamp paper printed in the Government Press in November, 1948.
The said Dissolution Deed was, therefore, clearly fabricated by the plaintiff.
The plaintiff signed various cheques in July, 1948 as the partner of Sethia & Co. [865 F H; 866 A C; 867 F] (c) No service by post or advertisement in the newspaper about the dissolution was given either by the plaintiff or by Seth Sugan Chand.
[867 F] (4) Seth Sugan Chand was a necessary party to the suit and in spite of the objections raised on behalf of the defendants the plaintiff did not care to implead ' Seth Sugan Chand.
The suit was bound to fail on that ground also.
[869 D E] (5) A material alteration in a document without the consent of a party to, it has the effect of cancelling the deed.
[870 A] Volume 12 of Halsburys Laws of England (Fourth Edition) referred to.
855 Nathu Lal & Ors.
vs Musammat Gomti & Ors.
(A.I.R. relied on.
In the present case there were many material alterations of the document.
The material alterations, therefore have the effect of cancelling the deed in question.
[870 B D] (6) The plaintiff 's suit was for a specific and ascer tained sum of money on the basis of settled account.
The Courts below found concurrently that there was no settlement of account as alleged by the plaintiff on 4th April 1949.
After that it was not open to the courts below to make out a new case for the plaintiff which he never pleaded.
The courts be.low could have either dismissed the suit or passed a preliminary decree for accounts directing that the books of account be examined item by item and an opportunity allowed to defendants to impeach and falsify the accounts.
[871 A C]
