Section 4 of the Andhra Pradesh (Andhra Area Electricity Supply Undertaking (Acquisition) Act, 1954, empowered the Government to declare that an electricity undertaking of the licensee Municipal Council shall vest in Government on a specified date.
Section 5 provides for compensation to be paid on one of three alternative bases, A, B or C set out in the Act.
Where compensation is on the basis 'C ',, it in cludes under section 5(3)(vi) the book value of all intangible assets to the extent such value has not been written off in the books of the licensee; and section 6(2)(a) mentions the items that would vest in the State Government.
Section 6(2)(a)(iii) relates to all the rights, liabilities and obligations of the licensee under any other contract entered into bona fide, not being a contract relating to the borrowing or lending for money.
Section 10(2) (b)(iii) lays down that the Government may deduct from the compensation all sums paid by consumers by way of security deposit and arrears of interest due thereon on the vesting date, in so far as they have not been paid over by the licensee to the Government, less the amounts which according to the books of the licensee are due from the consumers to the licensee for energy supplied to such consumers before that date.
In the present case, the State Government made a decla ration regarding the vesting of the Electricity Undertaking of the appellant in the State Government, and transferred its rights to the respondent Electricity Board.
Certain amounts were shown in the books of the appellant as due to it from consumers.
The respondent claimed those amounts and flied a suit against the appellant for their recovery.
The trial court dismissed the suit, but the High Court allowed the appeal.
In appeal to this Court, it was contended that past dues from the consumers would not vest in the respondent as they were not specifically mentioned in section 6(2)(a); and that under section 10(2)(b)(iii) the appellant was entitled to deduct and appropriate the amounts due from consumers for supply of electricity from their security deposits.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court, HELD: (1) The explicitly wide language used in section 6(2)(a)(iii) dispenses with the need to specify all items which are covered by it; and, arrears of dues from consumers are covered by the wide language of the clause.
[850 A] (2)(a) Section 10(2)(b)(iii) is meant for security deposits and arrears of interest due on them which are generally held in trust by the licensee so as to be ulti mately returned to the consumers,.
if the dues of the con sumers have been met without resorting to the amounts depos ited.
They are used for a deduction of dues from deposits where these have not been paid.
If these deposits have not been made over by the licensee to the Government, they will be claimable by the depositors, and, therefore, they are deducted from the compensation.
If however, there are any amounts due shown in the books of the licensee as duo from the consumers of energy they would become realisable by the Government under section 6(2)(a)(iii).
It is for this reason that the deduction of security 847 deposit from compensation is reduced by the amounts which are due from consumers to the Undertaking for energy sup plied by the Undertaking before the date of vesting as they become the claims realisable by the successor in interest of the Undertaking.
An exclusion from an item of deduction from compensation could only indicate that this was being done because this was an item which is covered by the compensation provided for and to be paid.
[850 A] (b) In .the present case, the only contention of the appellant was that the right to appropriate the amount of dues did not vest in the respondent but that the amount had vested in the appellant.
It was not argued on behalf of the appellant that what was vested in the Government was only the right to realise the dues from the consumers and not to recover from the appellant the amount which the appellant had actually realised or could have realised.
(3) The High Court 's interpretation of section 10(2)(b)(iii) must be accepted as a correct interpretation because it is in harmony with the meaning of the terms of section 5(3)(vi) read with section 6(2)(a) of the Act.
[851C]
