The appellant (plaintiff) filed a suit on behalf of and for the benefit of itself and of other creditors against the respondents (3 defendants) and prayed for a declaration that,, (1) the sale deed of the house in dispute by the 2nd defendant in favour of the 1st defendant was void as against the plaintiff and all other creditors of the 3rd defendant; and (2) that the house was and continued to be owned by the 3rd defendant.
The house was sold in the name of the 2nd defendant for Rs. 69,000.
He is the son of the 3rd defend ant who was alleged to be the real purchaser.
As the 3rd defendant failed to pay the arrears of income tax due from him the house was attached as his property.
The 2nd defendant raised an objection but the objection was reject ed.
The 3rd defendant filed an appeal against the assess ment of income tax and while the appeal was pending before the Appellate Assistant Commissioner, the 2nd and 3rd de fendants, and five other persons formed a limited company, namely, the 1st defendant.
The Appellate Assistant Commis sioner allowed the 3rd defendant 's appeal and ordered a fresh assessment of his income, and the Income Tax Officer made a fresh assessment.
Soon after the 2nd defendant purported to convey the house of the 1st defendant for Rs. 1,00,000 of which Rs. 90,000/ were payable to the 2nd de fendant in the shape of shares in the company.
The house was again attached for recovery of the tax due from the 3rd defendant.
The 1st defendant objected to that attachment.
The objection was allowed and the parties were referred to the Civil Court for.
redress and the suit was filed.
The trial court decreed the suit, but the High Court, in appeal, set aside the judgment.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, HELD: The evidence disclosed that the 3rd defendant 'was the owner of the house, and his son, the 2nd defendant, was merely a benamidar for him; and that the 1st defendant Company was formed just to transfer the house to it in an effort to save it from attachment and sale for realisation of the income tax arrears of the 3rd defendant.
[978 A C] (a) In a case where it is asserted that an assignment in the name of one person is in reality for the benefit of another, it is necessary to find out the source whence the consideration came, and to examine who actually was enjoying the benefits of the transfer.
[907 F G] Gangadara Ayyar and others vs Subramania Sastrigal and others (A,I.R. referred to Meenakshi Mills, Madurai vs The Commissioner of In come tax, Madras [(1956) S.C.R. 691] followed.
(b) Although the.
onus of establishing.
g that a transaction is benami is on the plaintiff, where it is not possible to obtain evidence which conclusively establishes or rebuts the allegation.
, .the case must be dealt with on reasonable probabilities and legal inferences arising from proved.
or admitted facts.
While the burden initially rests on the party who would fail if no evidence is led at all, after the evidence is recorded, it rests upon the party against whom judgment would be given if no further evidence were adduced by either side.
Thus, the burden of proof is not static, and may shift during the course of the trial Where the 968 entire evidence has been led by the contesting parties on the question in issue, abstract considerations of onus are out of place, and the truth or otherwise of the case must always be.
adjudged on the evidence: led by the parties.
It is therefore necessary to weigh the evidence in this case and to decide whether.
even if it were assumed that there was nO conclusive evidence to establish or rebut the benami allegation, what would, on a careful assessment of the evidence, be a reasonable.
probability and a legal inference from relevant and admissible evidence.
[973 A D] Kalwa Devadattam and two Others vs The Union of India and others ; followed.
In the present case, the 2nd defendant, at the time of the sale, was just 18 years old, and did not have any money of his own.
His father the.
3rd defendant was alive.
The High Court did not examine the reliability of the 2nd defendant 's evidence regarding the source.
from which he received the sum of Rs. 60,000/ even though it was an important question and had been examined by the trial court with reference to the entire evidence on record.
The rea sonable preponderance of probability on the evidence is, that the 2nd defendant had failed to establish the source of the consideration of Rs. 60,000/ even though it was an important fact within his special knowledge.
[973 E H] (d) The 2nd defendant had also failed to prove that he enjoyed the benefit of the sale.
[974 G] In order to find out whether the 3rd defendant was enjoying the benefit of the transaction, the finding of the High Court was clearly against the evidence on record.
The admissions contained in the records before the Income Tax Officer proved that the house was purchased by the 3rd defendant out of his own funds in the name, of his son, the 2nd defendant, and that the 3rd defendant was enjoying the income accruing from.
it as his own income.
[975 E F] (f)(i) The admissions by the 3rd defendant were substan tive evidence of the facts admitted and such admissions, duly proved, were admissible evidence irrespective of wheth er the party making them appeared in the witness box or not, and whether that party when appearing as a witness was confronted with those statements in case a statement con trary to those admissions was made.
They were taken into consideration against the 3rd defendant and not against the 2nd defendant.
[975 H, 976 A B] Bharat Singh and another vs Bhagirath ; , followed.
(ii) There is no requirement of the Evidence Act that unless the admissions were adverse to his interests when made, they could not be read against the person making them.
[976 F] (iii) The contention that the evidence of the admissions is admissible only in terms of section 33 of the Evidence Act was untenable because that section deals with statements of persons who cannot be called as witnesses and does not restrict or override the provisions relating to admissions in the Evidence Act.
[977 A C] (g) The 2nd defendant, who had failed to obtain an order for the release of the house from attachment when it was first attached, hastened to sell the house when the assess ment proceedings were pending before the Income tax De partment.
The 1st defendant Company was in fact dominated by the 3rd defendant and his close relations, it did not even pay the sale price.
in cash, and there was no evidence ' to show that it was able to transact any substantial busi ness.
Therefore, the sale of the house in favour of the 1st defendant was a sham transaction and was effected only to defeat and delay the creditors of the 3rd defendant.
[978 A B]
