The parents of the respondent originally professed Hindu religion and belonged to Madiga caste which is a scheduled caste, in the Andhra Pradesh as specified in the schedule to the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) order, 1950.
Respondent 's parents were converted to Christianity and thereafter the respondent was born.
The respondent got himself converted to Hinduism renouncing Christianity.
Thereafter, he applied for admission to Guntur Medical College on the basis that he was a member of a Scheduled Caste.
He was provisionally selected for admission but subsequently was informed by the principal the College that his selection was cancelled as he was not a Hindu by birth.
The Principal relied on Note (b) to Clause of rule 2 of the Rules issued by the Government of Andhra Pradesh for admission to the M.B.B.S. course in Government Medical College.
The said note provides that no candidate other than Hindu can claim to belong to Scheduled Caste.
It further provides that no candidate can belong to Scheduled Caste except by birth.
The respondent filed a Writ Petition in the High Court challenging the validity of Note (b) as going beyond the scope of the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) order, 1950.
The respondent succeeded before the learned single Judge as well as the Division Bench of the High Court.
In fact, it was conceded by the appellant before the High Court that note (b) was repugnant to the said order.
Dismissing the appeal by Special Leave, ^ HELD: 1.
It is clear on a plain reading of clause 4 of Article 15 that the State has power to make special provision for scheduled castes and in exercise of its power the State can reserve seats in a Medical College for members of Scheduled Castes without violating Article 15 or Article 29(2).
Article 366(24) defines Scheduled Castes to mean such castes, races or tribes as are deemed under Article 341 to be scheduled castes.
The President in exercise of the powers conferred upon him under Article 341 has issued Constitution (Scheduled Castes) order 1950.
Madiga caste is included in the schedule to the said order.
The said order itself, however, provides that no person who.
professes a religion other than Hindu or Sikh shall be deemed to be a member of a scheduled caste.
It, however, does not require that the should have been born a Hindu or a Sikh.
The only thing required is that at the material time he should profess Hindu or Sikh religion.
The requirement of the note that a candidate in order to be eligible for a reserved seat should be a member of a Scheduled Caste by birth went beyond the said order and was rightly condemned as void.
[1049B H, 1050A] 2.
There is no absolute rule applicable in all cases that whenever a member of a caste is converted from Hinduism to Christianity he loses his membership of the caste.
It would depend upon r the structure of the caste and its rules and regulations.
There are some castes, 1047 particularly ill South India, where this consequence does not follow on conversion since such castes comprise both Hindus and Christians.
Whether Madiga caste falls in this category is a debatable question.
For the purposes of the present appeal it is not necessary to decide the contention of the respondent that there are both Hindus and Christians in Madiga caste and even after conversion to Christianity his parents continued to belong to Madiga caste.
[1050 C F] 3.
A similar question about the effect of re conversion was decided by this Court in the case of C. R. Arumugam vs section Rajagopal.
In that case this Court laid down that there is no reason to hold that a person on reconversion to Hinduism cannot once again become a member of the caste in which he was born and to which he belonged before conversion to another religion.
The reasoning on which this decision proceeded is equally applicable will a cause where the parents of a person are converted from Hinduism to Christianity and he is born after their conversion and on his subsequent embraching Hinduism, the members of the caste to which the parents belong prior to their conversion accept him as a member within the fold.
It is for the members of the caste to decide whether or not to admit a person within the caste.
Since the caste is a social combination of persons governed by its rules and regulations, it may, if its rules and regulations so provide, admit a new member just as it may expel an existing member.
The only requirement for admission of a person as a member of the caste is the acceptance of the reason by the other members of the caste.
On conversion to Hinduism a person would not become a member of the caste to which his parents belonged prior to their conversion, automatically or as a matter of course but he would become such member if the other members of the caste accept him as a members and admit him within the fold.
[1050G, 1051B E] There is nothing on record to show whether the respondent was accepted by Madiga caste.
However, it is not necessary to undertake this enquiry because it has been agreed by the appellants that whatever be the result of the appeal, the admission of the respondent would not be disturbed.
[1051 FG]
