In a suit for the recovery of price of "Mac Intyre Sleeves, "supplied to the appellant, but alleged to have been wrongfully ' rejected after a considerable time, the respondent/plaintiff sought to make the appellant/defendant liable to compensate by reasons of provisions containing in Section 70 of the Indian Con tract Act.
The trial Court found that the goods were accepted and it dismissed the suit on the reasoning that the appellant offered to restore the goods.
But .on appeal, the Division Bench decreed the suit, not on the principles of Section 70 of the Contract Act, but treating the case of the respondent to be a claim for dam ages for wrongful rejection and for non acceptance of goods on the footing of uninforceable contract for sale of goods".
Dismissing the appeal by certificate the.
Court, HELD: (1) The three.
ingredients to support the cause of action undersection 70 of the Indian Contract Act are: First, the goods are to be delivered lawfully or anything has to be done for another person lawfully.
Second, the thing done.
or the ' goods delivered is so, done or delivered "not intending to do so gratuiously".
Third, the person to whom the goods are delivered "enjoys the benefit thereof".
It is only when the three ingredients are.
pleaded in the plaint that a cause of action is constituted under section 70 of the India Contract Act.
If any plaintiff pleads three ingredients and proves the three features the defendant is then bound to make compensation in respect .of or to re store the things so done or delivered.
[980 G H, 981 A] (2) Courts should not allow the parties to go to trial in the absence of proper pleadings.
In the instant case, the Court should not have allowed the respondent to go to trial with a claim under section 70 of the Indian Contract Act.
[981 B C] (3) When parties went to trial and issues were raised on claims and the litigation also went through the. course of trial and appeal, non suiting for want of proper plead ings at the appellate stage, by the Supreme Court is not desirable.
[981 C] (4) Restoration under section 70 of the Indian Contract Act does not mean restoration of "goods by actual delivery".
Intimation to take back the goods rejected evinces intention of restoration.
[982 B C]
