The respondents are the owner of a building known as Viram Lodge.
They run a hotel in the said building.
The annual gross rental value of the.
building was determined at Rs. 6,600/ in 1956.
It was revised to Rs. 43,405/ by the Assessment Officer in 1965.
Section 138(b) of the Madhya Pradesh Municipal Corporation Act, 1956, provides that notwithstanding anything contained in any ,other law for the time being in force, the annual value of any building shall be deemed to be the gross annual rent at which such building might be reasonably at the time of assessment be expected to let from year to year at the time of the less an allowance of 10 per cent for repairs etc.
The respondent challenged the valuation on the ground that the rental value of the premises could not be fixed at a rate higher than the stand ard rent under section 7 of the Madhya Pradesh Accommoda tion Control Act, 1961.
The Municipal Commissioner negatived the respondents ' contention.
An appeal filed by the respondents to the Additional District Judge also failed.
The High Court however allowed the Revision filed by the respondents.
Allowing the appeal by Special Leave held: 1.
In the.
present case the building in ques tion was never let on rent and is being used by the owners as a hotel.
[1019 A] 2.
On a proper construction of section 138(b) where the standard rent of a building has been fixed under section 7 of the Accommodation Control Act, and there is nothing to show that there has been fraud or collusion that would be its reasonable letting value but where the building has never been let out the question of fixation standard rent does not arise.
In that case it would be permissible to fix its reasonable rent without regard to the provi sions of Madhya Pradesh Accommodation Control Act.
This view gives proper effect to the nonobstante clause in section 138(b).
[1019 D F] The Corporation of Calcutta vs Smt.
Padma Debi and others ; , Corporation of Calcutta vs Life Insurance Corporation of India , Guntur Municipal Council vs Guntur Town Rate Payers ' Association ; and New Delhi Municipal Committee vs M.N. Soi and another ; , distinguished.
