Section 2(g) of the Central Provinces and Berar Sales Tax Act, 1947 defines 'sale ' and Explanation II to the sub section provides that notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Indian , the sale of any goods which are actually in the State at the time when the contract of sale, as defined in that Act in respect thereof is made, shall, wherever the contract of sale is made, be deemed for the purpose of this Act to have taken place in the State.
The Amending Act of 1949 substituted for this Explanation another Explanation but as the amend ment did not receive the assent of the Governor General under section 107 of the Government of India Act, 1935, it was void.
The assessee owned manganese ore mines in the State and was entering into contracts at places outside the State for the despatch abroad of manganese ore through different ports.
The contracts contained specifications of strengths of manganese ore to be supplied with permissible percentages of other ingredients an admixtures.
The assessee arranged for the transport of various grades of menganese ore in railway wagons from one or more of the mines, and the order in which trucks were loaded and unloaded was so arranged that the required average consistency or strength of manganese ore specified in the contracts was obtained in the course of such unloading.
The assessee described the par ticular type of conglomerate as 'Oriental mixture. ' The assessee contended (1) that the original Explanation II was validly repealed by the Amending Act and since no sub stitution of the new provision had taken place, only the repeal survived, and that, therefore neither the old una mended provision nor its replacement were in operation, with the result that the Sales after the date of amendment were.
not subject to sales tax, and (2) even assuming that the unamended provision was in force, 'Oriental Mixture ', as a taxable commodity came into existence only after the ores got mixed up in the process of unloading and not before so that, its sale could not be taxed as 'goods which are actu ally in the State ', at the time when contracts: were entered into.
The High Court on a reference held the first contention against the assessee and the second in favour of the asses see.
Both sides appealed to this Court.
Dismissing the appeals of the assessee and allowing the appeals of the State.
HELD: (1) As the period involved is preconstitution period, article 286 of Constitution, which is not retrospective in operation would not help the assessee even though the as sessment was after the Constitution came into force.
[1007 F] (2) There was no repeal of the existing Explanation when 'substitution ' by means of the amending Act failed to be effective and so the sale could be taxed under it.
[1012 A B] (a) The question is one of gathering the intent from the use of words in the enacting provisions seen in the light of the procedure gone through, and from the nature of the action of the authority which functions, [1010 B] 1003 (b) The word 'substitution ' does not necessarily or 'always connote two severable steps, one of repeal and another of a fresh enactment, even if it implies two steps.
The natural meaning of the word 'substitution ' is to indicate that the process cannot be so split up.
If the process described as substitution fails, it is totally ineffective so as to leave in tact what was sought to be displaced.
It could not be inferred that; what was intended was that in case the substitution failed or proved ineffec tive, some repeal, not mentioned at all, was brought about and remained effective so as to create what may be described as a vacuum in the statutory law on the subject matter.
The term 'substitution ' when it occurs without anything else in the language used or in the context of it or in the sur rounding facts and circumstances, means, ordinarily, that unless the substituted provision is there to take its place, in law and in effect, the preexisting provision continues.
[1009 H, 1010 A G] (c) In the present case, the whole legislative process termed substitution was abortive.
because, it did not take effect for want of the assent of the GovernorGeneral.
Considering the actual procedure, even if the Governor had assented the substitution, yet the amendment would have been effective as a piece of valid legislation only when the assent of the Governor General had also been accorded to it.
It could not be said that what the Legislature intended or what the Government had assented to consisted of a separate repeal and a fresh enactment.
The two results were to follow from one and the same effective legislative process.
[1010 CD] (d) It is easier to impute an intention to an executive rule making authority to repeal altogether, in any event, what is sought to be displaced by another rule, because the repeal as we11 as replacement are capable of being achieved and inferred from a bare issue of fresh instructions on the same subject.
In the case of a legislative provision sought to be amended by a fresh enactment, the procedure for enact ment is far more elaborate and formal.
A repeal and a replacement of a legislative provision by a fresh enactment can only take place after such elaborate procedure has been followed in toto.
Even the analogy of a merger of an order into another which was meant to be its substitute could only where there is a valid substitute.
[1011 C F, 1012 A B] Koteswar Vittal Kamath vs
K. Rangappa Balica & Co. AIR 1969 SC & 509 ; @ 47 Firm .A.T.B.
Mehtab Majid & Co. vs State Madras [1963] Suppl.
2, SCR 435 and B.N. Tewari vs Union of India & Ors. ; explained.
Shriram Gulabdas vs Board of Revenue, Madhya Pradesh & Anr.
(1952) 3 STC 343 @ 367 approved.
The present case is not one of mixing various ingre dients at a 'mixing works ', and the product which comes into existence being sold as a separate commercial commodity in the market.
The goods got mixed up in the process of un loading without employing any mechanical or chemical process of manufacture.
The mere fact that the specifications in the conrtacts were satisfied when they got so mixed up is not a good enough ground for holding that a new product has been manufactured.
The mere giving of the new name 'Orien tal mixture by the assessee to.
what is really the same product is not the manufacture of a new product.
[1013 A D, G H, 1014 A B] The Stale of Madras vs Bell Mark Tobacco Co. (1967) 19 STC 129, The State of Madras vs Swasthik Tobacco Factory (1966) 17 STC 316 and Anwarkhan Mchboob Co. vs The State of Bombay (Now Maharashtra) & Ors.
(1960) 11 STC 698 and Shaw Bros & Co. vs The State of West Bengal (1963) 14 STC 878 referred to.
Shaw Wallace & Co. Ltd. vs The State of Tamil Nadu (1976) 37 STC 522 explained.
Nilciri Ceylon Tea Supplying Co. vs The State of Bombay (1959) 10 STC 500 approved.
