Section 15(a) of the as it existed at the rele ant time enacted that tax in respect of any sale or purchase of declared goods inside the State shall not be levied at more than one stage.
According to cl.
(b) if these goods were subsequently sold, in the course of inter state trade, the tax to levied shall be refunded to such person as prescribed in the State law.
The proviso to section 4 of the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act and r. 23 of the Rules provide for the refund of the sales tax in the type of cases mentioned in section 15(b).
The appellant bought cotton yarn from local dealers and sold it by way of inter_state sale.
It paid the State sales tax and claimed refund under section 15 (b)of the Central Act.
It succeeded in part at each of the different stages; but on second appeal for the balance, the Appellate Tribunal re jected the appellant 's claim and held that it was not enti tled to any refund including the relief granted by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner.
The High Court rejected its revision petition.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: (1) The appellant firm is entitled to be paid the amount of sales tax levied under the State Act in respect of the goods sold by it in the course of inter State trade provided the appellant has paid the sales tax tinder the central Act in respect of those sales.
[956 E] (2) The proviso to section 4 of the State Act read with the rules leaves no doubt that the amount has to be paid to the dealer who sells the goods in the course of inter State trade and who has paid the tax under the Central Act in respect of such sale.
[955 B] (3)(a) There is no anomaly in paying the amount of the sales tax under the State Act to a dealer who sells declared goods in the course of inter State trade even though he did not himself pay the tax under the State Act in respect of those goods.
The reason for that is the price charged from such dealer by the person from whom he purchased the goods would normally take into account the sales tax paid by the seller.
[955 C] (b) The case of M. A. Khader & Co. vs Deputy Commer cial Taxation officer 25 S.T.C. 104 followed by the High Court is distinguishable on facts.
The question of asking for refund of the sales tax paid under the State Act did not arise directly in that case.
The emphasis in the word 'refunded ' as used in section 15(b) of the Central Act and the proviso to section 4 of the State Act.
on repayment of the amount.
[954 G] (4) (a) A word can have many meanings.
To find out the exact connotaon of a word in a statute, one should look to the context in which it is used.
The context would quite often provide the key to meaning of the word and the sense it should carry.
Its setting would give.
colour to it and provide due to the intention of the legislature in using it.
In the instant case the context in which the word "refund ed" is used shows that such repayment need not be to the person who initially paid the tax.
[954 H] 951 (b) The amended provision makes it plain beyond doubt that the tax levied under the State Act in respect of declared goods has to be reimbursed to the person making sale of those goods in the course of inter State trade or commerce in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be provided in the law in force in that State.
Accord ing to the notes on clauses appended to the statement of objects and reasons of the Bill the amendment made in cl.
(b) makes it clear that local sales tax would be reimbursed to the person making the sale in the course of inter State trade and commerce.
The amendment made in cl.
(b) can thus be taken to be an exposition by the legislature itself of its intent contained in the earlier provision.
[955 G] (c) The fact that the amendment of cl.
(b) of section 15 was not like some other provisions given retrospective effect, would not materially affect the position.
The legislature as a result of the amendment clarified what was implicit in the provisions as they existed earlier.
An amendment which is by way of clarification of an earlier ambiguous provision can be useful aid in construing the earlier provi sion even though such amendment is not given retrospective effect.
[956 B]
