The appellant succeeded before the revisional authority and obtained the orders of refund of duty levied and col lected on the consignment of ten metric tonnes of Manganese dioxide.
As no action was taken, the appellant gave a notice on October 3, 1974 u/s 80 C.P.C. for institution of a suit for recovery of refund.
On February 10, 1975 the respondent gave a notice u/s 131(3) of the to the appellant for suo motu revision of the order of the refund.
The Writ Petition filed in the Delhi High Court, impeaching the said order was dismissed directing the appel lant to raise all objections including those raised in the Writ Petition before the Central Government.
Dismissing the appeal by special leave, the Court Held: (1) section 28 of the speaks of three kinds of errors in regard to duties.
One is non levy, the second is short levy, and the third is erroneous refund.
Levy is.
linked to assessment.
In the process of assessment two kinds of errors may occur.
One is non levy and the other is short levy.
The expression "erroneously refunded" means refunded by means of an order which is erroneously made.
[986 F G] (2) section 131 (5) of the does not speak of any limitation in regard to revision by the Central Government of its own motion to annul or modify any order of erroneous refund of duty.
The provisions contained in Section 131(5) with regard to non levy or short levy cannot be equated with erroneous refund in as much as the three categories of errors in the levy are dealt with in section 28.
[987 D E] (3) Notice u/s 28 of the speaks of demand for money to pay back and the notice is required to be given within six months from the relevant date.
In the case of erroneous refund, it would be six months from the date of actual refund.
If no refund has in fact been made limita tion cannot be said to arise inasmuch as the relevant date u/s 28 in the case of erroneous refund speaks of the date of refund.
In the instant case the impugned order dated 20, April 1972 granted refund.
Grant of refund is not actual refund.
[986 G H, 987 A]
