In the Rajasthan Legislative Assembly elections held in March,1972, the respondent defeated the appellant by a margin of over 22000 votes.
The appellant filed an elec tion petition in the Rajasthan High Court challenging the election of the respondent alleging that the respondent and his election agent committed the following corrupt prac tices.
(1) A pamphlet containing defamatory and false statements touching the personal character of the appellant was distributed by the respondent and his election agent in a meeting on 23 2 72 at Nehru Park.
(2) Several copies of a Weekly newspaper called Patal Shakti dated 27 2 1972 containing a scurrilous editorial were distributed by the respondent and his election agent at a meeting of the Socialist Party held at Public Park on 27 2 1972.
The High Court dismissed the election petition filed by the appellant.
The High Court discarded the evidence of the appellant 's witnesses on the ground that they were interest ed witnesses.
This Court by consent of parties remitted the following two additional issue to the High Court with liberty to the parties to lead evidence on those issues.
(1) Whether the pamphlet was printed at the instance and with the consent of the respondent and whether the payment for that pamphlet was made by his election agent ? (3) Whether the editorial in Patal Shakti was read over in the meeting of 27 2 1972 by Vijay Kumar Talwar in the presence of the respondent.
The High Court after remand held in favour of the respondent on both the issues.
Dismissing the appeal under section 116A of the Repre sentation of the People Act, 1951, HELD: 1.
It is matter of common occurrence in election petitions that parties manage to collect a large volume of oral evidence in support of allegations of corrupt practice.
Very often, the allegations are connected and are attempted to be established with the evidence of partisan witnesses, On rare occasions when the allegations are true, untrue evidence is led to strengthen the charges.
[4D E] 2.
The High Court should not have brushed aside the evidence of the appellant 's witnesses merely on the ground.
that they belong.to the, same party as the appellant or that they were otherwise interested in his success in the 2 1458SCI/76 2 election.
Interested witnesses are not necessarily false witnesses though the fact that the witness has a personal interest or stake in the matter must put the court on its guard.
The evidence of such witnesses must be subjected to a closer scrutiny and the Court may in a given case be justified in rejecting that evidence unless it is corrobo rated from an independent source.
The reasons for corrobo ration must arise out of the context and the texture of evidence.
Even interested witnesses may be interested in telling the truth to the Court and, therefore, the Court must assess the testimony of each important witness and indicate its reasons for accepting or rejecting it.
A broad and general comment that a particular witness is an election agent of a candidate cannot therefore be relied on is not a judicial assessment of evidence.
Evidence can be assessed only after a careful analysis.
[4F H] 3.
Since the High Court rejected the evidence of the appellant on the omnibus ground that the witnesses were interested, this Court went through the relevant evidence and on a consideration of that evidence came to conclusion that it is impossible to accept the allegations of corrupt practice made against the respondent.
[5A B] 4.
The allegations that the respondent and his agent distributed the pamphlet in the meeting held at the Nehru Park was disbelieved by this Court on the following grounds: (a) The meeting was addressed by the Prime Minister and over a lakh of people were present.
It is fantastic to think that in a meeting called by the rival party which was so largely attended the respondent and his election agent would be so foolish as to distribute a scandalous pamphlet.
(b) None of the recipients of the highly defamatory document took any action after receiving it.
(c) It is impossible to accept the allegation of the appellant that the pamphlets were distributed to the Additional District Magistrate and the Circle Officers who were present at that meeting in their official capacity.
(d) Neither the Additional District Magistrate nor the Circle Officer produced a copy of the pamphlet nor did they take any action on the pamphlet.
(e) The election agent of the respondent is an advocate and the respondent had won 3 consecutive assembly elections by a good margin.
It is impossible that these two old hands would so openly and incontrovertibly lend an easy ground for the success of a possible election petition.
(f) Although the matter was remanded no proper evidence was led by the appellant.
The appellant tried to lead evidence on facts which even if proved would not decide the issue in his favour.
[5B H, 6A C] 5.
The Court negatived the appellant 's contention that the editorial was published with the consent of the respond ent or his agent for the following reasons: (a) Gyan Devi Talwar the mother of Vijay Kumar Talwar is styled as the Director of Patal Shakti.
Raj Kumar Sethi is said to be the Chief Editor of the weekly while Vijay Kumar Talwar is an Assistant Editor.
The proceedings of the meetings of the Congress workers of 18 2 1972 show that the said meeting which was called by the party to which the appellant belonged was attended amongst others by Gyan Devi Talwar, Rat Kumar Sethi, Madan Lal Kanda, Chandram Sherpal one of the Assistant Editors of Patal Shakti.
The said meeting resolved unanimously to support the candidature of the appellant.
3 (b) Gyan Devi Talwar had called a meeting of the Trade Union workers to support the appellant 's candidature.
(c) Seeing that persons closely connected with the Journal had taken a prominent part in the appellant 's election campaign, it is absurd to think that these very persons would be parties to the publication of the editorial.
(d) The receipt of Rs. 2000/ alleged to have been paid by the respondent for publication of the editorial is uninspiring.
(e) Raj Kumar Sethi has perjured himself on several important points.
(f) The letter of the appellant alleged to have been addressed to the editor and the reply of the editor are got up documents prepared for supporting the appellant 's case that the editorial was published at the instance of the respondent.
(g) Raj Kumar Sethi was pliable and could for consideration be made to say different things at different times.
(h) The evidence of the appellant suffers from serious infirmities.
(i) The evidence of the other witnesses only shows that several witnesses conspired to create false evidence.
[6E H, 7A H, 8A H, 9A C]
