Raw as well as dressed hides and skins are declared goods under .
Section 4 of the Madras General Sales Tax Act, 1959, provides that the tax shall be payable by a dealer, on the sale or purchase of declared goods inside the State, at the rate and only at the point specified in the Second Schedule to the Act, on the turnover 'in such goods.
Item 7(a) of the Schedule provides that with respect to raw hides and skins, the rate of tax shall be at 3% and the point of levy shall be at the point of last purchase in the State.
Item 7(b) provides that with respect to dressed hides and skins (which were not subjected to tax under the Act as raw hides and skins), the rate of tax shall be 1 1/2% and the point of levy shall be at the point of first sale in the State.
The appellants are dealers in hides and skins.
They purchase raw hides and skins locally as well as in the course of inter state trade and commerce, convert them into dressed hides and skins and sell them either locally or in the course of export.
The appellants challenged the validi ty of items 7(a) and 7(b).
The challenge to item 7(a) was that the item would also cover inter state sales and as such was beyond the competence of the State Legislature; and the challenge to item 7(b) was that it was violative of article 304 (a) of the Constitution on the ground that whereas dressed hides and skins sold locally, but which have been made out of imported raw hides and skins, are subject to tax under the item similar sale of dressed hides and skins made out of raw hides and skins which have been subjected to tax at the purchase stage are not subject to tax under the item.
HELD: (1) Item 7(a) relates only to intra state sales and not to inter state sales.
This is clear from the lan guage used in the item, especially the words "purchase in the State".
Assuming the language is ambiguous it should be so construed as would sustain its, constitutional validity.
[1067 F] (2) Article 304(a) does not prevent levy of tax on goods: what it prohibits is such levy of tax on goods as would result in discrimination between goods imported from other states and similar goods manufactured or produced within the State.
The object is to prevent discrimination against imported goods by imposing tax on such goods at a rate higher than that borne by local goods since the difference between the two rates would constitute a fiscal barrier and thus impede the free flow of inter state trade and commerce.
The scheme of items 7(a) and (b) is that in the case of raw hides and skins which are purchased locally in the State, the levy of tax would be at the rate of 3%.
When such locally purchased raw hides and skins are tanned and sold locally as dressed hides and skins no levy would be made on such sales, as those hides and skins have already been subjected to tax at 3% when purchased in the raw form.
On the other hand, in the case of hides and skins imported from other States in the raw form, thereafter tanned, and then sold inside the State as dressed hides and skins, the levy of tax is at 11/2%.
This levy however, cannot be considered discriminatory because the Legislature, while prescribing the rate in item 7(b) at half that levied under item 7(a) took into account the higher price of dressed hides and skins (nearly double) as compared to the price of raw hides and skins, and the fact that no tax under the State Act has been paid in respect of imported raw hides and skins.
Even though dressed hides and skins are treated as a. separate commodity there is a clear nexus between hides 1066 and skins in the raw form and those in the dressed form; and hence, there is no infirmity in the legislative provision, which, while levying tax on the sale of dressed hides and skins takes into account the levy in respect of raw hides and skins.
[1070 D H] .
The onus of showing that there would be discrimination .between raw hides and skins purchased local ly and then tanned, and raw hides and skins imported and then tanned is on the appellant, and the appellant has not discharged the onus.
[1070 C] Firm A. T. B. Mehtab Majid & Co. vs The State of Madras & Anr.
14 S.T.C. 355 and .4.
Hajee Abdul Shukoor & Co. vs The State of Madras 15 S.T.C. 719, explained and distin guished.
