On the 29th of December, 1947, petitioner No. 1 executed a lease to C (a company) of certain properties consisting of lands and buildings comprised in the estate belonging to him.
Subsequently, in 1949 he executed a deed of settlement whereby he transferred the properties to three trustees, namely, himself and petitioners 2 and 3.
Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950 (Bihar Act XXX of 1950) came into force on the 25th of September, 1950, and on the 3rd of November, 1951, the State of Bihar issued a notification under section 3(1) of the Act declaring that the estate of petitioner No. 1 had passed to and become vested in the State.
A notice under section 4(h) of the Act was issued by the Collector to C and on the 4th of March, 1954, the State Government issued a notification under s.3(1) purporting to vest in the State the properties in question.
It was contended for the petitioners that the buildings standing on the land comprised in the notified estate did not vest in the State, on the ground (1) that the estate of the petitioner No. 1 did not vest in the State under section 3 of the Act but by virtue of the provisions of section 4, (2) that the definition of "estate" in the Act speaks of land only and not of any building on it, (3) that on the date of vesting, the buildings were not used as office or cutchery for the collection of rent of the notified estate within the meaning of section 4(a), and (4) that section 4(h) is ultra vires the Constitution as it imposes an unreasonable restriction on the fundamental right of the petitioners to realise rent from the company.
Held, that (1) whether the estate of petitioner No. I vested in the State by reason of the publication of the notification under section 3 or by virtue of the provisions of section 4 was of little consequence as in either case a vesting took place; (2) although in the definition of "estate" the word land is used and there is no mention of the word building, the provisions of sections 4, 5 and 7 show the intention of the legislature to include some 989 thing more than merely the land of a notified estate as vesting in the State.
Under section 4(a), buildings of a certain description and other things vest in the State absolutely on the publication of a notification under section 3.
Under sections 5 and 7, the buildings mentioned therein are deemed to be settled by the State with the intermediary and this could only be an the supposition that the buildings vested in the State, the intermediary being a settlee under the State; (3) sections 4(a) and 4(h) must be read together.
Under section 4(h), the use to which the building was put previous to its transfer after the first day of January, 1946, and not thereafter was what the Collector was concerned with and not to what use it had been put after its transfer after the first day of January, 1946.
If a transfer was made after the first day of January, 1946 of a building comprised in the notified estate which was used immediately previous to the date of transfer primarily as office or cutchery for the collection of rent of such estate the transfer would be liable to be annulled under section 4(h) and the building would vest absolutely in the State on the publication of the notification and the provisions of section 4(a) must be read accordingly; and (4) the Collector 's powers under section 4(h), wide as they are, are not quite so absolute or arbitrary as suggested.
section 4(h) is a part of a validly enacted law of acquisition of estates and is an integral part of the machinery by which acquisition of an estate takes place.
The Act or section 4(h) of it imposing any unreasonable restriction on the fundamental right of the petitioners, therefore, does not &rise.
The Act including section 4(h) of it, is protected by article 31 A of the Constitution.
