Regulations 31 and 32.1 of the Punjab University Calendar, 1973, Volume II are as under: "31.
The Syndicate shall appoint annually a standing committee to deal with cases of the alleged misconduct and use of unfair means in connection with examinations; 32.1.
When the committee is unanimous, its decision shall be final except as provided in S.32.2.
If the Committee is not unanimous, the matter shall be referred to the Vice Chancellor who shall either decide the matter himself or refer it to the Syndicate for decision".
By virtue of the powers vested in the syndicate, the Punjab University appointed a standing committee under Regulation 31 consisting of a retired high court judge, an Advocate who was formerly a minister of State of Punjab & the Registrar of the University.
It also resolved, by its Resolution dated 17th August 1971, that two members shall form the quorum for the meetings of the standing committee appointed under Regulation 31.
For adopting unfair practices in the examination, respondents were disqualified by the Committee, in all the sittings of which, only two out of the three members were present.
The respondents contended by their writ petitions that the decisions of the Standing Committee were without jurisdiction in as much as all the three members of the Standing Committee had not taken part the meetings in which the decisions to disqualify them were taken.
By a majority of 2 to 1, the High Court set aside the decisions taking the view that despite the circumstance that two members of the committee formed the quorum, the impugned decisions were vitiated by the fact that only 2 and not all the 3 members of the committee participated in the proceedings.
Allowing the appeals by certificate, the Court, ^ HELD: (1) The Constitution of the Standing Committee is indisputably within the powers of the Syndicate under Regulation 31.
The Syndicate which had the power to appoint the Standing Committee had the incidental power to fix the quorum for the meetings of the Standing Committee. 'Quorum ' denotes the minimum number of members of any body of persons whose presence is necessary in order to enable that body to transact its business validly so that its acts may be lawful.
It is wholly inappropriate to draw on the Constitution of judicial tribunals as a parallel.
In the instant case, the syndicate by nominating 3 persons to be members of the Standing Committee, but by resolving that 2 of them would validly constitute the standing committee, did no more than provide that though the Standing Committee may be composed of 3 persons, any 2 of them could validly and effectively transact the business of and on behalf of the Committee.
[70 E F, 71 A C] (ii) By the quorum, a minimum number of members of the committee must be present in order that its proceedings may be lawful, but that does not mean that more than the minimum are denied an opportunity to participate in the deliberations and the decision of the committee.
There is no 68 warrant for the hypothesis that had the third member attended the meetings he would have dissented from the decision of the 2 other members so as to necessitate a reference to the Vice Chancellor under Regulation 32.1.
[71 F G 72 AB] (iii) When Regulation 32.1 speaks of the committee being unanimous, it refers to the unanimity of the members who for the time being are sitting on the committee and who, by forming the quorum can validly and lawfully discharge the functions of the Committee.
The fixation of quorum neither makes Regulation 32.1 a dead letter nor does it affect its application or utility.
The fixation of quorum by the Syndicate violates neither the letter nor the spirit of that Regulation.
[72 C D, E, F] (iv) Regulation 32.1 is aimed at conferring finality on decisions of the committee if they are unanimous and at leaving the validity and priority of a dissenting decision to the judgment of the Vice Chancellor who can deal with the matter himself or refer it to the decision of the Syndicate.
Regulation 32.1 does not even remotely attempt to fix the quorum.
That is not its purpose, and it sounds strange that the Regulation, by a circuitous method, should fix the quorum at the full complement of members.
Quorums are seldom so fixed and were it intended that the entire committee must decide every case, Regulation 31 could appropriately have said so.
[72 G H, 73 A] It is quite true that judicial consistency is not the highest state of legal bliss.
Law must grow, it cannot afford to a static and therefore, judges ought to employ an intelligent technique in the use of precedents.
But the language of the Regulations called for no review of established precedents.
Nor indeed is there any fear of unfairness if only 2 members decided the cases of students accused of adopting unfair practices in the examinations.
In such cases, it is so much better that the law is certain.
[73 C D, E] Bharat Indu vs The Punjab University & Anr.
ILR [1967] 2 Punjab & Haryana 198; Miss Manjinder Kaur vs The Punjab University (Civil Writ No. 3516/72 dt.
30 3 1973 decided by the Punjab High Court (approved).
