In September, 1973, the appellant applied under section 16(1)(a) of the U.P. Urban Buildings (Regulation of letting, rent and eviction) Act, 1972 for the allotment of a part of a house, which was actually occupied by him.
According to the appellant, he was included as a tenant by a person representing himself to be the owner but who in fact was a tenant.
In November, 1973, the first respondent also ap plied for allotment of the said premises.
The Area Ration ing Officer allotted the premises to the first respondent.
The District Judge allowed the appeal filed by the appel lant, set aside the order of allotment in favour of the first respondent and remanded the case to the Rationing Officer to be decided afresh in accordance with law.
The District Judge pointed out that the Area.
Rationing Officer had ignored altogether rule 11 of the Rules framed under the Act which required that in the matter of allotment the principle 'first come first served ' should be followed.
The District Judge also negatived the contention of the first respondent that the appellant 's application was not main tainable since he was an unauthorised occupant.
The Court held that there was no provision in the Act which bars an unauthorised occupant from applying for an allotment.
In a wit petition filed by the first respondent the High Court quashed the order of the District Judge and restored the order made by the Area Rationing Officer.
Section 11 of the Act provides that no person shall let any building except in pursuance of an allotment order issued under section 16.
Section 13 provides that no person shall occupy a building or part thereof which a landlord or tenant has ceased to occupy except under an order of allotment made under section 16.
Under section 16 the District Magistrate is empowered to make an order requiring the landlord to let any building which is or has fallen vacant or is about to fall vacant or a part of such building to any person specified in the order.
An order under sec tion 16 is appealable under section 18.
In exercise of powers conferred by section 41 of the Act, the rules have been framed by the State Government.
Rule 10 prescribes the procedure for allotment.
It provides that the application should be entered in the register after classifying them according to the priority of the categories.
Rule 10 further provides that a building shall not.be allotted to a person who is deemed to have ceased to occupy a building for a period of two years from the date of such deemed cessation.
Rule 11 fixes order of priorities in allotment of residen tial buildings and it further provides that in each of the categories the principle 'first come first served ' shall be followed.
Al1owing the appeal, HELD: (1) The High Court in its judgment has not men tioned any provision in the Act which dissentitles unautho rised occupants from applying for allotment.
Rules 10(5) & (6) provide that certain persons should not ordinarily be allotted a promises; the appellant does not fall within those categories.
[131D E] 2.
The High Court infers the disability of an unautho rised occupant from applying for an allotment from the object of the Act.
The object of the Act has to be gathered from its provisions.
There is nothing in the Act which disentitles an unauthorised occupant from applying for an allotment.
[131H, 132A] 129
