The respondent firm was assessed to sales tax under the Uttar Pradesh Sales Tax Act 1948 for the assessment year 1958 59.
On an appeal filed by the respondent the quantum of tax was reduced.
On a revision filed by the respondent made various payments towards the amount of tax found due from time to time. 'the Revenue initiated proceedings for recovering the balance of the tax and realising interest at the rate of 18 per cent.
The Revenue did not issue any fresh notice of demand after the tax was reduced but origi nally demand notice for the entire sum for which the re spondent was assessed was issued.
In a Writ Petition filed by the assessee the High Court quashed the recovery proceedings on the ground that a fresh notice of demand should have been issued to the respondent in respect of the amount as reduced in appeal and the revi sion.
Allowing the appeal by special leave, HELD: (1) Section 8 of the Act was amended by adding sub section (9) thereto by U.P. Sales Tax Amendment Act (3 of 1971).
The said sub section provides that notwithstand ing any judgment, decree etc.
where any notice of assessment and demand in respect of any tax or other dues is served upon a dealer by an Assessing Authority and where as a result of appeal or revision filed by the assessee the amount of tax is reduced it shall not be necessary for the Assessing Authority to serve upon the dealer a fresh notice.
The High Court judgment was, therefore, erroneous.
[135F, H, 136 A E] Firm Parshuram Rameshwar Lal vs State of U.P. 33, STC 540 approved.
(2) Section 8(1A) of the Act provides for payment of interest at the rate of 18 per cent on the tax amount re maining due from the expiry of the time specified in the notice of demand, till the.
date of payment.
The court in Haji Lal Mohammad vs State of U.P. has held that the li ability to pay the interest under section 8(IA) is automatic and arises by operation of law and that it is not necessary to mention the amount of interest in the recovery certifi cate.
[134 E H, 135 A E] Haji Lal Mohd. Biri Works vs State of U.P., 32 STC 496 followed.
