The appellant and the respondent entered into an agreement by which the appellant advanced money to the respondent and the respondent in lieu of interest thereon gave a portion of his house for residence to the appellant for a period of two years.
The other terms were that if after the expiry of the two year period, the respondent wished to repay the amount, he should give one month 's notice in writing; that if after the payment of the sum, the appellant would not vacate the house, she would be liable to pay damages and that if the respondent did not repay the amount on the expiry of the two year period, he would not be entitled to recover dam ages.
The respondent alleged that before the expiry of the two year period on September 27, 1969, he addressed a notice to the appellant and tendered repayment of the loan which she refused to accept.
The respondent 's suit for recovery of possession of the premises was decreed ex parte with an order that he should tender payment to the appellant and that if she refused to accept the money, it should be depos ited in the court.
The appellant, on the other hand, filed a suit for recovery of the loan in which the respondent contended that the claim was barred by limitation.
The respondent filed a review application before the Subjective contending that the order directing deposit of money in the court was clearly an error apparent on the face of the record.
Allowing the review application, the Sub Judge or dered the deletion of the direction for depositing the money in court.
The appellant filed a revision application in the High Court against the order can the review application.
The High Court held that since the order allowing the review application was appealable, the revision application was not competent, but on the alternative view that the revision application lay before the High Court, it held (a) that the Sub Judge had no jurisdiction to impose a condition requir ing deposit of the loan money.
particularly when the suit for recovery of the money was pending before the same court and (b) since the respondent tendered the money to the appellant, but it was refused, he was entitled to a decree for possession.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: (1) Order XLIII r. 1(s) of the Code of Civil Procedure, provides an appeal against an order allowing a review application.
Since the order allowing the review application was made by a Sub Judge, the appeal against it lay to the District Court and not to the High Court and since no appeal lay against the order of the Sub Judge to the High CoUrt: the revision application could not be re jected as incompetent.
[186F] Under section 115 C.P.C. a revision application cart lie before the High Court from an order made by a subordinate court only if no appeal lies from that order to the High Court.
The words of limitation used in that section, name ly, "in which no appeal lies thereto" clearly mean that no appeal must lie to the High Court from the order sought to be revised because an appeal is a much larger remedy than a revision application and if an appeal lies that would afford 183 sufficient relief and there would be no reason or justifica tion for invoking the revisional jurisdiction.
[186D E] (2) The High Court and the Sub Judge were in error in allowing the review application.
The direction requiring the respondent to pay the loan to the appellant or to depos it it in the court was a correct and valid direction and was rightly introduced in the original ex parte decree.
The courts below were in error in ordering its deletion.
[189 E] (3) Merely because one party has tendered the amount due and payable by him and such tender has been wrongly refused by the other party.
does not absolve the first party from its obligation to make payment and where the obligation to make payment is concurrent with the obligation to hand over possession, the claim for recovery of possession must be accompanied by payment or deposit of the amount.
[188C] Dixon vs Clark E.R. 919, referred to.
In the instant case, the respondent could not validly tender the amount to the appellant ha repayment of the loan until September 27, 1969 and the tender made on August 26, 1969 was clearly invalid.
If the respondent did not at any time validly tender payment to the appellant, she was not liable to hand over possession of the premises and no claim for damages for wrongful use could be sustained against her.
The respondent was not entitled to possession unless he paid or deposited the money in court in repayment of the loan.
The respondent could seek to recover possession of the premises only on condition of making repayment of the loan because the two obligations were mutual and concurrent and were required to be simultaneously performed and one could not get delinked from the reason of the refusal on the appellant 's part to accept the tender of money.
[188E H]
