The respondent assessee acquired before 1 1 1954 certain shares in a private limited company incorporated in Uganda for Sh.
192002 Rs.1,28,000/ .
The said company went into voluntary liquidation in the year 1961.
The liquidators, sold the assets of the company and the assessee received an amount equivalent to Rs.3,12,326/ .
The Income Tax Officer treated the difference between the amount received on liqui dation and the amount paid by the assessee for the acquisi tion of shares as capital gains liable to tax within section 45 of the Income Tax Act, 1961.
The Income Tax Officer held that since the Uganda company was not a company within the meaning of section 2(17) of the Act, the assessee was not enti tled to the benefit of section 46(2) and, therefore, the entire amount was liable to.
be taxed.
On an.
appeal, the AAC held that the transaction amounted to a transfer within the meaning of section 2(47) because there was extinguishment of the rights in the capital assets as represented by the shares.
The Tribunal held that it was not transfer within the mean ing of section 2(47).
The High Court decided the reference in favour of the assessee on the ground that when a shareholder received monies representing his share on distribution of the net assets of the company in liquidation, he receives such monies in satisfaction of the right which belongs to him by virtue of his holding the share and not by way of consideration for the extinguishment of his right in the share.
Dismissing the appeal by certificate, HELD: (1) The Uganda company is not a company within the meaning of section 2(17).
There was no transfer as contemplated by the Act to attract the.
levy of capital gain tax.
This Court in the case of Madurai Mills has already held that the act of liquidation in distributing the assets of the company which.
had gone into voluntary liquidation did not result in the creation of new rights.
It merely entailed recognition of the legal rights which were in existence prior to the distribution.
[223 C, 224 E F] Commissioner of Income tax, Madras vs Madurai Mills Co. Ltd., , followed.
(2) The legislature made express provisions in section 46(2) for levying capital gains tax in respect of distribution of assets of a company.
But for the said provision distribution of assets on the liquidation of a company would not attract the capital gains tax under section 45.
Since the Uganda company is not a company within the meaning of the Act the provi sions of section 46(2) do not apply to it.
The said distribu tion, therefore, does not attract capital gains tax.
Section 46(2) creates the liabality of a shareholder to pay the tax on capital gains and also prescribes the mode of calculat ing the capital gains.
[225 A F]
