U.P. Government issued a notification under Section 7(1) of the U.P. Land Acquisition (Rehabilitation of Refugees) Act, 1948 for acquiring the land belonging to the appellant for the purpose of Sufferers Cooperative Housing Society.
The Society entered into an agreement with the Government under section 6 of the Act.
The Land Acquisition Officer determined the amount of compensation for the acquired land.
The appellants challenged the validity of the said notifica tion on the following grounds: 1.
The notification did not properly speci fy the land sought to be acquired.
The notification was ultra vires the Act because it sought to acquire land for the rehabilitation of displaced persons and not for the rehabilitation of refugees.
The notification was not in accordance with the provisions of section 7(1) of the Act.
The single Judge of the High Court did not go into the first ground but accepted the second and third grounds and quashed the notification.
He held that according to the definition of refugees in section 2(7) a refugee is a person who has migrated from Pakistan to any place in the U.P. and has been since then residing in U.P. and that there was nothing to show that the displaced persons who are the members of the Society had settled in U.P. While accepting the third ground the learned Judge held that section 7(1) requires to indicate in the notification that it had decid ed to acquire the land.
However, the notification did not mention the expression "decided".
On an appeal, the Division Bench disagreed with the conclusions of the Single Judge and allowed the appeal.
The Division Bench held that the notification was substantially in accordance with the sect.ion 7( 1 ) and that the members of the Society consisted of refugees.
The Division Bench also held that the notification was not vague and it proper ly specified the land sought to be acquired.
In an appeal by Special Leave the appellants repeated the 3 grounds.
Dismissing the appeal HELD: 1.
The ground about the members of the Society not being refugees has not been taken in the Writ Petition at all.
The question whether those members have settled in U.P. is essentially one of fact.
In the absence of any averment in the writ petition the material facts having bearing on the point could not be brought on record.
A party seeking to challenge the validity of a notifi cation on a ground involving questions of fact should make necessary averments of fact before it can assail the notification on that ground.
[229 F H] 227 2.
The recital in the earlier part of the notification as well as the operative part of the notification that the land shall be deemed to have been acquired permanently and shall vest in the State Government lends clear support to the conclusion that the State Government decided to acquire the land and the order of acquisition was merely an implementa tion of that decision.
The fact that the word decided has not been used in the notification would not prove fatal when the entire tenor of the notification reveals the decision of the State Govt.
to acquire land.
The court would not strike down a notification for acquisition on hypertechnicality; what is needed is sub stantial compliance with law and the impugned notification clearly satisfies that require ment.
[230 D F] 3.
The contention that the notification in question is vague is not substantiated.
The notification makes an express reference to the site plan.
[230 G 231 A]
