The first respondent, a Co operative Transport Society terminated the services of respondent 3 and 4.
The State of Punjab referred the dispute arising out of the dismissal of respondents 3 to 4 under section 10 of the to the Labour Court that was presided over by Mr. Das.
On Mr. Das 's retirement Shri Hans Raj Gupta was ap pointed as the Presiding Officer of the Court.
Mr. Gupta gave an award directing the reinstatement of respondents 3 and 4 with 50 per cent back wages from the date of their dismissal until the date of reinstatement.
The first respondent being aggrieved by the award filed a writ petition in the High Court under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution praying that the award given by second respondent be set aside on the ground, inter alia, that he was not qualified to become the Presiding Officer under section 7(3) of the Act since he did not hold any judicial office in India for not less than 7 years.
The contention of respondent No. 2 was that he held such a judicial office because he worked as Upper Division Clerk cum Head Clerk, Assistant Settlemeat Officer and Registrar of the Pensions Appeals Tribunals.
The contention that he held judicial office was not pressed before the High Court and in this Court by the State.
The State Government, however. supported the award on the plea that Mr. Gupta 's appointment cannot be challenged in collateral proceedings filed in the High Court for challenging the award.
Re Toronto & Co. vs City of Toronto 46 Dominion Law Reports 547; Bhaskara Pillai and Anr.
vs State [1950] 5DLR Travailcore Cochin 382 and Queen Empress vs Ganga Ram ILR 16 All.
136 distinguished.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: 1.
Considering the nature and course of proceedings in the instant it is impossible to hold that the challenge to Mr. Gupta 's appointment was made in a collateral proceeding.
The appointment of Mr. Gupta could not have been challenged before him.
The challenge to his appointment having been made by writ petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution to which Mr. Gupta was impleaded as a party respondent, the challenge was made directly in a substantive proceeding and not in a collateral proceeding.
Since he was impleaded in the writ petition he had a clear and right ful opportunity to defend kid appointment.
[311 C E] 2.
The mere circumstance that the first respondent did not in so many words ask for a writ of quo warranto cannot justify the argument that the appointment was being chal lenged collaterally in a proceeding taken to challenge the award.
On the averments in the writ petition it is clear that the main and real attack on the award was the ineligi bility of Shri Gupta to occupy the post of a Judge of a Labour Court in the discharge of whose functions the award was rendered by him.
[311 G H, 312A] 307 3.
The relief of certiorari asked for by the writ peti tion was certainly inappropriate but the High Court was also invited to issue such other suitable writ, order or direction as it deemed fit and proper in the circumstances of the case.
There is no magic in the use of a formula.
The facts necessary for challenging the appointment are stated clearly in the writ petition and the challenge to the ap pointment is expressly made on the ground that the officer was not qualified to hold the post.
[312A B] 4.
The finality of the orders of the Labour Court con templated by section 9(1) although widely worded must be given a limited meaning so as to bar the jurisdiction of civil courts in the ordinary exercise of their powers.
It is impossible to construe the provisions in derogation of the remedies provided by Article 226 and 227 of the Constitu tion.
[313D E] Bezparua (G.C.) vs State of Assam A.J.R. 1954 Assam 161, Jagannath Vinayak Kale vs Ahmadi [1958] II L.L.J. 50 (Bom.) and Mewar Textile Mills Ltd. vs Industrial Tribunal A.I.R. , approved.
