In 1964, respondent No. 1 Society was registered as a Housing Society.
The Society wanted 12 plots to be con structed for its 12 members.
The Society, therefore, pur chased a plot of land.
In 1966, the Society mortgaged the land and the incomplete structure in favour of respondent No. 2.
In March, 1971, the Special Liquidator of the Socie ty was appointed under section 102 of the Maharashtra Co operative Societies Act, 1960.
The mortgagee after demand ing the dues from the mortgagor advertised the public auc tion for the sale of the property.
In the auction sale the appellant was declared as the highest bidder.
The auction purchaser took the possession of the land and the incomplete structure.
Society filed a dispute before the Officer on Special Duty under the Maharashtra Co operative Societies Act against the auction purchaser and the mortgagee praying for an injunction against the completion of the sale.
The Society in the meanwhile paid the mortgage money to the mortgagee.
The Officer on Special Duty delivered his judg ment in January 1975 and held that the Society was entitled to redeem the property because the conveyance was not com plete.
The appellant filed an appeal before the Maharashtra State Co operative Appellate Court.
In the appeal, plaint was allowed to be amended and a prayer for redemption was allowed to be introduced.
The appellate Court held that there was no complete sale within the meaning of section 69(3) of the and the equity of redemption was, therefore, not lost and that the auction price was grossly inadequate and that the sale was not after a fair competition.
One of the conditions of auction sale was that if the mortgagor deposited the mortgage money in court between the date of the sale and completion thereof and if as a result thereof the mortgagee was to reconvey the property to the mortgagor the auction purchaser Would be entitled to the refund of the amount paid without any inter est and/or cost.
In an appeal by Special Leave the appellant contended: (1) When under section 69 of the a mortgagor confers on the mortgagee a power of sale through court or without intervention of court, the power of sale extends to the entire legal estate of the mortgagor.
(2) When such a power is conferred it is agency coupled with interest under section 202 of the .
If the power is acted upon revocation even on payment of mortgage money cannot nullify acts already done pursuant to the said powers.
(3) Knocking down at an auction sale by the mortgagee pursuant.
to the power of sale extinguishes the mortgagor 's right of redemption.
(4) In a suit for specific performance by auction pur chaser, the purchaser will be entitled to specific perform ance because it is a sale by mortgagor.
Dismissing the appeal, 342 HELD: (1) Under section 69(1)(c) a mortgagee has power to sell without intervention of the court where power is con ferred by the mortgage deed and the mortgaged property or any part thereof was on the date of the execution of the mortgage deed situated in certain big towns.
[347D E] (2) In India the word "transfer" is defined with refer ence to the word ,"convey".
The word "transfer" in English law in its narrower and more usual sense refers to the transfer of an estate in the,land.
Section 205 of the Law of Property Act in England defines "conveyance as including mortgage, charge, lease, assent vesting declara tion, vesting instrument".
The word "conveys" in section 5 of the and section 17 of the Indian Registration Act is that contract for sale in respect of immovable property of the value of more than Rs.100 without registration cannot extinguish the equity of redemption.
In India it is only on execution of the conveyance and regis tration of transfer of the mortgagor 's interest by regis tered instrument that mortgagors right of redemption will be extinguished.
The conferment of power to sell without intervention of the Court in a mortgage deed by itself will not derrive the mortgagor of his right to redemption.
The extinction of the right of redemption has to be subsequent to the deed conferring such power.
The right of redemp tion is not extinguished at the expiry of the period.
The equity of redemption is not extinguished by mere contract for sale.
[348B, D E] Abraham Ezra Issac Mansoor vs Abdul Latif Usman I.L.R. 1944 Bombay 549, approved.
Meenakshi Velu & Ors.
vs Kasturi Sakunthala & Ors.
I.L.R. , overruled.
Ellappa Naiker and Ors.
vs Sivasubramania Manisaran , approved.
(3) Under the English doctrine, a contract of sale transfers an equitable estate to the purchaser.
In India there is no equity or right in property accrued is favour of the purchaser by the contract between the mortgagee and the proposed purchaser.
In India there is no distinction be tween legal and equitable estates.
In India there can be but one owner i.e. legal owner.
[347G H] Rani Chhotra Kumari vs Mohan Bikram (1931) 58 I.A. 279 and Rambaran Prasad vs Ram Mohit Hazra & Ors.
(1967) I SCR 293, followed.
(4) Under section 100(1)(i) of the Law of Property Act, 1925, if a mortgagee exercises power to sell the mortgaged proper ty by public auction or by private contract it is binding on the mortgagor before completion of the sale unless it is proved that the power was exercised in bad faith.
The English decisions are based on the said provision of the English Law of Property ,Act and, therefore, they are not applicable to India.
[346 B D] Waring (Lord) vs London and Manchester Assurance Co. (1935) Chancery 310 and Property & Bloodstock Ltd. vs Emer ton (1968) L.R. Chancery 94 distinguished.
