The appellants, private stage carriage operators, applied for the renewal of their expiring bus permits.
The re spondent State Transport Undertaking objected, urging preferential grounds in its own favour, claiming to have secured higher marks with the aid of r. 155 A of the Motor Vehicles Rules.
The State Transport Undertakings claim was upheld.
The appellants moved the appellate Tribunal, and also filed a writ petition before the High Court for direc tions to the appellate Tribunal to dispose of his appeal without relying on r. 155 A.
The writ petition was dismissed by a Single Judge, and an appeal before the Division Bench also failed.
In appeal by Special Leave, the appellants assailed the validity of r. 155 A the grounds of its being partial to the Government against public interest and contradicting the proviso to section 47(1) of the .
Dismissing the appeals, the Court, HELD: (Per Krishna Iyer J. for himself and on behalf of A. N. Ray CJ.) 1.
The assignment of marks under r. 155 A is geared to public interest, which h the desideratum of section 47(1) of the Act.
This is not an arbitrary stroke favouritism because there are many promotional factors bearing on the inter est of the travelling public which a State enterprise qua State enterprise will, but a private enterprise qua private enterprise will not take care of.
There is equity in r. 155 A, making up, as it does, for the present short.falls in the making system vis a vis a government transport service.
[398H. 399B] P. Kumaraswamy vs State Transport ,Appellate Tribunal, Madras & referred to.
The Court observed: Legal Darwinism, adapting the rule of law to new socie tal developments, so as to survive and serve the social order, is necessary.
[398B] Cardozo: The nature of the Judicial Process; Yale Uni versity Press; pp. 151 152, relied upon.
There cannot be any conflict between section 47(1) proviso and the impugned rule.
The proviso does not carry any negative injunction that transport tribunal shall not give any other preferential consideration than what is stated in it.
There is no implied interdict that in other contingen cies no preference shah be accorded.
The proviso merely takes care of a specific situation.
Moreover.
the mark ing formula does not deprive the administrative tribunals their discretion to choose the best [399C E] Per H.M. Beg, 1.
(Concurring) Where there is a single specified mode laid down for doing something exercise of the legal power to do it, the specified mode may, negatively operate.
393 (Krishna Iyer, J.) as a prohibition against what is not prescribed at all and is outside the statute.
But expressio unius est exclusio alterius could not apply ot a case where two modes of doing the same thing are provided for by a statute itself.
Here both chapters IV and IV A enable plying of State transport as well as privately owned vehicles on hire on same routes, but the grounds for these combined operations under the two chapters are different.
[403A, C, D] Parbhani Transport Co operative SOciety Ltd., vs The Regional Transport Authority, Aurangabad & Ors.
; , applied.
Nazir Ahmad vs King Emperor (1936) L.R. 63 I.A. 372, distin guished.
Colquhoun vs Brooks at a, 65; Taylor vs Taylor at 430 and Crawfords "Statuto ry Construction" 1940 Edn., Chapter 18, paragraphs 157 to 158, pages 240 244, referred to.
