The appellant was the assignee of a mortgage dated 14 12 1911, executed by A, which comprised.
lands belonging to the mortgagor and also a mortgage executed by the respondents in his favour on 19 7 1909.
The appellant instituted a suit in the court of the Subordinate Judge of Kakinada, for the recovery of the amount due on the mortgage, dated 14 12 1911, and prayed for sale of the hypotheca.
The respondents were impleaded as defendants but did not appear.
The suit was decreed ex parte, and in execution of the decree, the properties of the respondents, mortgaged to A on 19 7 1909, were brought to sale, and purchased by the decree holder.
The respondents then instituted the present suit in the District Court of East Godavari which then bad jurisdiction over the properties in suit, for a declaration that the decree obtained by the appellant was fraudulent and inoperative and could not affect their title.
The plaint was later on amended and a prayer added that the properties might be partitioned and the respondents put in separate possession of their share.
The trial Judge dismissed the suit and the District Court in appeal affirmed his decision.
Before the High Court in second appeal it was contended for the first time that the decree in question did not direct a sale of the mortgaged properties but a sale of the mort gagee 's rights under the mortgage deed dated 19 7 1909 and as such the sale of the properties was void.
The High Court having called for a finding from the District Court as to what was sold, it was 939 found by that Court that the decree bad really directed a sale of the mortgagee 's rights and not of the properties mortgaged and that there was excessive execution.
It was, however, of opinion that the point should have been taken before the executing court and the suit in so far as it claimed relief on the basis of excessive execution was barred under section 47 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
The High Court declined to entertain the objection that the suit was barred under section 47 as it had not been taken in the written statement and was raised for the first time in second appeal, and decreed the respondent 's suit.
It was contended for the appellant that the High Court should have entertained the objection and held that the suit was so barred.
Held, that the appellant should be permitted to raise the contention.
The point relating to excessive execution had never been specifically raised except before the High Court and the allegations in the plaint were vague and obscure.
It is a pure question of law which requires no further investigation of facts and was understood and debated as such by the parties before the District Court.
That it was well settled that the question whether an execution sale was in excess of the decree and, therefore, not warranted by it could be raised as between the parties only by an application under section 47 of the Code before the executing court and not by a separate suit.
J. Marret vs Md. K. Shirazi & Sons (A.I.R. 1930 P. C. 86), Venkatachalapathy Aiyen vs Perumal Aiyen ([1912] M.W.N. 44), Biru Mohata vs Shyania Charan Khowas ([1895] I.L.R. , Abdul Karim vs Islamunnissa Bibi ([1916] I.L.R. 38 All. 339) and Lakshminarayan vs Laduram ([1931] A.I.R. , approved.
That the court, however, had the power to treat the plaint in the suit as an application under section 47 subject to any objection as to limitation or jurisdiction.
That the application was not barred under article 165 as it ap plied only to applications for restoration to possession by persons other than judgment debtors and bad no application to the present case.
Vachali Bohini vs Kombi Aliassan '([1919] I.L.R. 42 Mad. 753), Batnam Aiyar vs Krishna Doss Vital Doss ([1897] I.L.R. , Basul vs Amina ([1922] I.L.R. and Bahir Das vs Girish Chandra ([1922] A.I.R. 1923 Cal.
287), approved.
Nor could article 166 apply since it had application only where the sale was voidable and not void and had to be set aside.
That the article applicable to a case of a void sale such as the present was article 181 of the Indian Limitation Act.
Seshagiri Rao vs Srinivasa Rao ([1919] I. , Bajagopalier vs Bamanujachariar ([1923] I.L.R. 47 Mad. 288), Manmothanoth Ghose vs Lachmi Devi ([1927] I.L.R. 55 Cal.
96), Nirode Kali Boy vs Harendra Nath (I.L.R. [1938] 1 Cal. 280), and 119 940 Md We Gyan vs Maung Than Byu (A.I.R. 1937 Rang.
126), ap proved.
That the starting point of limitation for an application under article 181 would be the date of dispossession by the purchaser and not the date of the void sale which had no existence in law and the plaint in the present suit, treated as an application, having been filed ,within 3 years of such dispossession was in time.
Chengalraya vs Kollapuri (A.I.R. , approved.
That the District Court of East Godavari to whose jurisdiction the properties had been transferred before the present suit was instituted had by reason of such transfer acquired an inherent jurisdiction over them and if it entertained an application for execution with reference to them such action was no more than an irregular assumption of jurisdiction and no objection to jurisdiction having been taken by the appellant at the earliest opportunity he must be deemed to have waived it and, consequently, there was no legal bar to treating the plaint as an execution application under section 47 of the Code.
Balakrishnayya vs Linga Bao, (I.L.R. , applied.
Case law discussed.
