In the election to the State Assembly the first respond ent was declared elected.
The appellant, who was one of the defeated candidates, impugned the election on the ground that the first respondent was guilty of adopting corrupt practices within the meaning of section 123(2), (3) and (3A) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
It was alleged that (i) to get support of the Muslim voters of a village, the first respondent offered a bribe for the construction of a school building for Muslim boys in the village and (ii) in another village with predominant Muslim voters, he paid a big sum of money for the construction of a mosque.
The first respondent in his written statement denied the allega tions as absurd and baseless and denied in toto the allega tion of bribery.
The High Court dismissed the petition.
On appeal to this Court it was contended that the alle gations against the respondent must be taken to have been admitted in view of his vague and evasive denial.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: The well settled principles governing election dis putes are: (1) proceedings arising out of election petitions are quasi criminal in character and the allegations made in the petition must be proved beyond reasonable doubt; (2) in an appeal under section 116A of the Act the Supreme Court will not interfere with the findings of fact recorded by the trial court except for very strong and cogent reasons; and (3) it is unsafe in an election case to accept oral evidence at its face value without looking for assurances from some surer circumstances or unimpeachable documents.
[413F] Rahim Khan vs Khurshid Ahmed, ; , 656, followed.
(i) In the instant case the contention that donation to public or charitable institutions could not amount to bribery is a legal plea asserting that even on the state ments made in the election petition the allegation of brib ery was not sustainable.
The allegation of bribery was denied by the first respondent in toto and as false and baseless.
[418G] (ii) The story that the first respondent visited the village at midnight and doled out money to a crowd of Muslim voters could not be true.
The central figures in the dis pute over the money had not been examined by the appellant and the letters produced by him to strengthen oral evidence relating to the incidents were clearly brought into exist ence for the purpose of election petition.
[419G] (iii) As regards the amount alleged to have been paid for the construction of a mosque one of the witnesses exam ined deposed without receiving any summons from the court.
The appellant had no personal knowledge of the facts alleged in support of the case of bribery.
The High Court rightly held that the letter which the appellant addressed to the District Magistrate containing vague references to the allegations had been written "with a view to create some sort of evidence in case the election petition was necessi tated to be filed ' '.
[420C] 413
