The appellants challenged the constitutional validity of the Gujarat Agricultural Land Ceiling Act 1961 by filing writ petitions in the High Court of Gujarat.
The Preamble of the Act state that the Act was enacted for Securing the distribution of agricultural land as best to sub serve the common good.
Section 6(1) of the Act provides that no person shall hold either as owner or tenant land in excess of the ceiling area.
Section 6(2) provides that where an individu al who holds land as a member of a family, not being a joint family, then the spouse.
and the children excluding major sons shall be grouped together for the purposes of the Act and the provisions of the Act shall apply to the total land so grouped together as if such land had been held by one person.
The ceiling area is fixed depending on the classes of land, nature of irrigation facilities and productivity.
The said statute has been put in the 9th Schedule by the Parliament.
The Gujarat High Court dismissed the writ petitions filed by the appellants but granted certificate of fitness under article 133(1) of the Constitution to the appel lant.
The appellants contended that (1).Second proviso to article 31A of the Constitution provides that where any law makes provision for the acquisition by the State of any estate which is held by a person under his personal cultivation, it shall not be lawful for the State to.
acquire any portion of such land as is within the ceiling limit applicable to him under any law for the time being in force unless the law provides for payment of compensation at a rate which is not less than the market value.
Apart from variations in the ceiling area imposed by a statute, there cannot be a depri vation of rights of individuals holding property separately in exercise of their separate individual rights by grouping them as members of one family.
(2) The concept 017 "person" adopted by the statute is unnatural and legally untenable.
The concept of the term 'person ' having been fixed by the Central General Clause Act, this concept and no other must be used for interpreting second proviso to article 31A of the Constitution.
(3) The second proviso to article 31A(1) does not confer any right upon any person but only imposes a limit upon legislative competence so that the inclusion of the Act in the ' 9th Schedule will not validate a provision which the Legislature was ' not competent at all to enact.
HELD: The term 'person ' is not defined in the.
Section 2(21 ) merely states that person includes a joint family Under s 3(42) of the , a person is defined as.
including any company or association or body of individuals whether incorporated or not.
In the absence of section 6(2) each individual member of a family would have been entitled to hold land upto the ceiling limit if it was his or her legally separate property.
The Act does not debar spouses and minor children from holding their sepa rate.
rights to land.
There is no fixed concept of 'person ' any where.
Section 6(2) does not either disable a husband or a wife from holding their separate properties separately.
It does not merge or destroy their separate legal personali ties.
It 104 merely requires their separate holdings to be grouped to gether as through they were held by one person only for the purpose of determining the ceiling limit Each, holder of such separate rights above the ceiling limit is permitted to select the property he or she wishes to continue to hold in such a way that the lands selected for such continuance shall be in the same proportion in which lands were held by each spouse.
The reduction in their holding will, there fore, be proportionate to the areas ' of lands held separate ly.
But, they are grouped together only for the purpose of determining the ceiling limit for the fan, and, as a result of a specific provision to that effect.
It is not denied by the appellants that the ceiling limit could have been low ered by the statute.
Article 31A does not prohibit the legislature from fixing ceiling limits for various individu als or the classes of individuals differently situated, nor does the second proviso to article 31A(1) prescribe any partic ular or direct mode of imposing different ceilings for individuals differently circumstanced.
[106 G H, 109 A E] Pritam Singh vs State of Punjab & Ors. ; distinguished.
(2) Article 3lB provides a complete answer to any attack directed against the provisions of the Act based upon viola tion of any of the rights conferred by the provisions of Part III of ' the Constitution.
To read any limit into the second proviso to article 31A(1) that there can be only single ceiling limit for all persons would be to accept a novel restriction on legislative competence.
There is nothing in the Constitution to bar any statute from receiving a dual protection.
In the.
present case, the statute in question is fully protected by article 3lB.
Since the second proviso to Article 31A confers certain rights up.on individuals, the protective umbrella of article 3lB shields the impugned provi sion against any attack based upon the alleged violation of such rights as well.
[110 G H, 111 A C] (3) There is no question of legislative competence.
in the present case.
The proviso protects and confers certain rights upon individuals to an amount of compensation.
That is the direct effect.
[111 B C]
