Under item 1 in the Second Schedule to the Andhra Pradesh General Sales Tax Act 1957, manganese ore was liable to be taxed at the point of purchase by the last dealer who bought in the State.
The appellants sell manganese ore to the Mines and Minerals Trading Corporation which exports the ore to buyers in foreign countries.
Their contention before the Sales Tax authorities that the sales of the ore to the MMTC were complete within the State of Andhra Pradesh and that it was the MMTC which was the last purchaser liable to pay sales tax was rejected.
On appeal the High Court held that the appellants ' contracts with the MMTC were integrally connect ed with the contract entered into by the MMTC with the foreign buyer and, as such, the appellants were the last purchasers liable to pay the tax.
The respondent State contended before this Court that since the property in the goods passed from the appellants to the MMTC on board the ship in view of the f.o.b.
charac ter of the contract, it was the appellants who, as the last purchasers, were liable to pay the tax and not the MMTC, Allowing the appeals, HELD: The law is that it has to be found out whether the contracts between the merchants and the Corporation are integrated contracts in the course of export or different contracts.
If they are different, the last purchaser within the State is liable to pay the sales tax.
[446G] (i) The tests for finding out the sale in the course of export are that there must be a single sale which itself causes the export or is in the progress or process of ex port.
There is no room for two or more sales in the course of export.
The only sale which can be said to cause the export is the sale which itself results in the movement of the goods from the exporter to the importer.
[443E F] (ii) State Corporations are often the only authori ties allowed to export goods out of the country.
These corporations enter into contracts with foreign buyers for export and the Corporations in turn give directions to the merchants to place the goods on board a ship.
These direc tions are not in the course of export because the export sale is an independent one between the Corporations and their foreign buyers.
[444D E] (iii) In f.o.b. contracts the sellers ' duty is to place the goods free on board a ship named by the buyer but the mere mention of f.o.b. price or f.o.b. delivery in a contract between the merchants and the trading corporations which export the goods under a separate contract with the foreign buyers to the latter will not make the two contracts either integrated or the contract between the merchants and the Corporation an f o.b. contract.
There cannot be two last purchasers in the sale of the same goods within the same State.
There cannot be two exporters in respect of the same goods.
[444G & 445C] 442 (iv) In string contracts the contracts between the Corporation and the foreign buyers are different and it is the Corporation which enters into independent contracts with foreign buyers on f.o.b. basis.
Under the terms of the contract, the merchants are required to bring the goods f.o.b.
to the ship named by the Corporation.
[444C] Mohd. Serajuddin etc.
vs State of Orissa [1975] Supp.
S.C.R. 169, Coffee Board, Bangalore vs Joint Commercial Tax Officer, Madras ; and M/s. Binani Bros. (P) Ltd. vs Union of India & Ors.
[1974] 1 S.C.C. 459, followed.
National Tractors Hubli vs Commissioner of Commercial Taxes Bangalore , no longer good law.
