Section 2(b) of the defines additional dearness allowance to mean such dearness allowance as may be sanctioned from time to time after the appointed day over and above the amount of dearness allowance payable in accordance with the rate in force immediately before the date from which such sanction of additional dearness allowance is to take effect.
Expla nation I to the clause states that where payment of dearness allowance is linked to the cost of living Index any auto matic payment after the appointed day of dearness allowance in consequence of any rise in such cost of living index or in consequence of any change in such other factor shall, notwithstanding the provisions of this clause, be deemed to be the additional dearness allowance.
Dearness allowance was paid to the employees of the respondent at the rate of quarterly average cost of living index for the relevant quarter.
The rate of dearness allow ance for one quarter e.g. the first quarter of 1974 was paid on.
the basis of the average cost of living index for the months of July September, 1973.
For the quarter July September, 1974 there was a rise in the cost of living index and consequently there was a rise in the dearness allowance payable to the employees.
In a writ petition under article 226 of the Constitution the employees contended that the increased dearness allowance payable for the quar ter July September, 1974 was as a result of rise in the cost of living index between January March, 1974 which was before the appointed day in July 6, 1974 and, therefore, no additional dearness allowance was deductible under the Act.
The High Court granted the writ.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: The High Court was wrong in its view that the rise of cost of living index should be after the appointed day.
The nexus, for the purpose of the explanation, is with the payment after the appointed day and not with the rise in the cost of living index.
There is nothing in the Explanation to warrant the conclusion that rise in the cost of living index should be after the appointed day.
What is to be after the appointed day is any automatic payment of dearness allowance in consequence of any rise in such cost of living index and not that any rise in the cost of living index should be after the appointed day.
[482B: 481H] When D.A. is linked to the cost of living index, actual determination of the D.A. takes place after the index is published and known.
The index, therefore, is always of a past period by the yard stick of which D.A. is adjusted.
This being the concept about linkage of D.A. to cost of living index.
Explanation I makes it clear that when pay ment of D.A. is linked to cost of living index any automatic payment after the appointed day of D.A. in consequence 'of any rise in the cost of living index shall, notwithstanding the provisions of this clause, be deemed to be the addition al D.A. [481G]
