On 6 7 1971 the Lt. Governor of Delhi passed an award directing the New Friends Co operative House Building Socie ty Limited to pay Rs.22 lacs to the Delhi Administration.
On 9 7 1971 the Lt. Governor by a notification removed the elected Managing Committee and appointed a nominated Manag ing Commitee under rule 56 of the Delhi Cooperative Socie ties Rules, 1950 framed under the Bombay Cooperative Socie ties Act 1925 as applied to Delhi.
The term of the Manag ing Committee was for one year.
On 23 10 1971 the nominated Managing Committee passed a resolution to make the award of the Lt. Governor a rule of the court.
In December, 1971, the nominated Managing Committee passed a resolution for having direct sub leases and in January 1972 called for more funds.
In July, 1972, the Lt. Governor issued a second notification extending the term of the nominated Managing Committee by further two years.
287 members of the Society filed writ petition No. 340 of 1972, challenging the rites of rule 56 and challenging the action of the Lt. Governor in superseding the elected Managing Committee and in extending the term of the nominat ed Managing Committee by a further period of 2 years.
On 30 4 1973, the nominated Managing Committee issued a circu lar asking the members of the Society to pay certain amounts.
On 6 7 1973, this Court restrained the Society and its Chairman from declaring any member a defaulter.
On 13 8 1973, this Court directed that all the interim orders passed in the writ petition should be confined to the 287 petitioners.
On 16 8 1973, K.V. Johar filed a writ petition in a representative capacity under Order 1 rule 8 of the C.P.C. on behalf of all the members of the Society.
On 17 8 1973, the nominated Managing Committee declared 321 members as defaulters.
On 21 9 1973 this Court restrained the Society from taking any steps in pursuance of the said resolution.
On an application made by respondent No. 6 the stay granted in K.V. Johar 's petition was vacated.
However, application for vacating the stay order in Raj Rani 's petition was not pursued.
On 6 1 1974 the nominated Managing Committee declared 39 members as defaulters for non payment of dues and 42 members as defaulters for not submitting the affidavits.
On 25 1 1974 the nominated Managing Committee decided to enrol 60 new members.
On 26 1 1974 a confidential letter was ad dressed by respondent No. 6 to the Lt. Governor seeking his approval to the enrolment of 60 new members and allotment of plots to them.
On the same day the Lt. Governor gave his approval.
Two C.M. Ps. were filed by the writ petitioners challenging the declaration of the members as defaulters and enrolment of 60 new member`.
This Court on 29 3 1971 di rected that all the papers including resolutions, original applications and original allotments should be produced in the Court.
This Court also restrained the nominated Manag ing Committee by an injunction from taking any steps in any manner.
On 4 4 1974.
this Court passed direction in respect of some members who were declared defaulters and who had made part payments either within the time prescribed or even beyond the time prescribed.
This Court also mentioned that the allotment of plota to 60 new metal:era who were cha racterised as very important persons appeared 372 to have been made in undue haste and the persons on the waiting list were not considered and that no notice was given to persons inviting applications.
This Court directed that the list of 60 new members had to await final adjudica tionand also directed that no further steps should be taken in the case of those 60 allottees.
The Court also directed that the cases of remaining 24 defaulters would be consid ered if it came to the conclusion that the allotment in favour of 60 new members could not be allowed to stand.
Rule 24 of the Delhi Cooperative Societies Rules 1973, requires a person to apply for membership in writing in the form prescribed by the Society.
His application is to be ap proved by the Managing Committee of the Society.
He has to fulfil other conditions laid down in the Act, the Rules and the Bye laws.
Rule 25 provides that a person shall not be eligible for admission as a member if he owns a residential house or a plot of land for the construction of a residen tial house in Delhi.
Rule 30 provides that on receipt of an application for membership the Cooperative Society shall enter particulars of the application in the register of applications in the form mentioned therein.
It also re quires the Society to dispose of the application received as early as possible and in no case later than the expiration of a period of one month from the date of receipt of the application.
Rule 30 further provides that the person whose membership has been approved by the Managing Committee of a Cooperative Society shall deposit the membership fee and the amount of qualifying shares necessary to become a member within 14 days of the passing of the resolution of the Managing Committee approving the membership of the person concerned.
Bye law 5 provides that every person seeking membership of the Society shall sign a declaration to the effect that he or his wife or any of his dependants does not own a dwelling house or a plot in Delhi.
When the writ petitions came up for final hearing along with the C.M.Ps.
on 29 8 1974 this Court appointed Shri Deb Brat Mukherjee as Chairman of the Society.
The Chairman was asked to scrutinise whether any person had been either illegally brought in as a member or illegally removed having regard to the rules, the bye laws and the regulations of the Society.
The Chairman restored the membership of the alleged default ers and published a tentative voters ' list.
The Chairman declared that out of the 60 new allottees 21 did not have applications for membership and 38 were illegally admitted and could not be included in the voters ' list.
The chairman said that the allotment of plots in their favour could not be upheld.
11 persons out of the 60 new allottees filed two C.M.Ps.
in August 1976 praying for an injunction restraining the chairman from holding elections.
These applications were filed without serving any party to the proceedings contrary to the rules and practice of the court.
On 23 9 1976, the Chairman submitted his report.
Allowing the writ petitions, HELD: 1.
The date of the application, prescription of time for deposit of membership fee and the amount of qualifying shares, and the filing of the requisite declaration are formalities which cannot be disregarded.
The Chairman rightly came to the conclusion that the new allottees could not be treated as members.
The new allottees were taken in without considering the persons on the waiting list.
It was incumbent on the Society to act in accordance with clause 7 of the Lt. Governor 's award.
The Managing Committee took 38 persons as members unlawfully.
The declaration of default ers could not have been made except by the General Body with a special majority and with the approval of the Regis trar.
The nominated Managing Committee could not have functioned after 1st April 1973 in view of the provisions of section 92 read with section 32 of the Delhi Cooperative Societies Act 1972.
In view of the award of the Lt. Governor dated 6 7 1971 the Committee had no jurisdiction to declare any member a defaulter.
The act of declaration of defaulters of 6 1 1974 cannot be dis associated from the enrolment of new allottees on 25th and 26th January 1974.
The report of the chairman in restoring membership to the 108 alleged defaulters is just and correct.
The circular dated 30 4 1973 issued by the nominated Managing Committee is not a notice within the meaning of 373 the bye laws of the Society and the declaration of default ers on the basis of the circular is illegal and contrary to the bye laws of the Society.
The circular was despatched after the time for payment mentioned therein was over.
No opportunity was given to a member as required by the amended bye laws to show cause why his right to a plot would not be forfeited.
The order of this court dated 6 7 1973 continued to be in force in so far as the petitionrs in Raj Rani 's petition are concerned.
Therefore, the declaration of defaulters from amongst the petitioners in Raj Rani 's peti tion was unjustified.
The action of the nominated Managing Committee declaring defaulters was in bad faith because they wanted to confer benefits on other persons in the guise of declaration of defaulters.
[381 A B, D, E, H, The Chairman rightly came to the conclusion that out of the 42 declarations of defaulters for not submitting affidavit 30 members had genuine grievances.
[384 F] The Chairman rightly held that the 4 persons whose money was lying with the Society should be made members.
The Chairman also rightly held that the 4 persons whose lands had been acquired by the Society should be accepted as members [385A B] The priority fixed by the Chairmaan about allotment of plots is just.
[385 C] [The Court with a view to ensuring that the persons mentioned in the Chairman 's report should get the reliefs mentioned in the report held that those persons should make fresh applications with affidavits through the Chairman 'and the allotment of plots should be made in accordance with the priority laid down by the Chairman.]
