The appellant.company sued Mr. & Mrs. Sequeira for recovery of certain amounts under two contracts of supply of iron ore.
The first contract was signed by Ramesh holder of a power of attorney of Sequeiras and the second contract was signed by Ramesh 's father as the agent of Ramesh.
Under the two contracts Sequeiras were supposed to supply and load iron ore and were liable to pay demurrage in case of delay in loading the ship and were entitled to receive certain despatch money if the loading was made earlier.
Sequeiras filed their counter claims.
The Court did 'not arrive at a definite conclusion about the quantity of ore supplied and left that to be determined in execution proceedings.
The court found that the first contract was binding between the appellant and Sequeiras as it had been ratified by Sequerias and acted upon by the appellant.
The court, however, held that the second contract was not 'binding on Sequeiras as Ramesh had a limited authority and, therefore, he could not constitute his father his attorney for the purposes of executing the second agreement.
The trial Court also found that the appellant had committed breaches of the contract but left the quantum of damages to be determined in execu tion proceedings.
The decree of the .trial Court was sub stantially confirmed in appeal by the Additional Judicial Commissioner.
HELD: 1.
The Judicial Commissioner erred in concentrat ing on only one dictionary meaning of.
the word "exploita tion" used in the power of attorney executed by Sequeiras m favour of Ramesh.
The court, while interpreting a power of attorney, has to construe the document as a .whole m the light of its purpose and surrounding circumstances and the transactions meant to be governed by it.
Practice and custom have also some bearing on the nature and effect of the power of attorney.
The purpose of the powers conferred on the power of attorney have to be ascertained having regard to the need which gave rise to the execution of the docu ment, the practice of the parties and the manner in which parties themselves understood the purpose of the document.
The powers.
which are absolutely necessary and incidental to the execution of the ascertained purposes of the general powers given must be necessarily implied.
Applying the above rules of interpretation the court came to the conclu sion that Ramesh had power to appoint an agent to execute the contract in question and therefore the second .contract was also binding on Sequeiras [454A B, 456A H] Bryant, Powls, and Bryant, Limited vs La Banque De Peuple etc.
@ 177 and 179 and Jonmenjoy Coondoo vs George ,Alder Watson, @ 912 approved.
O.A.P.R.M.A.R. Adaikappa Chettiar vs Thomas Cook & Son (Bankers) Ltd. , distinguished.
The implied powers cannot go beyond the scope of the general object tances do not derrogate from the width of the general power initially conferred of the power of attorney but must necessarily be subordinated to it Specific in to such a case ejusdem generis cannot be applied.
The mode of construing a document and the rules to be applied to extract its meaning correctly depends upon not only the nature and object but also upon the frame, provisions, and language of the documents.
In cases of uncertainty the rule embodied in proviso 2 to section 92 of the Evidence Act which is ap plicable to contracts can be invoked.
452 The ultimate decision of such a matter turns upon the prac tice and particular facts of each case.
[458D P] 3.
The findings arrived at by the Appellate Court that Sequeiras were prevented from performing their part of the contract, owing to the failure of the appellant to provide either sufficient lighting or enough winches to enable due performance of the contract, is unexceptionable.
The Judi cial Commissioner rightly concluded that the company had not discharged its own part of the contract so that it could not claim demurrage or damages.
[458 G H] The court partly allowed the appeal and remanded the matter back to the trial court for determining the liabili ties of the parties in the light of the judgment.
[459E F]
