The Corporation of Calcutta is not precluded from taking proceedings under section 363 of the Calcutta Municipal Act, 1923 by reason of its having taken proceedings prior thereto under section 488 of the Act read with Rule 62 of Schedule XVII.
The question of inconvenience to neighbours is not relevant for the purpose of deciding whether an order for demolition should be made under section 363 of the Act.
When the Legislature provides that on the same facts proceedings could be taken under two different sections and the penalties provided in those sections are not the same, it obviously intends to treat them as distinct, and, therefore, where no question under section 403 of the Code of Criminal Procedure arises, proceedings taken under one section cannot be treated as falling within the other.
The word. "may" in section 363 of the Act does not mean "shall" and the Magistrate has under that section discretion whether he should pass an order for demolition or not.
It is a well settled principle that when the legislature entrusts to an authority the power to pass an order in its discretion an order passed by that authority in exercise of that discretion is, in general, not liable to be interfered with by an appellate court, unless it can be shown to have been based on some mistake of facts or misapprehension of the principles applicable thereto.
In the present case, however, the orders of the courts below were based on mistakes and misdirections and therefore could not be supported.
But the Supreme Court did not think this to be a fit case for an order for the demolition of the buildings in view of certain special circumstances, viz, (1) though section, 363(2), which directs that no appli 126 996 cation for demolition shall be instituted after the lapse of five years from the date of the work, did not, in terms, apply as the proceedings had been started in time, it was nearly five years since the building bad been completed and the interests of the public did not call for its demolition, and (2) the appeal came on a certificate granted under article 134(1)(c) with a view to obtaining the decision of the Supreme Court on certain questions of importance.
Abdul Samzad vs Corporation of Calcutta ([1905] I.L.R. , referred to.
