The appellant was convicted by the Sessions Court under section 302, IPC, and sentenced to death.
On the date of the judgment his advocate was not present.
The trial court did not give the accused an opportunity to be.
heard in regard to the sentence as required by section 235(2), Cr.P.C., 1973.
The appellant also did not insist on his right to be heard.
The conviction and sentence.
were, confirmed by the High Court.
Even in the High Court the accused did not complain that the trial court had committed a breach of section 235(2).
On the question whether the sentence is vitiated because of the violation .of section 235(2), HELD: The matter should be remanded to.
the trial court for giving an opportunity to the appellant on the question of sentence.
Per Bhagwati, J: (1) Under section 235(1) the court must, in the first instance, deliver a judgment convicting or acquit ting the accused.
If the accused is acquitted, no further question arises.
If the accused is convicted, at that stage, he must be given an opportunity to be heard in regard to the sentence, and it is only after hearing him that the court can pass sentence.
[232 D E] (2) Section 235(2) is a new provision in consonance with the modern trends in penology and sentencing procedures.
Sentencing is an important stage in the process of adminis tration of criminal justice, and should not be consigned to a subsidiary position.
Many factors have to be considered before a proper sentence is passed such as the nature of the offence; the circumstances extenuating or aggravating of the offence; the prior criminal record, if any, of the offender; his age; his record of employment; his background with reference to education; home life.
sobriety and social adjustment; his emotional and mental condition; the pros pects for his rehabilitation; the possibility of his return to a normal life in the community; the possibility of treat ment or training Of the offender; the possibility that the sentence may Serve as a deterrent to crime by the offender or by others and the current community need, if any for such a deterrent in respect to the particular type of of fence.
The material relating to these factors may be placed before the court by means of affidavits.
The hearing contem plated by section 235(2) is not confined merely to hearing oral submissions, but .it is also intended to give an opportunity to the prosecution and the accused to place.
before the court facts and material relating to the various factors bearing on the question of sentence, and if they are con tested by the other side, then to produce evidence for the purpose of establishing those factors.
Otherwise, the hearing would be devoid of meaning and content.
The Court must however be vigilant to see that this hearing on the question of sentence is not abused and turned into an in strument for unduly protracting 1he proceedings.
[232 E; G A B] Ediga Anammo vs State of Andhra Pradesh ; referred to.
(3) If the trial court had, instead of sentencing the appellant to death, imposed on him the sentence of the imprisonment, he would not be, aggrieved by the breach of section 235(2 ), because, even after hearing the appellant, the. trial court could not have passed a more favourable sen tence.
But the trial court imposed death sentence and the possibility cannot be ruled out that if the 230 appellant has been given an opportunity to produce material and make submissions on the question of sentence, he might have been able to persuade, the trial court to impose the lesser penalty.
[235 D E] (4) Since the section is a new provision it is quite possible that many lawyers and judges might be unaware of it.
In the present case obviously the trial court as well as the appellant 's advocate in the High Court were aware of it.
No inference can, therefore, be drawn against the appellant that he had nothing to say from his omission to raise this point in the High Court.
[236 A] (5)(a) Non compliance with the requirement of the sec tion cannot be described as a mere irregularity curable under section 465.
It amounts to by_passing an important stage of the trial so that the trial cannot be said to be that contemplated by the Code.
Such deviation constitutes diso bedience of an express provision of the Code as to the mode of trial and hence cannot be regarded as a mere irregulari ty.
[236 H] Subramania Iyer vs King Emperor (1901) 28 I.A. 257 referred to.
(b) The; violation goes to the root of the matter and the resulting illegality is of such a character that it vitiates the sentence.
[237 B] Pulukuri Kotayya vs King Emperor, (1947) 74 I.A. 65 and Magga vs State of Rajasthan, ; referred to.
(c) When no opportunity has been given to the appellant in regard to the sentence to be imposed on him, failure of justice must be regarded as implicit and section 465 cannot have any application.
[137 B] Per Fazal Ali J. (1) The 48th Report of the Law Commis sion and the statement of objects and reasons of the 1973 Code of Criminal Procedure show that section 235(2) is a very salutary provision.
It contains one of the cardinal fea tures of natural justice, namely, that the accused must be given an opportunity to make a representation against the sentence proposed to be imposed on him.
It seeks to achieve a socio econonmic purpose and is aimed at attaining the ideal principle of proper sentencing in a rational and progressive society.
Section 235 is split up into two inte gral parts, (a) the stage which culminates in the passing of the judgment of conviction or acquittal; and (b) the stage which, on conviction, results in imposition of sentence on the accused.
Both these parts are absolutely fundamental and non compliance with any of the provisions would undoubt edly vitiate the final order passed by the Court.
Section 235(2) enjoins on the Court to stay its hands after passing a judgment oF conviction and hear the accused on the ques tion of sentence before passing sentence.
[238 H; 239 E; C] (2) There may lye a number of circumstances of which the Court may not be aware but which may be taken into consider ation by the court while awarding the sentence, particularly a sentence of death.
The accused must be given an opportu nity of making his representation and placing such materials which have a bearing on the question of sentence.
Parlia ment has not intended that the accused should adopt dilatory tactics under the cover of this new provision but contem plated that a short and simple opportunity has to be given to the accused to place materials bearing on the question of sentence, if necessary by leading evidence, before the .Court, and a consequent opportunity to the prosecution to rebut those materials.
The Court must be vigilant to exercise proper control over the proceedings so that the trial is not unavoidably or unnecessarily delayed.
[240 F G] (3) Non compliance with the section is not a mere irreg ularity which can be cured by section 465 of the Code.
It is an illegality which vitiates the sentence.
Having regard to the object and the setting in which the new provision was in serted, there can be no doubt that it is one of the most fundamental parts of criminal procedure and non compliance thereof will ex facie vitiate the order.
231 Even if it be regarded as an irregularity the prejudice caused to the accused would be inherent and implicit because of the infraction of the rules of natural justice which have been incorporated in this provision, since the accused has been completely deprived of an opportunity to represent to the Court regarding the proposed sentence and this manifest ly results in a serious failure of justice.
[240 B C] [Both the learned Judges indicated that there must be a system of training judges in the application of socio eco nomic laws and in modern methods and techniques of decision making and sentencing procedures]
