The respondents agreed to sell their agricultural land to the appellants.
The title deeds and possession of the land were given to the appellants and both parties jointly applied to the District Deputy Collector, Thana Prant, under section 63 of the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1948, seeking permission for the sale.
The permission was refused on the ground that the intending purchaser had failed to obtain a certificate from the Collector under Rule 36(f) of the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Rules 1956, that he intended to take to the profession of agricul ture and was capable of cultivating land personally.
The appellants thereafter obtained the requisite sanction from the Additional Collector, Thana, in spite of the respond ents ' non cooperation.
A suit by the respondents for de claring the agreement void in law was decreed by the Trial Court.
In appeal, the High Court opined that the Prant Officer 's refusal to permit the sate had rendered the agree ment impossible of performance.
Allowing the appeal, the Court.
HELD: (1) The parties are governed by section 56 of the Contract Act according to which a contract becomes void only if something supervenes after its execution which renders it impracticable or impossible of performance.
The order of the Prant Officer was not of such a catastrophic character.
[519A C] Satyabrata Ghose vs Mugneeram Bangur & Co. & Anr. ; ; Smt.
Sushila Devi & Anr.
vs Hari Singh & Ors.
and Tamplin Steamship Co. Lid vs Anglo Mexican Petroleum products Co. Ltd. , 403, applied.
Joseph Constantine Steamship Line Ltd. vs Imperial Smelting Corporation Ltd. at 168, referred to.
(2) The function which the Collector or the authorised officer discharges under the proviso to section 63(1) of the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act is an administra tive one and not judicial or quasi judicial.
[519G H] The State of Madras vs C.P. Sarathy & Anr.
AIR 1953 S.C. 53; A.K. Bhaskar vs Advocate General AIR 1962 Kerala 90; Shantanand vs Advocate General AIR 1955 All. 372; Shrimali Lal vs Advocate General AIR 1955 Raj. 166 and Abdul Kasim vs Md. Dawood AIR 1961 Mad.
similarity marked.
(3) The dismissal of a proceeding by an authority not on merits but merely on account of a formal defect will not attract the applicability of the general principles of res judicata and will not debar the authority exercising concur rent jurisdiction from entertaining the subsequent proceed ings for the same relief and passing proper orders on merits.
[520 F H] Putali Mehati vs Tulia I.L.R. and Pethaparu mal vs Murugandi , applied.
