Section 198(1) of the provides that the total managerial remuneration payable by a public compa ny to its directors in respect of a financial year shall not exceed eleven per cent of the net profits of that company for that financial year.
Sub section (3) prescribes that within 'the limits of the maximum remuneration specified in sub section
(1) a company may pay a remuneration to its managing or whole time director in accordance with the provisions of section 309.
Section 309(3) provides that a director who is either in the whole time employment of the company or a managing director may be paid remuneration either by way of monthly payment or at a specified percentage of the net profits of the company or partly by one way or partly by the other.
The proviso provides that except with the approval of the Central Government such remuneration shall not exceed five per cent of the net profits for one such director and if there is more than one such director ten per cent for all of them together.
Section 637A provides that where the Central Government is required or authorised by any provi sion of the Act to accord approval in relation to any matter the Central Government may accord such approval subject to such conditions, limitations, restrictions as it may think fit to impose.
In 1966 the respondent company appointed two managing directors and sought the approval of the Central Government under section 269 of the for their appoint ment.
Granting its approval the Company Law Board fixed a ceiling on the total remuneration payable to each managing director by way of commission and salary.
The Company 's representation to the Board to raise the ceiling of remuner ation was rejected.
In a petition under art, 226 of the Constitution the High Court held that the action of the Board in reducing the remuneration was arbitrary and void and that any condition regarding the remuneration which is contrary to the provi sions of sections 198 and 309 would not be germane to section 269 and that section does not include in its scope any element regarding the fixation of remuneration.
Allowing the appeals of the Board.
HELD: The High Court was in error in quashing the order of the Board.
In view of the provisions of sections 269 and 637A there is no infirmity in the condition imposed by the Board.
[510C; 509H] Section 309 does not deal with the appointment of manag ing directors but pertains to the remuneration of managing or .whole time directors who had already been appointed.
The effect of the proviso to section 309(3) is that if the tenure of a managing director already appointed continued after the coming into force of the Act, the remuneration to be raid to such managing director shall not, after the coming into force of the Act, exceed 5% of the net profits to be paid for one such director and if there be more than one such director 10% for all of them together.
[509D] In the instant case since the managing director had been appointed for the first time after the coming into force of the Act their .appointment had to be approved in terms of section 269.
The Board, while granting permission, inserted a condition regarding the total remuneration of each managing director.
In so doing the Board acted well within the power.
[509F G] 16 1546 SCI/76 504
