The District Magistrate of Delhi, "being satisfied that with a view to the maintenance of public order in Delhi it is necessary to do so" ordered the detention of the peti tioners under section 3 of the .
The grounds of detention communicated to the petitioners were "that your speeches generally in the past and particu larly on the 13th and 15th August, 1950, at public meetings in Delhi has been such as to excite disaffection between Hindus and Mussalmans and thereby prejudice the maintenance 01 public order in Delhi and that in order to prevent you from making such speeches it is necessary to make the said order.
" The petitioners contended that under the Constitu tion the maintenance of public order was not a purpose for which restriction can be imposed on the freedom of 452 speech guaranteed by article 19 (1) and that the grounds commu nicated were too vague and indefinite to enable them to make a representation and the provisions of article 22 (s) of the Constitution were not complied with, and their detention was therefore ultra vires and illegal: Held by the Full Court (KANIA C.J., PATANJALI SASTRI, MEHR CHAND MAHAJAN, S.R. DAs and VIVIAN BOSE JJ.) that though personal liberty is sufficiently comprehensive to include the freedoms enumerated in article 19 (1) and its deprivation would result in the extinction of those free doms, the Constitution has treated these civil liberties as distinct fundamental rights and made separate provisions in articles 19, 21 and 22 as to the limitations and conditions subject to which alone they could be taken away or abridged.
Consequently, even though a law which restricts freedom of speech and expression which is not directed solely against the undermining of the security of the State or its over throw but is concerned generally in the interests of public order may not fall within the reservation of cl.
(2) of article 19 and may therefore be void, an order of preventive deten tion cannot be held to be invalid merely because the deten tion is made with a view to prevent the making of speeches.
prejudicial to the maintenance of public order.
The deci sions in Brij Bhushan and Another vs The State of Delhi (1) and Romesh Thappar vs The State of Madras(2) are not incon sistent with the decision in A.K. Gopalan vs The State(3).
Held per KANIA.
C.J., PATANJALI SASTRI and S.R. DAS JJ.
(MEHR CHAND MAHAJAN and BOSE JJ.
dissenting) As the time and place at which the speeches were alleged to have been made and their general nature and effect,.
namely, that they were such as to excite disaffection between Hindus and Muslims were also stated in the grounds communicated, they were not too vague or indefinite to enable the petitioners to make an effective representation and the detention cannot be held to be illegal on the ground that article 22 (8) was not complied with.
Per CHAND MAHAJAN and BOSE JJ.
(contra) In the absence of any indication in the grounds as to the nature of the words used by the petitioners in their speech es, from which an inference has been drawn against them, the petitioners would not be able fully to exercise their funda mental right of making a representation, and as there were no such indications in the grounds supplied, there was a non compliance with the provisions of el.
(5) article 22 and the detention was illegal.
The State of Bombay vs Alma Ram Sridhar Vaidya(4) applied.
