Section 2(c) of the Orissa Development of Industries, Irrigation, Agriculture, Capital construction and Resettle ment of Displaced persons" (Land Acquisition) Act, 1948 (Act XVIII of 1948), defines development of industries to mean and include the construction of Hirakund Dam and other dams and reservoirs, Hydro Electric Projects and such other schemes or property as the State Government may by a notifi cation specify in this behalf.
By a notification dated 20th February, 1954 it was stated that "the project for the establishment of a steel plant and allied and ancillary industry in the block of villages round about Rourkela shall be included within the meaning of the expression "develop ment of industries" as defined in cl.
(c) of section 2 of the Act.
By notification dated 22nd February, 1954 and 9th Febru ary, 1955 82 sq.
miles of land was acquired for the "devel opment of industries, namely establishment of steel plant and allied and ancillary industries".
The above land vested absolutely in the State Government free from all encum brances on the dates of the above notifications.
The writ petitions filed by some owners of some of the acquired lands challenging the validity of the acquisition were dismissed in limine.
In appeal to this Court, the appellants contended (a) the State Government was not competent to acquire the land in question under the Act for the establishment of a steel plant as it cannot be said to be for the purpose of the development of industry; (b) the acquired land could only be used for the steel plant and ancillary industries and not for a civil township; (c) the transfer of 3.21 acres of land by the Railway authorities long after 14 years of the acqui sition to the Notified Area Committee for construction of taxi stand, busroad etc.
in and around the Railway Station is bad.
Dismissing the appeals to this Court, HELD: (1) In the face of the notification dated 20th February, 1954 and 2(c) of the Orissa Development .of
Indus try, Irrigation, Agriculture, Capital Construction and Resettlement of Displaced Persons (Land Acquisition) Act 1948, the establishment of steel plant and ancillary indus tries at Rourkela answers to the definition of development of industries as given in the Act.
[668 G H] Clause (c) of Section 2 confers wide powers on the State Government to notify any scheme or project as it may consid er appropriate for the development of industries and there is nothing in that clause that the scheme or project can be the subject matter of a notification must be similar to Hirakund Dam or other dams or reservoirs or hydro electric projects.
[669 A B] (2) The contention that the acquired land could only be used for the steel plant and ancillary industries and not for the civil township is devoid of force.
A township is a necessary adjunct and concomitant of a big steel plant.
The establishment of a steel plant necessarily postulates the construc 667 tion of residential quarters for the workmen, shopping areas, schools, hospitals, post offices etc.
The fact therefore that part of the land which was acquired has been used for civil township would not affect the validity of" the acquisition of the land.
[669 C D] (3) There is no principle of law by which a valid, compulsory acquisition stands void because long later the requiring authority diverts it to a public purpose other than the one stated in the declaration.
In the instant case, the transfer of 3.21 acres of the land by the Railways is to the Notified Area Committee who is the appropriate body to construct and maintain the link roads, bus and taxi stands and shop surrounding the Railway Station.
The land is not being used for a purpose extraneous from that for which the land was initially acquired.
[669 G H. 670 A B] Gulam Mustafa & Ors.
vs State of Maharashtra & Ors.
[1976] I SCR 875 applied.
