The respondent is a transporter.
The respondent lifts the iron ore in his trucks from Hubli Railway yard and carries it to Karwar and Belekeri harbours.
The trucks of the respondent have to pass in the course of transit through :he limits of various Town Municipalities situate on the highway of which the appellant happens to be one.
The respondent does not unload or re load the iron ore at any intermediary point or stop.
The appellant passed a resolu tion in purported exercise of section 124 of the Karnataka Munic ipalities Act, 1964 read with rule 26 of the.
Karnataka Municipalities Taxation Rules, 1965, imposing a fee of Re. 1/ per trip of each truck.
The respondent filed a writ petition challenging the levy of the fee.
The learned single Judge of the High Court dismissed the writ petition.
The Division Bench, however, allowed the appeal.
Dismissing the appeal by certificate, HELD: The present case is not covered by "any article or animal brought into the municipal limits for the purpose of immediate exportation" mentioned in section 124.
"Brought into" and "immediate exportation" do not comprehend within their sweep the continuous process of transit of goods by vehicles which merely use the State High Way passing through the areas which lie within the municipal limits.
In the instant case, the iron ore is carried in the trucks of the respond ent which merely pass through the areas which lie within the municipal limits and is not unloaded and reloaded at any place within the municipal areas.
The continuity or contin uous process of the carriage of iron ore is not in any way, in fact, broken within the municipal limits.
The respondent cannot be said either to bring in or export the iron ore as contemplated by section 124 of the Act read with Rule 26 of the Rules and, as such, is not liable to pay octroi or what is styled as supervision fee.
A contrary interpretation would make rail borne goods passing through the Railway Station within the limits of the municipality liable to the imposi tion of the fee on their arrival at the Railway Station and departure therefrom which could not be the intention of the Legislature.
[662 G H, 664 B, G H, 665 A B] The Central India Spinning and Weaving and Manufactur ing Company Limited, the Empire Mills, Nagpur vs The Munic ipal Committee, Nagpur ; 1958 SC 352, fol lowed.
Brown vs State of Maryland ; , 442; ; , 686 and Wilson vs Robertson , quoted with approval.
