Section 2(o) of the Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969 defines "restrictive trade practice" to be a trade practice which tends to bring about manipulation of prices or conditions of delivery or to affect the flow of supplies in the market relating to goods or services in such manner as to impose on the consumers unjustified costs or re strictions.
Section 33 provides that any agreement relating to a restrictive trade practice falling within one or more of the categories (a) to (I) specified in sub s.(1) thereof shall be registered.
Section 37 enacts that the Monopo lies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission may inquire into any restrictive trade practice, whether the agreement relating thereto had been registered under section 35 or not.
Under section 38 when the Commission finds that such re strictions are necessary or justified, in the circumstances mentioned in the section, it may permit such restrictions.
The appellant is a manufacturer of heavy and medium commercial vehicles.
The appellant enters into an agreement with dealers in regard to sale of its vehicles.
Clause 1 (a) of the agreement provides that a dealer shall buy from the Regional Sales Office of the company a new Tata diesel truck for resale within the territory described in accord ance with the provisions of the agreement.
Clause (b) provides that the agreement shall not preclude the company from entering into any dealership agreement with any other person or persons within the said territory.
Clause 3 prohibits the dealer from selling the vehicles either di rectly or indirectly to any person outside the territory.
Clause 6(a) provides that the dealer shall maintain an organisation for the sale of the vehicles in accordance with the directions of the appellant.
Clause 14 prohibits the dealer from handling or selling vehicles manufactured or supplied by any other company.
In a petition under section 10(a)(iii) of the Act, the Regis trar of the Restrictive Trade Practices alleged that cls.
(1) and (3) of the agreement between the appellant and its dealers provided for territorial restrictions or allocation of areas or market, cl.
(6) provided for resale price main tenance, cl. 14 provided for exclusive dealership and all these clauses of the agreement showed that the appellant was indulging in restrictive ' trade practices relating to allo cation of territories or areas among its dealers and that the appellant was not willing to abandon the restrictive trade practices.
The Commission held inter alia.
that cls.
(1) and (3) of the agreement.
constituted restrictive trade practices and, therefore, void.
It was contended on behalf of the respondent that irrespec tive of the injurious or beneficial consequences of a trade practice which may restrict competition, an agreement may fall within the definition of that term in section 2(0) of the Act.
An injurious or beneficial result Of the restriction is relevant only for purposes of section 37 and section 38 and not for the purposes of section 33.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: The agreement in the present case was not within the vice of restrictive trade practice and was not registra ble.
686 (1) An agreement will be registrable when it will have both the effect of restricting competition within the meaning of section 2(0) and also deal with the subject matter described in sections 33(1)(a) to (I).
A practice which is not restrictive under section 2(0) of the Act cannot be a restrictive 'trade practice only because of cls.
(a) to (1) of section 33(1).
Section 33 does not provide statutory illustrations to section 2(0) of the Act but only enumerates some types of trade practices which, if they are restrictive within section 2(0), require registration.
[693 F G] (2) The definition of restrictive trade practice is an exhaustive and not an inclusive one.
The decision whether a trade practice is restrictive or not has to be arrived at by applying the rule of reason and not on doctrine that any restriction as to area or price will per se be a restrictive trade practice.
The question in each case is whether the restraint is such as regulates and thereby promotes competi tion or whether it is such may suppress or even destroy competition.
To determine this question three matters are to be considered, namely, (1) what facts are peculiar to the business to which the restraint is applied, (2) what was the condition before and after the restraint was imposed, and (3) what was the nature of the restraint and what was its actual and probable effect.
[693 D F] (3) When the authorities under the Act want to challenge any agreement or any practice as a restrictive trade prac tice, it has to be established that it is a restrictive trade practice within the definition of section 2(0).
If it is found that it is a restrictive trade practice, it has to be registered under s 33.
It is only after an agreement had been registered that there is an enquiry under Chapter VI of the Act.
This enquiry under section 37 is to find out whether a restrictive trade 'practice is prejudicial to the public interest.
[692 H, 693 A] (4) The two terms of restriction on dealers, namely, one confining sales within the territory and .t_he other confin ing dealers to dealing in only the appellant 's vehicles are not prejudicial to public interest.
The territorial re striction is also in public interest and the Commission was in error in thinking that it was not so.
[701 C D] In the instant case, the supply of commercial vehicles is far below the demand and the gap between supply and demand is growing.
The vehicles of the appellant were in great demand not only in the country but outside the country as well.
Clauses relating to territorial restric tion do not constitute 'restrictive trade practice because the domestic market is spread all over the country, to meet the needs of the users of vehicles the appellant has a countrywide network of dealers who maintain service sta tions, workshops, requisite equipment, machinery and trained personnel.
The appellant ensures that the vehicles are only sold by dealers who have the requisite facilities and organisation to give after sales service.
The appellant gives a warranty in respect of the vehicles.
A geographical network is natural to the industry which the appellant has set up.
The appellant has zonal offices throughout the country.
If the territorial restriction is removed, there will be a tendency for person to book orders in all areas thus starving the consumers of a particular area of their equitable share and disrupting the flow of vehicles in both areas.
If the dealer is not assumed of a steady demand in his territory he may have no incentive or may not find it economic to organise proper after sales service.
Some of the dealers have even maintained mobile service vans.
[694 H, 695 A] The exclusive dealings of the appellant do not impede competition but promote it.
Such dealings lead to special isation and improvement in after salesservice.
The exclu sive dealership agreements do not restrict distribution in any area or prevent competition.
By making its dealers exclusive, it cannot be said that there is prevention, distortion or restriction of competition in the territory in which the dealer operates.
Any manufacturer of vehicles similar to those of the appellant is also free to appoint dealers of its choice in the Same territory covered by the appellant 's dealers.
The channels for outlet for vehicles have not been blocked.
[699 F G] 687 When there is acute scarcity of the goods and there is no possibility of dealers selling the product at less than the permissible price, it would be irrational to talk of territorial limits restricting competition.
Territorial restriction promotes competition between the different manufacturers in every part of India.
[700 B C] Clauses (1) and (3) are in the interest of the consumer and ensure an equal distribution as far as possible of the goods at a fair price.
Clauses (6) and (14) do not amount to a restriction in competition because other manufacturers could appoint other persons to deal in their commercial vehicles.
It is also in public interest to see that vehi cles of other manufacturers are sold in the same territory by other dealers.
[701 B C]
