Under section 32 of the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act 1948, the.
tiller of the land had the right to purchase the land tenanted to him.
Where the landlord is a minor or a widow or a person subject to any mental or physical disa bility, the right to purchase such land is postponed till their disability disappears and one year lapses thereafter.
But this embargo on the exercise ' of the right of purchase by the tenant does not operate as per proviso to section 32F(1)(a), if the property belongs to a joint family and there is a partition therein and the land is allotted to the person under disability.
In both the appeals, the family owned lands and other assets and there was a partition confined to agricultural land only.
In one case the share fell to a widow while in the other it fell to a minor, admittedly a disabled ' person within ' the meaning of s 32F(1).
Before the TribUnal and the High Court, the landlord claimed, therefore, protection under the proviso to clause (a) of section 32F(1) of the Act while the respondent contended that even if the agricultural land had been divided and other assets admittedly remained joint, the appellant was ineligible to claim the benefit of the proviso.
The High Court decided against the landlord and held: "The proviso is not satisfied unless the share of a disabled person is separated by metes and bounds in all the joint family property and unless the agricultural land allotted to him corresponds to his share in the entire property and is not in excess thereof '.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court, HELD: (1) The broad idea is to vest full ownership in the tenantry.
A compassionate exception is made in favour of a handicapped landlords who ' cannot prove their need to recover their land on approved grounds.
The Legislature conditioned the proviso by insisting that the separation should be from the whole joint family assets and not a tell tale transaction where agricultural lands alone are divided and secondly even where there iS a total partition only a fair proportion of the lands is allotted to the disabled person.
[682 C D F] What section 32F(1) insists upon is that (a) share of such person in the joint family has been separated by metes and bounds; (b).
the Mamlatdar is satisfied that the share of the disabled person in the land is separated in the same proportion as the share of that person in the entire joint family property and not in a larger proportion.
[681 G] (3) The imperative condition for the operation of the proviso is that there should be a total separation and so far as a disabled member is concerned, it must cover all the joint family properties.
The usage of the expressions "the share of such person in the joint .family", "the share of.
such person,, in the land", "the share of that person in the, entire joint family property in the section the clear statement in the proviso that the disabled person s share in the joint family must have been separated by metes and bounds and the statutory exercise expected of the Mam latdar by the proviso involving an enquiry into the share of the disabled person in the land and its value, the share of that person in the entire joint family properties, the proportion that the allot 679 ment of the land bears to his share in the entire joint family property with a view to see that there is no unfair manouvre to defeat the scheme of the Act lead to the neces sary postulate that it is not confined to the share of the land only but really means his share in the entire joint family property.
[683 E H, 684 A] (4) In the instant case there is no division of all the joint family property.
Only the landed properties have been separated.
[684 B] Observation: The reform of the inherited law making methodology may save court time and reduce litigation.
Our legislative process, not an unmixed blessing, works under such instant stress and ad hoc hephazardness that the whole piece of legislation when produced makes experienced draftsmen blush, as in the instant case, the involved drafting of section 32F has had its share in the marginal obscurity of meaning.
[682 B C]
