The appellant ,who was the Additional District Magis trate in overall charge ,of the Nizarat and the Land Acqui sition sections of the Collectorate was charged for criminal misconduct under section 5(2) read with section 5(1)(c) and 5(1 ) (d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947.
The allegation against the appellant was that he withdrew a sum of Rs. 10,000/ on 9 1 1965 on the ground that he wanted to distribute the said amount amongst the villagers whose land was acquired as the compensation; that in fact the appellant never wanted to distribute the said amount and that he retained,the money with him for about 6 months dishonestly and only after that the money was deposited in the Treasury.
The defence of the appellant was that the Secretary of the Works Department called a meeting in the Secretariat on 25 9 1964 and that the appellant was expressly directed to proceed to the spot and persuade the villagers to accept the compensation money; that it was pursuant to that mandate that the appellant withdrew the money on 9 1 1965; that he could not go to the village in question in that day because one of the officers who was to accompany him was not avail able; that he, therefore, again deposited the money back with the Nazir and collected the money from him again on 20 1 1975; that he went there along with several officials; that the villagers, however, refused to accept the compensa tion.
The appellant was, however, hopeful of getting the compensation increased and to persuade the villagers to accept the increased compensation.
He, therefore, on his return handed over the money to the Nazir, however, asked him not to deposit the same in the Treasury so that cash would be readily available as soon as needed.
Nazir was examined by the prosecution and he denied having received the money as suggested by the appellant.
Secretary of the Works Department was not examined by the prosecution.
The Land Acquisition Officer PW 8 deposed that the Secretary directed the appellant to take action for payment of the compensation money to the villagers and that the appellant should personally persuade the villagers to accept the compensation.
The said witness was, however, declared hostile on the ground that he did not state to the Police that when the appellant and the Executive Engineer visited the village they did not persuade the villagers to receive the compensation amount.
PW 7 the Executive Engi neer deposed that he accompanied the appellant to the vil lage and that the appellant tried to persuade the villagers to receive the compensation but that they refused to accept the same.
This witness was also declared hostile because of certain minor omissions in his statement before the Police.
PW 6, one of the villagers also deposed that the appellant persuaded them to give up possession but the villagers did not agree.
This witness was also declared hostile because he omitted state some facts before the Police.
The Trial Court and the High Court relying on the evi dence of Nazir and certain documents convicted the appellant under section 5(1)(c) and 5(1)(d) read with section 5(2)of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947.
12 1104SCI/76 440 Allowing the appeal by Special Leave, HELD: 1.
In a charge of misappropriation once the en trustment of money is proved and although the onus to prove the entrustment is on the prosecution.
if the explanation of the accused is found to be false he must be presumed to have retained the money with himself.
[444 A B] Jaikrishnadas Manohardas Desai and Anr.
vs State of Bombay, 324; followed.
Three principles of criminal jurisprudence which are well settled are as under: (i) that the onus ties affirmatively on the prosecution to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt and it cannot derive any benefit from weak ness or falsity of the defence version while prov ing its case; (ii) that in a criminal trial the accused must be presumed to be innocent until he is proved to be guilty; and (iii) that the onus of the prosecution never shifts.
[444 G H, 445 A] 3.
Under section 105 of the Evidence Act the onus of proving exceptions mentioned in the Indian Penal Code lies on the accused but the said section does not at all indicate the nature and the standard of proof required.
It is suffi cient if the, accused is able to prove his case by the standard of preponderance of probabilities as envisaged by section 5 of the Evidence Act.
[445 A B] Harbhajan Singh vs State of Punjab, ; , 241 and State of U.P. vs Ram Swarup & Anr.
[1975] 1 S.C.R. 409, 416 17, followed.
The accused succeeds if the probability of his version throws doubt on the presecution case.
He need not prove his case to the hilt.
It is sufficient for the defence to give a version which competes in probability with the prosecution version for that would be sufficient to throw suspicion on the prosecution case entailing its rejection by the court.
[445 B C] 4.
In a criminal trial it is not at all obligatory on the accused to produce evidence in support of his defence and for the purpose of proving his version he can rely on the admissions made by prosecution witnesses or on the documents filed by the prosecution.
The courts below were not justified in drawing adverse inference against the accused for not producing evidence in support his defence.
The prosecution cannot derive any strength or support from the weakness of the defence case.
[446 E G] 5.
The courts below erred in basing conviction of the appellant on the sole testimony of the Nazir completely ignoring the important admissions made in favour of the accused by other prosecution witnesses, some of whom were declared hostile and some were .not.
[446 H, 447 A] 6.
No explanation is coming forth why the Secretary, Works Department Who was a Government servant, has not been examined.
It was a part of the prosecution case that in the said meeting the Secretary did not direct the appellant to go to the village for making payment.
The prosecution ought to have examined the Accountant who was a material witness in order to unfold the prosecution narrative itself.
The court drew adverse inference for his non examination.
[447 D:E] 7.
Section 154 of the Evidence Act confers.
a discretion on the court to permit a witness to be cross examined by a party calling him.
The section confers a judicial discretion and must be exercised judiciously and properly in the inter est of justice.
The court will not nor.m.
ally allow a party to cross examine his own witness and declare the same hostile unless the court is Satisfied that the statement of the witness exhibits an element of hostility.
or that he has resiled from a material statement which he made before an earlier authority.
[448 G H, 449 A] 441 Dahyabhai Chhaganbhai Thakker vs State of Gujarat, ; , 368.
69. 70 followed.
Merely because a witness in an unguarded moment speaks the truth which may not suit the prosecution or which may be favourable to the accused, the discretion to allow the party concerned to cross examine his own witnesses cannot be allowed.
The contingency _of permitting the cross examina tion of the witness by the party calling him is an extra ordinary phenomenon and permission should be given only in special cases.
[449 G H, 450 C] 8.
On the facts the court found that the Trial Court wrongly exercised its discretion in permitting the prosecu tion to cross examine its own witnesses.
[451 F] 9.
Merely because a witness is declared hostile it does not make him unreliable so as to exclude his evidence from consideration altogether.
[450 E F] Bhagwn Singh vs State of Haryana, ; , 391 92 followed.
The court found that the defence version was ren dered probable by the testimony of witnesses as well as documents.
[457 A D] 11.
The Court found that the Nazir was not a reliable witness and that the courts below ought not to have acted on his sole testimony.
[455 C]
