The Maharashtra Legislature passed the Maharashtra Debt Relief Act.
By the said Act the existing debts of some classes of some indigents have been liquidated.
The Act is a temporary measure.
The validity of the said Act was challenged in the present writ petition and appeals on the following grounds: (1) Money lending was a trade covered by Article 304 of the Constitution.
The restric tion both substantive and procedural imposed by the impugned Act are not reasonable within the meaning of Article 304(b).
(2) The State legislature has no legislative competence to enact the statute.
(3) So far as the Gold ornaments are concerned the field is occupied by the Gold Control Act 1968 passed by the Parliament.
Therefore, inasmuch as the said Act deals with Gold Ornaments it is beyond the legislative competence.
829 The respondents contended that: (1) The money lending in the present case was not a trade.
(2) Even if it was trade the restrictions imposed by the statute are reasonable.
(3) The State Legislature is competent to enact the impugned Act.
(4) The doctrine of occupied field has no application.
(5) The Gold Control Act and the impugned Act deal with two completely different situa tions.
(6) In any case, there is no inconsisten cy between the two Acts.
Upholding the validity of the Act, HELD: (1) It is cruel legal like to legitimate as trade this age and bleeding business whereby the little peasant, the landless tiller, the bonded labour, the pave ment tenant and the slum dweller born and buried during the Raj and the Republic in chili penury.
[836 B C] Atiabari Tea Co. ; , 843, referred to.
(2) The topics of legislation listed in the 7th Schedule must receive a large liberal and realistic interretation.
[836 E] (3) The freedom while it is wide is not absolute.
Every systematic, profit oriented activity, however sinster, suppressive or socially diabole, cannot ipso facto exalt itself into a trade.
Dealings of Banks and similar institu tions having some nexus with trade, actual or potential, may itself be trade or intercourse.
All modern commercial credit and financial dealings amount 10 trade.
However, village based age old, feudal pattern of money lending to those below the subsistence level to the village artisan, the bonded labourer, the marginal tiller and the broken farmer, who borrows and repays in perpetual labour, hereditary service, periodical delivery of grain and unvouchered usuri ous interest is a countryside incubus.
Such debts ever swell.
never shrink, such captive debtor never become quits.
Such countryside creditors never get off the backs of the victims.
[840 D, 841 F H] Ibrahim , referred to.
Automobile Transport (1963) 1 SCR 491, followed.
(4) The economic literature, official and other, on agricultural and working class indebtedness is escalating and disturbing.
Indeed the money lender is an oppressive component of the scheme.
[844 G] (5) The test of reasonableness is not to be applied in vacuum but in the contest of life 's realities.
The Legis lature was confronted with the cruel species of money lend ers.
The life of the law is not noisis but actual experi ence.
The perspective of poverty jurisprudence is radically different from the canons and values of traditional Anglo Indian Jurisprudence.
The subject matter of the impugned legislation is indebtedness, the beneficiaries are petty farmers,manual workers and allied categories steeped in debt and bonded to the money lending tribe.
So, in passing on its constitutionality, the principles of Developmental Jurisprudence must come into play.
[846B, 848G H] (6) The exemption granted by the statute to credit institutions and banks is reasonable because liabilities due to Government, local authorities and other credit institu tions are not tainted with exploitation of the debtor.
Likewise, debts due to banking companies do not ordinary suffer from over reaching, unscrupulous or harsh treatment.
Financial institutions have until recently treated the village and urban worker and petty farmer as untouchables.
[849 E H] (7) Maybe some stray money lenders may be good souls but the Legislature cannot easily make meticulous exceptions and has to proceed on broad categorisations, not singular indi vidualisations.
The creditors have not placed material before the Court to contradict the presumption which must be made 830 in favour of the legislative judgment.
Since nice dis tinctions to suit every kindly creditor is beyond the law making process, the court has to uphold the grouping as reasonable and the restrictions as justified in the circum stances of the case.
[850 C E] Australian Bank Nationalisation Case: Commonwealth of Australia vs Bank of New South Wales: , 311, approved.
(8) The Court negatived the contention of the petitioner that there was procedural unreasonableness in the Act.
The section which imposes the obligation on the money lender to prove the debtor 's financial position, the issuance of a certificate in favour of the debtor having a presumptive value without hearing the creditor, the absence of appeal, obligation of the creditor to move the machinery and the period of 7 days and the deposit of the ornaments before the proceedings can commence are all reasonable in the circum stances of the case.
Viewed in the abstract, those griev ances look genuine but when we get down to the reality, nothing so exists in the so called provision.
The provision requiring the creditor to move and not the debtor is reason able because between the two.
the money lender .,is sure to be far shrewder and otherwise more capable of initiating proceedings.
To cast that obligation on the debtor when in bulk of cases he is the village artisan, landless labourer or industrial worker is to deny relief in effect while bestowing it in the book.
There is nothing objection able in the debtor seeking a certificate of qualification from the small officer of the area.
The officer or the Government servant possesses familiarity with the wherewith al and the whereabouts of the persons.
Hearing the creditor before the certificate is issued would merely prolong and puzzle the proceedings.
The creditor does not suffer because the certificate that the applicant is a debtor raises only a rebuttable presumption and it is idle to argue that the creditor has no means of disproving .the income or assets of his debtor.
Ordinarily, the money lender and the petty borrower live in and around the same neighbourhood.
As proforma of the certificate to be issued needs mentioning several particulars these have to be filled by the certify ing officer who has, therefore.
to make the necessary en quiries from and about the debtor.
Authorised Officer is one who exercises quasi judicial powers even otherwise on the Revenue side.
The adoption of the procedure under the Maharashtra Land Revenue Code is a fair safeguard although it is a summary procedure.
To equate summary with arbitrary is contrary to common experience.
The obligation for the production of the pledged article by the creditor as a preliminary to the institution of the proceedings is also a just measure so that when a decision is reached the article may be returned to the debtor in the event of the verdict going in his favour.
Where the subject matter is substan tial and fraught with serious consequences and complicated quest.ions are litigatively terminated summarily, without a second look at the findings by an appellate body it may be that unfairness is inscribed on the face of the law but where little men with petty debts, legally illiterate and otherwise handicapped are pitted against the money lend ers.
absence about appeal cannot invalidate the statute.
Where the enquiry is a travesty of justice or violation of provisions, where the finding is a perversity of 'adjudica tion or fraud on power the High Court is not powerless to grant remedy even after the recent package of constitutional amendments.
[852 A H, 853 A H, 854 A B] (9) Entry 30 in List II in the 7th Schedule is money lending and money lenders; relief of agricultural indebted ness.
If common sense and common English are components of Constitutional construction relief against loans by scaling down, discharging, reducing interest and principal, and staying the realisation of debts will among other things fall squarely within the topic.
[854 F H] (10) The argument that the subject matter of the present legislation would fall under the residuary power under Entry 97 of List I is negatived.
[855 B] (11) Where Parliament has made a law under Entry 52 of List I and in the course of it framed incidental provisions affecting gold loans and money lending business involving gold ornaments.
The State making a law on a different topic but covering in part the same area of gold loans must not go into irreconcilable conflicts.
The doctrine of occupied field does not totally 831 deprive the State Legislature from making any law inciden tally referable to gold.
In the event of a plain conflict the State Law must step down unless Article 252(2) 'can be invoked.
In that case the State law would still prevail if the assent of the President has been obtained.
There is no conflict between the Gold Control Act and the impugned Act.
Secondly, the subjects of both the legislations can be traced to the Concurrent List and Article 254(2) validates within the State the operation of the impugned Act since the assent of the President has been Obtained.
[858 B D]
