The three appellants, who were appointed as temporary junior engineers in the Madras High Way Subordinate Service under rule 10(a)(i)(1) of the Madras State and Subordinate Services Rules on 13 6 1950, 6 6 1951 and 8 6 1951 respectively, on being selected by the Public Service Com mission and again appointed to the same posts were permitted by an order issued under rule 23(a) ibid to commence their probationary period with effect from 15 3 1953, 4th July, 1954 and 18th July 1954 respectively.
On 1 11 1956, on the re organisation of States, they were allotted as junior engineers in the Kerala State which was formed by inclusion therein of parts of the Slates of Madras and Travancore Cochin.
For the propose of fixing the interstate seniori ty, several orders were passed, from time to time, both by the Central Government and the Government of Kerala.
A provisional integrated gradation list of junior engineers was prepared by the State Government in October 1962 giving the appellants ranks therein at serial Nos. 123, 132 and 145 respectively.
On a representation by the employees of the Travancore Cochin area, the Government of India recommended three alternatives for the acceptance of the Kerala Govern ment on 16 2 1963.
They were: (1) The Officers allocated to Kerala from the former Madras State may be allowed the benefit of emergency service towards seniority in the equated category if such service would have been regula rised from the date of their emergency appointment and if it would have been counted for interstate seniority on Novem ber 1, 1956 had these officers remained in Madras.
(2) The principles.
laid down by the Government of Madras in their order dated July 17, 1957 be accepted and (3) The Government of India would have no objection even if the State Government was to adopt the rule that interstate seniority would be determined on the basis of the length of continuous service in the equated grade subject to the exclusion of service rendered in purely stop gap or emer gency arrangements and that only short periods for which appointment was held under such arrangements should be excluded.
The Government of Kerala passed an order on May 10, 1963 adopting the first two alternatives but not the third.
The writ petition filed by the appellants in the Kerala High Court challenging he said orders dated 10 5 1963 was rejected.
In appeal by special leave, the appellants contended: (1) The emergency service rendered under Rule 10(a)(i)(1) of the Rules ought to be taken into account because such service can be taken into account under Rule 23(a) ibid (ii) Such service is not liable to be excluded by reason of the directives issued earlier by the Government of .India on 3rd April 1957 and 1st March 1962, (iii) If the appellants had remained in Madras, the temporary service rendered by them would have been taken in.to account for fixing their seniority and (iv) Such service should count in view of the grant of increments to them from the date of their initial appointments in view of the temporary service rendered by them having been counted for the purpose of eligibility for promotion to the higher post of Assistant Engineers, they being duly qualified to hold the posts of Junior Engineers, they having been permitted to appear for departmental tests which are open only to the probationers, their service books having been opened from the. date of their appointment and the concurrence of the Public Service Commission having been obtained for continuing them in service after the expiry of three months and again after the expiry of one year of their emergency service.
938 Dismissing the. appeals, the Court, HELD: (1) A fact of fundamental importance which perme ates every one of these cOnsiderations is that the appel lants were appointed under rule 10(a) (i)(1) of the Madras State and Subordinate Services Rules.
In face of the provi sions of these rules and the express terms of their ap pointment, to the effect, "that appointments were under rule 10(a) (i) (1) purely temporary necessitated on account of the non availability of regularly selected candi dates, conferring no claim for future appointment as junior engineers and they were liable to be terminated at any time without previous notice", it is clear.
that the appointments were purely as a matter of stop gap or emergency arrange ment and such service cannot be taken into account for the purpose of seniority from the date of their initial appoint ment.
[941 E, H, 942 A] (2) Clauses (iii) and (iv) of rule 10(a) reflect signif icantly on the nature of the appointment held by the appel lants and show that the appellants were appointed initially on a uniquely precarious tenure.
Such tenures hardly even count for seniority in any system of service jurispru dence.
[942 C D] (3) The fact that the appellants were qualified to hold the posts cannot, in view of clause (iii) of rule 10(a) entitle them to count for the purpose of seniority the period during which they served in a stop gap or an emer gency arrangement.
[942 B] (4) The contention that if the appellants had remained in Madras their entire service would have counted for the purpose of seniority is without any merit and one of specu lation as to what course the appellants ' destiny would have taken had they remained in Madras.
The Government of Madras itself did not treat the entire service of the appellants as regular when they were selected by the Public Service Commission.
That parent government undoubtedly assigned to them artificial dates for fixing the commencement of their probationary periods but such dates, though anterior to the dates of their actual selection by the Public Service.
Com mission, were quite subsequent to the dates of their initial appointment.
The services rendered by them under rule 10(a) (i)(1) were treated by the Government which appointed them as a matter of stop gap, emergency or fortuitous arrange ment.
[942 D G] (5) The concurrence of the Public Service Commission to the continuance of the appellants in the post filled by them, first after the expiry of three months and then after the expiry of one year was obtained not with a view to regularising the appointments but for the purpose of meeting the requirements of a provision under which such concurrence is necessary to.
obtain if an appointment made without selection by the Public Service Commission is required for any reason to be continued beyond three months or a year.
[943 E F] (6) In the instant case, the initial appointment was not only made without any reference to the Public Service Com mission but the various rules and the terms of the appoint ment shove that the appellants were appointed purely as a matter of fortuitous or stop gap arrangement.
Their initial temporary services cannot therefore be counted for the purpose of seniority.
[943 B C] C.P. Damodaran Nayar vs State of Kerala ; , distinguished and held not applicable.
