The Company Judge in t.he Bombay High Court directed on 3 1 1970 advertisement of the winding up petition fried by the Registrar of Companies in Maharashtra against the respondent company, one of the debtors of the Golcha company to the extent of Rs. 11,69,043/ .
The respondent company appealed against the decision of the Company Judge and obtained an order dated 3rd February, 1970, from a Divi sion Bench staying the operation of the order of advertise ment of the winding up petition.
As the respondent company defaulted in the payment of two of its instalments, as agreed to between the Golcha company and the respondent company by agreements dated 25th June 1966 and 17th January 1967, the Official Liquidator of the Golcha company made a claim under section 446(2) of the Companies Act for the recovery of a sum of Rs. 5 lac before the Company Judge of the High Court of Rajasthan.
The respondent company after obtaining an order of stay of the proceedings against it in the Bombay High Court made, another application under section 442(b) of the Companies Act in the Rajasthan High Court for staying of proceeding against it under s 446 (2) made by the appellant on the ground that a compulsory winding up petition was pending against it in the Bombay High Court.
The Company Judge rejected the application under section 442(b) of the Act on 9 5 .1974.
But, the Division Bench of the Rajasthan High Court allowed the appeal against the stay order and ordered a conditional stay of proceedings section 446 (2) of the Act against the respondent company.
On appeal by special leave, the Court, HELD: (1) The clear object of section 442 is that claims in suits and proceedings pending elsewhere which have a bearing on the company 's liabilities may be stayed only until the winding up order is made, because, after the winding up order has been passed, section 446 begins to operate so as to automatically transfer with certain exceptions, proceedings against the company being wound up to the court exercising the jurisdiction to wind it up.
[968 B C] (2) Sections 442 and 446 of the Act have to be read together.
It is only where the object of the two sections, when read together, is served by a stay order that the stay order could be justified.
That object is to expeditiously decide and dispose of pending claims in the winding up proceedings.
A stay is not to be granted if the object of applying for it appears to be merely to delay adjudication on a claim, and, thereby, to defeat justice.
In other words, a stay order under section 442 cannot be made mechanically or, as a matter of course, on showing fulfilment of some fixed and prescribed conditions.
It can only be made judi ciously upon an examination of the totality of the facts which vary from case to case, It follows that the order to be passed must be discretionary and the power to pass it must, therefore, be directory and not mandatory.
[969 B D] (3) The word "may" used before stay section 442 of the Compa nies Act really means "may" and not "must" or "shall" in such a context.
In fact, it is not quite accurate to say that the word "may" by itself acquires the meaning of "must" or "shall" sometimes.
This word, however, always signifies a conferment of that power.
That power may, having regard to the context in which it occurs and the requirements contem plated for its exercise have annexed to it 965 an obligation which compels its exercise in a certain way on facts and circumstances from which the obligation to exer cise it in that way arises.
In other words, it is the context which can attach the obligation to the power compel ling its exercise in a certain way.
The context both legal and factual may impart to the power that obligatoriness.
[969 D F] (4) Thus, the question to be determined in such cases always is whether the power conferred by the use of the word "may" has annexed to it an obligation, that, on the fulfil ment of certain legally prescribed conditions to be shown by evidence, a particular kind of order must be made.
In such a case, it is always the purpose of the power which has to be examined in order to determine the scope of the discre tion conferred upon the donee of the power.
If the condi tions in which the power is to be exercised in particular cases are also specified by a statute, then, on the fulfil ment of those conditions, the power conferred becomes an nexed with a duty to exercise it in that manner.
[969 F 970 G H] Frederic Guilder Julius vs The Right Rev.
The Lord Bishop of Oxford: The Rev. Thomas Thelusson Carder 5 A.C. 214, quoted with approval.
Bhaiya Punjalal Bhagwandin vs Dave Bhagwat prasad Prab huprasad ; State of Uttar Pradesh vs Jogen dra Singh ; ; Sardar Govindrao & Ors.
vs State of M.P. ; ; Shri A. C. Aggarwal, Sub Division al Magistrate, Delhi & Anr.
vs Smt.
Ram Kali etc.
[1968] 1 SCR 205; Bashira vs State of U.P. and Pra kash Chand Agarwal & Ors.
vs M/s. Hindustan Steel Ltd. , applied.
(5) In section 442 of the Companies Act the power to stay a proceeding is not annexed with the obligation to necessarily stay on proof of certain conditions although there are conditions prescribed for the making of the application for stay and the period during which the power to stay can be exercised.
The question whether it should, on the facts of a particular case, be exercised or not will have to be examined and then decided by the court to which the applica tion is made.
If the applicant can make out, on facts, that the objects of the power conferred by sections 442 and 446 of the Act can only be carried out by a stay order, it could per haps be urged that an obligation to do so becomes annexed to it by proof of those facts.
That would be the position in case the word "may" itself must be equated with "shall", but because judicial power has necessarily to be exercised justly, properly and reasonably to enforce the principle that rights created must be enforced.
[971 B D] (6) In such cases, the only right which could be said to have been created is the right to get speedier adjudication from the court where the winding up proceeding is taking place.
That is the object of the provisions.
On facts disclosed, if it be found that the application has been made with the object of delaying decisions on claims made, the application should be rejected outright.
[971 D E] (7) In the instant case the object of the respondent company appears to be to obtain an indefinite stay of pro ceedings against it in both High Courts.
This being a correct inference, the stay application under section 442(b) of the Companies Act could not be a bona fide one, but an abuse of the processes of the court.
[966 F G] (8) It is true that the Supreme Court does not, as a rule interfere with interlocutory orders.
The powers of interference under article 136 of the Constitution by the Supreme Court are not confined to those in respect of final orders, although finality of an order is a test which the Supreme Court generally applies in considering whether it should interfere under article 136 of the Constitution with it.
[972 B D]
