A certain consignment of iron sheets despatched by M/s. Hindustan Steel Plant EXBNDM (Banda Bunda, near Bhilai) to Bikaner in wagon No. SEKG 4875 was carried to Ludhiana via.
Agra because at some point of time before it reached Agra, the labels attached to the wagons were either changed or removed and the entry in the vehicle summary guidance was also tampered with and changed to EXLAR to LDH indicating that the wagon was despatched from Lalitpur and its destina tion was Ludhiana.
One Umedi Lal, a resident of Agra, approached a firm called M/s. Jindal Khemka & Co. represent ed by its partners Joginder Lal and Ram Nath with a forged railway receipt exhibit PW 10/A written on a blank form stolen from the Railway Receipt Book maintained at Ban more Railway Station and offered to sell to them the iron sheets covered by the aforesaid consignment sent by M/s. Hindustan Steel Co. Ltd. to Bikaner.
Umedi Lal represented himself as the partner of M/s. Bansi Dhar & Sons.
, Lalitpur_ since the forged RR (to self) bore the name of the consignor as M/s. Bansi Dhar & Sons, Lalitpur.
After negotiations when one of the partners, Mr. Joginder Lal presented the RR and claimed the goods, a goods clerk on duty, by name Teja Singh Sodhi, entertained a doubt and returned the RR as defective.
Thereafter, Umedi Lal accompanied by one Bhoja Ram, a wash ing soap dealer presented exhibit PW10A himself and obtained the delivery of the goods from the very same goods clerk, Teja Singh, who entertained the suspicion about the RR earlier.
Joginder Lal later on refused to purchase the iron sheets being a controlled item, in the absence of bill of purchase, but, however, took a receipt exhibit PW45/A from Umedi Lal to the effect that the latter has taken back the iron sheets brought by him to their godown.
The appellant, a guard working in the Northern Railway, was stated to have accompa nied and been present on the day i.e., 6 8 1964 when Jogind er Lal asked Umedi Lal to produce the original purchase bill.
On this basis coupled with the circumstances, namely, (a) his absence on leave from 1 8 1964 to 16 8 1964; (b) the tally of his handwriting given before the Police during the investigation with that of exhibit PW10/A as opined by the handwritten expert and (c) his identification by Ram Nath, one of the partners of M/s. jindal Khemka & Co. at the identification parade the appellant was put on trial for the offences under sections 109/420, 411,468, 471 but convicted for offences under sections 468, 411, 109/420 I.P.C. and sentenced to 2 years R.I. with a fine of Rs. 1,000/ or in default to undergo further R.I. for six months under section 468 and to R.I. for one year each under section 411 and 109/420 LP.C. the substantive sentences to run concurrently.
The appeals before the Sessions Judge and the revision before the High Court were dismissed.
Allowing the appeal by special leave, the Court, HELD: (1) It is well settled that expert opinion must always be received with great caution and perhaps none so with more caution than the opinion of a handwriting expert.
It is unsafe to base a conviction solely on expert 's opinion without substantial corroboration.
In the instant case, it would be extremely hazrdous to condemn the appellant merely on the strength of opinion 'evidence of a handwriting ' expert.
[1011C D] Ram Chandra vs State AIR 1957 SC 361; Ishwari Prasad vs Md. Isa ; ; Shashi Kumar vs subodh Kumar AIR 1964 SC 529 and Fakhruddin vs State AIR 1967 SC 1326, reiterated.
1008 Curnev vs Langlande (1622) 5 B & AId.
330; Morllar of Alfred Foster 's Will , quoted with approval.
(2) In the instant case, the circumstance that the appellant was on leave from 1st August 1964 to 16th August 1964 does not lead to the inferences that he had gone to Ludhiana in connection with the sale of iron sheets and that he was present in Ludhiana on 6th August 1964.
The identification by Ram Nath after some hesitation, the improbability of identifying after 21/2 years a person who is supposed to have merely accompanied another only once and the inability of Joginder Lal to identify him all these are circum stances, which militate the prosecution theory of the appel lant 's presence.
No conviction can therefore, be founded on such evidence.
[lO12D A, 1013 A B] (3) In the instant case the various facts, namely, inability of the Police to trace Umedi Lal or even Bhoja Ram who was frequently going to the Railway Station for taking delivery of goods on behalf of M/s. Jindal Khemka & Co. and apprehend them, the passing on of the forged exhibit PW10/A to joginder Lal by Umedi Lal, a stranger without insisting on payment and even without settling the bargain, the delivery of the goods the next day to Umedi La1 by Teja Singh who earlier suspected the genuineness of the RR when presented by Joginder Lal,the return of the iron sheets on the advice of some, broker on the non production by Umedi Lal of a bill of purchase, taking a receipt exhibit PW45/A when Umedi Lal removed back his goods etc.
prima facie indicate that Umedi Lal was a fictitious person and M/s. Jindal Khemka & Co. were not absolutely innocent in so far as this transaction was concerned.
This iron sheets appeared to have been taken delivery of by.
M/s. Jindal Khamka & Co. for themselves on the strength of the forged Railway Receipt No. PWIO/A.
But some how or the other, due to police inaction, they appear to have escaped and a small man like the appellant seems to have been made a scape goat.
The prosecution has totally failed to bring home the charge against the appellant.
[1013C H, 1014 A B] [Their Lordships expressed their dissatisfaction in the way the case was investigated and observed that "it was indeed a sad commentary on the efficiency of the Police".] [1013B C]
