Section 531 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1898 provides that no finding, sentence or order of any criminal Court shall be set aside merely on the ground that the enquiry, trial or other proceeding in the course of which it was arrived at or passed, took place in a wrong sessions divi sion, district, subdivision or other local area, unless it appears that such error has in Tact occasioned a failure of justice.
In her claim for maintenance from the respondent, who was her husband, the appellant filed a petition under section 488 Cr.
P.C. in the Court of a Magistrate.
The respondent took objection to the Court 's jurisdiction to try the case on the ground that the parties did not reside within its jurisdic tion.
The Magistrate passed an order that the decision on the question of jurisdiction must await the recording of evidence on the whole case.
The respondent did not chal lenge that order.
Ultimately the Magistrate held that he had the jurisdiction to entertain the application and decided it on the merits.
The Sessions Judge referred the respond ent 's revision application to the High Court.
The High Court heard that by taking recourse to section 531, proceedings could not be entertained in a Court which had no jurisdic tion more so when an objection had been taken against its maintainability and that section 531 could cure the infirmity only if the case had been fought on merits.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: The High Court erred in taking the view that section 531 would not be applicable to this case merely because the objection as to the jurisdiction was raised by the respond ent right at the first instance.
[1003 F] 1.
(a) Territorial jurisdiction is provided as a matter of convenience for the Court, the accused and the witnesses.
Under section 488(8) a proceeding may be taken against any person m any district where he resides or is or where he last resided with his wife.
[1001 F G] (b) Where a Magistrate has the power to try a particular application under section 488 and the controversy relates solely to his territorial jurisdiction, there should, Ordinari ly, be no reason why section 531 should not be applicable to the order made by him.
[1001 H] (c) The true meaning_of section 531 is that while it will not uphold an order passed in proceedings wilfully taken in a wrong place, or enable a Magistrate to confer jurisdiction on himself when he knows that he has no such jurisdiction, there is no reason why a Magistrate, who is otherwise duly empowered to make an order under section 488(1), cannot proceed with an application under that subsection for the purpose of deciding whether he has the territorial jurisdiction to entertain the application and to decide the application on the merits if he fin ds that he has the territorial juris diction.
Section 531 cannot be said to be in applicable to a case where there is a controversy as to the district where the proceeding should be held, the parties lead evidence in support of their respective contentions about the correct place of the proceeding, and the Magistrate finds it neces sary (after taking note of the entire evidence on the con troversy) to arrive at a decision on the basis of the bal ance of probabilities.
There is no reason why, in such a case, section 531 should not be applicable merely because the Magistrate, while considering the evidence relating to jurisdiction, unwittingly 998 makes a reference to section 531 in passing and not for the purpose of assuming jurisdiction under it If the Magistrate in this case, had thought of assuming jurisdiction under section 531, he would not have proceeded to record the evidence of the parties, on the question of the territorial jurisdic tion, or referred to it at length in his order and arrived at the decision that he had the jurisdiction.
[1002 D G] Purushottamdas Dalmia vs The State of West Bengal ; followed.
Radharani vs Rahim Sardar.
A.I.R. 1.946 Calcutta 459.
Sakuntala vs Thirumalyya , State vs Tavara Naika A.I.R. , Sultan Chand vs Yogin dra Nath Baz.
A.I.R. 1944.
Peshawar 25 and Satwant Singh vs Smt.
Jaswant Kaur, , held inapplicable.
In the instant case, the Magistrate was one of the Magistrates mentioned in section 488( 1 ).
He had specifically rejected the respondent 's application for confirming the evidence to the question of jurisdiction or to try that as a preliminary issue.
It cannot therefore be said that he had given himself jurisdiction by recourse to section 531.
The Magistrate had set out the point that arose for considera tion, discussed the entire evidence and taken into consider ation the conduct of the respondent all of which led to the conclusion that he had the jurisdiction to try the applica tion.
There is therefore no reason why section 531 should not be held to be applicable to this case.
[1005F H] (d) The High Court erred in holding that section 531 would not be applicable because the respondent had reserved a right to file a written reply on merits after the question of jurisdiction had been decided.
The Magistrate had spe cifically overruled the respondent 's objection, and directed the parties to adduce evidence, and deferred the decision on the question of jurisdiction until after the evidence had been recorded.
The respondent did not file his reply on the merits.
[1003G H] (e) The High Court erred in holding that there was failure of justice because the respondent never led evi dence.
The Magistrate called upon the parties to lead evidence.
While the appellant obeyed the order, the re spondent persisted in thinking that the Magistrate had no jurisdiction, refused to examine his witnesses on merits, and chose to confine his evidence to the question of juris diction.
[lOO4F H]
