In respect of an alleged speech made, on May 5, 1974, at a meeting held in Tughlakabad Railway Station Yard inciting workers to go on strike from May 8, 1974, the appellants who were leaders of the Northern Railwaymen 's Union were convicted by the learned Metropolitan Magistrate under Rule 118 and 119 of the Defence of India Rules and sentenced to six months rigorous imprisonment.
The order of conviction was upheld in appeal by the Sessions Court but in revision, the Delhi High Court while upholding the conviction re duced the sentence to the period already undergone.
In appeal by special leave to this Court, the appellants contended (1) There was no legal evidence to warrant the conviction; (2) The courts below were not justified in taking judicial notice of the fact that on the date when the appellants delivered their speeches a railway strike was imminent and that such a strike.
was, in fact, launched on May 8, 1974 and (3) The conduct attributed to the appellants does not fall within the mischief of the order because inciting other workers to go on strike is outside the defi nition of the word "strike" contained in rule 118(3)(b) of the Defence of India Rules, 1971.
Allowing the appeal by special leave, the court, HELD: (1) The courts below were justified in assuming without formal evidence that the railway strike was immi nent on May 5. 1974 and that a strike intended to paralyse the civic life of the nation was undertaken by a section of workers On May 8, 1974.
[995A B] (2) The purpose of section 57 of the Evidence Act is to provide that the court shall take judicial notice of certain facts rather than exhaust the category of facts of which the court may in appropriate cases take judicial notice.
Recog nition of facts without formal proof is an act of expedien cy.
Shutting the judicial eye to the existence of such facts and matters is in a sense an insult to commonsense and would tend to reduce the judicial process to a meaningless and wasteful ritual.
No court insists on a formal proof by evidence of notorious facts of history past or present and events that have rocked the nation need no roof and are judicially noticed.
judicial notice in such matters takes place of proof and is of equal force.
[994F H, 995 A] (3) The Government possesses the power to issue an appropriate order under rule 118(1) prohibiting the strike "in connection with any industrial dispute" even if there is no existing industrial dispute because the owner can be exercised prophylactically by preventing a strike in connec tion with an imminent strike.
[995C D] (4) In order to maintain a charge under rule 118(1) of the Defence of India Rules, 1971, the prosecution has to establish not only that a strike was imminent or had actual ly taken place of which indicial notice may be taken but further that the strike was in connection with the industri al dispute which is a matter of evidence.
[995E F] 992 (5) What is chargeable as contravening the prohibition must under the order issued by the Government of India under Rule 118(1)(a) is, in the circumstances of this case, the words used by the speakers and not the gist of the speeches made by a member of the audience.
A summary of speech may broadly and generally not be inaccurate and it may ' not faithfully reflect what the speaker actually said and in what context.
[994D E] (6) Rule 118(1)(a) limits the power of the Government to issue an appropriate order, general or special, for prohib iting inter alia, a strike in connection with any industrial dispute.
Since the rule does not empower the Government to issue an order prohibiting strikes generally, whet.her it is in connection with the industrial dispute or not, there can be no contravention of the order unless it is established by evidence that the strike was in connection with an industri al dispute.
In the instant case, the prosecution did not lead any evidence to prove this important ingredient of the offence and the generalisation made by the witnesses in their evidence is wholly inadequate for accepting that the appellants gave incitement to a strike in connection with any industrial dispute.
[995F G] (7) The contention of the prosecution that what is contem plated by rule 118 (1)(a) itself is a strike in connection with an industrial dispute and, therefore, it is not neces sary for the prosecution to establish that the strike was in connection with any industrial dispute is neither warranted nor supported by anything contained in sub rule (3) of rule 118 which defines expressions "industrial dispute" and "strike".
[995H, 996A B] [In view of the finding that the evi dence led by the prosecution is insufficient to establish the charge, in the instant case, the court thought it unnecessary to consider the question whether the conduct attributed to the appellants fall within the mischief of the order dated 26 11 1973, since inciting other workers to go on strike may be outside the definition of the words "strike" contained in Rule 118(3)(b) of the Defence of India Rules, 1971.
" The court, however, pointed out that the appropriate provision of the Defence of India Rules under which an incitement to strike as in the instant case may be punished in Rule 36(6) read with Rule 43(1)(a).]
