The Jammu and Kashmir University, which was a university constituted under the Jammu and Kashmir University Act, 1965, was bifurcated into two universities one for Jammu area and the other for Kashmir area by an act called the Jammu and Kashmir Universities Act, 1969.
Statute 2 made under the 1965 Act required every teacher to sign the pre scribed agreement of service with the University.
Clause (6) of the agreement stipulated that in all matters the teacher would abide by the statutes and regulations in force in the university from time to time.
The proviso to this clause provided that no change in the statutes and regula tions in this regard shall be deemed to have adversely affected the teacher.
Section 51 of the 1969 Act provides for continuing in force the statutes and regulations made under the 1965 Act; but section 48(2) empowered a special officer to propose modifi cations necessary to bring the statutes made under the 1965Act in conformity with the provisions of the 1969 Act and if such modifications were approved by the Chancellor they were deemed to have been made by the competent author ity under the 1969 Act.
Section 52(1) of the 1969 Act provides that all employees of the university employed under the 1965 Act shall continue in service on the same terms and conditions as regulated their service before the commence ment of the 1969 Act.
Sub section (2) empowers the Chancel lor to allocate employees of the university (other than those serving on contract) between the two new universities and the allocation so made was deemed to be an appointment to the post under the 1969 Act.
The proviso to this sub section provides that in making such allocations the condi tions of service of employment of such employees shall not be: varied to their disadvantage.
Sub section (4) provides that all persons who were employed under the former univer sity on contract shall cease to hold such posts after 60 days from the commencement of the 1969 Act and all such contracts with the former university shall stand terminated on the expiry of 60 days.
Section 13(4) of the 1969 Act empowers the Vice Chancel lor to take such action as he deems necessary in any emer gency which calls for immediate action.
Section 13(6) provides that the Vice Chancellor shall be responsible for the discipline of the University.
Section 14(3) of the 1969 Act contained an identical provision as that contained in section, 13(4) of the 1965 Act.
To bring the statutes under the 1965 Act in conformity with the provisions of the 1969 Act modifications proposed by the special officer under section 48(2) of the 1969 Act were approved by the Chancellor by his order dated December 24, 1969.
This order substituted Chapter IV in the statutes by a new chapter.
Acting under section 52(4), the Chancellor made an order on December 24 1969 directing that certain teachers shall continue on the respective posts in the new Universities on the terms and conditions embodied in Schedule II to the order.
Clause 9(ii) of the Schedule empowered the Vice Chancellor to suspend a teacher on grounds.
among others of misconduct.
The respondent, a teacher appointed under the. 1965 Act, was transferred to the Jammu area by the Chancellor 's order dated December 24, 1969.
In exercise of the power under el.
9(ii) of Schedule II of the Chancellor 's order 44 and section 13(4) of the 1969 Act, the Vice Chancellor, by an order dated May 21, 1970, suspended the respondent from service.
By another order dated June 6, 1970 the respondent was allowed a subsistence allowance amounting to half his pay and half D.A. which was later raised to 75% of his pay and allowances.
The respondent 's writ petition under article 226 of the Constitution challenging the suspension order of May 21, 1970, as well as the order dated June 6, 1970 was dismissed by a single Judge of the High Court.
On appeal the Division Bench struck down the order of suspension as violative of section 52(1) of the 1969 Act.
In appeal it was contended by the respondent that (1) since his case was governed by section 52(1) the order of Decem ber 24, 1969 made under section 52(4) was invalid because the terms and conditions set out in Schedule H to the order altered his conditions of service; (2) statute 24(ii) was invalid because it was not within the terms of section 48(2) and the statute was not necessary for bringing the statutes in conformity with the provisions of the 1969 Act; (3) the power to order interim suspension was a quasi judicial power and it would not be comprehended within the language of section 13(4) and (4) section 52(1) entitled him to continue in service on the same terms and conditions as before and under section 52(2) his conditions of service could not be varied to his disadvantage; therefore neither statute 24(ii) nor section 13(4) could confer power on the Vice Chancellor to suspend him which power the Vice Chancellor did not have under the earlier Act.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: The Vice Chancellor had the power to make the order of suspension and he was within his authority in doing so.
By reason of statute 2 read with el.
(6) of the form of agreement the respondent was bound by any changes made, in the statutes from time to time and no change made in the statutes was to be regarded as having adversely affected him.
Statutes made under the 1965 Act continued to be applicable by reason of section 51.
To bring the statutes in conformity with the provisions of the 1969 Act, modifica tions proposed by the special officer were approved by the Chancellor by his order dated December 24, 1969 and by reason of section 48(2) they were deemed to have been made by the competent authority under the 1969 Act.
This order substi tuted Chapter IV in the Statutes by a new Chapter and stat ute 24(ii) made the same provision as el.
9(ii) of Schedule II to the order made under section 52(4).
If statute 24(ii) were a valid provision, the Vice Chancellor would have power to suspend a teacher and the order of suspension against the respondent would be within the authority of the Vice Chancellor.
[53D E] Statute 24(ii) iS a statute validly approved by the Chancellor under section 48(2).
[54H] 2(a) Section 13(6) has entrusted the Vice Chancellor with the task of maintaining discipline in the university and the entrustment of this task carried with it, by neces sary implication, the Vower to take whatever action was necessary for maintaining the discipline.
Since section 13(6) was a new provision, it was necessary to make statutes for enabling the Vice Chancellor to discharge the responsibili ty of maintaining the discipline and for that purpose, vesting power in him to suspend a teacher pending departmen tal enquiry against him.
It was with this object of bring ing the statutes in conformity with section 13(6) that statute 24(ii) was added by way of modification in the statutes by the order of December 24, 1969.
Moreover, there is nothing in the 1969 Act which militates against vesting power in the Vice Chancellor to order interim suspension of a teacher.
The ChancellOr 's view that statute 24(ii) was necessary to bring it in conformity with section 13(6) cannot be said to be erroneous.
[54F G] (b) If statute 24(ii) is valid, the respondent would be bound by it and in that event the order of suspension made by the Vice Chancellor would be within the power conferred on him by that statute.
[55B] (c) Though the order of suspension did not recite stat ute 24(ii) it is wellsettled that when an authority makes an order which is otherwise within its competence, it cannot fail merely because it purports to be made under a wrong 45 provision of law, if it can be shown to be within its power under any other provision; a wrong label cannot vitiate an order which is otherwise within the power of the authority to make it.
[55B C] P.Balakotaiah vs Union of India, ; fol lowed.
3(a) It is not correct to say that an order of interim suspension was a quasijudicial order and in any event the language of section 13(4) is sufficiently wide and comprehensive to take within its scope and ambit every kind of action considered necessary by the Vice Chancellor in an emergency.
The order of suspension.
made by the Vice Chancellor was plainly an order which he had the power to make under section 13(4).
[55F] (b) Section 13(4) does not talk specifically of an order of interim suspension of a teacher but the width and ampli tude of the language of the provision would clearly include action by way of interim suspension of a teacher, when there is in the opinion of the Vice Chancellor, an emergency calling for immediate action.
[55E] (c) The respondent 's contention that there was no emer gency which called for immediate action on the part of the Vice Chancellor and, therefore, the order of suspension could not be justified, cannot be entertained by this Court because no such averment had been made in the writ petition.
[55H] 4(a) The respondent could not complain of any infraction of the provisions of section 52(1).
Since statute 24(ii) was a statute validly made the Vice Chancellor was entitled to make the order of suspension.
The Vice Chancellor could also avail of section 13(4) for sustaining the order of suspen sion since it conferred the same power on him as section 13(4) of the 1965 Act and exercise of the power conferred by it as against the respondent did not involve any violation of the provisions of section 52(1).
[57D E] (b) Section 52(1) continued the service of a teacher on the same terms and conditions as regulated his service before the commencement of the 1969Act and that was subject to the provisions of section 52(2).
But this subjection to the provisions of sub section (2) did not import the requirement set out in the proviso that the conditions of service of a teacher shall not be varied to his disadvantage.
The words "subject to the provisions of sub section (2)" in section 52(1) were intended merely to clarify that a teacher shall contin ue in service on the same terms and conditions but subject to any allocation which may be made by the Chancellor under section 52(2).
Nothing in sub section
(1) should be construed as in any way derogating from the power of the Chancellor to make an allocation of the teacher under section 52(2).
The proviso imposed a limitation on the power of the Chancellor to make an allocation by providing that in making such allocation the conditions of service of the employee shall not be varied to his disadvantage and it could not be construed as a substantive provision adding a requirement in sub s.(1) that even though the terms and conditions of service may permit alteration to the disadvantage of an employee, such alteration shall be inhibited.
[56H; 57A] (c) Even if the respondent was entitled to continue in service on the same terms and conditions as before by reason of section 52(1) these very terms and conditions provided that he would be bound by any changes which might be made in the statutes from time to time.
If, therefore, any changes were made in the terms and conditions of service of the respondent by statutes validity made under the 1969 Act the respondent could not complain of any infraction of the provisions of section 52(1).
[57C D] 5(a) The order of suspension suspended the contract between the respondent and the university and neither the respondent was bound to perform his duties under the contract nor was the university bound to pay any salary to him.
The respond ent was entitled to receive only such subsistence allowances as might be payable under the rules and regulations govern ing his terms and conditions of service.
[57G] (b) Where there is power in the employer either by an express term in the contract or by the rules governing the terms and conditions of service to 46 suspend an employee, the order of suspension has the effect of temporarily suspending the relation of master and servant with the consequence that the employee is not bound to render service and the employer is not bound to pay.
In such a case the employee would not be entitled to receive any payment at all from the employer unless the contract of employment or the rules governing the terms and conditions of service provide for payment of some subsistence allow ance.
[58H] In the instant case the Vice Chancellor had the power to suspend the respondent under statute 24(ii) and the respond ent could not claim payment of his salary during the period of suspension.
P. Gindroniya vs State of Madhya Pradesh, [1970] 3 SCR 448 followed.
