An industrial dispute between the appellant and its workmen including the respondents, was pending before the Industrial Tribunal.
The dispute, inter alia, related to the demand for permanent status of the respondents who were rated workers of the water works section of the Munici pality.
Meanwhile, without obtaining the Tribunal 's prior permission, the appellant retrenched the respondents.
On a complaint by the respondents section 33 A of the Industrial Disputes Act, the Tribunal made an award holding that the appellant had contravened section 33(1)(a) of the Act, and di rected reinstatement of the respondents.
The complaint was not adjudicated on merits.
The appellant filed a writ petition which was dismissed in limine by the High Court.
Allowing the appeal, but agreeing that the appellant had contravened section 33 ( I ) (a) and that the respondents ' com plaint section 3 3 ( 1 ) (a) was maintainable, the Court re stored the respondents ' complaint for disposal on merits by the Tribunal.
HELD: (1) The character of the temporary employment of the respondents being a direct issue before the Tribunal, that condition must subsist and cannot be altered to their prejudice by putting an end to that temporary condition.
This could be done only with the express permission of the Tribunal.
[933 G H] The Court further observed: To permit rupture in employment, in this case, without the prior sanction of the Tribunal will be to.
set at naught the avowed object of section 33 which is principally direct ed to preserve the status quo under specified circumstances in the interest of industrial peace during the adjudication.
[936 A B] (2) In a complaint under section 33 A, even if the employer is found to have Contravened the provisions of section 33, the Tribunal has to pronounce upon the merits of the dispute between the parties.
For the purposes of the Act, the complaint under section 33A takes the form of a reference of an industrial dispute by the appropriate authority and the same has to be disposed of in a like manner.
[936 C D] (3) The Tribunal has committed an error of jurisdiction in ordering reinstatement of the respondents and declining to adjudicate the matter and to make its award on the merits as required under the law.
[936 D]
