P.W. 9 Sabir aged about 18 year went to the house of Lala (deceased) who used to render physical training and swimming lessons to young boys and requested Lala to accom pany him to the bank of a river.
When Lala was cleaning his teeth and washing his face the appellant went there with 4 or 5 persons.
The prosecution case is that those 4 or 5 persons engaged Lala in talk and the appellant thrust a dagger on the back of Lala who died within minutes after the assault.
20 to 25 persons who were there and P.W. 9 and others ran behind the appellant.
The prosecution examined 13 witnesses out of which 4 were eye witnesses, namely, P.W. 1, 4, 9 and 10.
The Sessions Judge disbelieved all the eye witnesses, and acquitted the appellant.
The Sessions judge while acquitting the appellant took the following facts into consideration : (1) P.W. 4 who lodged the First Information Report did not name any accused and, in fact, he did not know the accused before the occur rence and could not even identify him at the test identification parade.
(2) P. Ws 1 and 10 had opportunity to see the accused before and therefore the test identification parade could not be attached much significance.
(3) P. Ws 1 and 2 are ' supposed to have seen the accused at the time when he was running away from the place of occurrence and, therefore, it was highly improbable that they would be able to retain the impression of the accused.
(4) It is highly improbable that P.W. 9 had seen the incident since he did not go to the Police Station nor even stayed at the place of occurrence till the arrival of the police.
On the other hand, he confined himself in his house until a constable came to take him to the police station.
The police in the begin ning suspected him as one of the persons who participated in the murder of the deceased.
His conduct is very suspicious.
The High Court in appeal by the State relied on the evidence of P.W. 9 as being corroborated 'by P. Ws. 1 and 10.
The High Court therefore, set aside the acquit tal and convicted the, accused under section 302 I.P.C. and sentenced him to rigorous imprisonment for life.
Allowing the appeal under section 2(a) of the Supreme Court (Enlargement of Criminal Appeal Jurisdiction) Act, 1970.
HELD: (1) When a trial court, with full view of the witnesses, acquits an accused after disbelieving direct.
testimony it will.
b.e essential for the High Court in an appeal against acquittal to clearly indicate firm and weighty grounds from the record for discarding ' the reasons of the trial court in order to be able to reach a contrary conclusion of guilt of the accused.
The High Court should be able to point out in its judgment that the trial court reasons 69 are palpably and unerringly shaky and its own reasons are demonstrably Cogent.
As a salutary rule of apprecia tion of evidence in an appeal against acquittal it is not legally sufficient that it is just possible for the High Court to take a contrary view about the credibility of witnesses but it is absolutely imperative that the High Court convincingly finds it well nigh impossible for the trial court to reject their testimony.
[74 A C] (2) This is not a case where it can be said that the Sessions Judge came to a palpably wrong conclusion on the evidence or that the reasons for acquittal of the accused are manifestly erroneous, shocking one 's sense of justice.
The High Court was not right in interfering with the acquit tal of the accused in this case.
174 D] (3) Since the Sessions Court and the High Court reached different conclusions from the same evidence this Court went through the entire evidence carefully in order to see wheth er the appreciation of the evidence by the Sessions Judge was so unreasonable and unrealistic as to entitle the High Court to interfere with the same.
[70E F]
