Clause 3(a) of the Maharashtra Scheduled Articles (Display and Marking of Prices) Order, 1966 issued by the Maharashtra Government in exercise of the powers conferred by section 3 read with section 5 of the Essential Commodities Act (Act 10 of 1955) provides that , 'every dealer shall in respect of .
the articles specified in Schedule I display a list of prices in the form prescribed in the Schedule", Schedule 1 lists under items 15 and 16 "Vanaspati tinned" and "Vanaspati loose" respectively.
Clause (4) of the Order provides that no dealer shall (a) sell or agree or offer for sale any article at a price higher than the price dis played or (b) refuse to sell or withhold from sale of such articles to any person at the price displayed or marked.
Section 7 of the Essential Com modities Act provides for punishment for contravention of the order made under section 3.
The four respondents, shopkeepers in Bombay some run grocery shops, while some deal only in oils of different varieties were charged for the offence of failure to dis play prices of vanaspati which they were selling in their shops in tinned 'and loose form.
The defence of the respond ents to the charge is that they were selling hydrogenated oils or vegetable ghee or vegetable oils and not "vanas pati".
The learned Magistrate acquitted the respondents and held that the charge was unsustainable because (1) Even if the word 'vanaspati ' may have acquired a local meaning, it could not be said that the order used the word 'vanaspati ' to include hydrogenated oils.
(2) Since hydrogenated oils were not included in Schedule I, the respondents could not be expected to know that they were bound to disclose the prices of hydrogenated oil.
Dismissing the States ' appeal, the High Court held, on a different reasoning that the prosecution was not maintainable since non complaiance of clause (3) of the Order 1966; cannot be an offence punisha ble as contravention unless there is a contravention of clause 4, inasmuch as the intention of the Legislature which always made a distinction between contravention of law and failure to comply or non compliance with it, was to punish contravention of clause 4 and not of clause 3 simpliciter.
Dismissing the State 's appeal, the Court, HELD: (1) Clauses 3 and 4 of the Maharashtra Scheduled (Display and Marking of Prices) Order, 1966 deal with different matters because whereas clause 3 imposes an obligation on a dealer to display the prices of articles specified in Schedule I clause 4 prohibits him from selling an article at a price higher than the one displayed or from refusing to sell it at the price displayed.
A contravention of clause 3(a) is full and complete by mere reason of the fact that the dealer has failed to display the prices of articles specified in Schedule I.
That contravention does not depend on the consideration where he has charged a higher price than the price marked or whether he has refused to sell an article at the price displayed.
In other words, the first step which a dealer has to take is to display the prices of articles specified in Schedule I; if he fails to do that, he is guilty of contravention of clause 3(a) which is punishable under section 7(1) of the .
The additional obligation which the dealer has to discharge is to be ready and willing to sell articles at the prices displayed.
Failure to do so is a different and distinct contravention which also attracts the application of section 7(1).
The view that clauses 3 and 4 of the Order 1966 are so interlinked that the Legislature did not intend.
to punish the contra 79 vention of the former unless such contravention was accompa nied by a contravention of the latter provision is not correct.
The wedding of the two clauses in this fasion is entirely unwarranted.
[81 E H 82 A] (2) The orders of acquittal, in the instant case, must be confirmed on the ground of total lack of evidence showing that the respondents are dealers in vanaspati and that they had kept vanaspati for sate in their shops.
In view of the challenge that what was being sold was not vanaspati and that the tins did not contain vanaspati within the meaning of items 15 and 16 of Schedule I, the prosecution should have led evidence to show that the tins in fact contained vanaspati in the sense in which that expression is used in the Schedule.
The mere ipse dixit of the Sub Inspector Who had merely assisted the Rationing Inspector in effecting the raid, without any inventory of the articles of which prices were not displayed, without examining the Panchas and with out any sample of the "Vanaspati" alleged to have been sold being taken, cannot establish the charge which involves a punishment of as long a term as seven years and normally of not less than three months, as provided in section 7(1)(a) (iii) of the .
[82 F H, 84 C] (3) Neither the nor the Maharashtra Scheduled Articles (Display and Marking of Prices) Order 1966 defines the expression "Vanaspati" and it was beside the point to say that "Vanaspati"is defined in the Bombay Sales Tax Act and the Prevention of Food Adulter ation Rules.
1965 to include hyarogenated oil since the purposes of these three Acts are quite different.
The prosecution has failed to establish as to what is the true meaning and connotation of the expression "Vanaspati" and what kinds of articles are comprehended within the scope of that expression.
[83 B H] (4) According to the fundamental principle of criminal jurisprudence which reflects fair play, a dealer 'must know with reasonable certainty and must have a fair warning as to what his obligation is, and what act of com mission or omission on his part would constitute a criminal offence.
The State Government ought to have expressed its intention clearly and unambiguously by including hydroge nated oil within items 15 and 16 which refer to "Vanaspati".
If that were done, a type of predicament which arises in this case could easily have been avoided with profit to the community.
[84 A B] State of Bihar vs Bhagirath Sharma, ; referred to: [The Court expressed its hope that the lacuna in the Sched ule I items 15 and 16 of the Maharashtra Scheduled Articles (Display and Marking of Prices) Order, 1966 would be recti fied expeditiously.]
