In an industrial dispute between the appellant mill and its workmen relating to the payment of gratuity, the Indus trial Tribunal framed a gratuity scheme and gave the neces sary guidelines for its implementation.
Special leave was granted to the appellant by this Court on the limited ques tion whether the correct principles on which gratuity should be payable had been followed in this case or not.
Since the making of the award, the was passed, which, by section 4(5) gave an option to the workers to choose between the gratuity scheme under the award and the one under the statute.
The workers, however, did not put in their appearance in this Court.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant that the qualifying period of service for earning gratuity was ten years and for calculating the amount of gratuity basic wages without adding dearness allowance should be the basis as laid down by some decisions of this Court and the tribu nal was wrong in holding 5 years as the qualifying service and basic wages and dearness allowance as the basis for calculating the amount of gratuity.
HELD: There is nothing fundamentally flawsome in the 5 year period being fixed as the qualifying service.
The Tribunal was realistic in fixing the period of eligible qualifying service as continUoUs service counted with refer ence to the completed years as defined in section 2(c) of the Act.
[100 C&F] (1) In some cases, this Court highlighted the view that the determination of gratuity is not based on any definite rules and each case must depend upon the prosperity of the concern, the needs of the workmen and the prevailing econom ic conditions examined in the light of the auxiliary bene fits which the workmen may get on determination of employ ment.
It was also held that stability of the concern, profits made 'in the past, the future prospects and capacity should be the relevant circumstances which the Tribunal should take into account in giving its award.
Awards are ' given on circumstances peculiar to each dispute and the Tribunals are, to a large extent, free from the restrictions of technical considerations imposed on courts.
In short, the approach of the Tribunal should be what may be de scribed as its legal hunch or horse sense.
Cases like Gaziabad Engineering Co. accept the position that.
while gratuity is usually related to the basic wage, a departure may be made by relating it to the consolidated wage if there be some strong evidence or exceptional circumstances justifying that course.
The real reason why some cases like British Paints required a qualifying period of 10 years was that a longer minimum period for earning gratuity in the case of voluntary retirement or resignation would ensure that workmen did not leave one concern for another after putting in the short minimum service qualifying for gratuity.
But current conditions must control the Tribu nal 's conscience in finalizing the terms of the gratuity scheme.
Colossal unemployment at all levels of workers in the country today means that a worker will not leave his employment merely because he has qualified himself for gratuity In an economic situation where there is a glut of labour in the market and unemployment stares the working class in the face it is theoretical to contend that employ ees will hop from industry to industry unless the qualifying period for earning gratuity is raised to 10 years.
[98 H; 99D; lOO A, D, E, F.] (2) Wages will mean and include basic wages and dearness allowance and nothing else.
This corresponds to section 2(s) of the Act.
Some of the decisions refer to basic wages and others to consolidated wages as the foundation for 92 computation of gratuity.
These are matters of discretion and the "feel" of the circumstances prevalent in the indus try by the Tribunal and, unless it has gone wrong in the exercise of its discretion the award should stand.
In the also it is not basic wages but gross wages inclusive of dearness allowance which had been taken as the basis.
[101 B; 100 G H] Delhi Cloth & General Mills Co. vs Workmen & Ors. ; , British Paints , Hydro Engi neers ; , Hindustan Antibiotics, , Bengal Chemical & Pharamaceutical Works Ltd., [1959] Suppl.
2 SCR 136, Gaziabad Engineering Co., and Calcutta Insurance Co. Ltd. ; re ferred to.
