According to section 5(2)(a)(ii) of the Punjab General Sales Tax Act, 1948, taxable turnover means the part of a deal er 's gross turnover during any period which remains after deducting therefrom the turnover during that period, on sales to a registered dealer of goods declared by him in a prescribed form as being intended for re sale in the State.
Section 7(1) provides that no dealer shall carry on business as a dealer unless he has been registered and possesses a registration certificate.
Rule 5 of the Punjab General Sales Tax Rules, 1949 as amended in October 1966 provides that the certificate of registration issued by the Assessing Authority shall be valid from the date of receipt by him of the application for registration or from the date of Commencement of the liability to pay tax whichever is later.
Rule 26 provides that a dealer claiming deduction under section 5(2)(a)(ii) shall produce on demand the cash memos or bill and a declaration in writing by the purchasing dealer that the goods specified in the certificate of regis tration are for use by him.
The assessee (respondent) and the purchasing dealer, the sole selling agent of the assessee, made applications on January 1, 1966 for registration as dealers.
The registra tion certificates were issued to them on March 27, 1966 with retrospective effect from January 1, 1966.
The Assessing Authority rejected the assessee 's claim for deduction under section 5(2)(a)(ii) of sales made by them to the purchasing dealer on the ground that during the period between January 1 and March 31, 1966, the purchasing dealer was not in possession of the registration certificate.
In a petition under article 226 of the Constitution the High Court held that since the certificate of registration had been granted with effect from January 1, 1966, i.e. the date of application, it could not be said that the sales during the quarter were to an unregistered dealer.
On appeal it was contended that to be entitled to deduc tion under the Act both the purchasing and selling dealers 'should be in physical possession Of the registration cer tificate at the time of sale.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: The assessees were entitled to deduction under section 5(2)(a)(ii) in respect of sales made by them to the purchas ing dealer during the quarter.
[90 G] (a) At the relevant time, the registering authority was fully competent to issue the registration certificate to the dealer with retrospective effect from the date of filing of the application.
The amendment of r. 5 made in October 1966 did not confer any new or additional power on the registering authority but was only clarificatory of the law.
The language of section 7 is clear that the registering authority had the power to give effect to the registration from the date of making the application.
[90 F; A] 86 (b) The words "has been registered and possesses a registra tion certificate" in section 7(1) should be construed in accord with the general tenor of the section as a whole, and in a manner which would avoid oppressive, unreasonable and anomalous results.
So construed it could never be the intention of the legislature that a dealer liable to pay tax, who has in compliance with the requirements of section 7(2) and (3) done all which lay in his power to obtain the regis tration certificate, should pull down his shutters and keep his business closed under pain of being punished and await indefinitely the pleasure and leisure of the prescribed authority in issuing the registration certificate.
Adoption of such a construction would be to make an applicant liable to punishment for the laches and delays of the authority and its office.
[90 B C] Chandra Industries vs The Punjab State & Ors. 29, S.T.O. 558, approved.
(c) The requirement of r. 26 will be substantially satisfied if the number of the registration certificate is supplied by the claimant alongwith the declaration of the purchasing dealer at the time of assessment to the Assessing Authority.
[90 E]
