Section 6(1) of the Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) Act 1941 exempts from tax liability "vegetables, green or dried commonly known as subji, tarkari or sak" when not sold in sealed containers.
The Sales Tax Authorities levied sales tax on "green ginger" sold by the respondents, taking the view that inasmuch as green ginger is.
used to add flavour and taste to food.
it is not "vegetable commonly known as subji, tarkari or sak".
A writ petition challenging the validity of the orders of assessment was allowed by the Calcutta High Court which held that green ginger is vegeta ble within the meaning of that expression as used in Item 6 of the First Schedule to the Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) Act, 1941.
Dismissing the State appeals by Special Leave the Court, HELD: (1) Green ginger is included.
within the meaning of the words "vegetables commonly known as subji, tarkari or sak" in Item 6 of Schedule I and its sales are exempt from tax under section 6 of the Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) Act, 1941.
[152 D] (2) The word "vegetable" though not defined in the Act, being a word of every day use, must be construed not in any technical sense, nor from any botanical point of view but as understood m common parlance i.e. denoting class of vegeta bles which are grown in a kitchen garden or in a farm and are used for the table.
The word "vegetable" in Item 6 of Schedule I to the Act, so construed, by giving its popular sense meaning, "that sense which people conversant with the subject matter with which the statute is dealing would attribute to it" denotes those classes of vegetables which are grown in a kitchen garden or in a farm and are used for the table.
Green ginger obviously is a vegetable grown in a kitchen garden or in a farm and it is used for the table.
It may not be used as a principal item of the meal, but it certainly forms part of the meal as a subsidiary item.
Green ginger is generally regarded as included within the meaning of the word "vegetable" as understood in common parlance.
1[150 F H, 151 G H, 152 A] Ramavatar Badhaiprasad vs Assistant Sales Tax Officer Akola, ; ; M/s. Motipur Zamindary Co. Ltd. vs State of Bihar ; , applied.
Madhya Pradesh Pan Merchants ' Association, Santra Mar ket, Nagpur vs State of Madhya Pradesh 7 S.T. Cases 99 at 102, referred to.
Grenfell vs I.R.C. at 248; Planters Nut and Chocolate Co. Ltd. vs The King ; 200 Chests of Tea (1824) 9 Wheaton (U.S.) 430, at 438 quoted with approval.
