All the accused were tried for offences section 302/120B and 364 I.P.C., but acquitted by the Additional Sessions Judge, Amritsar.
On State 's appeal against acquittal, the High Court convicted five of the appellants (Satbir Singh, Paramjit Singh, Harbhajan Singh, Shiv Narain and M.P. Singh) under section 302/120B I.P.C. and sentenced them to imprisonment for life.
Satbir Singh was also convicted on the sole testimony of Puran Singh (PW3) section 364 I.P.C. and sen tenced to rigorous imprisonment for seven years and fine.
The High Court held the extra judicial confessions made by Shiv Narain and Harbhajan Singh before R.K. Kapur (PW 41) the commander Border Security Force as admissible in evi dence before convicting them and rejected the plea of en counter on the Indo Pakistan border.
The High Court con victed the remaining eight appellants (Ajit Singh, Darshan Singh, Arian Singh, Baghal Singh, Tara Singh, Dial Singh, Bachan Singh and Malook Singh) section 364 I.P.C. and sentenced them also to rigorous imprisonment for seven years with fine.
Allowing the appeals under the Supreme Court (Enlarge ment of Criminal Appellate Jurisdiction) Act, 1971, the Court, HELD: (1) This was not a fit case where the High Court should have interfered with the acquittal of any of the appellants.
The High Court has not at all considered the reasons given by the Sessions Judge for acquitting the accused.
It has given its own reasons for convicting the appellants but that is not enough in an appeal against acquittal.
[205 B C] (2) As a practical proposition, in an appeal against acquittal, it is always necessary that the reasons given by the trial court for according an acquittal should be exam ined by the High Court.
If the conclusions of the trial court are not based upon any evidence or they are such as no reasonable 'body of men, properly instructed in law can reach, on the evidence, or they are so palpably wrong as to shock 'the sense of justice, the High Court will be justi fied in taking a contrary view by giving its own reasons.
It is not enough that it is just possible for the High Court to take a contrary view.
While interfering with acquittal the judgment of the High Court should demonstrate clearly the unworthiness of the conclusions of the trial court having regard to all the relevant evidence in record.
The High Court has followed these salutary principles in dealing with an appeal against acquittal.
[204 G H, 205 A] (3) In deciding whether a particular confession attracts the frown of section 24 of the Evidence Act, the question has to be considered from the point of view of the confess ing accused as to how the inducement.
threat or pro raise proceeding from a person in authority would operate in his mind.
In the instant case, the extra judicial confessions by the two accused Shiv Narain and Harbhajan Singh, have to be completely excluded from consideration being hit by section 24 of the Evidence Act.
When the two accused were questioned separately after several abortive attempts to secure confes sions it cannot be said that there was no inducement, threat or promise of some kind.
[203 H 204 A, E] 196 Observation: The witness cannot be relied upon by resort to a kind of special pleading.
in his aid.
The line of approach in a criminal case in order to find justification for conviction on .shaky testimony by making a virtue of the inalertness of the police administration is not to be commended.
