The assessee.
who was a manufacturer of iron shut ters, fabricates the different parts ,and components and fits them into shutters.
The shutters are prepared ac cording to the specific requirements of the customer and fixed in the customer 's premises.
Though the masonary work connected with the fitting of the shutters was done by the customer, it was done according to the contractor 's instruc tions.
The contract was complete after the shutters were taken to the premises of the customer and affixed to the building; and when fitted into the walls the shutters become permanently embedded into the wall and are not detachable.
The price charged by the contractor from the customer was a lumpsum and did not show a break up, of the materials used or fabricated or the cost of services or labour.
The assessee claimed that the contract being a works con tract the proceeds from such contracts are not exigible to tax.
But this plea was rejected by the Sales Tax Officer.
The assessee 's appeal was rejected by the Assistant Commis sioner (judicial).
The Judge (Revisions) Sales Tax upheld the assesee 's contention.
On reference the High Court held that the contract was not a works contract but a contract for the supply of goods simpliciter.
Allowing the assessee 's appeal, HELD .
The contract in the present case was a works contract and the transaction was not exigible to tax.
The High Court was in error in holding that the assessee was liable to pay tax on the sale proceeds of the contract [171E] (1) The question whether a contract can be said to be a works contract has to depend on the facts of each case.
It is difficult to lay down any rule of universal application but some of the important tests evolved by this Court are: [168 H] (i) Where the contract was primarily a contract for the supply of materials at a price agreed to between the parties for the materials so supplied and the work or service ren dered is incidental to the execution of the contract.
the contract is one for sale of materials and the sale proceeds would be exigible to sales tax.
[169 A B] (ii) Where the contract is primarily for work and la bour, and materials are supplied in execution of such con tract, there is no contract for sale of materials but it is a works contract.
The circumstance that the materials have no separate identity as a commercial article and it is only by bestowing work and labour upon them, that is, by affixing them to the building would be prima facie indicative of a works contract.
Where certain materials are not merely supplied but fixed to an immovable property so as to become a permanent fixture and an accretion to the said property, the contract ' prima facie would be a works contract.
[169 C] In the instant case the transaction was a composite, consolidated contract which was one and indivisible compris ing labour and services executed for a lumpsum.
The con tract could be completed when materials with various compo nent parts had been taken to the site, fitted into one another and then finally fixed into a frame so that the fixture became permanent and a, part of 166 the premises.
This operation could not be, said to be merely incidential to the contract, but was fundamental part of the contract itself.
[168 F & 170 A] (2) It is not correct to say that the contract could not be a works contract because the price was paid in advance and the title passed to the customer as soon as the shutters were packed and despatched to the site.
Advance payment of the price was a term meant for the convenience of the par ties as the contractor did not want to take any risk for delayed payment; the contract would be completed only after the shutters were finally assembled at the site and fixed according to specifications, which was essentially the responsibility of the contractor.
[170 D] State of Rajasthan vs Man Industrial Corporation Ltd. 24 S.T C. 349, 355 and State of Rajasthan vs Nanu Ram 26 S.T.C. 268 followed.
State of Madras vs Richardson and Cruddas Ltd. 21 S.T.C. 245 (S.C.) and Commissioner of Sales Tax.
M.P. vs Purshottam Premji 25 S.T.C. 38 referred to.
M/s T.V. Sundram lyengar & Sons vs The State of Madras 35 S.T.C. 24 [19751 2 S.C.R. 372 distinguished.
