Section 22(1) of the Bihar & Orissa Excise Act, 1915, provides that the States may grant to any person on such conditions and for such periods as it may think fit, the exclusive privilege of manufacturing or selling in retail count try liquor.
The proviso provides that a public notice shall be given of the intention to grant such exclu sive privilege and that a decision would be taken after considering objections.
Sub section (2) provides that no grantee of such a privilege shall exercise it unless or until he has received a licence in that behalf from the Collector or the Excise Commissioner.
In the present case the Collector issued a notice in form GL 10 relating to the auction of the right to open a liquor shop at the site named in the notice and the payment of the licence fee therefor.
The respondent was a success ful bidder at the auction.
He deposited the money under r. 103 of the Excise Rules but the Government did not grant him the licences.
In a writ petition filed by the respond ent the State Government alleged that the bids at the auc tion were not satisfactory and that in the interest of revenue the State Government did not accept the bids.
The High Court held (i) that the State Government had no power to interfere with the auction held by the Collector after it had become final and could not direct reauction and (ii) that the realisation at the auction was not a fee but a tax not contemplated by the Act and that the auction price for a licence was not excise duty within the meaning of Entry 51 of List II and hence r. 103(1) of the Rules providing for fixation of licence fee by auction was in excess of the rule making power of the Board.
The High Court also held that what was purported to be given under the sale notice of the Collector was not the grant of exclusive privilege under section 22.
By the Bihar & Orissa Excise (Orissa Amendment Ordi nance) 1970 which later became the Act, section 29(2) was amend ed.
The State Government issued an order for fresh settle ment of the shops and the Collector accordingly called for tenders.
In the respondent 's writ petition the High Court held that the State Government 's order was invalid as the author ities for fixing the procedure.
under section 29(2) as amended had not been specified and the order left it to the uncon trolled discretion of the authority concerned to accept or reject any tender and to determine the adequacy of the amount offered in the tender.
The State Government 's order and the Collector 's tender notice were quashed and the Collector was directed to issue licence to the respondent.
The High Court accordingly held that the respondent was entitled to the grant of the exclusive privilege under section 22 because he was the highest bidder in the auction.
The High Court also held in a petition filed by another respondent, that in so far as section 29(2) provided that the sum payable under sub section
(1) thereof shall be determined "other wise" than by calling tenders or by auction it was uncon stitutional; that portion of section 29(2).
should, therefore, be struck down: that section 6 of the Amending Act, 1970 was ultra vires as there was exercise of judicial power by the legis lature and, therefore, the licence fee collected by the State was illegal; but that as the respondent had already enjoyed the benefit of the licence and voluntarily partici pated in the auction he wag not entitled to its refund.
3 1338S.C.I./76 812 Therefore the Second Amendment Act, 1971 was passed.
The vires of the amended sections 21 and 29 was challenged in writ petitions but the High Court dismissed them.
In appeals to this Court, HELD: (1) The provisions of the Act and the express declarations make clear that the State Government had the power to reject a bid.
In any event no right is created in the bidder by making a bid.
The administration of the Excise Department and the collection of revenue within the district vest in the Collector.
It is not correct to say that the notice issued by the Collector in form GL 10 was sufficient to show that the exclusive privilege for retail sale of country liquor was not proposed to be given to the successful bidders at the auction.
The High Court erred in holding that a condition regarding the opening of additional shops was inserted in the Form. ; 820E] (b) It has been held by this Court that the State has the exclusive right or privilege of manufacturing and sell ing liquor.
The State grants such right or privilege in the shape of a licence or a lease.
The State has the power to hold, a public auction for grant of such right or privilege and accept payment of a sum in consideration of grant of lease, that the amount payable by the bidders as licensees was neither a fee in the technical sense nor a tax, but was in the.
nature of price of a privilege and that auctions were only a mode or medium for ascertaining the best price obtainable thereof.
Therefore, the right granted to the bidders by public auction and the licences issued to them was clearly an exclusive privilege within the meaning of section 22(1 ) of the Bihar Act and it was expressly provided in section 29 that it would be permissible for the State not to accept payment of a sum in consideration of the grant of the exclusive privilege.
[819 H; 820A D] Nashirwar etc.
vs The State of Madhya Pradesh ; ; Hat Shankar & ors.
vs The Dy.
Excise and Taxa tion Commissioner & ors.
; ; Thakur Prasad Sac & ors.
vs The Member, Board of Revenue & ors. ; State of Orissa & ors.
vs Harinarayan Jaiswal & ors. ; applied.
(c) The view of High Court that after the acceptance of the bid the Collector should have issued the licence and that he committed an illegality in ordering reauction pre supposes that a binding obligation had come into existence in favour of the bidder by accepting a deposit from him even though this was done on the express condition that it was tentative and was not an acceptance of his bid.
In the peculiar facts and circumstances of the auction, the bids were nothing more than offers in response to an invitation to make tenders and such auctions were the mode.
of ascer taining the highest offers.
The basic conditions for the emergence of rights through offers or conditions made and accepted and acted upon by paying any specified or agreed price as consideration were wanting in this case.
The express and advertised terms of.
the auction made it clear that the money tendered was to be deemed to be deposited tentatively, pending the acceptance of the bid.
The bids were neither offers nor acceptance ' by the Government.
They were only offers by the bidders.to purchase the rights.
The essentials of an agreement and mutuality of obligations were absent altogether.
Since auction is only a mode of ascer taining the highest offer, the State Government can deter mine the sum payable by any other method and hence.
the High Court was wrong in striking down the expression "other wise" from section 29(2)(a).
[820 H; 821 A C] (d) These auctions are not ordinary auctions where a binding agreement could be deemed to be concluded at the fall of the.hammer, creating mutually enforceable obliga tions but.
are a means for ascertaining the highest offers for the exclusive privileges which the Government alone could grant for carrying on a trade or business considered noxious under the law, and which, because of its special character, could be regulated m any way or even prohibited altogether by the Government.
This special character of the trade or business would appear from the power of the State Government to grant the exclusive privilege to carry on trade m the manufacture and sale of liquor.
[821 F G] (e) There is no justification for the argument of the.
respondents that it was not permissible for the State Gov ernment to issue directions for reauction even when it found that the bids at the auction were unsatisfactory.
So long as the powers of the Government to reject a bid are not used in an unreasonable or mala fide manner, their exercise cannot be questioned [821 G] 2(a) The High Court 's view that r. 103(1) was ultra.
vires was taken under the mistaken impression that the State was collecting a tax under the garb of a fee and that the auction price for a licence could not be treated as duty within the meaning of Entry 51, List II of the Seventh Schedule.
But what was sought to be raised was considera tion and not fee.
The use of the expression " 'fees" in the rule is inaccurate but that:cannot detract from the real nature of the recovery.
[822 A B] (b) The argument of the respondent that r. 103 continued to remain invalid even after the promulgation of the Amend ment Act is not correct because section 5 of the Second Amendment Act has substituted a new sub section
(2)for the old subsection providing for auction and this sub section stated that it shall be deemed always to have been substituted".
Section 17 has validated all grants made by way of licences for manufacture and retail sale of country liquor and the amounts paid or payable therefor.
[824 G H; 825 C] (c) The power to accept or reject a tender without assigning any reason cannot be said to be arbitrary as section 29(2) (which has been amended with retrospective effect) itself provides that (i) it shall be exercised in the inter est of the Excise revenue, (ii) by the specified authority and (iii) under such control as may be specified.
In the instant case the 'State Government retained the power of accepting or rejecting the tender or for calling of a fresh tender, to itself, and such an order cannot be said to be an absolute or naked power of the nature apprehended by the High Court.
Moreover, the power to accept or reject the highest o,r any bid was expressly reserved under the im pugned sale notification.
[823 A C] (3) Even though no authority was specified for taking action under section 29(1) it was the Collector who is in charge of the Excise Administration that took action in the present case and his action was approved by the State Gov ernment.
Moreover, the State Government issued a modified order under section 29 nominating itself as the authority to determine the sufficiency of the.
sum payable.
[822 D] (4) It has been held by this Court that there is no fundamental right to do trade or business in intoxicants and that in all their manifestations these rights are vested in the State and without such vesting there can be no effective regulation of various forms of activities in relation to intoxicants.
There is no inherent right in a citizen to sell intoxicating liquors by retail.
[823 H] Krishan Kumar Narula etc.
vs The State of J & K & ors ; ; Nashirwar etc.
vs The State of M.P. ; ; Har Shankar & ors.
vs The Dy.
Excise & Taxation Commissioner & ors.
; ; Coovetlee Bharucha vs The Excise Commissioner ; fol lowed.
(5) Since the Bihar & Orissa Excise (Second Orissa Amendment) Act, 1971 has made good the deficiency, if any, by stating that the amending provisions in sections 2 to 5 of the Amending Act, 1970 shall be deemed always to have been so added or inserted or substituted, the High Court was wrong in holding that there was any exercise of judicial power by 'the Legislature.
[824 C D]
