Section 17(3) of the Kerala General Sales Tax Act 1963 provides that if the return submitted by an assessee appears to be incorrect or incomplete.
the assessing authority may assess the dealer to the best of its judgment.
The proviso to the sub section enacts that before taking action under the sub section, the dealer shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard and, where a return has been submitted, to prove the correctness to completeness of such return.
Relying on the evidence furnished by entries in the books of account of some other dealers, the Sales Tax Officer disbelieved the assessee 's accounts and came to the conclusion that the return field by him was incorrect and incomplete and made a best judgment assessment under section 17(3).
The assessee 's request to cross examine the deal ers in regard to the correctness of their accounts was rejected by the Sales Tax Officer.
In revision the High Court quashed the order of the Sales Tax Officer.
Dismissing the State 's appeal, (Per Bhagwati and Sarkaria.
JJ) HELD .
The assessee was entitled to cross examine the dealers under the second part of the proviso to section 17(3).
The Sales Tax Officer 's refusal to summon the dealers for cross examination by the.
assessee constituted infraction of the right conferred on the assessee by the second part of the proviso and that vitiated the order of assessment made against him.
[239 F] (1) The rule which requires an opportunity to be heard to be given to a person likely to be affected by a decision is not an inflexible rule having a fixed connotation.
It has a variable content depending on the nature of the in quiry, the framework of the law under which it is held, the constitution of the authority holding the inquiry, the nature and character of the right affected and the coil sequences flowing from the decision.
The rule of audi alterem partem does not require in every case a specified procedure to be followed.
In a given case, the rule of audi alterem partem may import a requirement that witnesses, whose statements are sought to be relied upon by the author ity holding the inquiry, should be permitted to be cross examined by the party affected while in some other cases it may not.
The procedure required to be adopted for giving an opportunity to a person to be heard must necessarily depend on the facts and circumstances of each case.
[237 B D] (2) (a) It is only on the existence of one of two condi tions, namely, that no return is .submitted by the assessee or the return submitted appears to be incorrect or incom plete that the Sales Tax Officer gets the jurisdiction to make a best judgment assessment.
[237 H] 234 (b) The second part of the proviso lays down that where a return has been submitted, the assessee should be given a reasonable opportunity to prove the correctness or complete ness of such return.
"To prove" means to establish the correctness or completeness of the return by any mode per missible under law.
The opportunity to prove would, there fore, necessarily carry with it the right to examine wit nesses and that would include equally the right to cross examine witnesses examined by the Sales Tax Officer.
[238 G H] In the instant case, the assessee could prove the cor rectness and completness of his return only by showing that the entries in the books of account of the dealers on which the Sales Tax Officer relied, were false, bogus or manipu lated and that his return should not be disbelieved on the basis of such entries.
This could not be done unless an opportunity to cross examine the dealers was given.
[239 B] Murlimohan Prabhudayal vs State of Orissa, 26 S.T.C. 22 and M. Appukutty vs State of Kerala, 14 S.T.C. 489 approved.
Fazal Ali, J. (concurring).
Section 17(3) with the proviso thereto and r. 15, have given a statutory right to the assessee to prove the cor rectness of his return and the assessee was entitled to cross examine the wholesale dealers, relying on whose ac counts the Sales Tax Officer made a best judgment assess ment.
[247 E] (1) The well settled rules in regard to best judgment assessment are (i) The taxing authority must not act dis honestly or vindictively or capriciously.
He must make what he honestly believes to be a fair estimate, of the proper figures of assessment and for this purpose, he must be able to take into consideration all matters which he thinks will assist him in arriving at a fair and proper estimate.
Though it must necessarily be guess work it must be honest guess work.
[241 E] (ii) Although tax proceedings are quasi judicial and the Sales Tax Officer is not bound strictly by rules of evi dence, yet he must base his order on materials known to the assessee and after he has been given a chance to rebut the same.
[244 E] (iii) Admissibility of a document or material in evi dence is quite different from the value which the authority would attach to such material.
The tax authority can even base its conclusion on private opinion or assessment provid ed the same is fully disclosed to the assessee and he is given an opportunity to rebut the same.
[242 E] Income tax Commissioner vs Badridas Ramrai Shop, Akola (1937) 64 I.A. 102, 114, 115 and Dhakeswari Cotton Mills Ltd. vs Commissioner of Incometax, West Bengal, ; followed.
Raghubar Mandal Harihar Mandal vs State of Bihar 8 S.T.C. 770 and C. Vasantilal & Co. vs C.I.T. Bombay City 45/.T.R. 206 referred to.
Seth Gurmukh Singh vs Commissioner of Income tax Punjab, approved, 2(a) The words "opportunity of being heard" in section 17(3) are of very wide amplitude.
All that the court has.
to see is whether the assessee had been given a fair hearing.
Whether the hearing would extend to the right of demanding cross examination of witnesses or not, would depend upon the nature of the materials relied upon by the tax authorities, the manner in which the assessee can rebut those materials and the facts and circumstances of each case.
[234F G] 235 The second part of the proviso confers benefit on the asses see for giving him an opportunity not only of being heard but also of proving the correctness or completeness of his return.
Secondly, r. 15 clearly shows that where the return of the assessee is incorrect or incomplete he must be called upon to prove.
the correctness or completeness of the same.
It also enjoins on the Sales Tax Officer that a reasonable opportunity of being heard should be given to the assessee to prove the correctness and completeness of the return.
The requirement of the second part of the proviso to section 17(3) is reiterated in r. 15.
D] In the instant case, if the assessee desired the dealers whose accounts were used against him to be cross examined to prove that his return was not incorrect or incomplete, he could not be denied this opportunity.
The dealers might have made the entries to embarrass the assessee or they might have animus or business rivalry with the assessee.
The assessee could establish the correctness of his return only if he was allowed to cross examine the dealers.
[244 H] Jayantilal Thakordas vs State of Gujarat 23 S.T.C. 11 dis tinguished.
M. Appukutty vs State of Kerala, 14 S.T.C. 489 and Muralimohan Prabhudayal vs State of Orissa, 26 S.T.C. 22 approved.
