The appellants and respondents Nos. 3 to 37 herein, were allottees of houses in Chandigarh constructed by the State Government for low paid industrial workers under the Industrial Housing Scheme subsidised by the Central Govern ment.
The Labour Inspector, Union Territory, Chandigarh gave them notices in terms of the proviso to, rule 4(3) of the Punjab Industrial Housing Rules, 1956, as amended vide Notification dated November 7, 1972, to.
show cause why their allotments should not be cancelled.
The income of each of them exceeded Rs. 350/ per mensem, which disenti tled them to retain their allotments.
The appellants and the said respondents filed a joint petition in the High Court for a writ to quash the amendment to rule 4, and to restrain the Government from cancelling their allotments and evicting them.
The writ petition was dismissed.
The appel lants contended firstly, that rule 4(3) was ultra vires the Punjab Industrial Housing Act, 1956 as it took out industri al workers with income exceeding Rs. 350/ p.m. from the scope of section 2(e) of the Act which defines industrial workers; and secondly, that the authority competent to make rules u/s 24 of the Act cannot frame rules having retrospec tive effect, and as the amended rule 4(3) operates retro spectively it is invalid Dismissing the appeal by special leave, the Court, HELD: (1) The allotment of accommodation to an industrial worker is not unconditional but is subject to conditions which can be changed unilaterally by the Government from time to time by altering the rules in exercise of the powers conferred on it under section 24 of the Act.
Section 24 specifically empowers the State Government to make rules to provide inter alia for the manner of allotment of accom modation and conditions relating to its occupation.
The impugned amendment which squarely falls within the purview of the aforesaid provisions of section 24, was validly made, and was not ultra vires.
[331 G H, 331 (a) C] (2) Section 7 of the Act embodies a deeming provision and gives a mandate to treat a person as an unauthorised occupant not only if he ceases to be an industrial worker under the Act, but also if being an allottee, he ceases to fulfil any of the prescribed conditions then in force, including the one relating to the limit of his income, and thereby becomes amenable to action under section 9(2) of the Act.
[331(a) A B] (3) The proviso to rule 4(3) clearly shows that the allotment of an industrial worker whose income exceeds Rs. 350/ per mensem is to stand cancelled not from the date when his income started exceeding Rs. 350/ per mensem but on the expiry of one month 's notice in writing of the can cellation.
The rule is not intended to operate retrospec tively on industrial workers who had been allotted and were in occupation of industrial houses immediately before, 328 the amendment of the Punjab Industrial Housing (Chandigarh First Amendment) Rules, 1972.
[331(a) E F] The Court observed The scheme being meant for the benefit of the low paid industrial workers and the number of the houses constructed thereunder being very limited, the Government could legiti mately evolve the method which it did, to disentitle indus trial workers whose monthly income was relatively large, to retain the houses.
[331 (a) C D]
