Per section R. DAS, ACTING C.j., VIVIAN BOSE, BHAGWATI AND JAGANNADHADAS JJ., SINHA J. dissenting.
The exemption created by the provisions of section 5(2)(a)(iii) of the Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) Act of 1941 must be construed strictly and cannot be extended to sales to Government departments other than those mentioned therein.
The Department of Industries and Supplies, which was subse quently redesignated as the Ministry of Industries and Supplies, was not the same as the Indian Stores Department or the Supply Department of the Government of India and, consequently, sales made to the Ministry of Industries and Supplies are not exempt from payment of sales tax under that section.
In a welfare State with ever expanding activities in different fields including trade and commerce, Government departments are often entrusted with the performance of well defined activities and are authorised to deal with the outside world and enter into transactions in the same way as an ordinary person or a Company may do and may well be regarded as distinct units or quasi legal entities for the purpose for which they are created.
Consequently, the sales of hessian made to the Ministry of Industries and Supplies of the Government of India by the appellant Mills were not exempt from payment of sales tax under the Act and the State of West Bengal was entitled to levy the same.
1077 Per SINHA J.
The language of a statute has sometimes to be construed in a modified form in order to give effect to the real intentions of the legislature where, as in the present case, the language is only of a descriptive nature and not a definitive one.
Miller vs Salomons ([1852] 7 Exchequer 475), referred to.
Commissioners of Inland Revenue vs Forrest ([1890] 15 A. C. 334), held inapplicable.
The terms of section 5(2)(a)(iii) indicate that the exemption created attaches to a particular function of the Government of India described by a certain name.
The change of nomenclature was, therefore, of no consequence so long as a particular department continued to discharge that function, namely, that of purchasing articles including hessian for the Government of India.
History of the department shows that the Ministry of Industry and Supply is a lineal descendant of the Indian Stores Department and was at the time of the contract discharging its function on behalf of the Government of India and, consequently, the sales made to it must be held to be exempt from payment of sales tax.
A department of the Government is neither a natural nor a legal person but is one of the many functions of a Government placed in charge of a hierarchy of officials with the head of the department at the apex.
