The appellant, a statutory body framed the scales of rates of demurrage of goods under section 43 (a) of the Bombay 'Port Trust Act 1879 which was sanctioned by the Central Government.
Later on the Central Government in its D.O. letter dated 7th September 1952 addressed to the appel lant expressed its view that it seems unreasonable to charge an importer any demurrage once it is accepted that clearance was delayed on account of the reasons beyond his control.
It also expressed its hope that the appellant would recon sider its decision and fall in line with the practice of the Calcutta and Madras Ports.
The Port considered this letter and after taking into consideration the several circum stances suggested that demurrage may be levied on a graded scale and the Central Government did not take any further action.
In fact, the appellant has prescribed reduced demurrage levy from the expiry of the free days.
In respect of the three consignments of Chinese news print imported by the respondent for home consumption in India, the appellant claimed demurrage for the period from March 25, 1957 and as the amount was not paid the goods were sold in public auction.
The respondent thereafter filed a suit for recovery of a sum of Rs. 24,950/ and interest thereon from the appellant being the aggregate loss sus tained by it.
The appellant denied that liability and pleaded that it was, in law, entitled to collect the demur rage levied on the respondent and as it failed to pay the demurrage, the appellant was entitled to sell the goods by auction.
The City Civil Court, Bombay decreed the suit with interest at 6 per cent per annum from the date of the suit till judgment and thereafter at 4 per cent per annum and costs of the suit.
The appeal preferred by the appellant to the High Court failed and the decree stood confirmed.
The decretal amount deposited in the High Court during the pendency of the appeal was withdrawn by the respondent.
Allowing the appeal by Special leave the Court, HELD: (1) The High Court was in error in holding that the importer of the goods cannot be held responsible for any delay not attributable to his own default and that demur rage under section 43(a) could never be imposed as long as the goods were detained for the purpose of the operation of the Import Trade Control regulations.
[350 E] (2) The D.O. letter addressed by the Government of India should not be construed as a direction calling upon the Board to modify any portion of the scale framed by the Port Trust.
The language of the D.O. would indicate that the Government wanted the Port Trust to consider the Govern ment 's proposal and nothing further.
The Port Trust consid ered the proposal and made its report.
Section 43B(1A) has no application to this case.
[346 F H] (3) It is no doubt true that before clearance is given by the Import.
Trade Control Authorities and the Customs Authorities, the goods cannot be cleared by the importer.
Neither can the Port Trust deliver the goods without the consent of the Import Trade Control Authorities.
Taking into account the hardship caused to the importer because of the delay certain concessions in demurrage rates are per mitted.
As the scales of rates are permitted by virtue of the statutory 344 powers conferred on the Board under section 43 and as the rates have been approved by the Central Government under section 43B, the rates have the force of law and cannot be questioned.
Taking into account the hardship to the importers certain concession has been given but the legality of the rate which are being levied according to law cannot also be questioned.
[347 C D; E F] Trustees of the Port of Madras vs M/s Aminchand Pyarelal & Ors.
[1976].
SCR 721.
followed.
(4) Even though the delay in clearing the goods was not due to the negligence of the importer for which he should be held responsible yet he cannot avoid the payment of demurrage as the rates imposed are under the authority of law, the validity of which cannot be questioned, In the instant case the claim of the appellant cannot be resisted as there is no evidence that the delay was due to any act of the Port Trust or persons for whom the Port Trust is respon sible.
[349 G H] Aktieselskabet Reidar vs Arcos, Limited [1927] 1 K.B. 352;Budgett & Co. vs Bippington & Co. [1891] 1 Q.B.p. 35 and Compania Crystal De Vapores of Panama vs Herman & Mohatta (India) Ltd. , quoted with approval.
(5) Section 43, 43A and 43B of the Bombay Port Trust Act 1891 which make reference to "free days" are intended only to omit Sundays, other holidays or on which the assessment of customs duty cannot be taken up and would not include the entire period during which the Import Trade Control formali ties have not been completed.
[350 C D] (6) Under the powers vested in the Board, it is its statutory duty to collect the rates, to have a lien on the goods and seize and detain the goods until such rates are fully paid.
The Board is empowered to sell the goods if rates are not paid or lien for freight is not discharged or when the goods are not removed from its premises within the limited time.
[347 A B]
