Under section 38(1)(b)(i) of the Gujarat Municipalities Act, 1963, if a councillor.
during the term for which he has been elected or nominated, acts as a councillor in any matter in which he has directly or indirectly any share or interest, he shall, subject to the provisions of sub section 2, be disabled from continuing to be a councillor and his office shall become vacant.
While functioning as President of a municipality the appellant obtained a plot of land within the municipality for running a mill.
The Chief Officer who was the authority to grant such permission permitted the appellant to hold the plot on certain conditions.
The High Court in writ petition by the respondent held that the appellant was disqualified from continuing President of the municipality.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, HELD: (1) Section 38(1)(b)(i) disables a councillor from continuing as such if he, "acts as a councillor" in the matter of allotment of any land to himself; there is no bar in the Act to a councillor getting a lease of the land from the municipality as would appear from section 11(3)(A)(i).
It is only in a case where he acts as a councillor in getting the lease that he is disqualified.
There is nothing on the record to show that the appellant had acted as a councillor to have the plot allotted to himself.
[887 H] (2) Whether or not the Chief Officer was influenced by the fact that the applicant before him was President of the municipality, was not relevant to the question whether section 38(1)(b)(i) was attracted.
[888 A] (3) The general power of supervision conferred on the Presi dent does not imply that in every case where he applied for a lease, which he is entitled to do as section 11(3)(A)(i) indi cates, he should be deemed to have 'acted ' within the mean ing of section 38(1)(b)(i); otherwise the President of a munici pality under the Act, by virtue of his office would be disentitled altogether from applying for permission to use any land of the municipality.
If this were the correct position then there was no point in limiting the disqualifi cation contemplated in section 38(1)(b)(i) to cases where the councillor acts as a councillor.
The words 'acts as a councillor ' cannot be treated as redundant.
The councillor acts as a councillor within the meaning of section 38(1)(b)(i) when he performs any of the functions, which, under the Act, he is required to perform.
An allegation of misuse of his position against a councillor would not attract the disabil ity unders.
38(1)(b)(i) unless it was shown further that he has acted as a councillor in the matter.
[888 B D]
