On the strength of a Will dated 25th May 1959, executed in her favour by one Purohit Mani Ram, the respondent Smt.
Ishroo Devi filed a suit for recovery of the schedule property in the plaint.
It was alleged in the plaint that the appellants (A 1, son; A 2, Wife; and A 3, grand daughter of Purohit Mani Ram) after the death of Purohit Mani Ram wrongfully disposed her after getting the name of appellant No. 1 mutated in the records and that the three items of the schedule property were the separate properties of the testa tor and that he was entitled to dispose them under the Will.
The appellants averred in their written statement that the properties belonged to the joint family of which the first appellant and his father Purohit Mani Ram were members and as the properties were joint family properties, they cannot he disposed of by Will.
It was further alleged that the Will was a forged one and is fictitious.
The trial court, accepting the evidence of PW1, an advocate, who advised in the preparation of the Will and also an attest ing witness, PW2 the scribe and PW3 who deposed the fact that the properties were self acquired ones of late Purohit Mani Ram, decreed the suit as regards item No. 1 (a) of the plaint schedule but dismissed the claim as regards items l(b) and 2 holding that they were ancestral ones.
On ap peal, the High Court accepted the findings of the trial court and confirmed the decree as regards item l(a) of the property but modified the order as regards item l(b) and 2 by allowing the claim of the respondent to the extent of 1/2 share since under section 27 of the Jammu & Kashmir Hindu Succession Act Mani Ram was entitled to dispose of his interest in the joint family property by Will.
In appeal by certificate to this Court, the appellant contended: (i) The Will was not a valid one for the reasons, namely, (a) it was ante dated in order to escape the prohi bition against alienation introduced by Ordinance which came into force in July 1959; (b) the signature on the Will was forged; (c) the Will is a most unnatural one as it had not provided for the son or the wife or any near relative but has provided to a distant relative and (d) in a suit for partition filed by the son against Mani Ram, the latter gave an undertaking in the court not to alienate his properties which would improbalise the execution of the Will; (ii) The hereditary profession of Mani Ram being that of a priest whatever he earned while practising that profession and all his acquisitions should be held to be joint family property.
(iii) In view of the Mitakshara law applicable to the estate when partition of the joint family property takes place during the father 's life time at the instance of the son, the mother also has a share equal to him.
The Court confirmed the decree in respect of item 1 (a) of the property in favour of the respondent, modified the decretal order of the High Court in respect of items 1(b) and 2 of the schedule property as 1/3rd in favour of appel lant No. 1, 1/3rd in favour of appellant No. 2 and 1/3rd in favour of respondent as entitled by the Will.
The Court, HELD: (1) The plea that the Will was executed after July 1959 when there was a prohibition against the alienation and that it was pre dated and not executed 401 on the day on which it purports to be is without any sub stance and against the evidence on record.
[403 H, 404 A] (2) The contention that the Will is an unnatural one is also without substance.
The non disclosure of the execu tion of the Will is understandable because Mani Ram did not want anyone, particularly his son, to know about his pos sessing of the property by Will.
[404 B, D] (3) The findings of the two lower courts that the Will is a genuine one and was executed by Mani Ram by his own free will cannot be assailed.
In fact, there was no chal lenge to the gist of the Will noted by PW2, the scribe, in one of his regularly kept record; there was no denial by the first appellant, the son of Mani Ram that the signature found in the Will was not that of his father and there is no reason why the cogent evidence of PW 1, a respectable advocate who spoke of his advising in the preparation of the Will having seen the executant sign the Will in his presence be not accepted.
[405 A C] (4) The income from the practice of a hereditary profes sion will not be a joint family property.
Item 1 (a) of the Property is the self acquisition of Mani Ram and the decree of the appellate court so far as item No. 1 (a) is concerned must be confirmed.
[406 A, D] Hanso Pathak vs Harmandil Pathak and Anr., AIR 1934 Allahabad 851, approved.
Chalabhai Gaurishankar vs Hargowan Ramji & Ors.
I.L.R. 36 Born.
94, over ruled.
(5) Under the Mitakshara law excepting Madras, in the other states referred to in the decisions cited when there is a partition between the son and his father the mother is entitled to a share equal to that of the son.
In the in stant case the case of the first appellant was that the joint family consisted of himself and his father alone, though in the earlier partition suit filed by him he claimed 1/3rd share conceding that his father and mother are entitled to the other 2/3rd share.
As no decision in re spect of the interest of the male Hindu in Jammu & Kashmir was cited the question is remitted to the High Court for decision as to what is the extent of the interest as regards items I(b) & 2 of the plaint Schedule properties.
[406 E F, 407 B E] Dular Koeri vs Dwarkanath Misser ILR ; Sumrun Thakoor vs Chunder Mun Misser & Ors., ILR ; Hos banna Devanna Naik vs Devanna Sannappa Naik and Ors.
ILR and Pratap Singh vs Dalip Singh ILR 52 All.
596, approved.
(6) In view of section 27 of the Jammu & Kashmir which provides that any Hindu male may dispose of by Will any property which capable of being disposed of by him in law and also explanation to that section which makes it clear that the interest of a male Hindu in a Mitakahara coparcenary property be deemed to be property capable of being disposed of by him within the meaning of the sub section, in the instant case Mani Ram can dispose of his share under a Will.
Admittedly the respondent, will be entitled to 1/3rd share in respect of item l(b) and 2 of the plaint schedule in addition to the decree in her favour in respect of item 1 (a).
[406 D E, 407 E F] [The Court remitted the case back for the determination of the interest which Mani Ram had in the joint family property at the time of his death which he could dispose of by his Will and grant a decree accordingly.]
