Section 303 I.P.C. lays down that "whoever being under sentence of imprisonment for life commits murder shall be punished with death".
The appellant, for the offence of murder committed on December 3, 1959, had been convicted on July 26, 1961, by the High Court of Mysore under section 302 I.P.C. and sentenced to imprisonment for life in appeal by the State against his acquittal.
State Government, in exercise of its power under section 402 Cr.
P.C. conditionally remitted his sentence on February 8, 1972 and he was, there fore, conditionally released from jail on February 8, 1972.
The two conditions of the remission were that during the unexpired period of his sentence conditionally remitted (i) he will not commit any offence punishable by any law in Mysore and (ii) he will not in any way associate with per sons known to be of bad character or lead a dissolute or immoral life.
Even before the expiry of the first year of his.
release.
, the appellant got himself involved on January 27, 1973, in another murder charge.
He was convicted under section 302 read with section 303 I P.C. by the Sessions Judge, Kolar on November 7, 1974 and sentenced to death under section 303 I.P.C. On an appeal to the High Court which was heard along with the reference for confirmation, the sentence of death under section 302 I. P.C. was confirmed on November 19, 1975.
It held that section 303 I.P.C. was applicable.
as this was In case of conditional remission under section 401 Cr P.C. and the second murder was committed during the unexpired portion of the sentence of imprisonment for life.
This Court while granting the special leave limited it to the question of applicability of section 303 I.P.C. and the sentence.
Allowing the appeal parly and modifying the sentence of death to that of life imprisonment, the Court, HELD: (1) An accused cannot be under a sentence of im prisonment for life at the time of commission of the second murder unless he is actually undergoing such a sentence or there is legally extant judicially a final sentence which he is bound to serve without the requirement of a separate order to breathe life into the sentence which was otherwise dead on account of remission under section 401 Cr.
P.C. [398 H, 399 A] (2) The earlier sentence of imprisonment for life became final and inexor able so far as the judicial process was concerned.
It is only when such a sentence is "operative and executable that section 303 I.P.C. a attracted.
[395 C] Dilip Kumar Sharma & Ors.
State of Madhya Pradesh ; , referred to.
(3) Section 303 I.P.C. is applicable only to an accused who on the date of ,commission of the second offence of murder had earlier committed a murder for which his convic tion and sentence of imprisonment for life were beyond judi cial controversy and operative.
[399 A] (4) Unlike in the case of section 75.
LP.C., section 303 I.P.C. does not contemplate a mere enhanced punishment for a con vict with a past criminal history for the same offence Section 303 I.P.C. creates a most aggregated form of offence when, committed by a person under sentence of imprisonment for life to be punished only with death, the maximum penalty under the law.
The true effect 394 of section 303, I.P.C. is that if the accused was continuing to be under the sentence of imprisonment for life on the day of the second murder the court cannot come to his rescue by exercising discretionary clemency in favour of the alterna tive sentence.
The only sentence the court has power and is obliged to impose and no other is the sentence of death.
[399 B C] (5) A person must be actually and irrevocably the lifer beyond the pale of judicial controversy at the time of commission controversy of the second offence of murder to be vitiated with a penalty of death under section 303 I.P.C.
If the sentence of a convict had already been remitted at the time of commission of the second murder, he would cease to be an actual lifer to come within the lethal clamp of section 303 I.P.C. [399 C] (6) For the purpose of section 303 I.P.C. there, can be no warrant for introducing a legal fiction of being deemed to be under a sentence of imprisonment for .life.
In the instant case the appellant is not liable for conviction under section 303 I.P.C. [399 D] Sohan Singh vs State Punjab 201, over ruled.
(7) Section 401(3) makes it clear that for the purpose.
of section 303 I.P.C., it does not make any difference whether the remission under section 401 Cr.
P.C. is with or without condi tions.
[396 F] Po Kun vs King AIR 1939 Rangoon 124; Sogan Singh vs State Punjab 201; Gulam Mohammad Wali Mohammad vs Emperor AIR 1943 Sind 114 and Sarat Chandra Rabha & Ors.
vs Kagendranath & Ors.
[1961](2) SCR 133, referred to.
(8) Section 401(3) leaves it to the option of the Govern ment to take the penal action and there is no automatic return of the prisoner to the jail on breach of any condi tion of the remission.
It will certainly be open to the Government in a particular case to cancel the remission but it may not.
The Government is not under a legal obligation to cancel the remission.
It is only when the Government chooses to pass an order of cancellation of the remission of sentence that the convict is arrested and is required to serve the unexpired portion of the sentence.
During the interval the accused who is released cannot be said to be, under a sentence of imprisonment for life while.
is in enjoyment of the freedom on account of remission.
That period is not even reckoned under section 401 Cr.
P.C. for the purpose of calculation of the sentence to be served in the eventuality.
[397 B C, E]
