The appellant and respondent No. 1 company entered into a contract for the manufacture and supply of wagons.
By the correspondence exchanged, the number of wagons to be supplied and the price of wagon of each type was ,indicated.
It was provided that the contract would be governed by the Standard Conditions in so far as they are not inconsist ent with the ' correspondence exchanged between the parties.
Under the Standard conditions, 90 per cent of the payment had to be made against the Company submitting the bill to the purchaser together with the completion certificate and on payment of such 90 per cent price the vehicle in question would become the property of the purchaser.
The balance of 10 per cent was to be treated as security for the due ful filment of the contract.
The balance was to be received on the receipt of certificate from the purchaser to the effect that the actual delivery of the vehicle was taken and that the delivery was made in due time.
One of the clauses provided that where any raw materials for the execution of the contract are procured with the assistance of the appel lant the company would hold the said materials as trustee for Government and use such materials economically and solely for the purpose .of the contract against which they are issued and not dispose them of without the permission of the Government and return, if required by the purchas er.
all surplus or unserviceable materials that might be left after the completion of the contract or its termination for any reason whatsoever on his being paid such price as Government might fix with due regard to the condition of the material.
Clause 10 further provided that if and when the State and inter State Sales Tax on the stock on order becomes payable under law such payments would be reimbursed by the Railway Board.
The Railway Board, however, is not to be made.
liable for the payment of Sates Tax paid under misapprehension of law.
No sales tax on materials including steel and components would be reimbursed by the Railway Board.
That the stores and articles shall be such as arc required for the execution of the contract and the advance made by the Railways is without prejudice to, the provisions of the contract and is subject to inspection and rejection of the stores.
That the said articles and materials shall at all times be open to inspection of any officer authorised by the Railways.
There are 3 categories of materials, the first category admittedly was the property of the Railways; the second category is the material procured by the Company against 90 per cent advance; and the third category was at all times material of the Company.
Para graph 3 of the letter exchanged between the parties fixed the period of delivery.
Pars 4 provided for doing the packing of axle boxes by the Railway for which no packing charges were to be recovered from the Company.
Section 2(0) of the Rajasthan Sales Tax Act, 1954 defines sale as any transfer of property in goods for cash or for deferred payment or for any other valuable consideration.
The appellant relied on the following circumstances: Under the Special Conditions read with the indemnity bond the property in the raw materials purchased by the Company for the construction of the 438 wagons passed to the Railway Board as soon as the latter advanced 90 per cent of the value of such material; which thereafter is held by the Company merely as an agent or trustee for the Board.
Condition No. 5 obligates the con tractor to hold "as trustee for Government" and raw materi als for the execution of the contract procured with the assistance of Government and further requires the contractor to use such materials economically and solely for the pur pose of the contract against which they are issued and not to dispose them of without the permission of the Government.
The Railway wagon at the time of its delivery had no indi vidual existence as the sole property of the Company.
The respondents contended that there was nothing in the Special Conditions which militates or is inconsistent with the Standard Condition No. 15.
The Special Conditions, read as a whole show that the raw materials purchased by the Company against 90 per cent of advance payment do not become the property of the Railway Board or the Union of India because under the express terms of the contract such advance payment is made towards the contract price of the wagons ' and not towards price of the materials.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: (1) Transfer of property in goods for a price is the linch pin of the definition of 'sale '.
The difficulties in distinguishing between the contract of sale and work contract is an age old one.
It was much debated even by the Roman Jurists.
According to Pollock & Mulla, the test would be whether the thing to be delivered has any individual existence before delivery as the sole property of the party who is to deliver it.
If the answer is in the affirmative it is sale of the thing otherwise not.
Another rule is that if the main object of the contract is the transfer from A to B for a price of the property in a thing in which B had no previous property then the contract is a contract of sale.
According to Lord Halsbury, the distinction is often a fine one.
A contract of sale is a contract whose main object is the transfer of the property in and the delivery of the possession of a chattel as a chattel to the buyer.
Where the main object of work undertaken by the payee of the price is not the transfer of a chattel qua chattel the contract is one for work and labour.
The test is whether or not the work and labour bestowed and in anything that can properly become the work and labour bestowed and in anything that can properly become the subject of sale, neither the ownership of materials nor the value of the skill and labour as com pared with the value of the materials is conclusive, al though such matters may be taken into consideration in determining in the circumstances of a particular case wheth er the contract is in substance one for work and labour or one for the sale of a chattel.
[446 F H, 447 A D] (2) The question, whether a contract is one for sale of goods or for executing work or rendering services is largely one of fact depending upon the terms of the contract includ ing the nature of the obligations to be discharged thereun der and the surrounding circumstances.
In the present case the contract is expressly one for the manufacture and supply of wagons for a price.
Price has been fixed taking the wagon as a unit.
Payment of the price is made for each vehicle on its completion and delivery by the contrac tor to the purchaser who is described as the Union of India acting through the Railway Board.
The payment is made in two instalments; 90 per. cent of the value of the vehicle on completion against an On Account Bill together with the completion certificate and 10 per cent after delivery.
The real intention of the contracting parties is pri marily to be sought within the four corners of the docu ments containing Standard and Special Condition of the contract.
If such intention is deafly discernible from these documents it would not be proper to seek external aid from the stereo typed indemnity bond.
The terms and condi tions of the contract read as a whole undoubtedly lead to the conclusion that the property in the material procured or purchased by the Company against the 90 per cent value of which 439 advance is taken from the Railways, does not before their use in the construction of the wagons, pass to the Railways, for the following reasons: (a) On account payment upto 90 per cent is a part of the full contract price for each completed wagon; (b) Condition No. 5 while imposing restric tion as to the use and disposal of material against which advance is taken further gives a pre emptive right to the Government to pur chase all surplus or unserviceable materials from the company on its "being paid such price as Government may fix with due regard to the condition of material".
If the materi al belonged to the Government or the Rail ways, no question of purchasing the same from the Company could arise.
No one can be seller and purchaser of the same property at the same time.
(c) Condition No. 10 which provides that no sales tax on materials including steel and components will be reimbursed by the Railway Board clearly postulates that the Company becomes the owner of the materials by pur chase and, therefore, becomes liable to pay the sales tax.
There is no condition or term in the contract that the material purchased by the Company after drawing on Account pay ment to the extent of 90 per cent of the value of the material became the property of the Railways.
The conditions embodied in the contract read as a whole clearly show that the property in the material purchased by the company with the assistance of the Railway, does not pass to the Railway.
Thus, most of the raw materials required for the construc tion of the wagons belong to the Company and not to the Railway Board.
With the exception of a relatively small proportion of the compo nents, the entire wagon including the materi al, at the time of its completion for deliv ery, is the property of the Company.
Clause 15 stipulates in unmistakable terms that as soon as a vehicle has been completed the Company will get it examined by the Inspecting officer and submit to .the purchaser an On Account Bill for 90 per cent of the value of the vehicle.
This clearly shows that the contract was in substance one for the sale of manufactured wagons by the Company for the stipulated prices.
[441 G, 447 E F, 451 B H & 455 B C] M/s.
Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd. Bangalore Division vs The Commissioner of Commercial Taxes, Mysore ; and State of Gujarat (Commissioner of Sales Tax, Ahmeda bad) vs M/s. Variety Body Builders ; , distin guished.
Patnaik & Company vs State of Orissa [19651 16 STC 369 (SC), followed.
