The appellant, a tenant in the building situate at No. 13 India Exchange Place, Calcutta and belonging to one Rai Bhupathi Nath Deb Bahadur who died on September 23, 1959, was inducted in as a tenant through a registered lease deed dated 5th March 1960 for a period of thirty one years effec tive from 18th March 1960 and on a monthly rent of Rs. 1,400/ by nine persons who claimed to be the nephews and nieces of the 'said Bhupathi Nath Deb.
Respondents Nos. 3 and 4 claiming respectively to be the son and daughter of the deceased Bhupathi Nath, in their capacity as executors of the will dated 20th November 1957 said to have been made by the deceased prior to his death filed an account in form No. ED 1, of the properties includ ing the building at 13 India Exchange Place, in respect of which, according to them estate duty was payable on the death of the deceased.
The Assistant Controller of Estate Duty, after assessing the principal value of the estate under section 58 of the Act determined a sum of Rs. 1,40,090/28 as the amount of duty payable by the accountable persons.
Being unable to recover the amount, the Assistant Controller of Estate Duty, in.
view of the fact that the rent payable by the appellant was a fortiorari an amount which in law belonged to the estate issued a notice to the appellant section 73(5) of the Act r/w section 46(5A) of the Income Tax Act, 1922, pointing out that "a sum of Rs. 1,40,090/20 is due from Tulsi Charan Deb and others on account of estate duty as accountable persons to the estate of late Rai Bhupathi Nath Deb" and requiring him to pay forthwith "any amount due from you to or, held by you.
or on account of the said estate of Bhupathi Nath Deb Bahadur" upto the amount of Rs. 1,40,090/20.
The appellant on receipt of the notice paid a sum of Rs. 2800/ being the rent for the months of December 1961 and January 1962.
From February 1962 to May 1962, the appellant paid the rent to his lessors on the strength of a notice dated 24th February 1962 from the lessor 's attorney to the effect that the Assistant Controller had no jurisdic tion to demand from the appellant the rent, 'since the lessors were not the accountable persons as they were not assessed to estate duty.
No further payment of rent, there fore was made either to the lessors or to Revenue; but instead the appellant preferred a claim for refund of Rs. 2800/ on the ground that this payment had been made by him under a bonafide mistake of law.
By his order dated 25th March 1964, the Assistant Controller, holding that the appellant had acted in contravention of the notice dated 9th January 1962 issued against him, imposed a penalty of Rs. 3000/ under section 73(5) of the r/w. section 46(1) and required the appellant to pay up the amounts of Rs. 35,000/ and Rs. 3,000/ on or before 6th April 1964.
The writ petition filed by the appellant challenging the said order was rejected by the Calcutta High Court.
AlloWing the appeal by special leave in part, the Court, HELD: (1) Two conditions must be fulfilled before penalty Can be imposed 46(1) of the Income Tax Act, 1922: one is that the person on whom penalty is sought to be impoSed must be an assessee and the other is that the assessee must be in default within the meaning of section 45.
Where a garnishee is required by notice issued under sub section (5A) of section 46 to pay to the Income Tax Officer so much of the money due or which may become due from the garnishee to the assessee or held or which may subsequentiy be held by the garnishee for or on account of the assessee, as. 'is sufficient to pay the amount due by the tax payer in respect of the arrears of income tax, he does not become an assessee as defined in section 2, sub seCtion (2).
The garnishee merely pays the amount which is due from him to the assessee and such pay ment is in discharge of the debt owed by him to the as assessee.
It is not a payment the liability for which is created under any provision of the Act.
There is no provi sion 490 in the Act which by a legal fiction makes him an assessee.
Unlike section 226 (3 )(x) of 1961 Act, there is no provision in the 1922 Act that the garnishee who fails to comply with the notice issued under sub section
(SA) of section 46 shall be deemed to be an assessee in default.
No penalty, therefore, can be imposed on a garnishee under sub section
(1) of section 46, even if he fails tO comply with the notice issued to him under sub section
5A of section 46.
[496 G H, 497 A] (2) Section 73, sub sections (1) and (2) of the correspond to section 45(1) of the 1922 Act deeming the accountable person to be in default only on his failure tO pay in accordance with the requisition contained in the notice.
Since section 73, sub section (5) by incorporating the provisions of sub7 sections (1), (IA), (2), (3), (4), (5), (5A), (6) and (7) of section 46 of the 1922 Act makes them ap plicable for the purpose of collection and recovery of estate duty, it must follow a fortiori that penalty can be imposed on a garnishee, under section 73, sub section (5) of the read with section 46, sub section (1) of the ACt of 1922 only, if the garnishee can be said to be an accountable person in default.
The garnishee cannot be regarded as an accountable person, since section 2, sub section (12A) defines 'accountable person ' to mean the person accountable for estate duty within the meaning of the Act and the garnishee does not come within the category of persons specified in sections 53 and 54 as persons ac countable for estate duty.
There is also no provision in the , deeming a defaulting garnishee as an accountable person in default by a legal fiction.
In the instant case the order .dated 25th March, 1964, imposing penalty of RS.
3,000/ On the appellant is outside the power of the Assistant Controller under the .
[497 B, D H] (3) The plain effect of section 53, sub section
(1) read with section 73, sub sec.
(1) is that .when an order of assessment is made not only the accountable person in respect of whom proceeding for assessment has been taken, but also every other accountable person as defined in section 2(2) and (12A) would be liable to pay the amount of estate duty, limited of course to the assets of the deceased which he ' actually received or which, But for his own negligence or default, he might have received.
[501 C.H, 502 A] (4) The words "the property passing on the death", appearing in the expression "the whole of the estate duty on the property passing on the death" in subsection (1) of section 53, according to their plain grammatical construction, indicate that every accountable person would be accountable for the estate duty on the entire property passing or deemed to pass on the death of the deceased.
[502 C D] (5) The argument that having regard to the words "where any property passes" appearing in the opening part of the sub section, coupled with the words "such property so passes and "the property so passing ', appearing in the respective sub clauses, the word the" appearing before the words "property passing on the death" must again refer to the same property which is referred to in the respective sub clauses (a), (b) or (c), as the case may be is not well founded, for it ignores one very important circumstance namely, that each of the persons mentioned in sub clauses (a), (,b) and (c) is rendered accountable for the whole of the estate duty not, merely "on the property so passing", but on "the property passing on the death ".
[502 D F] (6) Where the legislature wanted to refer to the specif ic property passing on the death of the deceased described in the opening,part of the sub section, the legislature used the words "such property so passes" and 'the property so passing" in the sub clauses (a), (b) and (c), but while imposing accountability for the estate duty, the legislature ,made a deliberate departure and instead of the words the property so passing", which were familiar coinage, it used the words "the property passing on the death".
This highly significant departure in phraseology Clearly indicates that the legislative intent was that each of the persons men tioned in sub clauses (a), (,b) and (c) should be account able for the estate duty on the entire property passing on the death.
It was for this reason that the liability of each of these persons had to be limited to the assets of the deceased Which he actually received or which, but for his own neglect or default he might have received".
If the liability.
of each of these persons was only to the extent of the estate duty On the particular property falling within the respective sub; clause, there Was need for limit ing it to the assets of the deceased which such person received or ought to have received.
[502 F H, 503 A] 491 (7) The possibility that an anomaly may arise is only a factor to be taken into account by the court where two interpretations are possible, but where the meaning of a statutory provision is plain, it cannot alter such meaning.
Though the trustee of an insurance policy taken out by the deceased under the Married Women 's Property Act, 1874 would fall within sub clause (b) and hence become accountable for the estate .duty on the entire property passing on the death, he would not be liable to pay the estate duty out Of the policy monies, since the estate of the deceased would have no interest in the policy monies and the policy monies would not form part Of.the estate of the deceased and his liability as an accountable person would be limited only to the assets of the deceased which he has actually received or which he ought to have received.
[503 C D] (8).
Sub section (5) of section 53 merely emphasises the principle of joint and several liability where two or more persons are accountable for estate duty.
in respect of any property passing on the death of the deceased, regardless whether they are so accountable in the same capacity or in different capacities.
It would be reading much more in sub section (5) than what its language warrants to say that this sub section is consistent only with an accountable. person mentioned in sub clause (a), (b) or (c) of sub section (1) being accountable only in respect of estate duty on the.
particular property passing to him on the death of the deceased.
(9) The object of sub section (5) of section 53 is to provide that every accountable person shall be liable not only jointly with other accountable persons, but also severally for estate duty in respect of any and every property passing on the death of the deceased.
On a proper construction of sub section (1) of section 53, read in the context of the other provisions Of the Act, each of the persons mentioned in sub clauses (a), (b) and (c) would be accountable for the estate duty on the entire property, passing on the death and his accountability qua the Revenue would_not be limited only to the estate duty on the particular property passing to him.
C D] (10) In the instant case, the lessors were clearly accountable persons since they admittedly took possession of and intermeddled with the leased premises which formed part of the estate of the deceased.
The order of assessment made by the Assistant Controller of Estate Duty was not challenged by the appellant in the writ petition, nor was it decared invalid by a superior authority at the instance of the lessors.
Not even any steps appear to have been taken by the lessors for the purpose of challenging the order of assessment.
The lessors were in the circumstances, account able for the whole of the estate duty on the entire property passing on the death of the deceased and hence they were liable to pay the estate duty of Rs. 1,40,0920/20 limited of course to the extent of the leased premises which consti tuted the asset of the deceased received by them.
[504 H, 505 A B] (11 ) Since the rent of the leased premises was payable by the appellant to the lessors under the lease deed and the lessors were liable to pay the estate duty of Rs. 1,40,090/20 it was competent tO the Assistant Controller to issue a notice under section 73.
sub section (5) read with section 46, sub section (SA) of the Act of 1922 requiring the appellant to pay the amount of rent due and to become due in respect of the leased premises.
[505 C D] (12) The notice dated 9th January 1962 was a valid notice and the appellant was bound to comply with it .and to pay to the Assistant Controller the amount of rent due or to become due in respect of the leased premises.
Non mentioning of the lessors in the notice as the persons to whom the amount of rent .was due from the appellant in respect of the leased premises does not render the notice invalid or inef fective.
What the notice dated 9th January 1962, in sub stance and effect required the appellant to do was to pay to the Assistant Controller, the amount due or to become due from the appellant to the lessors in respect of the leased premises; that amount could rightly and legitimately be described as amount due to the estate of the deceased so as to be covered by the terms of the notice.
[505 H, 507 D] (13) Questions of fact not raised in the writ petition nor argued before the High Court, cannot be allowed to be agi tated for the first time before this Court.
[506 B] 492 (14) In order that proceeding may be validly taken against a garnishee under section 73, sub section (5) read with section 46, sub section (5A), it is not necessary that the accountable person must be deemed to be in default and hence such garnishee proceeding need not be preceded by a notice of demand on the accountable person under sub section (1) of section 73.
[506 G H] Third Income Tax Officer, Mangalore vs
M. Damadar Bhat, , followed.
[Their Lordships expressed their opinion that the view taken in this decision was not correct for three reasons given by them.]
