In a writ petition filed under article 226 of the Constitu tion impugning his dismissal from service, the respondent contended that since he had not been given a reasonable opportunity of meeting the allegations against him, his dismissal was void.
writ petition was dismissed.
Thereupon, the respondent flied a suit in a civil court challenging his dismissal on the ground, among others, that since he had been appointed by the Inspector General of Po lice, his dismissal by the Deputy Inspector General of Police was wrong.
The State took the plea that the suit was barred by res judicata.
Dismissing the suit, the trial court held that it was not barred by res judicata.
The first appellate court dismissed the respondent 's appeal.
Purporting to follow a line of decisions of this Court, the High Court held that only that issue between the parties would be res judicata which was raised in the earlier writ petition and was decided by the High Court after contest and since in this case the respondent did not raise in the earlier writ petition the plea of competence of the Deputy Inspector General of Police to dismiss him.
the parties were never at issue on it and that the High Court never consid ered and decided this issue in the writ petition.
On the question of invoking the principle of constructive res judicata by a party to the subsequent suit on the ground that the matter might or ought to have been raised in the earlier proceedings, the High Court held that this question was left open by the Supreme Court in Gulabchand Chhotalal Parikh vs State of Bombay ; , and allowed the respondent 's appeal.
Allowing the States appeal to this Court.
HELD: The High Court was wrong in its view because the law in regard to the applicability of the principle of constructive res judicata having been clearly laid down in Devi Lal Modi vs Sales Tax Officer Ratlam and Others ; it was not necessary to reiterate it in Gulabchand 's case as it did not arise for consideration in that case.
The clarificatory observation in Gulabchand 's case was misunderstood by the High Court in observing that the matter had been left open by this Court.
The doctrine of res judicata is based on two theo ries: (i) the finality and conclusiveness of judicial deci sions for the final termination of disputes in the general interest of the community as a matter of public policy, and (ii) the interest of the individual that he should be pro tected from multiplication of litigation.
[430 D] 2.
(a) In certain cases, the same set of facts may give rise to two or more causes of action.
In such cases res judicata is not confined to the issues which the Court is actually asked to decide but covers issues or facts which are so clearly part of the subject matter of the litigation and so clearly could have been raised that it would be an abuse of the process of the court to allow a new proceeding to be started in respect of them.
This rule has sometimes been referred to as constructive res judicata which is an aspect or amplification of the general principle.
[431 A] (b) Section 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure, with its six explanations, covers almost the whole field, but the section has, in terms, no application to a petition for the issue of a high prerogative writ.
[431 D] (c) Although in the Amalgamated Coalfields Ltd. and others vs Janapada Sabha, ; this Court held that constructive res judicata being a special and artifi cial form of res judicata should not generally be applied to writ petitions, in Devilat Modi 's this Court held that if the doctrine of constructive 429 res judicata was not applied to writ proceedings, it would be open to a party to take one proceeding after another and urge new grounds every time, which was plainly inconsistent with considerations of public policy.
The principle of constructive res judicata was, therefore, held applicable to writ petitions as well.
[433 G & 434 D] 3.
The High Court missed the significance of these deci sions and relied upon L. Jankirama lyer and 'Others vs
P.M. Nilakanta lyer and Others [1962] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 206 which had no bearing on the controversy.
In Gulabchand 's case, this Court observed that it did not consider it necessary to examine whether the principle of constructive res judicata could be invoked by a party to the subsequent suit oft the ground that a matter which might or ought to have been raised in the earlier proceeding but was not so raised therein could be raised again relying on which the High COurt concluded that the question was left open by this Court.
This in turn led the High Court to hold that the principle of resjudicata could not be made applicable to a writ petition.
[435 E F] In the instant case, the respondent did not raise the plea that he could not be dismissed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police.
This was an important plea which was within his knowledge and could well have been taken in the writ petition.
Instead he raised the plea that he was not afforded a reasonable opportunity of meeting the case in the departmental inquiry.
It was therefore not permissible for him to take in the subsequent suit the plea that he had been dismissed by an authority subordinate to that by which he was appointed.
That was clearly barred by the principle of constructive res judicata and the High Court erred in taking a contrary view.
[436 A B]
