The state Government issued two notifications under sections 4 and 6 of the Land Acquisition Act seeking to acquire certain land belonging to a textile mill.
When the Letters Patent Appeal of the 'Textile mill was pending before the High Court the mill was taken over by the Central Government and later the appellant was substituted for the original appellant.
By virtue of section 3 of the Sick Textile Undertakings (Nationalisation) Act, 1974 the management of every sick textile mill vested absolutely in the Central Government and later in the appellant.
Section 4(2) of the Act provides that all property which vested in the Central Government shall, by force of such vesting, be freed and discharged from trust, obligation, mortgage, charge, lien and all other incumbrances affecting it and any attachment, injunction or decree or order of any court restricting the use of such property in any manner shall be deemed to have been with drawn.
The appellants ' contention that by reason of ss.4(2)the two notifications must be held to have become ineffective because the section provides that all property vested in the Central Government shall be free from all incumbrances affecting it was rejected by the High Court.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court, HELD : The High Court was right in its view that the notifi cations issued under ss 4 and 6 of the Land Acquisition Act were not incumbrances and could not be held to have become inoperative on the land vesting in the Central Government.
[528 B] 1.The term "incumbrance" has not been defined in the Act, The dictionary meaning given to incumbrance is a claim, lien or liability attached to property.
An incum brance in this sense has to be a liability "attached to property".
a burden or liability that runs with the land.
The notifications issued under the Land Acquisition Act are not a burden or liability attached to the property.[528 B] 2.
"Incumbrance" in the context of section 4(2) means some burden or liability attached to the property ,like mortgage, charge, lien etc.
That this is so would appear from the words 'all other incumbrances affecting it".
Having said that the vesting will be free from trust etc.
, sub section
(2) goes on to add that "any attachment.
injunction or decree . shall be deemed to be withdrawn" upon vesting.
If "incumbrance" meant any kind of fetter, any attachment, injunction or decree or order restricting use of the proper ty would be included in "all other incumbrances" and it would have been quite unnecessary to mention them separate ly.
This means that fetters on the property like attach ment, injunction or decree or order of any court restricting the use of the property which are deemed to have been with drawn upon.
the property vesting in the Central Government are not really incumbrances within the meaning of the word as used in s.4(2) [528 E G]
