The respondent an assessee to wealth tax as an individual, in the assessment for the assessment year 1968 69, valued his property situate on plot No. 12, Block 39 Kautilya Marg, Chanakyapuri in his return of net wealth @ Rs. 4,52,000 as against the value of Rs. 6,00,000 shown by him in the previ ous years.
The property consisted of leasehold interest in the land together with a house built on it.
The land be longed to the President of India and it was leased by the President of India to one Vashesharan Devi on the terms and conditions set out in an agreement of lease dated 30th December, 1954 and the leasehold interest was acquired from Vashesharan Devi by the assessee.
Clause (13) of the lease deed provided that the assessee shall not be entitled to assign the leasehold interest in the land without obtain ing the prior approval in writing of the lessor and 50 per cent of the unearned increase in the value of the land at the time of assignment shall be claimable by the lessor and moreover, if the lessor so desires, he shall have pre emp tive right to purchase the property after deducting 50% of the unearned increase in the value of the land.
It further provided that "all such assignees and transferees . . shall be bound by all the covenants and conditions herein contained and be answerable in respect therefor".
In accordance with this clause, the Architects who are approved valuers estimated the value of the property @ Rs. 5,82,268 and from this ' figure, they deducted a sum of Rs. 1,30,000 representing 50 per cent of the unearned in crease in the value of the land, which belonged to the lessor and arrived at the value of Rs. 4,52,268/ .
The Wealth Tax Officer did not accept the estimate of the valuation and taking the annual rental value of Rs. 1,32,000/ fetched by the property as the basis, computed the net annual rent at Rs. 82,956/ and arrived at the figure of Rs. 8,29,560/ as the value of the property by applying the multiple of ten to the net annual rental value of Rs. 82,956/ .
The claim of the assessee to deduct from the value of the property 50 per cent of the unearned in crease in the value of the land was rejected on the ground that this claim was based "merely on hypothetical presump tions".
The value of the property was, however, reduced from Rs. 8,29,560/ to Rs. 6,00,000/ since that was the figure accepted by the Revenue in the past assessment years.
The appeals before the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and the Tribunal failed.
On a reference, the High Court took the view that the liability to pay 50 per cent of the un earned increase in the value of the land to the lessor at the time of the assignment was a disadvantage attached to the leasehold interest in the land and hence its value was liable to be deducted from the value of the property in arriving at the net wealth.
Dismissing the appeals, the Court, HELD: (1) In determining the value of the leasehold interest of the assessee in the land for the purpose of assessment to wealth tax the price which the leasehold interest would fetch in the open market, were it not encumbered or affected by the burden of the restriction contained in clause (13) of the leasedeed, would have to be reduced by 50 per cent of the unearned increase in the value of the land on the basis of the hypothetical sale on the valuation date.
[427 C D] (2) The only way in which in a. case of this kind the valuation section 7(1) of the Wealth Tax Act can be done is by taking the market value of the leasehold interest as if it were unencumbered or unaffected by the burden or restriction contained in clause (13) and deducting from it, 50 per cent of the unearned 419 increase in the value of the land on the basis of the hypo thetical sale as representing the value of such burden or restriction.
[425 A C] (3) The true test for determining the matter of payment made by an assessee out of an amount received by him wheth er it is an application of part of the amount which belongs to him or it is payment of an amount which is diverted before it reaches the assessee so that at the time of re ceipt, it belongs to the 'payee and not to the assessee.
In the present case 50 per cent of the unearned increase in the value of the land would be diverted to the lessor before it reaches the hands of the assessee as part of the price.
[425 E F] C.I.T.v.
Sitaldas Tirathdas SC; applied.
Pandit Lakshmi Kant Jha vs Commissioner of Wealth Tax, Bihar , explained.
(4) The burden or limitation attaching to the leasehold interest must be taken into account in arriving at the value of the leasehold interest and it can not be value ignoring the burden or limitation The covnaent in clause (13) is clearly a covenant running with the land and it would bind whosoever is the holder of the leasehold interest for the time being.
It is a constituent part of the rights and liabilities and advantages and disadvantages which go to make up the leasehold interest and it is an incident which is in the nature of burden, on the leasehold interest.
Plainly and indisputably, it has the affect of depressing the value which the leasehold interest would fetch if it were free from this burden or disadvantage.
When the lease hold interest in the land has to be valued this burden or disadvantage attaching to the leasehold interest must be duly discounted in estimated the price which the leasehold interest would fetch.
To value the leasehold interest on the basis that this burden or disadvantage were to be ignored would be to value an asset different in content and quality from that actually owned by the assessee.
[424 B, 423 D H] Corrie vs MecDermott , quoted with approval.
(5) When under the lease deed the lessor has a bundle of rights which includes "something" more than the reversion, that "something" would necessarily be subtracted from the interest of the lessee and to that extent, the interest of the lessee would be the leasehold interest minus that "something".
What goes to augment the interest of the lessor would correspondingly reduce the interest of the lessee and it cannot be taxed as the wealth of both the lessor and the lessee.
It would be includible in the net wealth of the lessor and hence it cannot at the same time form part of the wealth of the lessee and must be subtracted in determining the nature and extent of the interest of the lessee.
[424 E F]
