The respondent was convicted for an offence under section 5(2) read with section 5(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 and section 161 of the I.P.C.
The conviction was set aside by the High Court on the sole ground that the sanction for his prosecution was not accorded by a competent authority.
The respondent was a Civilian in the Defence Services in the rank of temporary Superintendent, Building and oRads Grade I. The prosecution case was that he had accepted illegal gratification of Rs. 300/ from one Brij Bhushan Lal,Contractor, as a motive or reward for doing an official act.
The sanction for the prosecution of the re spondent was accorded by Brig.
Naresh Prasad Chief Engineer, North Western Zone, Chandigarh.
The High Court held that Brig.
Naresh Prasad had no authority under the relevant rules either plenary or dele gated to appoint a person to a post in class III service at the time when he passed the order for sanction of prose cution.
That such a power was delegated to him subsequent ly.
The learned Judge held that the authority was the Chief Engineer, Western Command and not the Zonal Chief Engineer.
Section 6(1) of the Prevention of Corruption Act pro vides that no Court shall take cognizance of the offence in question alleged to have been committed by a public servant except with the previous sanction of the officer enumerated in clauses (a), (b) and (c) of that section.
Sub section 2 of section 6 further provides that where for any reason whatsoever any doubt arises whether the previous sanction as required under sub section (1) should be given by the Central or State Government or any other authority such sanction shall be given by that Government or authority which would have been competent to remove the public servant from his office at the time when the offence was alleged to have been committed.
The appellant contended that by an order communicated by letter dated 27 4 1956 (subsequently reiterated in letter dr. 23 1 1963) made under rule 10 the Engineer in Chief had empowered all Chief Engineers in Military Engg.
Service to make first appointments and that the operation of the said order was preserved by the saving clause in rule 34(1) of the 1965 Rules.
The appellant further contended that the fetter placed on the power given to the Chief Engineers in the matter of removal or dismissal of Class III servants operates only in case of persons appointed by the Engineer in Chief and not where he was appointed by the Chief Engi neer of a Command.
In the present case, the respondent was appointed not by Engineer in Chief but by the Chief Engi neer, Western Command.
The respondent contended that the order dated 27 4 1956 expressly delegates the power of making first appointments only to the Chief Engineers of the three commands then in existence and of the 'other departments specified therein.
In 1956, when the order was made there were no zonal Chief Enginers, which 594 came into existence in December, 1962 as a class apart working under the overall administrative control of the Chief Engineers of Commands.
A general delegation of the power in favour of the Chief Engineers of Commands as a class cannot by any reckoning amount to a delegation in favour of the Zonal Engineers also working under the control of the Chief Engineers of Commands.
Secondly, the letter dated 23 1 1963 was not issued under the signature of the Engineer in Chief nor can it be construed as a delegation of the power of appointment under rule 10.
Alternatively, the power delegated by the Engineer in Chief to the Chief Engi neers was a qualified one inasmuch as no power was given to them to dismiss or remove a Government servant of Class III service.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: (1 ) Unless a different intention appears the power to appoint to an office includes the power to dis miss or remove from that office as provided in section 16 of General Clauses Act.
The post which the respondent was holding is a post of Class III service and the members of the service are governed by Central CiVil Services (Classi fication, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965.
1965 Rules repeal the earlier 1952 Rules and any notification or orders issued thereunder in so far as they were inconsistent with the 1965 rules.
Under rule 10, appointments to Class III and Class IV Civilian Service are to be made by the officers empowered by the Engineer in Chief.
Thus the appointing authority is competent to delegate the power of appointment.
[596 B, C, G H, 597D] (2) A perusal of the letter dated 27 4 1956 communicat ing the order of the Engineer in Chief shows that it is addressed to the Chief Engineers, Southern Command, Eastern Command and Western Command.
On the date of this letter there were only 3 Commands; two Commands were created subse quently.
There were no Zones or Zonal Chief Engineers at that time.
Therefore, the Chief Engineers to whom the powers have been delegated under this letter could only be the Chief Engineers of the Commands as a class and it would cover Chief Engineers of the Commands which were subsequent ly created.
But it would not include the Chief Engineers of Zone.
Zonal Chief Engineers have, to work under the Command and technical control of Chief Engineers of Com mands.
Zonal Chief Engineers are a class apart from the Chief Engineers of Commands.
They are under the administra tive control of the Chief Engineers of Command.
Thus the delegation is to the Chief Engineers of Commands and not to the Zonal Chief Engineers.
[600 A B, F H 601 A B] (3) The letter dated 23 1 1963 is not signed by the Engineer in Chief.
It appears to have been signed by some other person for Engineer in Chief.
Nor does it purport to have been issued pursuant to any separately passed order of the Engineer in Chief expressly delegating the powers of appointment to posts in Class III service under Rule 10.
There is nothing in the letter to show that the delegation was to the Zonal Chief Engineers.
On the contrary, para 8 of the letter talks of the Command Chief Engineers.
The way in which the Engineer in Chief has construed the letter is not relevant.
[601 G H, 602AB] (4) Brig.
Naresh Prasad, Zonal Chief Engineer was not competent to remove the respondent and as such, the order sanctioning the prosecution of the respondent was bad in law.
[602 C]
