The respondent was serving as an Accountant in 'the Electricity Department of the former State of Hyderabad.
On the reorganisation of the States in pursuance of the , he was allotted to the new State of Mysore with effect from 1st November, 1956.
Option was given to the respondent to continue in the Government serv ice or to opt to the BOard.
On 1st October, 1957, the re spondent opted to the service under the Board and ceased to be an employee of the Government with effect from that date.
In 1960, the Board framed Recruitment and Promotion Regula tion in exercise of its powers conferred under section 79(c) of the Indian Electricity Supply Act, 1948.
The regulations were subsequently amended on 16.12.1966.
The amended The regulations prescribed that the posts of Accounts Super intendents were to be filled on the basis of seniority cum merit on their having passed SAS examination.
In December, 1966, some persons junior to the respondent were promoted on their having passed the SAS examination, while promotion was denied to the respondent as he had not passed the examina tion.
After the respondent 's representations were rejected he filed a Writ Petition.
The Single Judge dismissed the Petition.
The Division Bench refused to throw out the Writ Petition on the ground of delay.
It found on consideration of the two resolution of the Board one dated 19.5.1969 and another dated 5.1.1970 that the respondent being an allottee was exempted from complying with the requirements of passing the examination.
Allowing the appeal.
HELD: (1) The Division Bench rightly refused to deny relief to the respondent on the ground of delay and laches.
[510 B] (2) Section 79 of the Act empowers the Board to make regulations not inconsistent with the Act and rules made thereunder to provide for all or any of the matters referred to hi cls.
(a) to (k) of the section.
Sub section
(c) empowers the Board to make regulations regarding the duties of offi cers and servants of the Board and their salaries, allow ances and other conditions of service.
By virtue of the said powers the Board framed Mysore State Electricity Board Recruitment and Promotion of Employees of the Board Regula tions, 1960.
The minimum qualification prescribed is pass ing of SAS examination.
The resolution.
of the Board dated 19.5.1969 merely provides that the candidates appointed to the Government Board services for the first time after 1st November, 1956, must pass the department examination for purposes of earning increments and promotion.
The said resolution does not deal with cases of allottees.
It is silent about allottees and, therefore, it is not possible to infer from that resolution that the allottees were exempted from passing the departmental examination.
In any case, the passing of the resolution cannot have the effect of relax ing statutory regulations.
Apart from that by the subse quent resolution of 1970, the Board made it absolutely clear that the SAS examination had to be passed.
[510 C D, G H, 511 E F]
