section 6(17) of the Madras Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Act, 1951 defines a temple as "temple" means a place by whatever designation known, used as a place of public religious worship, and dedication to, or for the benefit of or used as of right by, the Hindu Community or any section thereof, as a place of public religious worship.
The Deputy Commissioner, in a proceeding u/s 57 of Madras Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Act, 1951 and the Commissioner on appeal held that an ancient temple founded about 400 years ago known as Varadaraj Venkataraman Temple at Gurpur in Mangalore Taluk in Karnataka as a 'Public Temple '.
But in the suit No. DS.
106/1961 instituted by the appellant trustees of the temple for a declaration that the temple was a private temple and not a temple as defined in section 6(17) or in the alternative that it was a denominational or sectional temple belonging to the Goud Saraswat Brahmin Community of Gurpur, the Subordinate judge South Kanara, held on the evidence that this was a denominational or sectional temple belonging to the Goud Saraswat Community and allowed the alternative declaration.
The High Court on appeal found that this was a temple as defined in section 6(17) of the Act and taking a different view of the evidence held that the temple was a place of religious worship dedicated to and used as of right by the general Hindu Community and was thus a public temple.
On appeal by certificate the Court, HELD: (1) It is now well settled that "the mere fact of the public having been freely admitted to the temple cannot mean that Courts should readily infer therefrom dedication to the public.
The value of such public user as evidence of dedication depends on the circumstances which give strength to the inference that the user was as of right." [635 B C] Bihar State Board Religious Trust, Patna vs Mahant Sri Biseshwar Das, (689) referred to.
(2) In the instant case the circumstances disclosed in evidence do not support the inference that Hindus generally used the temple as a place of worship as of right.
The evidence is to the effect (i) that the temple was founded by 37 Goud Saraswat Brahmin families of Gurpur, (ii) that the trustee managing the temple belonged always to the members of said community, (iii) that the lended properties owned by the temple had all been endowed by members of the Community, (iv) that none of the witnesses claimed a right of ownership in the temple and the small sevas were voluntary, (v) that it was the members of the Goud Saraswat Brahmin Community who were allowed to participate in the more important cere monies.
[634 B D; 635D] (3) The High Court 's finding that "numerous endowment" have been made by Hindus not belonging to Goud Saraswat Brahmin Community, is not subpotted by the evidence in the case.
In the context of the Award (Ext.
A 13) the term general body mentioned therein could only refer to the members 633 of the Goud Saraswat Brahmin Community and not to the Hindu Community generally, because the proceeding concluded by the decree was confined to the members of the Community.
[635 A B]
