According to section 2(0) of the Monopolies & Restric tive Trade Practices Act a "restrictive trade practice" means inter alia a trade practice which has, or may have, the effect of preventing, distorting or restricting competi tion in any manner.
The appellant, who was a manufacturer of consumer goods such as soaps and toilet preparations, entered into agreements with redistribution stockists for the wholesale distribution of its products.
Clause 5 of the agreement, inter alia, provides that a stockist shall keep and maintain adequate stocks and shall carry out instructions and direc tions given by the appellant.
He is prohibited from charg ing anything more than the stipulated maximum resale price.
The last part of the clause provides that "the redistribu tion stockist shall purchase and accept from the company such stock as the company shall, at its discretion, send to the redistribution stockist for fulfilling its obligations under this agreement".
Clause 9 prohibits the redistribution stockist from re booking or in any way conveying, transport ing or despatching parts of stocks of the products received by him outside the town except when he was so expressly directed in writing by the appellant.
He shall also, when ever so required by the appellant, make available from the stocks such part as the appellant directs him to do.
On a complaint made to the Monopolies & Restric tive Trade Practices Commission by one of the stockists the Commission, after examining cls.
5 and 9 of the impugned agreement, held that the practice of resale price mainte nance and full line forcing to which the original el.
5 related, shall be discontinued and shall not be repeated.
It directed deletion of the last sentence of cl. 5 and declared cl. 9 as void.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court.
HELD: The Commission was right in reframing cl. 5 in the way it did.
Deletion of the last sentence of cl. 5 was essential to prevent possible misuse of the appellant 's power so as to regulate the prices contrary to the express provisions in the clause.
(a) The last part of cl. 5 placed the redistri bution stockist at the mercy of the appellant which could dictate to him what amounts of various commodities he "shall purchase and accept from the company".
It also empowered the appellant to allocate send to the redistri bution stockist only what it "shall, at its discretion, send to the redistribution stockist for fulfilling its obliga tions" under the agreement.
[464 G] (b) The word "shall" used in the clause did not bind down the exercise of the appellant 's discretion by reference to any requirements of the consumers in a particu lar area in which the stockist might sell.
The stockist was bound to accept and carry out the appellant 's decisions.
[464 H] 2(a) The contention that though the clauses gave power to the appellant to regulate trade, in practice they did not operate as restrictions, is not well founded.
It is not possible to isolate the terms of a contract from the practice.
The appellant did not intend that the clauses in the agreement would be treated as 456 dead letter.
Although the practice of imposing restrictions under such clauses and the practice of introducing such clauses are separate practices, introduction of a clause like cl. 5 is itself a trade practice.
Moreover, even if the power given in such wide terms was not meant to be exercised unreasonably, its presence in the agreement was a needless surplusage which could be used to impede freedom of competition and trade and this made it objectionable.
[465 A] (b) Inasmuch as the introduction of clauses in an agree ment taken by itself, is a practice it would be specious reasoning to separate the clauses in the agreement from action under the agreement and then urge that the clauses are innocuous and should not be modified.
[460 H; 461 A] 3.
From the definition of "restrictive trade practice" it is clear that if the introduction of the clause in itself is a trade practice and could be used to prevent, distort or restrict competition "in any manner", it could be struck down.
The definition of "trade practice" is wide enough to include any "trade practice" if it is in relation to the carrying on of a trade.
If the result of introduc tion of a clause is to restrict trade it would be struck by the provisions of the Act.
[461 E G] 4(a) Each type of business has its peculiarities, its own mode of operation, the special features relating to the market for it and the requirements of distribution of par ticular goods, to secure a just and equitable distribution consistently with the maintenance of freedom of competition so that prices are not artificially pushed up.
[462 G] (b) The Telco case is distinguishable from the present on the ground that in that case the manufacturer who had the monopoly of special quality trucks, had to provide specially trained and skilled personnel with special equipment and tools for their maintenance and running.
Therefore, the agreements did not restrict trade or curtail competi tion.
[462 H] (c) In the instant case, the appellant could compel the stockist to buy the goods manufactured by it irrespective of whether the stockist wanted the goods or not.
The appel lant was under no obligation to render any service for the maintenance of the goods supplied.
Secondly, the present is not a case in which the terms of the agreement were required to be explained by the facts to which they were meant to be applied.
[463 C D] Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co., Ltd. vs The Registrar of Restrictive Trade Agreements ; distin guished.
If it was clear from the agreement that prices lower than the "maximum re sale price stipulated" might be charged by the stockist, then, there was no reason why it was necessary to clarify by circulars, what the stockist was free to do under the agreement.
Even if the appellant 's practice of issuing circulars was established, it did not justify retention of cl. 5 in a form which could be used to compel the stockist to act at the appellant 's behests.
The last part of cl. 5 made it necessary for the stockist to purchase such goods and in such combination as the appellant might decide.
Hence it would be struck by section 33(1)(b) of the Act.
[465 C] (b) Inasmuch as.
the original el. 5 gave the stockist the discretion to sell at lower than maximum resale prices the agreement was not struck by section 33 (1 ) (b).
But, the deletion of the sentence was essential to prevent possible misuse of the appellant 's power by resort to it.
[465 G] The Commission was justified in declaring cl. 9 as void and inoperative.
[465 H] 7(a) The power to impose restrictions falling under section 38 had to be justified by the appellant by actual proof of public interest which could not be better served without it [466 A].
(b) Clause 9 gave the appellant an unreasonably wide power of deciding what is actually fair and equitable distribution which is more a part of the duty of governmen tal authorities entrusted with powers of rationing such consumer goods in public interest.
Before any question of reasonableness of a power to 457 ration any goods is entrusted to any person or authority those goods must be shown to be scarce or in short supply and evidence establishing such a need has not been shown to exist in this case.
[466 F G] (c) The appellant was wrong in its contention that in holding cl. 9 to be invalid, the purpose of "equitable distribution" was overlooked by the Commission.
This sup posed limitation did not restrict the appellant 's power to decide what to distribute.
The appellant was left to itself to decide what is "equitable distribution".
The clause conferred too wide a power and is unreasonable.
[469 H] 9.
Under section 55 an appeal lies to the Supreme Court only on one of the grounds mentioned in section 100, C.P.C.
It is necessary for the parties to formulate questions of law that arise for decision.
[467 A] 10(a) The plea against use of "per se" rule referred to by the appellant means that on the assumption that a restriction is illegal in itself should not be made without examining its impact upon the particular trade involved.
On the other hand the "rule of reason" envisages consideration of facts of each case so as to determine the context in which the restraint was imposed.
[468 C] Board of Trade of the City of Chicago vs United States of America (b) In Telco case this Court accepted the correctness of the approach that no bald or simple test should be adopted in judging the legality of a restraint upon trade.
Such a view has nothing to do with rules _relating to inter pretation of documents used in finding out the effect and intent of words used in a document.
Whenever a court deter mines the meaning and effect of the words of a rule or a clause in an agreement it does not adopt what is termed as "per se" rule.
All that the court does in such a case is to interpret the clause, the effect of which may become obvious on a bare determination of the meaning or may be seen from other evidence.
Where that effect is not obvious, evidence may be led to show how the language used is actually applied to the facts to which it was meant to apply.
[468 D F] In the instant case, the Commission has correctly ar rived at the conclusion that the clauses were unreasonable and illegal after taking into account the relevant fac tors.
The rules of reason applicable to a case like the present are (i) the meaning of the impugned clause or clauses in an agreement must be determined according to law and (ii) the possible effects of such a clause upon competition in the trade to be regulated must be determined.
[469 B C] (c) Consideration of extraneous evidence is not required at all when the practice complained of is the introduction of clauses conferring wide powers, Which may be used to impose restrictions contrary to the Act.
In such a case the introduction of clauses constitute restrictive practice.
Evidence of what is actually practised could only be rele vant for purposes other than a determination of the meaning and the effect which follows logically or reasonably from such determination.
[469 F G] (d) No oral evidence could be led to adduce the meaning of the clauses in the agreement in view of sections 91 and 92 of the Evidence Act.
Section 92 proviso (6) is not applicable to the present case.
[464 C] (e) It is unnecessary to admit extraneous evidence as to the absence of distortion of competition.
The probability of the effect is only part of the rule of reason to be applied where extraneous evidence is admissible.
[470 B] (f) It is not possible to assume public benefit from a mere declaration of intention to exercise a power so as to benefit the public.
On the evidence adduced it was not shown that this power was necessary so as to benefit the public.
[470 D] (g) Actual benefit to the public is a question of fact on which findings cannot be reopened unless some error of law is revealed.
No error of law in assessing evidence was disclosed.
E] 458 (h) The confusion which may be created by using such terms as "per rule which could be applied to describe prac tices developed in other countries with different statutory provisions, should be avoided.
[469 D E] 10.
Proceedings before the Commission ' are maintainable at the instance of a complainant whose motives in making the complaint are quite irrelevant.
All that the Commission, and, on appeal, this Court, has to examine is whether a practice by a company of introducing clauses complained of in the agreements with the stockists, amounted to a restric tive trade practice.
[460 D]
