Accused, No. 1 though in her thirties had entered a period of premature menopause.
She was anxious to get a child which could only happen if her menstrual cycle was restored.
She used to consult quacks and Mantriks in order to help.get a child.
Accused No.1 's mother was accredited with sixth sense in the matter of discovery of treasure trove.
She had oracled that a treasure trove lay buried I in accused No. 1 's house underneath the Pimpal tree.
The Pimpal tree is believed to be the haunt of Munjaba, who is supposed to be the spirit of an unmarried Brahmin boy.
Accused NOs.
1 and 2 consulted quacks who prescribed that virgins should be offered as sacrifice to Munjaba and to propitiato the deity, blood from their private parts be sprinkled on the food offered by way of 'Naivedya '.
Five small girls about 10 years of age, a year old infant and.
4 women in their mid thirties were found murdered between 14 11 1972 and 4 1 1974 in a village called Manawat.
The. murders of these 10 females showed significant similarities in pattern and conception.
The time and place chosen for crime, preference for females as victims, the nature of injuries caused to them, the strange possibility that the private parts of some of the victims were cut in order to extract blood, the total absence of motive for killing these very girls and women, the clever attempt to dodge the police and then to put them on a false scent and the extreme bru tality surroundings the crimes gone to the case an eerie appearance.
Eighteen persons were put up for trial before the Ses sion Judge for the 10 murders.
Two out of these persons were tendered pardon and were examined in the case as ap provers.
Accused No. 6 died during the trial.
The Sessions Judge acquitted accused 4, 5, 7, 8 and 13 to 16.
Accused No. 1 and 2 were convicted under section 302 read with section 120 B and section 34 of the Penal Code.
Accused No. 1, 2 and 3 were sentenced to death while accused No. 9 to 12 were sentenced to life imprisonment.
The matter went to the High Court in the form of various proceedings.
The High Court acquitted accused No. 1 and 2 holding that the offence of conspiracy which formed the gravamen of the charge against them was not proved.
Since the charge of conspiracy failed and since it was a common ground that accused No. 1 and 2 had not taken any direct part in the commission of the murders, the High Court held that they were entitled to acquittal on all the charges.
The High Court dismissed the appeal filed by accused No. 3 holding that he was responsi ble for the first 4 murders and confirmed his conviction under section 302 read with section 34 as also the sentence of death imposed upon him.
The High Court dismissed the State 's appeal against acquittal of accused No. 4 and 5 but allowed the State 's appeal and enhanced the sentence of accused No. 9 to 12 to death.
Criminal Appeal No. 437 of 1976 was filed by accused Nos.
9 to 12.
Criminal Appeal No. 438 of 1976 was filed by accused No. 3 and Criminal Appeal No. 441 of 1976 was filed by the State of Maharashtra against acquittal of accused 1%s. 1 and 2.
The Court acquitted accused No. 12 by giving him the benefit of doubt and while dismissing the three appeals.
637 HELD: (1) There is no antithesis between section 133 and illustration (b) to section 114 'of the Evidence Act because the illustration only says that the Gourt may presume a certain state of affairs under section 114 of the Evidence Act The Court may presume the existence of any fact which it thinks likely to have happened regard ' being had to the common course of natural events, human conduct and public and private business in their relation to the facts of theparticular casee.
Under section 133 of the Evidence Act, an accomplice shall be acompetent wireess against an accused person and a conviction is not illegal merely because it proceeds upon the uncorroborated testimony of an accomplice: [643 B C] (2) Though an accomplice is,a competent witness and though a conviction may lawfully rest upon his uncorroborat ed testimony yet the court is entitled to presume and may be justified in presuming in the generality of cases that no reliance can be placed on the evidence of an accomplice unless that evidence is corroborated in material particu lars, by which is meant that there has to be some independ ent evidence tending to incriminate the particular accused in the commission of the crime.
1643 C D] (3) It is hazardous as a matter of prudence to proceed on the evidence a self confessed criminal.
The risk involved in convicting accused on the testimony of an accomplice unless it is corroborated in material particulars is so real and potent that what during the early development of law was felt to be a matter of prudence has been elevated by judi cial experience into a requirement or rule of lave.
What has hardened into a rule of law is not that the conviction is illegal if it proceeds upon the uncorroborated testimony of an accomplice but that the rule of corroboration must be present to the mind an the Judge and that corroboration may be dispensed with only if the peculiar circumstances of the case make it safe to dispense with it.
[643 ,E F] King vs Baskerville [19161 2 K.B. 653; Rameshwar vs State of Rajasthan ; , Bhuboni Saku vs The King 76 I.A. 147; The State of Bihar vs Basawan Singh ; and Ravinder Singh vs State of Haryana ; relied on.
(4) It is true that an approver has real incentive to speak out his mind after tender of pardon but where it is impossible to reconcile his earlier statements with his later assertions his evidence has to be left out of consid eration.
It is one thing to say that an approvers statement cannot be discarded for the mere reason that he did not disclose the entire story in his police statement and quite another to accept an approver in spite of contradictions which cast a veil of doubt over his involvement of others.
[646 B C] Madan Mohan Lal vs State of Punjab [1970] 2 S.C.C. 733 relied on.
Tahsildar 's case [1959] Supp.
2 S.C.R. 875, distin guished.
(5) The failure to comply with section 164(3) Cr.
P.C. with the High Court circulars will not render the confessions inadmissible in evidence.
Relevancy and admissibility of evidence have to be determined in accordance with the provi sions of the Evidence Act.
[651 E] (6) Under section 29 of the Evidence Act, if a confession is otherwise relevant, it does not become irrelevant merely because, inter alia, the accused was not warned that he was not bound to make it and the evidence of it might be given against him.
If, therefore a confession does not violate any one of the conditions operative under sections 24 to 28 of the Evidence Act, it will be admissible in evidence.
But as in respect of any other admissible evidence oral or documen tary, so in the case of confessional statements which are otherwise admissible.
the Court has still to consider wheth er they can be accepted as true.
If the facts and circum stances surrounding the making of a confession appear to cast a doubt on the veracity or voluntariness of the confes sion, the Court may refuse to act upon the confession even if it is admissible in evidence.
[651 E G] (7) A strict and faithful compliance with section 164 of the Code and with the instructions issued by the High Court affords in a large measure the guarantee 638 that the confession is voluntary.
The failure to observe the safeguards prescribed therein are in practice calculated to impair the evidentiary value of the confessional state ments.
In the instant case no reliance can be placed on any of the contesstons.
Apart from the cofessions of the two ap provers, all others were retracted, which further cripples their evidentiary value.
[657 H] (8) The imperative language of sub section (2) leaves no room for doubt that after recording the finding of guilt and the order of conviction, the.
Court is under an obligation to hear the accused on the question of sentence unless it releases him on probation of good conduct or after admoni tion under section 360.
The social compulsions, the pressure of poverty, the retributive instinct to seek an extra legal remedy to a sense of being wronged, the lack of means to be educated in the difficult art of an honest firing the par entage, the heredity all these and similar other consider ations can, hopefully and legitimately, tilt the scales on the property of sentence.
The mandate of section 235 (2) must, therefore, be obeyed in its letter and spirit.
[657 F H] (9) The failure on the part of the Court, which convicts an accused, to hear him on the question of sentence does not necessarily entail a remand to that Court in order to afford to the accused an opportunity to be heard on the question of sentence.
[658 A B] Santa Singh vs State of Punjab , ex plained.
(10) The Court, on convicting an accused, must unques tionably hear him on the question of sentence.
But if, for any reason, it omits to do so and the accused makes a griev ance of it in the higher court, it would be open to that Court to remedy the breach by giving a hearing to the ac cused on the question of sentence.
That opportunity has to be real and effective, which means that the accused must be permitted to adduce before the Court all the data which he desires to adduce on the question of sentence.
The accused may exercise that right either by instructing his counsel to make oral submissions to the Court or he may, on affidavit or otherwise, place in writing before the Court whatever he desires to place before it on the question of sentence.
The Court may, in appropriate cases, have to adjourn the matter order to give to the accused sufficient time to produce the necessary data and to make his contention on the question of sentence.
For a proper and effective implementation of the provision contained in section 235(2) it is not always necessary to remand the matter to the Court which has recorded the conviction.
Remand is an exception, not the rule, and ought, therefore, be avoided as far as possible in the interests of expeditious, though fair disposal of cases.
[658 B D, F] Santa Singh vs State of Punjab , distinguished.
GOSWAMI, I. (Concurring) : Whenever an appeal court finds that the mandate of section 235(2) Cr. P.C. for a hearing on sentence has not been complied with it becomes the duty of the Court to offer to the accused an adequate opportunity to produce before it whatever material he chooses in whatever reasonable way possible.
Courts should as far us possible avoid remands when the accused can secure a full benefit of section 235 (2) Cr.
P.C. in the appeal court.
[661 C D]
