Under Section 43 of the Orissa Land Reforms Act, the Revenue Officer determines the ceiling surplus and on the termination of the proceedings thereunder, the Revenue Officer u/s 44(1) confirms the draft statement; u/s 44(2) an appeal lies to the prescribed authority against the order under sub section (1) and subject to results of such appeal, if any, order of the Revenue Officer shall be final.
Sec tion 58 provides a right of appeal to any person aggrieved by an order passed under any of the Sections enumerated in subsection (1).
Sub section (1) of section 59 provides that the Collector may revise any order passed in appeal by any officer below the rank of a Collector under this Act.
Section 59(1) also empowers the Board of Revenue to revise any order passed by the Collector.
Sub section (2) enables the Collector or the Board of Revenue sue motu or on the application of the party concerned call for and examine the record in respect of any proceedings under the Act and modify, annual reverse or remit for reconsideration.
In the proceedings u/s 38 of the Act the plea of the respondent landlord that there was a partition between him and his sons was rejected by the Revenue Officer who deter mined the surplus extent as 12.08 standard acres.
The appeal preferred before the Sub Divisional Officer having failed, the respondent filed a revision before the Additional District Magistrate.
The Additional Magistrate held that the appellate orders u/s 44 are final and that no revision lay to him.
The writ petition filed against this order filed by the respondent was allowed by the Orissa High Court by its order dated 15 7 1976 holding that the Additional Magistrate had powers to revise an order of the appellate authority passed u/s 44 by virtue of the powers conferred on him under section 59of the Act.
Dismissing the appeal by certificate, the Court, HELD: (i) The language of section 59(1) of the Orissa Land Reforms Act is wide enough to enable the Collector to revise any order including an appellate order under section 44 of the Act.
[561 B] (ii) In applying the rule of harmonious construction with a view to give effect to the intention of the legisla ture the court will not be justified in putting a construc tion which would restrict the revisionary jurisdiction of the Collector and the Board of Revenue.
[560E] In the instant case, the Act is of expropratory nature and the determination of the excess lands is done by the Revenue Officer.
The legislature intended that any error or irregularity should be rectified by higher authorities like the Collector and the Board of Revenue.
[560E] J. K. Cotton Spinning & Weaving Mills Co. Ltd. vs State of U.P. & Ors. ; held not applicable.
The Bengal Immunity Company Ltd. vs The State of Bihar & Ors.
[1955] 2 S.C R. 603 referred to.
(iii) It cannot be said that there is any conflict between section 44(1) and 8.
58 inasmuch as section 44(1) provides that the order of the Revenue Officer shall be final, sub ject to the result of appeal u/s 44(2), while no such final ity 557 is mentioned in the case of an appeal u/s 58.
The provision as to finality u/s 44(2) is provided for so that in the absence of the aggrieved party proceeding further in the matter, the consequences of the vesting of surplus lands u/s 45, the preparation of the Compensation Assessment Roll, the settlement of surplus lands etc. can be proceeded with.
[559 D F] (iv) The amendment to 8.
44(3) by the Amendment Act of 1975 making it clear that a right to revision is provided for orders passed u/s 44(2) does not make any difference.
The amendment could not mean that section 44(2) as it originally stood did not provide for power of revision to the Collec tor ' u/s 59.
[560 A B]
