The appellant a Public Limited Company filed its Income Tax Return relating to the assessment years 1957 58 and 1959 60 under the Income Tax Act, 1922.
The Income Tax Officer passed assessment orders on 16 4 1959 and on 30 3 1961 respectively in respect of the two years.
Certain depreciation was allowed by the Income Tax Officer for both the years.
On 5 10 1965.
the Income Tax Officer addressed a letter to the appellant stating that there had been a mistake in the calculation of the depreciation allowance.
The appellant was asked by that letter if it had any objec tion to.
the rectification of the mistake in the calculation of the depreciation amounts.
for the above mentioned two years.
On 2nd February, 1966, the Income Tax Officer ad dressed a letter under section 147(a) of the Income Tax Act, 1961 alleging that the income of the appellant had escaped assessment for failure of the appellant to disclose all materials facts.
The appellant in his reply stated that the depreciation was calculated by the Income Tax authorities and there was no failure on the part of the appellant in disclosing all the facts.
Thereafter, the Income Tax Offi cer issued the notices on 4 3 1966 stating that he had reasons to believe that the income of the appellant charge able to tax for the assessment years in question had escaped assessment within the to meaning of section 147 of the 1961 Act.
The appellant was called upon to furnish fresh return.
The appellant challenged the said notices by filing a Writ Petition in the High Court.
According to the appellant there was no omission or failure on its part to disclose fully and truly all material facts necessary for the assess ment; that all material facts were placed before the assess ing authority; and that the fact that initial depreciation on the new assets had been allowed was also on the record of the department.
It was further contended that if there was any oversight on the part of the Income Tax Officer the appellant could not be held responsible.
The respondent filed an affidavit in the High Court contending that the appellant did not disclose in the return that initially depreciation in respect of certain items of capital assets had been allowed in the past and that the same should be taken into account while calculating the depreciation allow able for the assessment years in question.
The High Court dismissed the Writ Petition on the ground that there was an omission or failure on the part of the appellant to disclose truly and fully the fact that the initial depreciation had been allowed in respect of items of capital assets in ques tion during the previous years.
Under section 10 of the 1922 Act an assessee is liable to pay tax under the head "Profits and Gains of Business, Profession or Vocation, carried on by him".
Such profits or gains shall be computed after making a number of allowances.
Those allowances included the allowances provided by section 10(2)(vi) which deals with depreciation under section 147(a) of the Income Tax Act, 1961.
if the Income Tax Officer has reason to believe that the reason of the omission or failure on the part of the assessee to disclose fully and truly all material facts necessary for his assessment, income charge able to tax has escaped assessment for that year he may subject to the provisions of sections 148 to 151 assess or reassess such income or recompute the loss or the deprecia tion allow 93 ance as the case may be.
According to section 148 of 1961 Act before making the assessment, reassessment, or recompu tation under section 147, the income Tax Officer shall serve on the assessee a notice containing all or any of the re quirements which may be included in a notice under section 149(1).
The Income Tax Officer has also before issuing such notice to record his reasons for doing so.
Section 149 prescribes a time limit for the notice.
The time limit in respect of section 147(a) is 8 years.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: 1.
Two conditions have to be satisfied before an Income Tax Officer acquires jurisdiction to issue notice under section 148 beyond the period of 4 years but within the period of 8 years: (i) The Income Tax Officer must have reason to believe that income chargeable to tax has escaped assessment; (ii) He must have reason to believe that such income has escaped assessment by reason of the omission or failure on the part of the assessee to disclose fully and truly material facts necessary for his assessment for that year.
The duty which is cast upon the assessee is to make a true and full disclosure of the primary facts at the time of the original assessment.
The duty of the assessee in any ease does not extend beyond making a true and full disclosure of primary facts.
Once he has done that his duty ends.
It is for the Income Tax Officer to draw the correct inference from the primary facts.
It is no responsibility of the assessee to advise the Income Tax Officer with regard to the inference which he should draw from the primary facts.
If an Income Tax Officer draws an inference which appears subsequently to be erroneous mere change of opinion with regard to that inference would not justify initiation of action for reopening assessment.
[98 E G, H, 99 A B] Income Tax Officer vs Lakhmani Mewal Dass, followed.
What facts are material and necessary for assessment will differ from case to case.
Calcutta Discount Co. vs Income Tax Officer, , followed.
The Income Tax return has to be filled in form, No. C under rule 19 of the Income Tax Rules, 1922.
Part V of that form deals with depreciation.
The said part requires a number of columns to be filled in by the assessee.
It has not been suggested that any of the information furnished or any of the particulars given in those columns by the appellant Company were factually incorrect.
When Income Tax Officer relies upon his own records for determining the amount of depreciation 'and makes.
a mistake in doing so, the respon sibility for the mistake cannot be ascribed to an omission or failure on the part of the assessee.
[99 D 100 B D, E F] Commission of Income Tax vs Bhanji Lavli, fol lowed.
(Taxes are the price that is paid for civilisation.
It is essential that those who are entrusted with the task of calculating and realising that price should familiarise themselves with the relevant provisions and become well versed with the law on the subject.
Any remissness on their part can only be at the cost of the national exchequer and must necessarily result in loss of revenue.
At the same time, it has to be borne in mind that the policy of law is that there must be a point of finality in all legal proceed ings).
