Section 136 of the City of Bangalore Municipal Corpora tion Act, 1949 provides that every person who erects, exhib its etc., over any land or structure any advertisement or who displays any advertisement to public view in any place whether public or private, shall pay on every advertisement a tax levied by the Corporation.
Clause (e) of the third proviso to the section enacts that no such tax shall be levied on any advertisement which is exhibited within any railway station or upon any wall or other property of a railway, except any portion of the surface of such wall or property fronting any street.
An advertisement facing a public street was put up by the appellant adjacent to the compound fencing of a railway station but within the railway premises.
The Municipal authorities levied tax on the advertisement.
The appel lant 's writ petition challenging the levy was dismissed by a single judge of the High Court and this decision was upheld by a division bench.
On appeal to this Court it was contended that the ex pression "fronting any street" occurring in the proviso qualified the railway property and not the advertisement.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: 1. (a) Since the advertisements were fronting public street and were exposed to public view.
were not covered by the exemption contemplated by the proviso and were, therefore exigible to tax.
[677 D] (b) The word "fronting" qualifies not the wall or property mentioned in the latter part of the proviso but "advertisement".
The test laid down by the proviso is that the Court has to see if the advertisement affixed whether inside the compound of the railway or not fronts the street.
If it fronts the street or faces the street, even if it is within the railway premises it will be exigible to tax.
[674 D & F] (c) The word "fronting" has been used in the proviso not in any legal technical sense but it ordinary parlance.
It is not a term of art but one that signifies its meaning according to common notions.
[675 D] The Corporation of Madras vs Messrs The Oriental Mercan tile Company Ltd., Madras, and Ware Urban District Council vs Gaunt & Others.
[1960] 3 All E.R. 778, 787 distinguished.
The view of the single Judge that since the public street to which the advertisements were facing, ran along the railings with no other obstacle between the advertise ment and the public view, it could reasonably be said that they were fronting public street is correct.
On the other hand, the view of the Division Bench that the proviso would only apply to advertisements of such hoardings whose owner ship lay with the railway or which belonged to the rail way is not borne out by el.
The question of exigibili ty to tax is relatable not to the ownership of the hoardings but their situs.
[676 G H] 671
