The appellant was convicted along with two other accused under section 302 I.P.C. and sentenced to death while the other two were sentenced to life imprisonment.
In appeal to this Court against the orders of the High Court confirming the death sentence imposed, the special leave was granted limit ed to sentence.
Allowing the Criminal Appeal No. 337 of 1976 in part and modifying the death sentence to one of life imprisonment, the Court, HELD: (1) The object of section is to give a fresh opportunity to the convicted person to bring to the notice of the court such circumstances as may help the court in awarding an appropriate sentence have regard to the per sonal, social and other circumstances of the case.[712 D] (2) Failure to give an opportunity under s" 235(2) Cr.
P.C. will not affect the conviction under any circum stance.
In a murder case where the charge is made out the limited question is as between the two sentences prescribed under the Penal Code.
If the minimum sentence is imposed.
question of providing an opportunity under section 235 would not arise.
[712 F] (3) The hearing contemplated by section 235(2) is not con fined merely to hearing oral submissions but extend giving an opportunity to the prosecution and the accused to place before the court facts and materials of sentence and;if they are contested by either side then to produce evidence for the purpose of establishing the same.
[712 G] Santa Singh vs State of Punjab A.I.R. 1976 S C 2386, reiter ated.
(4) To save time and expense and help produce prompt justice, it may be more appropriate for the appellate court to give an opportunity to the parties in terms of section 235(2) to produce the materials they wish to adduce instead of going through the exercise of sending the case back to the trial court.
1713 A] In the instant case, the Court modified the death sen tence to one of life imprisonment in view of the facts: (i) The death sentence has been inflicted nearly two years ago, and the agony of such a sentence has been an exCruciating experience suffered by the convict for a long period; (ii) The appellant had two other assailants with him who have been awarded life imprisonment; (iii) There was no motive for the appellant to kill the innocent child; and (iv) The other circumstances present indicate that the ends of justice would be met by awarding life imprisonment.
[713 G E] E. Annamma vs State of Andhra Pradesh ; , referred to
