The Orissa Taxation (On goods carried by Roads or Inland Waterways) Act 7 of 1959 and the Orissa Taxation (On Goods carried by Road or Inland Waterways) Validation Act 18 of 1962 were struck down by this Court on 10 8 1967 as invalid and it was held that the respondents were not entitled to recover any tax from the appellants under the aforesaid Acts.
On March 26, 1968, the Orissa Taxation (On Goods carried by Roads or Inland Waterways) Act 8 of 1968 was passed after obtaining the previous sanction of the Presi dent under article 304 of the Constitution to the moving of the Bill, imposing the same levy which it had unsuccessfully at tempted to levy under the Actor 1959 and to validate under the Act Of 1962.
By section 1(3) of the 1968 Act, the Act was to be deemed to have come into force on April 27, 1959 being the date on which the Act of 1959 had come into force.
Section 27 of the Act provides that notwithstanding the expiry of the Act of 1959 and notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment decree or order of any court, all assessments made; all taxes imposed or realised any liabili ty incurred or any action taken under the, Act of 1959 shall be deemed 10 have been validly made, imposed, incurred or taken under the corresponding provisions of the Act 1968.
The claims of some of the appellants who had asked for refund of the tax collected under the Act of 1962 which was held unconstitutional, having been refused by the Govern ment, they filed writ petitions in the Orissa High Court challenging the validity of the 1968 Act.
The High Court dismissed the writ petitions.
In appeal to this Court by special leave, the Court, HELD: (1) The impugned enactment is a valid exercise of legislative power and is in no sense a fraud on the Consti tution.
Since it is well established that the power to legislate carries with it the power to legislate retrospec tively as much as prospectively, the circumstance that an enactment operates entirely in the past and has no prospec tive life cannot affect the competence of the Legislature to pass the enactment if it falls within the list on which that competence can operate.
As regards the power to pass a validating Act, that power is essentially subsidiary to the legislative competence to pass a law under an appropriate entry of the relevant list.
[718 B E] Khyerbari Tea Co. Ltd. vs State of Assam [1964] 5 S.C.R. 975, applied.
(2) In the instant case, the State Legislature passed an independent enactment in 1968 after complying with the constitutional requirements.
but it gave to that enactment retrospective effect from the date that the 1959 Act had come into force and it created a legal fiction which was permissible for it do, that all actions taken under the Act of '1959 shall be deemed to have been taken under the Act of 1968.
[717 FG] Jawaharmal vs State of Rajasthan ; , not applicable.
(3) If the vice from which an enactment suffers is cured by due compliance with the legal or constitutional require ment, the Legislature has 715 competence to validate the enactment and such validation does not constitute an encroachment on the functions of the judiciary.
The validity of a validating taxing law depends upon whether the legislature possesses the competence over the subject matter of the law; whether in making the valida tion it has removed the defect from which the earlier enact ment suffered and whether it has made due and adequate provision in the validating law for a valid imposition of the tax.
[718 G H] Prithvi Cotton Mills vs Broach Borough Municipality ; Tirath Ram Rajindra Nath vs State of U.P.A.I.R. and Government of Andhra Pradesh vs Hindustan Machine Tools Ltd. (1975) Supp.
SCR 394 referred to.
(4) If any appeal challenging an order of assessment is filed beyond the period of limitation and the authority is satisfied that the appeal could not be filed within limita tion for the reason that the Acts of 1959 and 1962 were held to be unconstitutional, the delay in filing.
the appeal can be condoned under the second proviso to section 12 of the Act of 1968.
If any appeal filed for challenging the order of assessment was withdrawn or not pursued for the reason that the two Acts were held unconstitutional, the authority concerned can pass appropriate orders reviving the appeal.[719 D F] Observation: It is hoped that article 144A. introduced by the 42nd Amendment will engage the prompt attention of the Parliament so that it may, by so that it may, by general con sensus, be so amended as to general consensus, be so amended as to leave to the court itself the duty to decide how large a Bench should decide any particular case.
A court which has large arrears to contend with has now to undertake an unnecessary burden by 7 of its members assembling to decide all sorts of constitutional questions, no matter what their weight or worth.
Since article 13(3) (a) of the Constitution defines "law" to include any Ordinance, Order, bye law, rule, regu lation.
notification etc.
having the force of law, seven Judges of this Court may have to sit for determining any and every question as to the constitutional validity of even orders and notifications issued by the Government, which have the force of law.
This will inevitably cause great inconvenience and undue delay in disposal of cases.
[720 C D]
