The petitioner was convicted for the offence of murder under section 302, I.P.C. and sentenced to death by the Trial Court.
The Judicial Commissioner, Goa confirmed the death sentence in the referred trial under section 374 of the 1898 Code of Criminal Procedure.
Dismissing the special leave petition to appeal, the Court.
HELD: (1) Discretion to choose between the capital sentence and life term under section 354(3) of the 1973 Code of Criminal Procedure is limited.
If the offence has been perpetrated with attendant aggravating circumstances, if the perpetrator discloses an extremely depraved state of mind and diaboli cal trickery in committing the homicide, accompanied by brutal dealing with the cadaver, infliction of death penalty cannot be avoided.
Special leave under article 136.
of the Constitution cannot be granted when it is difficult to fault the court on any ground, statutory or precedential.
[772 G H, 773 A] Ediga Annamma; , , referred to.
(2) Section 377 of 1898 Code of Criminal Procedure applies only to situations where the court at the time of the con firmation of the death sentence consists of two or more Judges.
Section 4(1)(i) of the Code of Criminal proce dure, in relation to a Union Territory, brings within the definition of "High Court", the highest court of criminal appeal for that area, namely, the Judicial Commissioner 's Court.
If, at the time the case for confirmation of death sentence is being heard, the Judicial Commissioner 's Court consists of more than one Judge, at least two Judges must attest the confirmation.
So long as one Judicial Commis sioner alone functions in the Court, section 377 was not attracted.
In the present case there is nothing illegal in a single (i.e.the only) Judicial Commissioner deciding the reference.
[773 D F] (3) Referral jurisdiction under section 377 is akin to appeal and revision.
Regulation 8(1) of the Goa, Daman and Diu (Judicial Commissioner 's Court) Regulation 1963 does not disentitle the Judicial Commissioner from exercising power section 377, Cr.
In the instant case, the Judicial Commis sioner 's confirmation of death sentence is not without jurisdiction.
[774 C D] (4) Judicial clemency cannot attenuate the sentence of death on the sole circumstance that the accused was a young man and the sentence of death been haunting him for long without other supplement factors or in the face of surround ing beastly circumstances of the crime.
Possibly, Presiden tial power wider but judicial power is embanked.
[774 E F] 10 707SCI/77 772
