The appellant along with another accused deceived several desperate unemployed youngmen, received various sums of Rs. 1200 by false pretences that they would secure jobs for them through politically influential friends and other make believe representations.
The offence of cheating under a. 420 was made out and all the 3 courts concurrently convicted both the accused.
The appellant was sentenced to 3 years rigorous imprisonment.
The appellant is an unemployed youngman around 28 years old and used to work as a Junior Assistant in the Andhra Pradesh Secretariat.
This Court granted special leave limited to the question of sentence.
Allowing the appeal partly, HELD : (1) The pre sentencing provision in section 248(2) Cr. P. C. has a penological significance of far reaching import which has been lost on the trial magistrate.
Reform of the black letter law is a time lagging process.
At an the three tiers the focus was on the serious nature of the crime and no ray of light on the criminal or on the pertinent variety of social facts surrounding him penetrated the forensic mentation.
[153 D, E] (2)Since the whole territory of punishment in its modern setting is virtually virgin so far as our country is concerned, the court went into the subject in some incisive depth for the guidance of the subordinate judiciary.
[155 G] (3)Progressive criminologists in the world agree that the Gandhian diagnosis of offenders as patients and his conception of prisons as hospitals mental and moral is the key to the pathology of delinquency and the therapeutic role of punishment.
The whole man is a healthy man and every man is born good.
Criminality is a curable deviance.
If every saint has a past every sinner has a future and it is the role of law to remind both of this.
[155 B C] (4)Man is subject to more stresses and strains in this age than ever before and a new class of crimes arising from restlessness of the spirit and frustration of ambitions has erupted.
White collar crime, as in the present case, belong% to this disease of man 's inside.
Barbarity and injury recoils as injury so that if healing the mentally or morally maimed or malformed man is the goal, awakening the inner being more than torturing through exterior compulsions, holds out better curative hopes.
The infliction of harsh and savage punishment is thus a relic of past and regressive times.
Today sentencing should be a process of re shaping a person who has deteriorated into criminality and the modern community has a primary stake in the rehabilitation of the offender as a means of social defence.
Therefore, a therapeutic, rather than a terrors outlook should prevail in our criminal courts.
[156 E, H, 157 C D] Tejani AIR 1974 S C 228, 236; Jagmohan Singh ; and Santa Singh , referred to.
(5)There is a great discretion vested in the judge while imposing sentence.
The Judge must exercise this discretionary power, draw his inspiration from the humanitarian spirit of the law living down the traditional precedents which have winked at the personality of the crime doer and been swept away by the features of the crime.
Unfortunately, the Indian Penal Code still lingers in the somewhat compartmentalised system of punishment viz., imprisonment, 154 simple or rigorous, fine and, of course, capital sentence.
There is a wide range of choice and flexible treatment which must be available with the Judge if he is to fulfil his tryst with curing the criminal in a hospital setting.
Rule of thumb sentences of rigorous imprisonment or other are too insensitive to the highly delicate and subtle operation expected of a sentencing judge.
Release on probation, conditional sentences, visits to healing centres, are all on the cards.
[161 E H 162 A] (6)In the present case the crime is doubly bad and throws light on how gullible youngmen part with hard earned money in the hope that political influence indirectly purchased through money can secure jobs obliquely.
But the victims of the crime must be commiserated with and in such white Collar offences it is proper to insist upon reparation of the victims apart from any other sentence.
The Court, therefore, directed the appellant to pay a fine of Rs. 1200/ which was directed to be made over by the Trial Court to P.W. 1 who was victim in the present case.
[162 E FG] (7)The appellant is a youngman of 28 years.
He has a degree in Oriental Languages and another in Commerce.
He was working as a Junior Assistant in the Government Secretariat and has now lost the post consequent on the conviction.
This is a hard lesson in life.
The socioeconomic circumstances of the man deserve notice.
His parents are old and financially weak.
His parents, sisters and younger brothers are his dependents.
The younger brother is also unemployed.
These factors suggest that the economic blow, if the appellant is imprisoned for long, will be upon his brother at College and other members of his family.
He had not committed any previous crime.
The court rejected the prayer of the appellant for release on probation on the ground that the appellant had a deliberate plan behind the crime operated in partnership upon 4 or more persons and that his age is such that he cannot be called immature, The court, however, reduced the sentence to 18 months.
The court also recommended that (a) he should not be given work of a monotonous, mechanical, degrading type, but of a mental, intellectual or like type mixed with a little manual labour.
This would ensure that the person does work more or less of the kind he used to; (b) the appellant must be paid a reasonable fraction of remuneration by way of wages for the work done, as unpaid work is bonded labour and humiliating; (c) the appellant should be allowed to participate in sports and games, and take to artistic activity and/or meditational course.
He should be given such opportunities by the Jail authorities as would stimulate his creativity and sensitivity.
(d) a guarded parole release every 3 months for at least a week.
[162 H, 163 A E] Humanitarian winds must blow into the prison barricades.
Jail reforms from abolition of convict 's costume and conscript labour to restoration and fraternal touch, are on the urgent agenda of the nation.
Our prisons should be correctional houses, and not cruel iron aching the soul.
[164 C] The court observed that the State should not hesitate to respect the personality in each convict in the spirit of the preamble to the Constitution and not to permit the colonial hangover of putting people behind the bars and then forget about them.
[164 F] R. vs King and R. vs Ironfield , referred to.
