Under section 2(g) of the Madhya Pradesh General Sales Tax Act the term 'goods ' means all kinds of movable property and includes all growing crops, trees, plants and things at tached to.
or forming part of the land which are agreed to be severed before sale or under the contract of sale.
Under el.
(n) 'Sale ' means any transfer of property in goods for cash or deferred payment.
Clause (0) defines 'sale price ' as the amount payable by a dealer as valuable consideration for the sale of goods and under cl.
(t) 'turnover ' means the aggregate of the amount of sale price received and receiva ble by a dealer.
The respondent Mills entered into a lease with the Forest Department of the State for the cutting of bamboo and salai wood from the leased forest area in the State.
The lease deed provided that the lessee shall pay a minimum royalty every year whether there was cutting of timber or not, the lessee could construct roads, railways etc.
for the purposes of business; should pay the price fixed for the wood removed from the leased area; should keep a,n account of all wood cut and removed and that the rights and privi leges of the lessees shall extend only to bamboos and salai wood within the leased area.
The appellant (Forest Department) which was a registered dealer under Sates Tax Act demanded front the respondent, (also a registered dealer) sales tax in respect Of timber extracted from the leased area.
When the respondent repudi ated the Department 's claim it paid the tax and proceeded to recover the tax under the revenue recovery proceedings under section 82 of the Indian Forests Act.
Allowing the respondent 's writ petition under article 226 of the Constitution the High Court held that the State Govern ment and its Forest Departments were not a 'dealer ' within the meaning of the sales tax law and as such were not enti tled to recover the amount from the respondent.
Thereupon the definition of the dealer under the Act was altered to undo the effect of the High Court 's decision.
In appeal to this Court the appellant contended that though apparently the transaction was a lease, in reality the lease was no more than a simple sale of standing timber, coupled with a licence to enter and do certain things on another 's land and the transaction in essence was a sale of goods within the meaning of the Act.
Allowing the appeal to this Court.
HELD: Going by the definition of 'sale of goods ' under s.2(7) of the Sale of Goods Act and section 2(g) of the Sales Tax Act standing timber is 'movable property ' if under the contract it is to be severed.
But the severence must take place when the timber still vests in the contracting party.
[158D] In the instant case there was sale of bamboo and salai wood under the contract and, in the contemplation of the parties they were to be cut and severed pursuant to the contract itself.
Raja Bahadur Kamakshya Narain Singh (1943) 11 I.T.R. 513; Badri Prasad [1969] 2 S C R. 380 held inapplicable.
150 1.
(a) Despite its description, the deed conferred in truth and substance a right to cut and carry timber of specified species.
Till the tress were cut, they remained the property of the appellant.
Once the trees were severed, the property passed.
Royalty is a euphemism for the price of the timber.
[157D] (b) From the terms of the lease it was clear that for a price fixed, bamboo and salai wood were permitted to be removed by the respondent from the forest of the appellant.
Possession of the land qua land was not given and there was a provision that the rights of the lessess shall extend only to bamboos and wood within the leased area and nothing therein shall in any way be deemed to authorise the lessees to interfere with the working of the forest area of other contractors of the forest lands.
[157A B] (2) The amending bill, whereby the liability was being de novo fastened, was enacted into law ' after the judgment of the High Court.
Read with section 82 of the Indian Forests Act, the amount was being recovered as if it were land revenue.
This process deprived the respondent of his right to chal lenge the qualification of the tax.
The respondent should be enabled to prove his case that the sum claimed was much higher than could be legitimately recovered.
[159B] [The case was remanded for consideration of the quantum of tax that the Forest Department was legally liable to pay as a dealer, to the Sales Tax Department.
Once the tax is settled the payment by the respondent will follow.]
