The appellant, though charged section 302 of the Indian Penal Code for intentionally causing the death of one K. G. Thomas alias Thampi, a well built male of 32 years on the night of December 16, 1972, by inflicting a stab 3X1 cm.
over his left infrascapular area was, however, on a consideration of the material adduced before him, acquitted of the said charge and convicted section 326 and sentenced to 7 years rigorous imprisonment by the Sessions Judge.
Both the appellant and the State appealed against the said orders.
The High Court ,accepted the State 's appeal, set aside the conviction section 326 and convicted him u/s 302 and sentenced him to imprisonment for life.
The High Court rested the conviction on the dying declaration (exhibit p. 9) which received ample corroboration from the testimony of; one of the three eye witnesses, Pappan (P.W. 5).
Dismissing the appeal to this court section 2(a) of the Supreme Court (Enlargement of Criminal Appellate Jurisdiction) (Act 28 of 1970), 1970, the court, HELD : (1) Non production by the prosecution of the doctor who performed the operation on the deceased is of no avail.
It is no doubt unfortunate that the prosecution has not attempted to examine the doctor who performed the operation, but this lapse is not sufficient to downgrade the enormity of the offence committed by the accused.
[583 C D, H] Explanation (2) to section 299 of the Indian Penal Code which provides that where death is caused by an injury, the person who causes it would be deemed to have caused the death although by resorting to proper remedies and skilful treatment, the death might have been prevented.
[583 H, 584 A] (3)(a) In the instant case, taking into consideration the deadly character of theweapon used, the dastardly assault made by the accused and the vital organsof the body on which the injury was caused as also the categorical statement of Dr. Jayapalan, P.W. 4, who conducted the autopsy of the dead body of the deceased that the injury No. 1 was sufficient in the ordinary course to cause death of the deceased, it is clear that the appellant deliberately caused the fatal wound on the person of the deceased.
The conviction u/s 302 of the Indian Penal Code must be maintained.
[584 B C] (b)It is true that the appellant inflicted only one stab wound on the deceased but the facts established in the case, namely, that the appellant did not act under any sudden impulse but pursued the deceased after arming himself with a dagger which is a dangerous weapon in execution of a premeditated plan motivated by ill feelings nurtured for a number of days and inflicted a severe stab injury on the vital region of the body of the deceased which perforated not only his left lung but also penetrated into and impaired the left centrical of his heart clearly show that the appellant had the intention of causing the death of the deceased and pursuant thereto acted in a manner which brings the offence within the mischief of section 302 of the Penal Code.
The offence committed by the accused squarely falls within the purview of clause "thirdly" of section 300 of the Indian Penal Code according to which culpable homicide is murder if the act 13 930SCI/77 578 by which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing bodily injury to any person and the bodily injury intended to be caused is sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death of the deceased.
[583 B E] Gudar Dusadh vs State of Bihar, A.I.R. 1972 S.C. 952, followed.
