The appellant company executed .a
Loan and Note Purchase Agreement with a foreign bank.
Under that agreement the appellant was to authorise the creation and issuance of secured notes, Series A and B, and the Notes were to be issued under and secured by a Deed of Trust and Mortgage between the Company and the Bank.
The Deed of Trust and Mortgage stated that as the appellant was in the process of constructing a refinery for the refining of crude oil and deemed it necessary to borrow money from time to time to finance such construction and to issue its Notes therefor, and to mortgage and charge its properties to secure the payment of such Notes, it executed the Deed of Trust and Mortgage as Security in accordance with the terms and condi tions of Article 2 of the Deed of Trust and Mortgage to secure the due payment of the principal and the premium, if any, and the interest on the Notes, and of all other monies for the time being and from time to time owing on the security of the indenture and on the Notes and the perform ance by the Company of all of its obligations thereunder.
It was also agreed that the Notes shall be secured and shall have the other terms and conditions provided in the agree ment and shall be guaranteed by the President of India pursuant to the terms of the Guarantee Agreement.
The Guarantee Agreement state.
that the President of India, as the guarantor, unconditionally guaranteed as primary obligor and not as surety merely, the due and .punctual payment from time to time of the principal as well as interest stated m the Agreement.
The obligations of the guarantor were abso lute and unconditional under any and all circumstances and were not be to any extent or in any way discharged, impaired or otherwise affected, except by performance thereof in accordance with the terms thereof.
It was also provided that each and every remedy of the Trustee shall be cumula tive and shall be in addition to any other remedy given therein or under the mortgage or any of the other collateral or now or hereafter existing at law or in equity or by statute.
The Guarantee Agreement was executed on the same day as the Deed of Trust and Mortgage between the President of India and the foreign bank as a Trustee.
The High Court decided that stamp duty was chargeable on the Trust and Mortgage Deed under article 40(b) of Schedule I to the Act.
In appeal to this Court it was contended that it was the Guarantee Agreement which was the principal and primary security and that the Deed of Trust and Mortgage was a collateral or auxillary security and as such stamp duty was payable under article 40(c) and that the Guarantee Agreement was exempt from duty under section 3 and debentures under article 27.
Dismissing the Appeal, HELD: (1) It is the real and true meaning of the deed of Trust and Mortgage and the Guarantee Agreement which has to be ascertained irrespective of the description given by the parties.
[568 E] (2) The Trust and Mortgage Deed was executed before the execution of the Guarantee Agreement though both of them were executed on the same day.
It was the Deed of Trust and Mortgage which was the security for the 566 loan though the loan was also guaranteed by the President in terms of the Guarantee Agreement.
[568 G H] (3) The.
terms and conditions of the Guarantee Agreement cannot detract from the basic fact that the Deed of Trust and Mortgage was executed first in point of time and was the principal or the primary security for the loan.
The Deed of Trust and Mortgage was clearly the principal or the pri mary security and could not be said to be a collateral agreement.
[569 H] (4) The Deed of Trust clearly stated that the terms "Collateral Agreements" shall mean the Guarantee Agreement and the Undertaking.
[570 A B] (5) The Guarantee Agreement was not an instrument of sale, mortgage or settlement and did not fall within the purview of section 4(1) of the Act.
[571 E.F] (6) There is no justification for the contention that the debentures were the principal instruments and not the Deed of Trust and Mortgage.
The secured notes were issued under and secured by the Deed of Trust and Mortgage.
The notes were issued in consequence of and on the security of the Deed of Trust and Mortgage.
[571 H, 572 A]
