The Cement Control Order promulgated under the West Bengal Cement Control Act, 1948 prohibits storage for sale and sale by a seller and purchase by a consumer of cement except in accordance with the conditions specified in a licence issued by a designated officer.
It also provides that no person shall sell cement at a higher than the notified price and no person to whom a written order has been issued shall refuse to sell cement "at a price not exceeding the notified price".
Any contravention of the order becomes punishable with imprisonment or fine or both.
Under the A.P. Procurement (Levy and Restriction on Sale) Order, 1967, (Civil Appeals Nos. 2488 to 2497 of 1972) every miller carrying on rice milling operation is required to sell to the agent or an officer duly authorised by the Government minimum quantities of rice fixed by the Government at the notified price, and no miller or other person who gets his paddy milled in any rice mill can move or otherwise dispose of the rice recovered by milling at such rice mill except in accordance with the directions of the Collector.
Breach of these provisions becomes punishable.
It was contended in this Court on behalf of the appellants that the word ,sale" in the Bengal Finance Sales Tax Act, 1941, must receive the same meaning as in the since the expression "sale of goods" was, at the time when the Government of India Act, 1935 was enacted, a term of well recognised legal import in the general law relating to sale goods and in the legislative practice relating to that topic both in England and in India and (2) since under the there can be no sale without a contract of sale and since the parties had no volition but were compelled by law to supply the goods at prices fixed under the Control Orders by the authorities the transactions were not sales and so were not exigible to tax.
Disssing the appeals.
HELD : Per curiam Sale of cement by the allottees to the permit holders and the transactions between the growers and procuring agents as well as those between the rice millers on the one band and the wholesalers or retailers on the other, are sales exigible to sales tax in the respective States.
[465 F G] Per Beg.
C.J, The transactions in the instant cases are sales and are exigible to tax on the ratio of Indian Steel and Wire Products Ltd. Andhra Sugar Ltd. and Karam, Chand Thapar.
In cases like New India Sugar Mills, the substance of the concept of a side itself disappears because the transaction is nothing more than the execution of an order.
Deprivation of property for a compensation called price does not amount to a sale when all that is done is to carry out an order so that 434 the transaction is substantially a compulsory acquisition.
On the other hand, a merely regulatory law, even if it circumscribes the area of free choice, does not take away the basic character or core of sale from the transaction.
Such a law which governs a class obliges a seller to deal only with parties holding licences who may buy particular or allotted quantities of goods at specified prices, but an essential element of choice is still left to the parties between whom agreements take place.
The agreement despite considerable compulsive elements regulating or restricting the area of his choice, may still retain the basic character of a transaction of sale.
In the former type of case, the binding character of the transaction arises from the order directed to particular parties asking them to deliver specified goods and not from a general order or law applicable to a class.
In the latter type of cases, the legal tie which binds the parties, to perform their obligations remains contractual.
The regulatory law merely adds other obligations, such as the one to enter into such a tie between the parties.
Although the regulatory law might specify the terms, such as price, the regulation is subsidiary to the essential character of the transaction which is consensual and contractual.
The parties to the contract must agree upon the same thing in the same sense.
Agreement on mutuality of consideration, ordinarily arising from an offer and acceptance, imparts to it enforceability in courts of law.
Mere regulation or restriction of the field of choice does not take away the contractual or essentially consensual binding core or character of the transaction.
[438B D, EG, 439A C, 440B] New India Sugar Mills vs Commissioner of Sales Tax, Bihar, ; ; [1963] Supp. 2 SCR 459 explained.
Commissioner, Sales tax, U.P. vs Ram Bilas Ram Gopal, AIR 1970 All 518, Chittar Mal Narain vs Commissioner of Sales Tax, [1971] 1 SCR 671, Indian Steel and Wire Products Ltd. vs State of Madras; , , Andhra Sugar Ltd. vs State of Andhra Pradesh ; and State of Rajasthan vs Karam Chand Thapar, AIR 1969 SC 343 referred to.
[Per Chandrachud, Bhagwati, Krishna Iyer, Untwalia, Murtaza Fazal Ali and Kailasam, JJ.] According to the definitions of "Sale" in the two Acts the transactions between the appellants and the allottees or nominees are patently sales because in one case the property in cement and in the other property in the paddy and rice was transferred for cash consideration by the appellants.
[445D] 1.
When essential goods are in short supply, various types of Orders are issued under the with a view to making the goods available to the consumer at a fair price.
Such Orders sometimes provide that a person in need of an essential commodity like cement, cotton, coal or iron and steel must apply to the prescribed authority for a permit for obtaining the commodity.
Those wanting to engage in the business of supplying the commodity are also required to possess a dealer 's licence.
The permit holder can obtain the supply of goods, to the extent of the quantity specified in the permit, from the named dealer only and at a controlled price.
The dealer who is asked to supply the stated quantity to the particular permit holder has no option but to supply the stated quantity of goods at the controlled price.
[440 E G] 2.
In State of Madras vs Gannon Dunkerley & Co. Ltd., ; after considering a variety of authorities on the subject, this Court held that the expression sale of goods in Entry 48 List 11 Government of India Act, 1935 cannot be construed in its popular sense and that it must be interpreted in its legal sense.
Whereas in popular parlance a sale is said to take place when the bargain is settled between the parties through property in the goods may not pass at that stage, as where the contract relates to future or unascertained goods, the essence of sale in the legal sense is the transfer of property in a thing from one person to another for a price.
It was further held that according to the law both of England and India in order to constitute a sale, it is necessary that there should be an agreement between the parties for the purpose of transferring title to the goods which pre supposes capacity to contract, supported by valuable consideration and that as a result of the transaction property must actually pass 435 in the goods.
"Unless all these elements are present, there can 'be no sale.
" The effect of the construction which the Court put on the words of Entry 48 in Gannon Dunkerley is that a sale is necessarily a consensual transaction and if the parties have no volition or option to bargain, there can be no sale.
If this view is assumed to reflect the correct legal Position, the transactions in these cases will amount to sales.
[447B C, D F, 449D E] 3.
Offer and acceptance need not always be in an elementary form, nor does the law of contract or of sale of goods require that consent to a contract must be express.
Offer and acceptance can be spelt out from the conduct of the parties which covers not only their acts but omissions as well.
On occasions, silence can be more eloquent than eloquence itself.
Just as correspondence between the parties can constitute or disclose an offer and acceptance, so can their conduct.
This is because law does not require offer and acceptance to conform to any set pattern or formula.
[450D E] 4.
In the instant case, it is not correct to say that the transactions between the dealer and the consumer were not consensual.
The limitations imposed by the Control Order on the normal right of the dealers and consumers to supply and obtain goods, the obligations imposed on the parties and the penalties prescribed by the order do not militate against the position that eventually, the parties must be deemed to have completed the transactions under an agreement by which one party bound itself to supply the stated quantity of goods to the other at a price not higher than the notified price and the other party consented to accept the goods on the terms and conditions mentioned in the permit or the order of allotment issued in its favour by the concerned authority.
in order, to determine whether there was any agreement or consensuality between the parties regard must be had to their conduct at or about the time when the goods changed hands.
In the first place, it is not obligatory on a trader to deal in cement nor on the consumer to acquire it.
The primary fact is that the decision of the trader to deal in an essential commodity is volitional.
Such volition carries with it the willingness to trade strictly on the terms of the Control Order.
The consumer who is under no legal compulsion to acquire or Possess cement, decides as a matter of his volition to obtain it on the terms of the permit or the order of allotment issued in his favour.
That brings the two parties together, one of whom is willing to supply the essential commodity and the other to receive it.
When the allottee presents his permit to the dealer, he signifies his willingness to obtain the commodity from the dealer on the terms stated in the permit.
His conduct reflects his consent.
And when, upon the presentation of the permit the dealer acts upon it, he impliedly agrees to supply the commodity to the allottee on the terms by which he has voluntarily bound himself to trade in the commodity.
His conduct too reflects his consent.
Thus, though both parties are bound to comply with the legal requirements governing the transaction, they agree as between themselves to enter into the tranaction on statutory terms, one agreeing to supply the commodity to the other on those terms and the other agreeing to accept from him on the very terms.
[449E H, 450C, E H,451A] 5.
Secondly, though the terms of the transaction are mostly predetermined by law, it cannot be said that there is no area at all for bargain.
The conditions provided in the order that cement shall not be sold at a higher than the notified price and that no dealer shall refuse to sell it at a price not exceeding the notified price leaving it open to the individuals to charge and pay a price which is less than the notified price or charge a lesser price.
Within the bounds of reasonableness, it would be open to the parties to fix the time of delivery.
The consumer has a right to ask for weighment of goods which shows that he may reject the goods if found short in weight or are not of the requisite quality.
The consumer has a right to ask for weighment of goods which shows that he tions have the freedom to bargain militates against the view that the transactions are not consensual.
[451 AE] 6.
In New India Sugar Mills Ltd. the question was whether sugar supplied by the mills on the orders of the Sugar Controller was exigible to tax.
The majority held that a contract of sale between the buyer and the seller, which is a pre requisite to a sale, being absent the transaction was not exigible to sales 436 tax.
But the principle on which the problem should be approached was set out in the dissenting judgment which said that consent may be express or implied and that it could not be said that unless offer and acceptance were present in an elementary form, there could be no taxable sale.
Taking the view that on obtaining the necessary permit the seller on the one hand and the buyer on the other agreed to sell and purchase sugar it was pointed out that when the buyer, after receiving the permit, telegraphed instructions to despatch sugar and the seller despatched it, 'a contract emerged and consent must be implied on both sides though not expressed antecendently to the permit".
So long as the parties trade under controls at fixed price and accept these as any other law of the realm, the contract is at the fixed price, both sides having or deemed to have agreed to such a price.
Consent under the law of contract need not be express; it could be implied.
[453B G; 454A C] 7.In coming to its conclusion the majority in New India Sugar Mills followed the decision of this Court in Gannon Dunkerley that in a building contract there was no agreement express or implied to sell goods and secondly that property in the building materials does not pass in the materials regarded as goods" but it passes as part of immovable property.
The majority in New India Sugar Mills was in error in saying that the ratio govern that case because the questions involved in both different.
In New India Sugar Mills the commodity with concerned was sugar and was delivered as sugar just as in commodity is cement, which was delivered as cement Dunkerley tax was demanded after the commodity had after property in it had passed.
The question in this case which was question involved in New India Sugar Mills namely decidendi of Gannon Dunkerley must cases were altogether which the Court was the instant case the Secondly, in Gannon changed hands, that is, the very whether a transaction effected in accordance with the obligatory terms of a statute can amount to a sale, did not arise in Gannon Dunkerley, Gannon Dunkerley is not an authority for the proposition that there cannot at all be a contract of sale if the parties to a transaction are obliged to comply with the terms of a statute.
[456C E] 8.
In Gannon Dunkerley this Court was influenced largely by the observations in the 8th edn. of Benjamin on "Sale? ' that to constitute a valid sale there must be a concurrence of four elements, one of which is "mutual assent".
The majority judgment in New India Sugar Mills also derived sustenance from the same passage in Benjamin 's 8th edn.
Gannon Dunkerley involved an altogether different point and is not an authority for the proposition that there cannot at all be a contract of sale if the parties to a transaction are obliged to comply with the terms of a statute.
[464E F , 465C D] 9.
With the high ideals of the Preamble and the directive principles of our Constitution, there has to be a fundamental change in the judicial outlook.
Freedom of contract has largely become an illusion.
The policy of the Parliament in regard to the contracts including those involved in sale of goods, has still to reflect recognition of the necessity for a change, which could be done by a suitable modification of the definition of sale of goods.
[464C D] Majority decision in New India Sugar Mills vs Commissioner of Sales Tax, Bihar, ; ; [1963] Supp. 2 SCR 459 overruled.
Minority opinion in India Steel & Wire Products vs State of Madras ; , Andhra Sugar Ltd. vs State of Andhra Pradesh, ; , Salar Jung Sugar Mills Ltd. vs State of Mysore [1972] 2 SCR 228 and Oil and Natural Gas Commission vs State of Bihar ; approved.
State of Tamil Nadu vs Cement Distributors Pvt. Ltd. ; partly approved.
Chhitter Mal Nazrain Das.
vs Commissioner of Sales Tax [1971] 1 SCR 671 explained.
State of Madras vs Gannon Dunkerley ; explained and distinguished.
Kirkness vs John Hudson and Co. Ltd. held inapplicable.
Ridge No miness Ltd. vs Inland Revenue Commissioners referred to.
Commissioner, Sales Tax U.P. vs Ram Bilas Ram Gopal AIR 1970 Allahabad 318 referred to.
