The suit property of one Kalyan Chand in the joint possession of Shital Prasad (son 1/3), Bansidar (great grandson 1/3) and Sheo Shankar Sangamlal and Kripa Shankar (1/9+1/9+1/9 grandsons) was mortgaged by Sheo Shanker, Sangamlal and Bansidhar acting on their own behalf and allegedly on behalf of Kripa Shankar (who was a minor then).
Shital Prasad was not a party to the mortgage.
When the whole house was sold in Court auction on 3 10 1937, in realisation of the mortgage money decreed, one Bhagwandas father of Kailash Chand (Respondent No. 1) purchased the said house and took symbolical possession on 12.9.1938. 'The residential portion of the house was in occupation of Kripa Shankar (Appellant 's husband) and Devika Rani w/o Shital Prasad who established her right to 1/3 share by a decree obtained on 22 1 1941.
Another suit filed by Bhag wandas for a declaration and possession over 2/3 share for ejecting Kripa Shankar was decreed on 27 8 1945, and, again symbolical possession was obtained on 21 11 46 under O.21 r.96 C.P.C. Kripa Shankar died in 1953 leaving behind the appellants Raj Rani (wife) and Kali Charan (son).
Respond ent No. 1 son of the auction purchaser Bhagwan Das filed a suit No. 475/1959 on or about 10 8 1959 for partition and possession over 2/3 share of the portion in addition 'to certain claims of rents illegally collected and the amount of tax unpaid by the appellants.
The plaint allegations were: (i) The auction purchaser has been in possession over 2/3 part of the house with Devika Rani who had 1/3 share in the house; (ii) The defendants had no concern with 2/3 share in the said 'house themselves or through any other person were not in possession or in occupation of any part of the above said house at any time as owners; (iii) The plaintiff was being obstructed in looking after the house and realis ing rents and that the defendant had misled some tenants and realised the rents due to him.
The appellant defendants took the plea (i) the mortgage was not valid as the amount was not borrowed for legal necessity; (ii) Even if the house "had been sold in execution of the mortgage, they have been openly denying the rights of the plaintiff and had been in adverse possession and occupation of the property for more than 12 years so that, even if the plaintiff or his prede cessors had any right, it had been extinguished by the operation of law limitation.
The Trial Court decreed the suit and the first appellate court confirmed it.
The second appeal filed in the High Court was also dismissed.
Allowing the appeal by special leave, the Court, HELD: (1) The High Court in a second appeal and the Subordi nate courts failed to determine the crucial question of actual or even constructive possession of the plaintiff within twelve years and give a finding to that effect.
[24E] (2) The plaintiff had to Drove that he was in actual or constructive possession within twelve years.
It would be enough if he establishes that he was in constructive posses sion within twelve years by receipts of rent or otherwise.
[25F] (3) A decision on the question whether article 142 Limita tion Act applies to a case, really depends upon an interpre tation of the pleadings.
In cases governed by the former Limitation Act, at any rate, a plaintiff admitting dispos session in suits based on title, had to Drove that he was in actual or constructive possession within twelve years.
[25C E] 19 (4) The allegations in the plaint amount to an allega tion that by asserting their ownership and inducing the tenants not to pay rents to the plaintiffs, the defendants had dispossessed the plaintiff.
In such a case, even if a defendant in actual possession could be deemed to be ini tially a co sharer, the plaintiff would be really asserting that the co sharer had dispossessed or ousted him.
Hence an ouster having been admitted in the plaint the burden would lie upon the plaintiff of proving his case that the ouster had taken place within twelve years as article 142 of the old Limitation Act applied to such a case.
In the instant case, even if the symbolic delivery of possession to a co sharer could be said to have interrupted any adverse possession, that interruption took place beyond twelve years [23B C] Bindhyachal.
Chand & Ors.
vs Ram Gharib Chand & Ors.
AIR [1934] All.
referred to.
Manikyala Rao vs Narasimhaswami ; , distin guished.
Appeal allowed and case remanded to first Appellate court to determine whether plaintiff was in possession within the period of limitation.
