All the petitioners were charged with the offence of murder u/s 302 I.P.C., but all of them were acquitted by the Sections Judge on 4 11 1972.
The State successfully appealed against the acquittal and by its judgment dated 20 5 1977 the High Court, while reversing the findings of the Sessions Court, held all of them guilty and sentenced them all to life imprisonment.
The petitioners came up to the Supreme Court exercising their statutory right of appeal.
Pending the disposal of the appeal, they moved an application for bail which was rejected on 7 9 1977.
The petitioners moved another application for bail.
Granting the bail, subject to fulfilment of conditions imposed, the Court HELD : 1.
An order refusing an application for bail does not necessarily preclude another, on a later occasion, giving more materials, further developments and different considerations.
While it is a circumstance which the Courts surely must set store, Courts are not barred from second consideration at a later stage.
An interim direction is not a conclusive adjudication and updated reconsideration is not overturning an earlier negation.
[779 D E] 2.
The significance and sweep of article 21 make the deprivation of liberty ephemeral or enduring, a matter of grave concern and permissible only when the law authorising it is reasonable, even handed and geared to the goals of community good and State necessity spelt out In Article 19.
Reasonableness postulates intelligent care and predicates that deprivation of freedom by refusal of bail is not for punitive purpose, but for the bifocal interests of justice to the individual involved and society affected.
[784 E F] 3.
Personal liberty deprived when bail is refused, is too precious a value of ourconstitutional system recognised under article 21, that the curial power to negateit is a great trust exercisable, not casually, but judicially with lively concern for the cost to the individual and the community.
Personal liberty of an accused or convict is fundamental, suffering lawful eclipse only in terms of procedure established by law.
The last four words of article 21 are the life of that human right.
[781 A B] 4.
All deprivation of liberty is validated by social defence and individual correction along an anti criminal direction.
Public justice is central to the whole scheme of bail law.
Feeling justice must be forbidden but punitive harshness should be minimised.
Restorative devises to redeem the man, even through community service, meditative drill, study classes or other resources should be innovated and playing foul with public peace by tampering with evidence, intimidating witnesses or committing offences while on judicially sanctioned "free enterprise" should be provided against.
No seeker of justice shall play confidence tricks on the Court or community.
Conditions may be hung around bail orders, not to cripple but to protect.
Such is the holistic jurisdiction and humanistic orientation invoked by the judicial discretion correlated to the values of our Constitution.
[785 B C] 5.
The principal rule to guide release on bail should be to secure the presence of the applicant, who seeks to be liberated, to take judgment and serve sentence in the event of the Court punishing him with imprisonment.
In this 778 perspective relevance of considerations is regulated by their nexus with the likely absence of the applicant for fear of a severe sentence.
[783 E] The vital considerations are: (a) The nature of charge, the nature of the evidence and, the punishment to which the party may be liable, if convicted, or conviction is confirmed.
When the crime charged is of the highest magni tude and the punishment of it assigned by law is of extreme severity, the Court may reasonably presume, some evidence warranting, that no amount of bail would secure the presence of the convict at the stage of judgment, should he be enlarged (b) whether the course of justices would be thwarted by him who seeks the benignant jurisdiction of the Court to be freed for the time being (c) Antecedents of the man and socio geographical circumstance, and whether or the petitioner 's record shows him to be 'a habitual offender, (d) When, a person charged with a grave offence has been acquitted at a stage, the intermediate acquittal has pertinence to a bail plea when the appeal before this Court pends.
The grounds for denial of provisional releases becomes weaker when a fair finding of innocence has been recorded by one court, (e) Whether the accused 's safety may be.
in, prison, than in the, vengeful village where feuds have provoked the violent offence and (f) The period in.
prison already spent and the prospect of delay in the appeal being heard, and disposed of.
[783 A B,F, 784 C, D, 785 D E, 786,A] Kashmira Singh vs State of Punjab, ; = A.I.R. @ 2148; Gudikanti Narasihmalu and Ors.
vs Public Prosecutor, Govt of A.P.; , Reiterated.
Tinglay vs Dolby, ; Rex vs Rose, 1898 18 CC 717; 67 QB 289; quoted with approval.
Courts should soberly size up police exaggerations; of prospective misconduct of the accused if enlarged, lest danger of excesses and injustice creep subtly into the discretionary curial technique.
Bad record and police prediction of criminal prospects to invalidate the bail plea are admissible in principle, but shall not stampede the Court into complacent refusal.
The endemic pathology of factious scrimmage and bloodshed should be preempted by suitable safe guards.
[785 F G] To answer the test of reasonableness subject to the need for securing the presence of the bail applicant, the Court must also weigh the contrary factors like (i) the better chances which a man on bail has to prepare or present his case than one remanded in custody, (ii) promotion of public justice, (iii) the considerable public expenses in keeping in custody where no danger of disappearance or disturbance can arise and (iv) the deplorable condition verging on the inhuman of our sub jails.
[784 G H; 785 A] In the instant case, the following 'significant factors frown ' upon continuance of incarceration and favour provisional but conditional enlargement of the petitioners.
(a) Petitioners 1 to 5 have suffered sentences in some measures having been imprisoned for about twenty months.
(b) When the High Court entertained the appeal, the State did not press for their custody for apprehended abscondence or menace to peace and justice.
(c) The sixth Petitioner had been on bail in the Sessions Court and all the petitioners had been free during the pendency of the appeal.
(d) There is nothing indicated to show that during the long five years, when the petitioners had been out of prison, pending appeal, there had been any conduct on their part suggestive of disturbing the peace of #he locality, threatening any one in the village or otherwise thwarting the life of the community or the cause of justice and (e) All the petitioners 1 to 5 are the entire male members of a family and their remaining in jail will jeopardise their defence in this Court.
, B E]
