Held, that adjudication by an adjudicator under the does not mean adjudication according to the strict law of master and servant and that an adjudicator 's award may contain provisions for the settlement of a dispute which no court could order if it was bound by ordinary law.
Thus the scope of an adjudication under the is much wider than that of an arbitrator making an award.
Industrial Tribunals are not fettered by such limitations and an adjudicator has jurisdiction to investigate disputes about discharge and dismissal and where necessary, to direct reinstatement.
Nevertheless, wide as their powers are, these Tribunals are not absolute and there are limitations to the ambit of their authority.
Though they are not courts in the strict sense of the term, they have to discharge quasi judicial functions and as such are subject to the overriding jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under article 136 of the Constitution.
Their powers are derived from the statute that creates them and they have to function within the limits imposed there and to act according to its provisions.
Those provisions invest them with many of the trappings" of a court and deprive them of arbitrary or absolute discretion and power.
Benevolent despotism is foreign to a democratic Constitution.
When the Constitution of India converted this country into a sovereign, democratic, republic, it did not invest it with the mere trappings of democracy but invested it, with the real thing, the true kernel of which is the ultimate authority of the courts to restrain all exercise of absolute and arbitrary power not only by the executive and by officials and lesser tribunals but also by the legislatures and even by Parliament itself.
The Constitution established a "Rule of Law" in this land and that carries with it restraints and restrictions that are foreign to despotic power.
The courts, however, must always exercise caution and should not substitute their own judgment and discretion for that of such tribunals.
166 1316 In view of sections 7 and 11 of the and U.P. State Industrial Tribunal Standing Orders 1951 these Tribunals, though not bound by all the technicalities of Civil Courts must nevertheless follow the general pattern of the Civil Courts in the matter of taking the pleadings of the parties in writing and the drawing up of issues.
It is not open to the Tribunals to disregard the pleadings and to reach any conclusion that they think are just and proper.
The Supreme Court remitted the case to the Labour Appellate Tribunal for a rehearing of the appeals as the Adjudicator and the Labour Appellate Tribunal had adopted the attitude of benevolent despots and had based their conclusion on irrelevant considerations and ignored the real questions that arose for decision and the issues that arose out of the pleadings of the parties.
Western India Automobile Association vs Industrial Tribunal, Bombay ([1949] F.C.R. 321, 345), State of Madras vs C. P. Sarathy, ([1953] S.C.R. 334, 348), Bharat Bank Ltd. vs Employees of Bharat Bank Ltd., ([1950] S.C.R. 459, 497), Muir Mills Co. vs Suti Mills Mazdoor Union, Kanpur ([1955] 1 S.C.R. 991, 1001), referred to.
