The High Court passed an order directing issue of notice to the appellant to show cause why he should not be proceeded against for committing contempt .of the High Court.
The notice was issued in accordance with the procedure prescribed under section 17 of the .
The appellant filed an appeal against the said order under section 19(1) of the Act in this Court.
The counsel for the respondent raised a preliminary objection that no appeal under section 19(1) is maintainable against the order in question.
Dismissing the appeal the Court, HELD : (1) An appeal lies to this Court as a matter of right from any order or decision of a Bench of the High Court if the order has been made in the exercise of its jurisdiction to punish for contempt.
However, an appeal cannot lie from any kind of order made by the High Court in the proceeding for contempt.
The proceeding is initiated under section 17 by issuance of a notice.
Thereafter, there may be many interlocutory orders passed in the said proceeding by the High Court.
It could not be the intention of the Legislature to provide for an appeal to this Court as a matter of right from each and every such order made by the High Court.
The order or the decision must be such that.
it decides some bone of contention raised before the High Court affecting the right of the party aggrieved.
Mere initiation of a proceeding does not decide any question.
[511 F H] 2.
if the alleged contemner in response to the notice appears before the High Court and asks it to drop the proceedings on the ground of its being barred under Section 20 of the Act but the High Court holds that the proceedings is not barred, it may well be that an appeal would lie to this Court under section 19 It is neither possible nor advisable to make an exhaustive list of the type of orders which may be appealable under section 19.
[512 B C] Baradakanta Mishra vs Orissa, High Court, A.I.R. 1976 S.C. 1206, relied on.
Baradakanta Mishra vs Justice Gatikrushna Mishra ; , 53132, distinguished.
