The appellant was convicted of offences under Sections 302 (,on two counts), 307 and 460 I.P.C., and sentenced to death by the trial court, for illegally entering a residential house and causing two murders by shooting.
He was noticed by the deceased Natrajan 's wife and neighbour, who identified him in a test parade.
The High Court confirmed the death sentence.
The appellant, inter alia, challenged the propriety of his identification by the witnesses, and also the identification of the fire arm used for the murders.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court.
HELD : 1.
Identification parades have been in common use for a very long time, for the object of placing a suspect in a line up with other persons for identification is to find out whether he is the perpetrator of the crime.
This is all the more necessary where the name of the offender is not mentioned by those who claim to be eye witnesses of the incident but they claim that although they did not know him earlier, they could recall his features in sufficient details and would be able to identify him if and when they happened to see him.
The holding of a test identification in such cases is as much in the interest of the investigating agency or the prosecution as in the interest of the suspect or the accused.
For while it enables the investigating officer to ascertain the correctness or otherwise of the claim of those witnesses who claim to have seen the perpetrator of the crime, and their capacity to identify him, and thereby fill the Zap in the investigation regarding the identity of the culprit, it saves the suspect or the accused from the sudden risk of being identified in the dock by the self same witnesses during the course of the trial.
The line up of the suspect in a test identification parade is, therefore, a workable way of testing the memory and veracity of witnesses in such cases and has worked well in actual practice.
[703 A D] (2)The argument that the evidence regarding the holding of a test identification parade would be of no consequence and would suffer from a fatal defect if the prosecution has not led any evidence to prove that the appellant was kept "ba parda", is not correct.
After referring to the decision in Dhokal Singh and Anr.
vs The State, I.L.R. (1953) 3 Raj. 762, their Lordships approved of the view taken in State of Rajasthan vs Ranjitha, A.I.R. 1962, Raj 78 (FB) in which the earlier decision in Dhokal Singh 's case was adequately reexamined.
[701 H, 702, 703A] (3)A comparison microscope is the most important and most widely used scientific instrument in comparing the crime cartridge with the test cartridge, but there has been considerable difference of opinion amongst investigators regarding these photographs in a court for the purpose of illustrating the matching of the markings, and while it may be that microscopic photographs, when taken with the due care and in the best of conditions, may enable the evidence to be placed on the record in a visible form, a court would not be justified in rejecting the opinion of an expert who has examined the markings under the comparison microscope simply for the reason that he has not thought it necessary to take the photographs.
[705 F 706 A B] 695 The State of Gujarat vs Adam Fateh Mohmed Umative & Ors., , differentiated.
