One Smt.
Sughra Begum, a Shia Muslim lady was possessed of vast Zamindari and other properties.
On October 6, 1928, she created a waqf of the entire properties dividing them in three qurras, Raja Haji Saiyed Mohammad Mahmood Hasan was appointed by the waqifa as the Mutawalli of qurra No. 1.
After the death of his first wife Smt.
Akbari Begum.
the Raja took the plaintiff appellant as his second wife in the year 1933.
On January 22, 1935, a permanent lease was executed on behalf of one Saiyad Anwarul Rahman in respect of the disputed land in the name of the plaintiff.
The rent fixed was Rs. 80/per year.
Between the years 1937 and 1939 a bungalow was constructed on the said land which was named as "Mahmood Manzil".
The Raja died in September, 1939.
The plaintiff appellant filed a suit No. 86 of 1952 in the Court of the Civil Judge, Aligarh in which the original respondent was the sole defendant.
The plaintiffs case was that the disputed property belonged to her and that the defendant was inducted as a tenant of the 'kothi ' on and from 1 3 1947 on a rental of Rs. 60/ p.m., that he paid rent upto May 1950, but did not pay any rent thereafter, that she served a notice on him to pay the arrears of rent and deliver vacant possession of the Kothi.
The defendant respondent pleaded inter alia that Raja Sahib, the first Mutawali of qurra No. 1 had acquired the lease of the land and constructed the Kothi with the waqf fund as Mutawalli of the waqf and therefore it was a waqf property, that after the death of the Raja, he became the Mutawalli of qurra No. 1 including the Kothi in question and that he occupied the Kothi as a Mutawalli and not as a tenant.
The Trial Court accepted the case of the defendant, rejected that of the plaintiff and dismissed her suit.
Her appeal before the High Court was dismissed.
Dismissing the appeal by special leave, the Court HELD : 1.
According to Shia law, the waqf is irrevocable after possession is given to the beneficiaries or the Mutawalli.
The settler divests himself of the ownership of the property and of everything in the nature of usufruct from, the moment the waqf is created.
In pure metaphorical sense, the expression "ownership of God" is used but unlike Hindu law, since conception of a personal God is not recognised there is no ownership of God or no property belongs to God in the jural sense, although "the ownership of the property becomes reverted in God as he is originally the owner of all things".
The property is considered as transferred to the beneficiaries or the Mutawalli for the object of the waqf.
Strictly speaking, the ownership of the waqf property has no jural conception with any exactitude.
The corpus is tied down and is made inalienable.
Only the usufract and the income from the corpus or the waqf property is available for carrying out the objects of the waqf.
Creation of waqf for the purpose of maintenance of the waqif 's family and their descendants is also a charitable purpose.
[894 G 14, 895 A B] 2.
A Mutawalli is like a manager rather than a trustee.
The Mutawalli, so far as the waqf property is concerned, has to see that the beneficiaries got the advantage of usufruct.
The Mutawalli may do all acts reasonable and proper for the protection of the waqf property, and for the administration of the waqf.
[895 E, 896 D] 887 2(a) A Mutawalli of a waqf although not a trustee in the true sense of the term is still bound by the various obligations of a trustee.
He like a trustee or a person standing in a fiduciary capacity cannot advance his own interests or the interests of one class of relations by virtue of the position held by him.
The use of the funds of the waqf for acquisition of a property by a Mutawalli in the name of his wife would amount to a breach of trust and the property so acquired would be treated as waqf property.
[905 E G] Moattar Raza and Ors.
vs Joint Director of Consolidation U.P., Camp at Bareilly and Ors., A.1,R. 1970 All.
509 explained.
Mohammad Qamer Shah Khan vs Mahammed Salamat Ali Khan A.I.R. 1933, All. 407 over ruled.
The law as regards distribution of distributable income of the waqf property amongst the beneficiaries is that the benefit of a waqf for a person 's "sons and his children, and the children of his children for ever so long as there are descendants, is taken per capita, males and females taking equally and the children of daughters being included." [896 C F] Ahmed G. H. Ariff and Ors.
vs Commissioner of Wealth Tax, Calcutta, ; ; explained and held inapplicable.
In the eye of law, according to the concept of Mohammedan law, there was no legal entity available in whose name the property could be acquired except the Mutawalli or the beneficiary.
Unlike Hindu law, no property could be acquired in the name of God.
Nor could it be acquired in the name of any religious institution like the waqf estate.
Necessarily the property bad to be taken in the name of one of the living persons.
Ordinarily and generally the acquisition of property out of the waqf funds should have been in the name of the Mutawalli.
But it did not cease to be a waqf property merely because it was acquired in the name of one of the beneficiaries.
[901 E G] 5.
(a) The burden of proof that a particular sale is benami and the apparent purchaser is not the real owner always rests on the person asserting it to be so.
This burden has to be strictly discharged by adducing legal evidence of a definite character which would either directly prove the fact of benami or establish circumstances unerringly and reasonably raising an inference of that fact.
[910 A B] (b) The law relating to benami transactions strictly speaking, cannot, be applied in all its aspects to a transaction of such a kind.
Even if applied there will be no escape from the position that the real owner of the property was the Raja in the instant case in his capacity as Mutawalli and the appellant was a mere benamidar.
The property in reality, therefore belong to the waqf estate as concurrently and rightly field by the two Courts below.
[901 G H, 902 A] Gopeekrist Gosain and Gangaparsaud Gosain, 6 Moore 's Indian Appeals, 53.
Bilas Kunwar and Desraj Ranjit Singh and Ors., 42 Indian Appeals, 202, Kerwick and Kerwick, 47 Indian Appeals, 275, Sura Lakshmiah Chetty and Ors.
vs Kothandarama Pillai 52 Indian Appeals, 286 Mt. Sardar Jahan and Ors.
vs Mt. Afzal Begam, A.I.R. 1941, Oudh, 288, Mt. Siddique Begam vs Abdul Jabbar Khan and Ors.
, A.I.R. 1942, Allahabad, 308, Kalwa Devadattam and two Ors.
vs The Union of India and Ors, ; Union of India vs Moksh Builders and Financiers Ltd. and Ors., ; Kana karathanammal vs V. section Loganatha Mudaliar and Anr.
; , Jaydayal Poddar (deceased) through 1. rs.
and Anr.
vs Mst.
Bibi Hazra and Ors., and Krishnanand vs The State of Madhya Pradesh, [1977] 1 S.C.C. 816 referred to.
In the instant case (a) It is not possible to decree the appeal in face of her three varying stands in the three Courts viz. (1) in the Trial Court case of acquisition of property with her personal money; (2) in the High Court acquisition of property with the personal money of her husband and (3) in this Court the waqf fund invested from time to time became her personal money and enabled her to acquire the property.
[912 B C] 888 (b) A valid waqf was created by Smt.
Sughra Begum.
Except a Portion of money which was to be spent for public, religious or charitable objects the waqf was primarily of a private nature for the benefit of the settler 's family and their descendants, which is called waqf alal aulad.
The ultimate object was to spend income, if any, in the service of the Almighty God.
[894 C] Abdul Fata Mohammad vs Rasamaya, 22 Indian Appeals 76 referred to.
(c) The evidence is overwhelming on the question as to what was the source of money for the acquisition of the disputed property, either the land and Kothi.
It came from the waqf fund.
[897 C] (d) Though the Raja was vested with the power to fix stipends for his children and their descendants and for his wives during his life time also, he was not conferred an absolute power or discretion to fix any stipend for any beneficiary and no stipend for some beneficiary.
Equality amongst all is a golden thread which runs throughout the Mohammadan law.
It is a chief trait of that law.
[900 G] (e) Clause 19 of the last will of the Raja cannot create a title in favour of the plaintiff and finish the right of the waqf to the property.
If the property became the acquired property of the waqf, a Mutawalli; as the Raja was, by his own declaration contained in clause 19 of the Will could not make it a property of the plaintiff appellant.
The recital of fact could be pressed into service only to lend additional support to the plaintiff 's case if she would have stuck to that case and proved it by evidence aliunde.
[905 A B] (f) The concurrent findings of the Courts below that the appellant was benamidar on behalf of the waqf does not suffer from any infirmity to justify this court 's interference with the said finding.
The burden has been discharged by the respondent so much so that the finding as recorded could not be assailed.
It was merely attempted to be availed of to support a new case in this Court.
It should be remembered that 'by far the most important test for determining whether the sale standing in the name of one person is in reality for the benefit of another ' namely the source whence the purchase money came has been established beyond doubt.
The nature and possession of the property after the acquisition was such that it did not lead to the conclusion that it was not a waqf property and was a property in exclusive possession of the appellant through her tenants including the respondent.
[910 H, 911 A B] (g) In a case of this nature, all the aspects of the benami law including the question of burden of proof cannot justifiably be applied fully.
Once it is found, as it has been consistently found, that the property was acquired with the money of the waqf, a presumption would arise that the property is a waqf property irrespective of the fact as to in whose name it was acquired.
The Mutawalli by transgressing the limits of his power and showing undue favour to one of the beneficiaries in disregard to a large number of other beneficiaries could not be and should not be permitted to gain advantage by this method for one beneficiary which in substance would be gaining advantage for himself.
In such a situation it will not be unreasonable to say rather it would be quite legitimate to infer, that it was for the plaintiff to establish that the property acquired was her personal property and not the property of the waqf.
[911 G H, 912 A B]
