The plaintiff respondent filed a suit for recovery of a sum of Rs. 2 lakhs invested by him in the Adarsh Bima Company, which was taken over by the appellant, (defendant No. 3) herein, on the basis that the managing,, director of the Adarsh Bima Company by practising fraud and misrepresentation on the plaintiff that the plaintiff would be entitled to an assured dividend of 4%, that too contrary to the statute of the company induced him to part with the said sum by purchasing 200 shares of Rs. 100/ each.
The suit was contested by the appellant mainly on the ground that after the appellant took over the Adarsh Bima Company he was not liable for any act of the company which was ultra vires of the statutes of the company.
The trial Court passed a decree in favour of the respondents and the High Court affirmed it by dismissing the appeal by the appellant.
In appeal by certificate, the appellant contended (a) that on the finding that fraud was committed on the plaintiff and the act of the managing director being ultra vires of the statutes of the company, the company would not be liable although the managing director may be personally liable; and (b) assuming that the company was liable, but in view of the provisions of section 7(2) of the , the liability of the appellant would extend only to matters appertaining to, the controlled business as defined in the Act.
Dismissing the appeal the Court.
^ HELD : (1) The words of section 7(2) of the are of the widest amplitude and the section includes all debts, liabilities, obligations of whatever kind then existing and appertaining to the controlled business of the insurer.
There can be no doubt that but the time when the appellant took over the Adarsh Bima Company.
the obligation to restitute the benefit received by the company from the plaintiff had been fastened and the appellant was legally bound to return the same to the plaintiff under section 65 of the Contract Act, in view of the findings of the Courts below that the contract was void.
[15G H, 16A I] (2) The question as to whether or not the transaction was ultra vires of the statutes of the company was wholly irrelevant because that was the reason why the contract was void and not a ground for exempting the appellant from its liability to pay.
[16A] (3) The words "of whatever kind" in section 7(2) are wide enough to take within its sweep all kinds of transactions entered into by the predecessor company.
The present transaction was undoubtedly entered into by the Predecessor 12 company which had received the sum of Rs. 2 lakhs from the plaintiff and had issued share slips and the appellant, therefore, cannot escape his liability even under section 7(2).
[16 A C] (4) As the plaintiff will be entitled to restitution of the benefits under section 65 of the Contract Act, he can get only the amount which he had paid to the appellant company and not any interest upto the date of the suit.
[16C] [However the Court awarded interest at six percent per annum from the date of the suit, to the date of payment under section 34 of the C.P.C.] (5) The contention that on the finding that a fraud was committed on the plaintiff and the act of the managing director being ultra vires of the statutes of the company, the company would not be liable although the managing director may be personally liable is wrong.
There was absolutely no pleading by the defendants that the monies were received by the managing director personally and in fact the same did not go to the coffers of the company.
From the issue of the share scrips to the plaintiff, it must be presumed that the money was received by the company.
Moreover this question not having being raised before any Courts below and also being a question of fact cannot be gone into.
[13C, E, F, 14D E]
