The appellants were the purchasers of the mortgagors ' interests in the agricultural lands in suit and deposited the amounts due on the mortgages in court under section 83 of the Transfer of Property Act, which were withdrawn by the representatives of the mortgagees and the mortgages were redeemed.
They were obstructed in taking khas possession of the lands by tenants who were recorded as "settledraiyats" in the finally published record of rights and brought the suit for recovery of possession from the tenants and, alternatively, for damages against the representatives of the mortgagees.
The subordinate Judge found that the lands were the private lands of the proprietors and the tenants were inducted not by them but by the mortgagees in possession by a lease for a term which was neither bona fide nor binding on the appellants and passed a decree in ejectment.
On appeal, the High Court held that the lands were not the private lands of the mortgagors, the lease was bona fide and the recognition of the lessees as tenants by the mortgagees conferred on them rights of occupancy in the suit lands and dismissed the suit.
The respondents relied on the presumptions under sections 103 B and 120(2) of the Bihar Tenancy Act and contended that the recognition by the mort gagees of their tenancy right had the effect of conferring on them the rights of occupancy under the Act.
Held, that an entry in the record of rights published under section 103 A of the Bihar Tenancy Act does not create rights but merely raises a presumption under section 103 B of the Act that such Tights exist, which can be rebutted if it can be shown that the materials on which it was based do not justify it.
Bogha Mower vs Ram Lakhan, ([1917] and Bakub Ali vs Muhammad Ali ([1928] , referred to.
That where, as in the present case, no evidence was produced before the authority who made the record, one has only to produce 2 such evidence as satisfies the court in order to rebut the presumption.
This is equally true with regard to the presumption enacted by section 120(2) of the Act with regard to the proprietor 's private land.
That section 120 of the Bihar Tenancy Act merely enacts certain rules of evidence for determining whether a disputed land is the proprietor 's "private" land.
It does not preclude the proprietor, even if he cannot prove that he cultivated the land as such for 12 years prior to the date of the Act, from adducing other evidence to show that the land is his private land.
Kisho Prashad Singh vs Parmeshri Prasad Singh, ([1923] I.L.R. 2 Pat. 414) and Bindeshwari Prasad Singh vs Kisho Prasad Singh ([1926] L.R. 53 I.A. 164), relied on.
That as the mortgagees were neither proprietors nor tenure holders as defined by the Bihar Tenancy Act, persons inducted by them could not be raiyats within the meaning of section 5(3) of the Act so as to acquire any rights of occupancy under section 21 of the Act.
Mahabir Gope vs Harbans Narain Singh ([1952] S.C.R. 775), applied.
Nor could the provisions of section 76 (a) of the Transfer of Property Act be of any avail.
Assuming that the lease granted by the mortgagees continued even after termination of the period fixed therein, that could confer on the lessees no more than the status of tenants from year to year, in which case, their possession would cease with the termination of the agricultural year during which the mortgages were redeemed.
Rajendra Nath vs Dinu Prodhan (A.I.R. , disap proved.
Binod Lal Pakrashi vs Kalu Pramanik ([1893] I.L.R. 20 Cal.
708), doubted and held inapplicable.
Pramatha Noth vs Sashi Bhusan (A.I.R. , distinguished.
Case law discussed.
Held further, that there is no presumption of genuineness in favour of certified copies of documents under section 90 of the Evidence Act, nor does that section authorise the raising of a presumption as to the existence of authority of an agent to act for another.
Basant vs Brijraj ([1935] L.R. 62 I.A. 180), referred to.
