Article 371 D (3) inserted by the Constitution (Thirty Second Amendment) Act 1973, empowers the President to constitute an Administrative Tribunal for the State of Andhra Pradesh to exercise such jurisdiction powers and authority which immediately before the amendment was exercisable by any Court, tribunal or authority in respect of appointment, allotment or promotion to posts in the Civil Services of the State, under the State or under the control of any local authority within the state.
Clause (10) provides that the provisions of the Article and any order made by the President thereunder, shall have effect notwithstanding any other provision of the Constitution or in any other law for the time being in force.
6 of the Andhra Pradesh Administrative Tribunal Order, 1975 issued by the President, setting up the Andhra Pradesh Administrative Tribunal, provides that the Tribunal shall have 'all the jurisdiction, powers and authority exercisable by all Courts with respect to appointment, allotment or promotion to any public post, seniority of persons appointed.
allotted or promoted to such post and all other conditions of service of such persons '. 'The first Respondent in C.A. No. 2826/77 was a former employee of the High Court.
He originally belonged to the High Court service.
After being on deputation with the Central and State Governments for some years he re joined the High Court service as Assistant Registrar and was later promoted as Deputy Registrar. 'The Chief Justice of the High Court in exercise of his powers under Article 229 of the Constitution read with the relevant rules, passed an order, dated January 3, 1969, compulsorily retiring the respondent from service, who by then had attained the age of 50 years.
His writ petition assailing the orders of compulsory retirement, was dismissed by the High Court on the ground that the jurisdiction of the High Court which was hitherto being exercised under Article 226 of the Constitution to correct orders of the Chief Justice on the administrative side with regard to conditions of service of officers of the High Court, vested in the Administrative Tribunal by reason or clause 6 (1) of the A.P. Administrative Tribunal order made by the President under Article 371 D of the Constitution.
The respondent thereafter moved the Andhra Pradesh Administrative Tribunal, which set aside the impugned order on the ground, that it was arbitrary.
27 and amounted to a penalty of dismissal or removal from service and, as such, as hit by Article 311(2) of the Constitution.
The respondent in C.A. No. 278/78 was a member of the Andhra Pradesh State Judicial Service working as a Subordinate Judge.
He was prematurely retired in public interest by an order of the State Government on the recommendation of the High Court.
The respondent 's contention, that in the case of Subordinate Judges, the High Court being the appointing authority, the Governor had no power or jurisdiction to pass an order of premature retirement, of a member of the State Judicial Service, was accepted by the Tribunal, and the impugned order was set aside.
In the appeals against both the orders of the Administrative Tribunal, it was contended before this Court by the appellants that Article 371 D of the Constitution should be construed harmoniously with the basic scheme underlying Chapters V and VI in Part VI of the Constitution; and so construed, the general expression, such as "class or classes of posts` ', "Civil Services of the State" etc.
in Clause (3) of this Article will not include posts/members of the High Court staff and the Subordinate Judiciary, with the result that the impugned orders of the Administrative Tribunal are without jurisdiction and nullities.
On the other hand, the respondents contended that.
the phrase "any Civil Service of the State" in clause (3) of this Article interpreted in its widest sense, includes the members of the High Court staff and the Subordinate Judiciary; that even it such an interpretation is contrary to the Constitutional scheme of securing independence of the judiciary, such a result was intended to be brought about by insertion of Article 371 D, the non obstante provision in Clause (10) of which gives it an over riding effect.
Allowing the appeals, ^ HELD: 1.
The entire scheme or Chapters V and VI in Part VI of the Constitution epitomised in articles 229 and 235 has been assiduously designed by the Founding Fathers to ensure independence of the High Court and the Subordinate Judiciary.
[43F] (a) In regard to servants and officers of the High Court, Article 229 of the Constitution makes the power of their appointment, dismissal, removal, suspension, reduction in rank, compulsory retirement etc.
including the power to prescribe their conditions of service, the sole preserve of the Chief Justice and no extraneous executive authority can interfere with the exercise of that power by the Chief Justice or his nominee except to a very limited extent mentioned in the provisos.
In conferring such exclusive and supreme powers on the Chief Justice the object which the Founding Fathers had in view was to ensure the independence of the High Court.
[37F G] (b) The control over the Subordinate Judiciary vested in the High Court under Article 23 5 is exclusive in nature, comprehensive in extent and effective in operation.
It comprehends a wide variety of matters and is a complete control subject only to the power of the Governor in me matter of appointment, dismissal or removal.
[41B C] 28 (c) Since retirement, simpliciter, in accordance with the terms and conditions of service, does not amount to dismissal or removal or reduction in rank under Article 311 or under the service rules, it is for the High Court in the exercise of its 'control ' under Article 235, to decide whether or not a judge of the Subordinate Judiciary should be prematurely or compulsorily retired.
Though in form such an administrative decision of the High Court is advisory in substance and effect.
it is well nigh peremptory.
[42D, 43B] M. Gurumoorthy vs Accountant General Assam and Nagaland and Ors. , Chandra Mohan vs State of Uttar Pradesh , Chandramouleshwar vs Patna High Court ; ; State of Assam vs Ranga Mohammed ; ; State of West Bengal vs Nripendra Nath Bagchi ; ; Shamsher Singh vs State of Punjab ; ; Punjab and Haryana High Court vs State of Haryana (Sub nom Narendra Singh Rao) ; ; State of Assam vs section N. Sen ; State of Assam vs Kuseswar Sukla State of U.P. vs Batuk Deo Pati Tripathi and Anr.
; Tara Singh vs State of Rajasthan ; ; State of Haryana vs Inder Prakash Anand ; referred to.
The phrase "any civil service of the State" commonly employed in sub clauses (a), (b) and (c) of clause (3) of Article 371 D is a general, undefined and flexible expression and is capable of bearing meaning more than one.
If it is construed loosely, in its widest sense so as to include in it the High Court staff and the members of the Subordinate Judiciary, the result will be that the control vested in the Chief Justice over the staff of the High Court, and in the High Court over the subordinate judiciary will become shorn of its substance, efficacy and exclusiveness; and after being processed through the conduit of the Administrative Tribunal, will pass on into the hands of the Executive Government, which, under clause (5) of Article 371 D is the supreme authority, having full power to confirm or not to confirm, modify or annul the orders of the Tribunal.
Such a construction will lead to internecine conflict and contradiction, rob Articles 229 and 235 of their content make a mockery of the Directive Principles in Article 50 and the fundamental concept of the independence of the judiciary, which the Founding Fathers have with such anxious concern built into the basic scheme of the Constitution.
Parliament could never have intended such a strange result.
[53E H] 3.
(a) In its strict, narrow sense, the phrase 'Civil service of the State.
will not take in members of the High Court staff and the subordinate judiciary.
[49 A C] (b) Non use of the expressions. "judicial service of the State" and "District Judges" (which have been specifically defined in Article 236), and "Officers and Servants of the High Court", which have been designedly adopted in Articles 235 and 229, respectively, to differentiate these in the scheme of the Constitution from the other Civil Services of the State, gives a clear indication that posts held by the High Court Staff or by the Subordinate Judiciary have been advisedly excluded from the purview of Clause (3) of Article 371 D. [55 B C] 4.
In such a situation.
the Court must eschew the wide, literal interpretation which will defeat or render otiose the scheme of Chapters V and VI, Part VI, particularised in Articles 229 and 235, and instead, choose the alternative interpretation according to which members of the High Court Staff and the Subordi 29 nate Judiciary will not fall within the purview of Clause (3) of Article 371 D. A Such a restricted construction will ensure smooth working of the Constitution; and harmony among its various provisions.
[53H, 54A B] 5.
The officers and servants of the High Court and the members of the Judicial Service, including District Judges, being outside the purview of Clause (3), the non obstante provision in Clause (10) of Article 371 D cannot operate to take away the administrative or judicial jurisdiction of the Chief Justice or of the High Court, as the case may be, under Articles 229, 235 and 226 of the Constitution in regard to a dispute or matter relating to the conditions of service of a member of the High Court Staff or of the Subordinate Judiciary.
[55D] 6.
In view of the above, nothing in the Andhra Pradesh Administrative Tribunal Order, 1975, issued by the President confers jurisdiction, power and authority on the Administrative Tribunal to entertain, deal with or decide the representation by a member of the High Court Staff or of the Subordinate Judiciary.
The impugned orders.
therefore, of the Administrative Tribunal in both these appeals, were without jurisdiction, null and void.
[55 F G]
