The Rajasthan Land Reforms and Resumption of Jagirs Act, 1952 which provide for the resumption of jagir lands and other measures of land reforms, contains a comprehensive scheme for the determination of the amount of dues and debts recoverable by the State from the Jagirdar in respect of the jagir lands and their deduction from the amount of compensation payable to him.
Sections 22 to 31 read together provide for the continuance of the Jagirdar 's liability to the payment of arrears of revenue, ceases and other dues which were due from him in respect of the jagir lands for any period prior to the date of resumption or the jagir, out of the compensation payable to him.
A duty has been cast on the jagirdar to mention, in the statement of his claim for compensation the amount of dues and debts recoverable from him under section 22(1)(e).
Section 32(1) makes it obligatory on The Jagir Commissioner to provisionally determine the amount of compensation unrecoverable from the Jagirdar under section 22(1)(e) and serve a copy of the provisional order on the Government, the Jagirdar and every other interested person.
It is only after giving all or them a reasonable opportunity that the Jagir Commissioner can make a final order.
The order so made under section 32(2) would be final in respect of the amounts mentioned in it.
Section 34 provides for the deduction of the amounts determined by the Commissioner, from the compensation payable to the Jagirdar under section 26.
Section 35 deals with payment of compensation.
Section 39 provides for appeals against and decision of the Jagir Commissioner, to the Board of Revenue according to which the decision of the Board in the appeal shall be final.
Section 46 provides that no order mad by any officer or authority under the Act shall be called in question in any civil or revenue court.
Under the provisions of the Act, the lands belonging to the respondent, who was a. Jagirdar in the State of Rajasthan, vested in the State.
When the Jagir Commissioner took up the question of deciding the compensation payable to the respondent, the State filed a claim that a certain amount was recoverable from the compensation payable to the Jagirdar on account of revenue dues etc.
But since the State was not able to give a proper account of the dues, the Jagir Commissioner made an order that the amount claimed by the State could not be deducted.
The Board of Revenue dismissed the State Government 's appeal any, therefore, the order of the Jagir Commissioner became final.
In the meanwhile, when the Tehsildar sought to recover the dues from the respondent, he raised an objection that since the Jagir Commissioner 's order became final the Government was not competent to claim that amount.
The 96 Tehsildar rejected the objection.
In the respondent 's appeal, the Board of Revenue quashed the order of the Tehsildar on the ground that the State Government did not furnish the required particulars in spite of several opportunities given to it when the matter was before him and that the Jagir Commissioner was light in rejecting the claim of the State.
It also held that since his order became final, proceedings to have the recovery of the dues under the Land Revenue Act, Where without jurisdiction.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition filed by the State Government.
It held that The determination of the dues and debts recoverable by the State from the Jagirdar was a matter which was required to be settled by the Jagir Commissioner and that by virtue of section 46 of the Act, a Civil or Revenue Court had no jurisdiction in respect of it.
On the question whether the Jagir Commissioner 's order was final and whether any Civil or Revenue Court had jurisdiction to reopen it, as it related to a matter which was required to be settled or decided or dealt with by the commissioner.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: The High Court was right in raising the bar of section 46 and holding that no Civil or Revenue Court had jurisdiction in respect of the controversy as it was a matter which had in fact been finally decided by the Jagir Commissioner and the Board of Revenue under the provisions of the Act.
The belated attempt by the State to get over.
the bar by instituting proceedings under section 229 or section 257 A of the Rajasthan land Revenue Act was illegal and was rightly set aside by the Board.
The objection against it had no merit and had rightly been rejected by the High Court.
[104D E] The provisions of the Act are quite adequate and comprehensive and read with the relevant rules, provide for the determination and recovery of the amounts due from the Jagirdar on account of the Jagir lands.
This had to be so, because when the Act provides for the resumption of the jagir lands it is fair and reasonable that it should make provision for the determination and recovery of the amount recoverable from the Jagirdar.
The provisions of that Act are a comprehensive code concerning the liability of the Jagirdar.
[103D E] There is no force in the contention that the resolution of the Jaipur State Council was a final adjudication of the liability of the Jagirdar and that, being in the nature of a decree, the Jagir Commissioner 's order was illegal.
The Jagirdar denied any knowledge of the resolution.
When the Jagir Commissioner undertook the enquiry, the State did not produce the resolution and, therefore, he dismissed the claim of the State.
[104F H, 105A B] There is also no force in the contention that section 34 is not a bar to civil action because in a given case the amount of compensation might fall short of the amount recoverable from the Jagirdar.
Such possibility could not arise in this case.
The compensation payable to the Jagirdar was far in excess of his liability to the State.
The Act casts a duty on the Jagir Commissioner to take necessary steps for the adjustment of the recovery and further recovery of the balance, if any, that might remain outstanding against the Jagirdar there could, therefore, be no occasion for the recovery of any balance of revenue does by civil action in this case.
[105C F] 97 Ullal Venkatrava Kini vs Louis Souza AIR ; G. Venkatachala Odavar vs Ramachandra Odavar & Anr., AIR 1961 Mad, 423 Kulandaiswami Madurai & Ors.
vs Murugayya Madurai & Ors., ; Rameshwar Prasad & Ors.
vs Satya Narain & Ors.
AIR 1954 All 115, Gurbasappa Mahadevappa vs Neel Kanthappa Shivappa AIR 1951 Bom.
136; A. R. Sarin vs B. C. Patil & Anr.
AIR 1951 Bom.
423; Shivshankar Prasad Shah & Ors.
vs Baikunth Nath Singh & Ors. ; held inapplicable.
