Under section 363(1) of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 "when the accused is sentenced to imprisonment, a copy or the judgment shall immediately after the pronouncement of the judgment, be given to him free of cost".
Under section 363(2), "on the application of the accused, a certified copy of the judgment or when he so desires z. translation in his own language if practicable or in the language of the Court, shall be given to him without delay and such copy shall in, every case where the judgment is appealable by the accused be given free of cost: Provided that where the sentence of death is passed or confirmed by the High Court, a certified copy of the judgment shall be immediately given to the accused free of cost whether or not he applies for the same".
section 387 of the Code, these provisions contained in Chapter XXVII are applicable so far as may be practicable to the judgment in appeal by a Court of Sessions or Chief Judicial Magistrate.
section 388, however, requires that the order of the High Court on appeal should be certified to lower court and the court to which the High Court certifies its judgment shall make such orders as are comfortable to the judgment of the High Court.
The petitioner was tried for the various offences under s.417 read with s.511 I.P.C`., section 467 I.P.C. section 468 I.P.C. and 471 read with section 467 I.P.C. by the Sessions Court and found guilty of the said offences but sentenced to a soft sentence of simple imprisonment till the rising of the Court and some fine.
Two appeals were filed one by the petitioner and the other by the State.
The High Court dismissed the petitioner 's appeal and accepting the State 's appeal enhanced the sentence to three years on 22 11 73.
On 26 11 73, in conformity with the Judgement of the High Court, the Sessions Court passed necessary orders to the Central Prison Authority Bombay to take him into custody.
He was later on transferred to Yeravada Jail, Pune.
The petitioner under went the full period of im 193 prisonment and filed the special leave petition with a petition for condonation , of delay contending that on 10 12 73 he had applied under section 363(2) read with section 387 of the Code for a certified copy of the judgment dated 22 11 73 through the jail authorities and that though the copy was received by the jail authorities in March 1 1974 from the High Court it was never delivered to him, with the result he not only lost his right to appeal by special leave but was forced to come up with a condonation petition after obtaining another certified copy from the High Court.
Condoning the delay and dismissing the petition the Court ^ HELD: l. Freedom is what freedom does.
In article 21 of the Constitution the guarantee of the personal liberty is phrased with superb amplitude with the words, "No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to procedure established by law".
"Procedure established by law" are words of deep meaning for all lovers of liberty and judicial sentinels.
Amplified activist fashion, 'procedure ' means 'fair and reasonable procedure ' which comports with civilised norms like natural justice rooted firm in community consciousness not primitive processual barbarity nor legislated normative mockery.
[201C E] 2.
One component of 'fair procedure ' is natural justice.
Generally speaking and subject to just exceptions, at least a single right of appeal on facts, where criminal conviction is fraught with long loss of liberty, is basic to civilized jurisprudence.
It is integral to fair procedure, natural justice and normative universality save in special cases like the original tribunal being a high bench sitting on a collegiate basis.
In short, a first appeal from the Sessions Court to the High Court, as provided in the Criminal Procedure Code, manifests this value upheld in article 21.
Every step that makes the right of appeal fruitful is obligatory and every action or inaction which stultifies it is unfair and, ergo, unconstitutional (In a sense, even article 19 may join hands with article 21, as the Maneka Gandhi reasoning discloses).
Maneka Gandhi 's case has laid down that personal liberty cannot be cut out or down without fair legal procedure.
[197F, 203D E. F 208E] Pertinent to the point in the case are two requirements: (i) service of a copy of the judgment to the prisoner in time to file an appeal an(l (ii) provision of free legal services to a prisoner who is indigent or otherwise disabled from securing legal assistance where the ends of justice call for such service.
Both these are.
State responsibilities under article 21 and apply where procedural law provides.
for further appeals as well.
[203F G] Maneka Gandhi vs Union of India , referred to.
Judicial Justice with procedural intricacies, legal submissions and critical examination of evidence, leans upon professional expertise; and a failure of equal justice under the law is on the cards where such supportive skill is absent for one side.
Our Judicature and Judicial Process, engineered by kindred legal technology, compel the colloboration of lawyer power for steering the wheels of equal justice under the law.
[204C D] If a prisoner who is sentenced to imprisonment is virtually unable to exercise his constitutional and statutory right of appeal, inclusive of special leave to appear for want of legal assistance, there is implicit in the Court under article 142 194 read with Articles 21 and 39A of the Constitution power to assign counsel for such imprisoned individual "for doing complete justice".
This is a necessary incident of the right of appeal conferred by the Code and allowed by article 136 of the Constitution.
The accused has a right to counsel not in the permissive sense of article 22(1) and its wider amplitude but in the peremptory sense of article 21 confined to prison situations.
[28F G, 209C] 4.
Where the prisoner seeks to file an appeal or revision every facility for exercise of that right shall be made available by the jail administration.
[209E] (a)Courts shall forthwith furnish free transcript copy OF the judgment when sentencing a person to prison term.
In the event of any such copy being sent to the jail authorities for delivery to the prisoner by the appellate, unrevisional or other Court, the official concerned shall with quick despatch.
get it delivered to the sentence and obtain written acknowledgement thereof from him.
Any jailor who by indifference or vendetta, withholds the copy thwarts the Court process and violates article 21 and may pavc the way for holding the further imprisonment illegal.
These obligations are necessary implied in the right of appeal conferred by the Code read with the commitment to procedural fairness in article 21.
section 363 of the Cr.
P.C. is an activist expression of this import of article 21 and is inviolable.
[204A B & 209DE] John Richard Argersinger vs Raymond Hamlin, ; 530 at 535 36 and 554, quoted with approval.
article 8 of the Universal Declaration on Human Rights and article 14(3) of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights referred to.
(b) The State which prosecuted the prisoner and set in motion the process which deprived him of his liberty shall pay to the assigned counsel such sum as the Court may equitably fix.
the Court may judge the situation and consider from all angles whether it is necessary in the ends of justice to make available legal aid in the particular.
That discretion resides in the Court.
[209A B, & G] (c) These benign prescriptions operate by force of article 21 "strengthened by article 19(1)(d) read with sub article (5) from the lowest to the highest Court where deprivation of life and personal liberty is in substantial peril.
[209H] 5.
Since the Supreme Court is the last in Indian pyramid of justice every party in person elicits from the Court extra solicitude so that he may not suffer from a sense of handicap due to the absence of professional legal service.
The present petition, the party though proffessional legal aid by the Court preferred to argue himself [1971H. 198A, 209B] 6.
(a) The Supreme Court has laid down certain fundamental principles its governing its jurisdiction when special leave is sought under article 136 of the Constitution.
The Court cannot depart from this criteria lest the endless chase for justice by every defeated litigant, civil and criminal should flood it into dysfunction.[198A B] 195 Ujjagar Singh & Anr.
vs State (Delhi Admn), order in S.L.P. (Crl.) No. A 1319 etc.
Of 1977 dt. 31 7 78 (unreported case).
(b) The soft justice syndrome vis a vis white collar offenders scandalizes the Court.
It stultifies social justice and camouflages needed severity with naive leniency.
[196G] (c) Social defence is the criminological foundation of punishment.
In the instant case, the trial judge has confused between correctional approach to prison treatment and nominal punishment verging on decriminalisation of serious social offences.
The first is basic and the second pathetic.
That Court which ignores the grave injury to society implicit in economic crimes by the upperberth 'mafia ' ill serves social justice.
Soft sentencing justice is gross injustice where many innocents are the potential victims.
It is altogether a different thing to insist on therapeutic treatment, hospital setting and correctional goals inside the prison "even punctuated by parole, opportunities for welfare work meditational normalisation and healthy self expression so that the convict may be humanised and on release rehabilitated as a safe citizen.
Coddling is not correctional any more than torture is deterrent.
While iatrogenic prison terms are bad because they dehumanize, it is functional failure and judicial pathology to hold out a benignly self defeating non sentence to deviants who endanger the morals and morale, the health and wealth of society.
[199E H, 200A] Mohammad Giasuddin vs State of Andhra Pradesh [1978] I SCR 153.
applied.
