section 3(e) of the Mines and Mineral (Regulation and Development) Act, 1957 defines " 'Minor Mineral ' as meaning building stones, gravel, ordinary clay, ordinary sand other than sand used for prescribed purposes, and any other mineral which the Central Government may, by Notification in the official Gazette declare to be a minor mineral".
In exercise of the power conferred by section 3(e) of the Act the Central Government declared inter alia brick earth as a 'minor mineral '.
Dismissing the appeal by special leave the Court ^ HELD: ( I ) The word 'mineral ' has no fixed but a contextual connotation.
If 'mineral ' is not a term of art it is a word of common parlance, capable of multiplicity of meanings depending upon the context.
The word is occasionally used in a very wide sense to denote any substance that neither animal nor vegetable Sometimes it is used in a narrow sense to mean no more than precious metals like gold and silver.
Again the word 'minerals ' is often used to indicate substances obtained from underneath the surface of the earth by digging or quarrying.
though it is not always so.
[273 A C, 274 F] In the context of the ', the word Mineral is of sufficient amplitude to include brick earth.
If the expression 'minor mineral ' as defined in the Act, includes 'ordinary clay` and 'ordinary sand '.
there is no earthly reason why brick earth should not be held to be 'any other mineral ' which may, be declared as a 'minor mineral '.
[1275 B C] Bhagwan Das vs State.
Of U.P., ; , applied Laddu Mal vs State of Bihar, AIR 1965 Pat. 491; Amar Modilal Singh vs State of Haryana, AIR 1972 Punjab and Haryana 356; Sharma & Co. vs State of U.P., AIR 1975 All. 386 approved.
State of West Bengal vs Jagdamba Prasad, AIR 1969 Cal.
281; overruled.
Todd Birleston & Co. vs The North Eastern Railway Co., [1903] I K.B. 603; quoted with approval.
(2) A substance must first be a mineral before it can be notified as a minor mineral pursuant to the power vested in the Central Government under section 3(e) of the Act.
Brick earth being a mineral.
the Central Government has correctly notified it as a 'minor mineral '.
[272 G H] 272
