The Punjab Excise Act 1914 contemplates grant of licences for trading in (Indian) foreign and country liquor.
Section 59(f) (v) of the Act provides for the fixing of the days during which any licensed premises may or may not be kept open for sale of liquor and the closure of such premises on special occasions.
The conditions of the licence includes restrictions of various types including obligation not to sell liquor on certain days and during certain hours.
Rule 37(a) as it originally stood prohibited sale of liquor on Tuesdays upto 2 p.m. and also on tho 7th day of every month.
This rule was amended by a notification whereby in place of "Tuesdays upto 2 p.m. plus the 7th of every month" "Tuesday and Friday in every week", was substituted as the days when liquor vending was prohibited.
"Note" appended to the said rule exempted tourist bungalows and.
rest houses run by the Department of tho State Government from the operation of the condition regarding closure.
Consequent upon the change of days, the .
Licence fee payable by a vendor was reduced from Rs. 12,000/ to Rs. 10,000/ to compensate for the marginal loss caused by two days ' closure.
The petitioners who were licensed vendors of liquor in the State challenged the constitutionality of section 59(f)(v) and the vires of Rule 37 on the ground that section 59(f)(v) vested an unguided, uncanalised, vague and vagarious power in the Financial Commissioner to fix the days or number of days and hours or number of hours without laying down any guidelines, indicators or controlling points.
The State on the other hand contended that the subject matter of the legislation being a deleterious substance (liquor), requiring restrictions in the direction of moderation in consumption, regulation regarding the days and hours of sale and appropriateness in the matter of location of the places of sale, reasonableness and arbitrariness must be tested on the touchstone of principled pragmatism and living realism, Dismissing the writ petitions, ^ HELD: (a) Section 59(f)(v) of the Punjab Excise Act 1914 is valid.
[158 C] 123 (b) The regulation of the number of days and the duration of the hours when supply of alcohol by licensees shall be stopped is quite reasonable whether it be two days in a week or more.
[158D] (c) The exercise of the power to regulate, including to direct closure for some days every week, being reasonable and calculated to produce temperance and promote social welfare, cannot be invalidated on the imaginary possibility of misuse.
The test of the reasonableness of a provision is not the theoretical possibility of tyranny.
[158E] (d) There is enough guideline in the scheme and provisions of the Punjab Excise Act to govern the exercise of the power under sections 58 and 59.
[158E] (1) (a) The Constitutional test of reasonableness, built into Article IV and of arbitrariness implied in Article 14 has a relativist touch.
The degree of constitutional restriction and the strategy of meaningful enforcement will naturally depend on the Third World setting, the ethos of our people, the economic compulsions of today and of human tomorrow.
While scanning the rationale of an Indian temperance measure it would be useful to remember the universal evil in alcohol and the particularly pernicious consequences of the drink evil in India.
Societal realities shape social justice.
[133H, 134A B] (b) "We, the people of India" have enacted Article 47 and "we the Justices of India" cannot 'lure it back to cancel half a life ' or 'wash out a word of it especially when progressive implementation of the policy of prohibition is, by Articles 38 and 47, made fundamental to the country 's governance.
[138H] (c) The Constitution is the property of the people and the court 's know how is to apply the Constitution not to assess it.
In the process of interpretation Part IV of the Constitution must enter the soul of Part m and the laws.[138H, 139A] State of Kerala & Others vs N. M. Thomas & Others ; referred to.
(d) Even restrictions under Article 19 may, depending on situations be pushed to the point of prohibition consistently with reasonableness.
While the police power as developed in the American Jurisprudence and Constitutional law.
may not be applicable in terms to the Indian Constitutional law, there is much that is common between that doctrine and the reasonableness doctrine under Article 19 of the Indian Constitution.
There is also a close similarity in judicial thinking on the subject.
[148F, G] South Western Law Journal Annual Survey of Texas Law Vol.
30 No. 1.
Survey 1976 pp.
725 26.
Idaho Law Review Vol. 7 1970 p. 131, Fatehchand Himmatlal vs Maharashtra ; at 839 848 referred to.
(e) The statutory scheme of the Act is not merely fiscal but also designed to regulate and reduce alcoholic habit.
While commodities and situation dictate whether power, in given statutory provisions, is too plenary to be other than arbitrary or is instinct with inherent limitations, alcohol is so manifestly deleterious that the nature of the guidelines is written in invisible ink.
[151 G H] 124 (f) The subject matter of the legislation is a deleterious substance (alcohol) requiring restrictions in the direction of moderation in consumption, regulation regarding the days and hours of sale and appropriateness in the matter of the location of the places of sale.
If it is coal or mica or cinema, the test of reasonableness will be strict, but if it is an intoxicant or a killer drug or a fire arm the restrictions must be stern.
Just as the difference between bread and brandy is felt in the field of trade control, coal and gold are as apart from whisky and toddy as cabbages are from kings.
Life speaks through law.
[ 154D F] Nashirwar vs M.P. State ; at 869 71 referred to.
(2) Even if section 59 and Rule 37 were upheld in toto that does not preclude any affected party from challenging a particular executive act pursuant Thereto on the ground that such an act is arbitrary, malafide or unrelated to the purposes and the guidelines available in the statute.
To illustrate, if the Financial Commissioner or the Excise Commissioner as the case may be declares that all liquor shops shall be opened on his birthday or shall remain closed on his Friend 's death anniversary, the executive order will be invalid.
The law may be good, but the executive action may be corrupt and then it cannot be sustained.
[145G H] (3) The most significant social welfare aspect of the closure is the prevention of the ruination of the poor worker by drinking down the little earnings he gets on the wage day.
Any government with worker 's weal and their families ' survival at heart will use its 'police power ' under Article 19(6) read with.
section 59(f)(v) of the Act to forbid alcohol sales on pay days.
To save the dependent women and children of wage earners the former unamended rule had forbidden sales on the 7th day of every month the day the monthly pay packet passes into the employees ' pocket.
While bringing in the Tuesday Friday for biddance of sales, the ban on sales on the seventh of every month was entirely deleted.
The victims of the change are the weeping wives and crying children of the workers.
All power is a trust and its exercise by governments must be subject to social audit and Judas exposure.
[146E H] (4) The liquor trade is instinct with injury to individual and community aud has serious side effects recognised everywhere in every age.
Not to control alcohol business is to abdicate the right to rule for the good of the people.
Not to canalize the age and sex of the consumers and servers, the hours of sale and cash and carry basis, the punctuation and pause in days, to produce partially the 'dry ' habit it to fail functionally as a welfare state.
The whole scheme of the statute proclaims its purpose of control in time and space and otherwise.
Section 58 vests in government the power for more serious restrictions and laying down of principles.
Details and lesser constraints have been left to the rule making power of the Financial Commissioner.
The complex of provisions is purpose oriented, considerably reinforced by Article 47.
Old statutes get invigorated by the Paramount Parchment.
Interpretation of the text of preconstitution enactments can legitimately be infused with the concerns and commitments of the Constitution as an imperative exercise.
It is impossible 'to maintain that no guidelines are found in the Act.
[147D F] (5) While the forensic problem is constitutional, the Constitution itself is a human document.
The Court has justified the ways of the Constitution and the law to the consumers of social justice and spirituous potions.
[128D, 158G] 125 (6) As between temperance and prohibition it is a policy decision for the Administration.
Hopefully it is expected of the State to bear true faith and allegiance to that Constitution orphan, Article 47.
[158A, G] The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi pp 29 30.
Society and the Criminal by M. J. Sethna 3rd Edn.
P. 165, 166 & 168 69 .
Society, Crime and Criminal Career by Don C. Gibbars p. 427 428.
Har Shankar & others etc.
vs Dy.
Excise & Taxation Commissioner & others ; at 266 267 referred to.
Report of the Study Team on Prohibition Vol.
344. 346, 347
