The appellant plaintiff is a playwright, dramatist and producer of stage plays.
The appellant had written and, produced a number of plays.
The subject matter of the appeal however, is the play entitled (Hum Hindustani '.
This play was written by him in the year 1953 and was enacted in the year 1954 and thereafter the play proved to be popular.
In November 1954 the appellant received a letter from the second defendant Mr.
Mohan Sehgal requesting the appellant to supply a copy of the play so that he could consider the desirability of making, a film on it.
Thereafter, the appellant and defendant No. 2 met at Delhi.
In May, 1955 the second defendant announced the production of a motion picture entitled "New Delhi".
The picture was released in Delhi in September 1956.
The appellant saw the picture.
The appellant filed a suit alleging that the film "New Delhi" was entirely based upon the play "Hum Hindustani", that the play was narrated by the appellant to defendant No. 2 and he dishonestly imitated the same in his film and thus committed an act of piracy as to result in violation of the copy right of the plaintiff.
The appellant, therefore, filed the suit for damages, for decree for accounts of the profits made by the defendant and a decree for permanent inujunction against the defendants restraining them from exhibiting the film.
The suit was contested by the defendants.
The defendants pleaded that defendant No. 2 is a film director and producer and director of Delux Films defendant No. I that at the instance of a common friend Mr. Gargi the defendant No. 2 met the appellant and saw the script of the play, that the play was inadequate for The purpose of making of a full length commercial motion picture.
The defendants contended that there could be no copy right so far as the subject of provincialism is concerned which can be used or adopted by anybody in his own way.
The defendants further contended that the motion picture was quite different from the play both in contents, spirit and climax.
The mere fact of some similarities between the firms and the play could be explained by the Fact that the idea, provincialism was the common source of the play as also of the film.
The trial court raised several issues and came to the conclusion that the appellant was the owner of the copy right in 'Hum Hindustani ' but there was no violation of copy right of the appellant.
Thereafter the appellant filed an appeal in the Delhi High Court.
A Division Bench of the Delhi High Court upheld the decree dismissing the appellant 's suit.
The counsel for the appellant contended (1) that the principles enunicated and the legal inference drawn by the courts below are against the settled legal principles laid down by the courts in England, America and India (2) the two 219 courts have not fully understood the imports of the violation of copy right particularly when the similarities between the play and The film are so close that would lead to the irresistible inference and unmistakable impression that the film is nothing but an imitation of the play.
The counsel for the respondents submitted (1) that the two courts below have applied the law correctly.
(2) This Hon 'ble Court may not enter into the merits in view of the concurrent findings of fact given by the two courts.
(3) Even on the facts found it is manifest that there is a vast difference both in the spirit and the contents between the play and the film.
Dismissing the appeal by special leave the Court ^ HELD: (a) In order to appreciate the argument of the parties the court discussed the law on the subject.
At the time when the cause of action arose in the present suit, the Indian Parliament had not made any law governing copyright violation and therefore the court relied on the old law passed by the British Parliament viz., the Copyright Act of 1911.
section 1 sub sec.
(2)(d) defines copyright as including in the case of a literary, dramatic or musical work, to make any record, performed roll.
cinematograph film, or other contrivance by means of which the work may be mechanically performed or delivered.
section 2(i) defines that copyright in a work shall be deemed to be infringed by any person who without the consent of the owner of the copyright, does anything, the sole right to do which is by this Act conferred on the owner of the copyright.
The play written by the appellant falls within the definition of copyright.
[229 D H 230 A B] The following is summary of the decided cases in England, America and India on the question of copyright.
There can be no copyright in an idea, subject matter, themes, plots or historical or legendary facts and violation of the copyright in such cases is confined to the form, manner and arrangement and expression of the idea by tile author of the copy righted work.
[248 H, 249 A] 2.
Where the same idea is being developed in a different manner, it is manifest that the source being common, similarities are bound to occur.
In such a case the courts should determine whether or not the similarities are on fundamental or substantial aspects of the mode of expression adopted in the copyrighted work.
If the defendant 's work is nothing but a literal imitation of the copyrighted work with some variations here and there it would amount to violation of the copyright.
In other words, in order to be actionable the copy must be a substantial and material one which at once leads to the conclusion that the defendant is guilty of an act of piracy.
1249 A C] 3.
One of the surest and the safest test to determine whether or not there has been a violation of copyright is to see if the reader, spectator or the viewer after having read or seen both the works is clearly of the opinion and gets an unmistakable impression that the subsequent work appears to be a copy of the original.
[249 C D] 4.
Where the theme is the same but is presented and treated differently so that the subsequent work becomes a completely new work, no question of violation of copyright arises.
[249 D] 220 5.
Where however apart from the similarities appearing in the two works there are also material and broad dissimilarities which negative the intention to copy the original and the coincidences appearing in the two words are clearly incidental no infringement of the copyright comes into existence.
[249 E] 6.
As a violation of copyright amounts to an act of piracy it must be proved By clear and cogent evidence after applying the various tests laid down by decided cases [249 F] 7.
Where however the question is of the violation of the copyright of a stage play by a film producer or a Director the task of the plaintiff becomes more difficult to prove piracy.
It is manifest that unlike a stage play a film has a much broader prospective, wider field and a bigger background where the defendants can by introducing a variety of incidents give a colour and complexion different from the manner in which the copyrighted work has expressed the Idea.
Even so, if the viewer after seeing the film gets a totality of impression that the film is by and large a copy of the original play, violation of the copyright may be said to be proved.
[249 F H] Hanfstaengl vs W. H. Singh & Sons, [1905] 1 Chancery Division 519; Bobbs Merill Co. vs Isdor Straus and Nathan Strau, ; ; West Francis, , 743; Ladbroke (Football) Ltd. vs William Hill (Football) Ltd. ; Corelli vs Gray, ; Hawkes & Son (London) Ltd. vs Paramount Film Service Ltd., ; Harman Pictures N. V. vs Osborne & Ors., ; Donoghue vs Allied Newspapers Ltd. ; Bobl & Anr.
vs Palace Theatre (Ltd.) & Alir.
; Tate vs Fullbrook, 77 Law Journal Reports 577; Frederick.
B. Chatterton & Benjamin Webster vs Joseph Arnold Cave, ; Sheldon vs Metro Goldwyn Pictures Corp., 81 2d 19; Shipman vs R.K.o.
Radio Pictures, 100 2d 533, Michael vs Moretti vs People of the State of Illionois, 248 2d 799=356 U.S. 947, Warner Bros. Pictures vs Columbia Broadcasting System, ; Otto Eisenchiml vs Fawcett Publications, 246 2d 598; Dorsey vs Old Surety.
Life Ins., Co., ; Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation vs Stonesifer, 140 2d 579; Oliver Wendel Homes vs George D. Hurst, ; ; Macmillan & Co. Ltd. vs K. & J. Cooper, 51 I.A. 109; Florerlce A Deeks vs H. G. p Wells & Ors., 60 I.A. 26; N. T. Ragllunathan & Anr.
vs All India Reporter Ltd., Bombay, A.I.R. 1971 Bom.
48, K. R. Venugopala Sarma vs Sangu Ganesan, ; The Daily Calendar Supplying Bureau, Sivakasi vs The United Concern, A.I.R. 1967 Mad. 381; Hantsiaenql vs Bains & Co., (25); C. Gunniah & Co. vs Balraj & Co., A.I.R. 1961 Mad.
111; Mohendra Ghundra Nath Ghosh & ors.
vs Emperor, A.I.R. 1928 Cal.
section K. Dutt vs Law Book Co. & Ors.
A.I.R. 1954 All. 570; Romesh Chowdhry & Ors vs Kh.
Ali Mohammad Nowsheri & Ors., AIR 1965 J. & K.101 and Mohini Mohan Singh & Ors vs Sita Nath Basak, AIR 1931 Cal.
238; referred to.
The learned trial Judge who had the advantage of seeing the picture was of the opinion that the film taken as a whole is quite different.
from the play written by the appellant.
This Court also got the play read to the learned Judges and the learned Judges also saw the film.
The Court came to the conclusion that the essential features of the play are as under: [250 A B, 251 G] 1.
That the central idea of the play is based on provincialism and parochialism.
[251 G] 221 2.
The evils of provincialism are illustrated by the cordial relations of the two families being marred because of an apprehended marriage tie which according to both the families WAS not possible where they belonged to different States.
[251 H, 252 A] 3.
That the Madrasi boy Amni is a coward and in spite of his profound love 'or Chander he does not muster sufficient courage to talk the matter out with his parents.
[252 A B] 4.
That in sheer desperation while the parents of the families are trying to arrange a match for the couple belonging to the same State Amni and Chander enter into a suicidal pact and write letters to their parents intimating their intention.
[252 B C] 5.
It was only after the letters are perused by the parents that they realise he horror of parochialism and are repentant for having acted so foolishly.
[252 C] 6.
That after this realisation comes the married couple Amni and Chander appear before the parents and thus all is well that ends well.
[252 D] The Court came to the conclusion that the essential features of the film are as under: (1) Two aspects of provincialism viz. the role of provincialism in regard to marriage and in regard to renting out accommodation (2) Evils of a caste ridden society, and (3) the evils of dowry.
[255 H] It is true that there are following similarities in the two.
[256 A] (i) Before the actual stage play, the producer gives a. narrative.
He states that although we describe ourselves as Hindustanis we are not really Hindustanis.
He questions the audience as to what they are and various voices are heard.
To say in their own provincial language that they are Punjabis, Bengalis, Gujarati, Marathas, Madrasis, Sindhis etc.
In the said Film the same idea is conveyed and the hero of the picture is shown searching for a house in New Delhi and wherever he goes he is confronted by a landlord who describes himself not as a Hindustani but as a Punjabi, Bengali, Gujarati, Marathi, Madarasi or Sindhi.
[256 C D] (ii) Both the said play and the said film deal with the subject of Provincialism.
[256 E] (iii)Both the said play and the said film evolve a drama around the lives of two facilities, one a Punjabi and the other a Madrasi family.
1256 E] (iv) In both the said play and the said film the name of the Madrasi father is Subramanyam .[256 F] (v) Both the said play and the said film have their locale in New Delhi.
[256 F] (vi) Both the said play and the said film show cordiality of relations between the two families.
[256 F G] (vii)Both the said play and the said film show the disruption of cordial relations as soon as the heads of the families discover the existence of a love affair between their children.
[256 G] (viii) In both the said play and the said film, both the parents warn their respective children not to have anything to do with each other on pain of Corporal punishment.
1256 Hl.
222 (ix) The entire dialogue in both the said play and the said film before and after the disruption is based upon the superiority of the inhabitants of one Province over the inhabitants of the others.
[257 A] (x) In both the said play and the said film the girl is shown to be fond of music and dancing.
[257 B] (xi) In both the said play and the said film the hero is shown as a coward to the extent that he has not the courage to go to his parents and persuade them to permit him to marry a girl hailing from another Province.
[257 B C] (xii) Both in the said play and in the said film, when the parents of the girl are discussing marrying her off to some body the girl is listening to the dialogue from behind a curtain.
Thereafter the girl runs to the boy and explains the situation to him.
[257 C] (xiii) In both the said play and the said film, the girl writes a letter of suicide.
[257 D] (xiv) In the said play reconciliation takes place when the children of the two families, who were in love, go out to commit suicide by drowning etc., whereas in the said film, it is only the daughter who goes out to commit suicide by drowning herself in the Jamuna.
[257 D E] (xv) In the said play the children are stopped from committing suicide by an astrologer whereas in the said film the girl is stopped from committing suicide by a friend of the family.
[257 E F] (xvi) In the said play reconciliation between the two families takes place only after they have experienced the shock of their children committing suicide on account of their provincial feelings whereas in the film, the father of the girl realised his mistake after experiencing the shock of his daughter committing suicide.
[257 F G] (xvii) In both the said play and the said film, stress is laid on the fact that although India is one country, yet there is acute feeling of provincialism between persons hailing from its various States even though they work together and live as neighbours.
[257 G] (xviii) Both in the said play and in the said film even the dialogue centres around the same subject of provincialism.
[257 H] However, the Court found following dissimilarities: (i) In the play provincialism comes on the surface only when the question of marriage of Amni with Chander crops up but in the picture it is the starting point of the story when Anand goes around from door to door in search of accommodation but is refused the same because he does not belong to the State from which the landlord hails as a result thereof Anand has to masquerade himself as a Madrasi.
This would therefore show that the treatment of the subject of provincialism in the film is quite different from that in the play and is actually a new theme which not developed or stressed in the play[258 D F] (ii) similarly in the play the two families are fully aware of the identity of each other whereas in the film they are not and in fact it is only when the dance Performance of Janki and Anand is staged that the identity of the two families 223 is disclosed which forms one of the important climaxes of the film.
Thus, the idea of provincialism itself is presented in a manner or form quite different from that adopted in the play.
[258 F G] (iii) In the film there is no suicidal pact between the lovers but only a suicide note is left by Janki whereas in the play both the lovers decide to end their lives and enter into a suicidal pact and leave suicide note to this effect.
Furthermore, while in the play Amni and Chunder get married and then appear before the parents in the picture the story takes a completely different turn with the intervention of Sadhu Ram who does not allow Janki to commit suicide but keeps her with him disguised as his niece and the final climax is reached in the last scene when Janki 's real identity is disclosed and Subramaniam also finds out that his daughter is alive [258 H, 259 A B] (iv) The story in the play revolves around only two families, namely, the Punjabi and the Madrasi families but in the film there are three important families, namely, the Punjabi family, the Madrasi family and the Bengali family and very great stress is laid down in the film on the role played by Ashok Banerjee of the Bengali family who makes a supreme sacrifice at the end which turns the tide and brings about a complete revolution in the mind and ideology of Daulat Ram.
[259 B D] (v) The film depicts the evil of caste ridden society and exposes the hollowness of such a society when in spite of repeated requests no member of the brotherhood of Daulat Ram comes to his rescue and ultimately it is left to Ashok Banerjee to retrieve the situation.
This aspect of the matter is completely absent in the play.
[259 D E] (vi) The film depicts another important social evil, namely, the evil of dowry which also appears to be the climax of the story of the film and the horrors of dowry are exhibited and demonstrated in a very practical and forceful fashion.
The play however does not deal with this aspect at all.
The aspects mentioned above which are absent from the play are not mere surplusage or embellishments in the story of the film but are important and substantial part of the story.
[259 E G] The Court came to the conclusion that the number of similarities by themselves are not sufficient to raise an inference of colourable imitation.
The similarities are trivial and touch insignificant points and do not appear to be of substantial nature.
The appellant has failed to prove that the defendants committed colourable imitation of the play.
[259 G H, 260 B] Applying the principles mentioned above to determine whether in this particular case there has been a violation of the copy right, the Court came to the conclusion that the film produced by the defendants cannot be said to be a substantial or material copy of the play written by the plaintiff.
The treatment of the film and the manner of its presentation on the screen is quite different from the play written by the appellant at the stage.
No prudent person can get the impression that the film appears to be a copy of the original play nor is there anything to show that the film is a substantial and material copy of the play.
At the most the central idea of the play viz. provincialism is undoubtedly the subject matter of the film along with other ideas also.
It is well settled that a mere idea cannot be the subject matter of copy right.
[260 G H, 261 A B] 224 The two courts of fact having considered the entire evidence, circumstances and materials before them have come to a, finding of fact that defendants committed no violation of the copyright.
This Court would be slow to disturb the findings of fact arrived at by the courts below particularly when after having gone through the entire evidence the court finds that the judgments of the court below are absolutely correct.
[261 C D] (Jaswant Singh, 1.
concurring) On a careful comparison of the script of the plaintiff 's copyright play with the film, although one does not fail to discern a few resemblances and similarities between the play and the film, the said resemblances are not material or substantial and the degree of similarities is not such as to lead one to think that the film taken as a whole constitutes an unfair appropriation of the appellant 's copyright word;.
In fact a large majority of material `incidents, episodes and dramatic situations portrayed by defendants 1 and 2 in their aforesaid film are substantially different from the plaintiff 's protected work and the two social evils viz. caste system and dowry system sought to be exposed and eradicated by defendants 1 and 2 by means of motion film, do not figure at all in the appellant 's play.
There has been no breach on the part of the defendants of the appellant 's copyright.
[261 G H, 262 A] (Pathak, J. concurring) lt appears from a comparison of the script of the play 'Hum Hindustani ' and the script of the film 'New Delhi ' that the authors of the film have been influenced to a degree by the salient features of the plot set forth in the play script.
There can be little doubt from the evidence that the auth ors of.
the film script were aware of the scheme of the play.
But, the story portrayed by the film travels beyond the plot delineated in the play.
The theme of provincial parochialism is illustrated only in the opposition to a relationship by marriage between two families hailing from different parts of the country.
In the film the theme is also illustrated by the hostile attitude of proprietors` of lodging accommodation towards prospective lodgers who do not belong to the same provincial community.
The plot then extends to the evils of the dowry system which is a theme independent of provincial parochialism.
There are still other themes embraced within the plot of the film.
The question can arise whether there is an infringement of copyright even though the essential features of the play can be said to correspond to a part only of the plot of the film.
In the attempt to show that he is not guilty of infringement of copy right it is always possible for a person intending to take advantage of the intellectual efforts and labour of another to so develop his own product that it covers a wider field than the area included within the scope of the earlier product and in the common area covered by the two productions to introduce changes in order to disguise the attempt at plagiarism.
If a. reappraisal of the facts in the present case were open to this Court, the Court perhaps would have differed from the view taken on the facts by the High Court but in view of the concurrent findings of the two courts below to the effect that the appellant 's copy right has not been infringed this Court is extremely reluctant to interfere with the concurrent findings of fact reached by the Courts below.
In another, and perhaps a clearer case it may be necessary for this Court to interfere and remove the impression which may have gained ground that the copy right belonging to an author can be readily infringed by making immaterial changes, introducing in substantial differences and enlarging the scope of the original theme.
so that a veil of appa 225 rent dissimilarity is thrown around the work now produced.
The court will look A strictly at not only blatant examples of copying but also at reprehensible attempts at colourable imitation.
[262 B H, 263 A C]
