The deceased Mewa Singh is the brother of the two accused Sarwan Singh and Bachan Singh and the paternal uncle of two other accused Karnail Singh and Zora Singh sons of Sarwan Singh, Malkait Singh the other accused is the son in law of Sarwan Singh.
They are thus close relatives and there was dispute over a common khal of the land and pahi.
The deceased had put an application before the Revenue Authority against the accused and the matter was pending when the occurrence took place on 8 9 1969.
The deceased was attacked by the accused with deadly weapons resulting in as many as 27 injuries of which injuries 2 and 3 were grievous.
The deceased died the next day in the civil hospital.
The cause of death was shock and haemorrhage and the injuries were ante mortem and sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death.
The trial court found all the five accused guilty under section 302 read with section 149 I.P.C. and punished them taking the view that once the existence of injuries sufficient to cause death is proved, the intention to cause death will be presumed unless the evidence or the circumstances warrant an opposite conclusion.
The High Court in appeal from that the common object was clearly to kill the deceased and that the offence fell under section 300.
Thirdly read with section 34 IPC and accepted the trial court 's Judgment.
Dismissing the appeals by special leave the Court, ^ HELD: (1) If a person causes an injury with the intention of causing bodily injury to any person and when the bodily injury intended to be inflicted is sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death, the offence would fall under clause (iii) of section 300 and would be punishable under section 302 I.P.C. [387 B] (2) In order to find the person guilty of offence under section 300 read with section 149, the prosecution must establish that the offence was committed by any member of an unlawful assembly in prosecution of the common object of the assembly or such as the members of that assembly knew it to be likely to be committed in prosecution of the common object.
It is, therefore, necessary for the prosecution to establish that the common object of the unlawful assembly was to commit an offence under section 300 or that the members of the assembly knew it to be likely that an offence under section 300 punishable under section 302 IPC would be committed in prosecution of the common object.
[387 B D] (3) If the injuries that are sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death are traced to a particular accused, he will be guilty of an offence under section 300 punishable under section 302 without the aid of section 149, when the injuries caused are cumulatively sufficient to cause death, it is necessary before holding 384 each of the accused guilty under section 300 read with section 149 to find that the common object of the unlawful assembly was to cause death or that the members of the unlawful assembly knew it to be likely that an offence punishable under section 302 IPC would be committed in prosecution of the common object.
[387 D F] In the instant case, on an analysis of the injuries (a) it cannot be said that any of the persons that inflicted injuries intended to cause death or such injury as is sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death.
(b) The circumstance that unexpected quarrel was between the members of the same family over a dispute as to water rights shows that no offence under section 300 read with sec.
149 IPC punishable under section 302 IPC has been made out.
(c) the common object of the assembly was to cause bodily injury as is likely to cause death.
Though the doctor has stated that the injuries were sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death, it is difficult to hold that the injuries, cumulatively, were sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death.
The common object of the assembly in the circumstances can only be said to cause injuries which are likely to cause death which will be an offence punishable under section 304(1) of the Indian Penal Code.
[388 E H 389 A] (4) (a) The object of section 357(3) is to provide compensation payable to the persons who are entitled to recover damages from the person sentenced even though fine does not form part of the sentence.
Though section 545 of 1898 Code enabled the court only to pay compensation out of the fine that would be imposed under the law, by section 357 (3) when a court imposes a sentence, of which fine does not form a part, the Court may direct the accused to pay compensation.
[390 D E] (b) In awarding compensation it is necessary for the court to decide whether the case is a fit one in which compensation has to be awarded.
If it is found that compensation should be paid, then the capacity of the accused to pay a compensation has to be determined.
In directing compensation, the object is to collect the fine and pay it to the person who has suffered the loss.
The purpose will not be served if the accused is not able to pay the fine or compensation for, imposing a default sentence for non payment of fine would not achieve the object.
If the accused is in a position to pay the compensation to the injured or his dependent to which they are entitled to, there could be no reason for the court not directing such compensation When a person, who caused injury due to negligence or is made vicariously liable is bound to pay compensation it is only appropriate to direct payment by the accused who is guilty of causing an injury with the necessary mens rea to pay compensation for the person who has suffered injury.
[390 E G] (c) The court should not first consider what compensation sought to be awarded to the heirs of the deceased and then impose a fine which is higher than the compensation.
It is the duty of the court to take into account the nature of the crime, the injury suffered, the justness of the claim for compensation.
the capacity of the accused to pay the other relevant circumstances in fixing the amount of fine or compensation.
[390 G H, 391 A] Palaniappa Gounder vs State of Tamil Nadu, ; applied.
[The Court altered this conviction of offence punishable under section 304(1) read 385 with section 149 and sentenced to 5 years R I and a fine of Rs. 3500/ each, the fine to be paid as compensation to the widow of the deceased]
