Respondents were two workmen originally employed by M/s Seth lam Gopal and Partners, who were licensees for the distribution of electricity under the Electricity Act, 1910.
There were certified Standing orders for the industrial establishment of the said licensees; but they did not prescribe any age of superannuation for the employees with the result the workmen could continue to hours long as they were fit and able to discharge their duties Pursuant to The purchase by the appellant with effect from 1 12 1964 of the electricity undertaking of M/s Seth Ram Gopal, the employees in their industrial establishment including the respondents became the employee of the appellant.
I he appellant board which ii admittedly an industrial establishment to which the Industrial Employment (Standing orders Act.
1946 applies neither made nor got certified any standing orders as it was bound so to do under hat Act.
The Board however considered the certified Standing orders of the establishment Seth Ram Gopal as applicable to their employees even after the purchase of the undertaking by the Board.
However.
On lay 2. 1970 the Governor of Uttar Pradesh notified under Section 13 B o the Industrial Employment (Standing orders) Act, 1946.
a regulation made by the U.P. State Electricity Board under Section 79(c) of the electricity Suppl.
Act, 1948 fixing the age of superannuation as S and 60 on a par with the other State Govt.
employees.
Action in pursuance of the regulation as notified by the Governor the appellant sought to retire the respondents on July 2, 1972 and July 7. 1972 respectively.
On their attaining the age of 58 years.
The respondents filed a Writ Petition in the Allahabad High Court challenging the regulation male by the Board and its notification by the Governor which was dismissed.
But the Division Bench which heard the special appeal preferred by then.
Referred three questions to a Full Bench The Full Bench answered the questions as follows: ``(l) The Industrial Employment (Standing Orders 1946 applies to the industrial establishment of the State Electricity Board.
(2) The Standing Orders framed, in an industrial establishment by an electrical undertaking, do not cease to be operative on the purchase of the undertaking by the Board or on framing of the Regulations under Section 79(c) of the electricity (Supply) Act 1918 and (3) Section 13 B of the Industrial Employment (Standing orders Act.
applies only to the industrial establishments of the Government and to no other establishments.
356 Following the opinion of the Full Bench, the Division Bench allowed the special Appeal and issued a writ quashing the notification dated May 28, 197) and directing the appellant not to enforce the regulation against the respondents.
he appellant obtained a certificate under article 133(1) of the Constitution and has preferred the appeal.
Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD : 1.
The Industrial Employment (Standing orders) Act.
1946 (Act 20) is a special law in regard to the matters enumerate(l in the schedule and the regulations made by the Electricity Board with respect to my of those matters are of no effect, unless such regulations are either notified by the Government under Section 13 B or certified by the certifying officer under Section 5 of the Industrial Employment (Standing orders) Act, 1946.
In regard to matters in respect of which regulations made by the Board have not been notified by the Governor or in respect of which no regulations have been made by the Board the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders Act shall continue to apply.
In the present case, the regulation made 1.
the Board with retired to the age of superannuation having been duly notified by the government , the regulation shall have effect.
notwithstanding the fact that it is a matter which could be the subject matters of Standing orders under the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act.
The respondents were, therefore, properly retired when they attained the are of 58 years.
[371A F] 2.
The Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act is an Act specially designed to define the terms of employment of workmen in industrial establishment, to give the workmen a collective voice in defining the terms of employment and to subject the terms of employment to the scrutiny of quasi judicial authorities by the application of the test of fairness and reasonableness.
It is an Act giving recognition and hard won and precious right of workmen.
It is a Special Act expressly and exclusively dealing with the schedule enumerated conditions of service or workmen in industrial establishment.
[364E G] Associated Cement Co. Ltd. vs P. D. Vyas, [196(] 2 S.C.R. 974; Rohtak Hissar district Electricity Supply Co. Ltd. vs , State of U.P. an(l ors.
; , ; Western India Match Co. Ltd. vs Workmen, [1974] 1 S.C.R. 434; referred to.
The Electricity Supply Act does not presume to be an Act to regulate the conditions of service of the employees of State Electricity Board.
It is an act to regulate the coordinated development of electricity.
It is a special Act in regard to the subject of development of electricity, even as the Industrial Employment (Standing orders) Act is a special act in regard to the subject of conditions of service of workmen in industrial establishments.
If section 79 of he Electricity Supply Act generally provides for the making o regulations providing for the conditions of service of the employees of the Board, it can only be regarded as a general provision which must yield o the special provisions of the Industrial Employment (Standing orders) Act in respect of matters covered by the latter.
[365D F] 4.
The reason for the rule "Generalis specialibus non derogant", that a general provision should yield to specific provision is this: In passing a special Act, Parliament devotes its entire consideration to a. particulars subject.
When a 357 General Act is subsequently passed, it is logical to presume that Parliament has A not repealed or modified the former special Act unless it appears that the Special Act again levied consideration from Parliament [366 D] The provisions of the Standing orders Acts therefore, must prevail over Section 79(c) of the Electricity Supply Act in regard to matters to which the Standing (Orders Act applies.
It is impossible to conceive that Parliament sought to abrogate the provisions of the Industrial Employment (Standing orders) Act, embodying as they do hard won and precious rights of workmen and prescribing as they do an elaborate procedure, including a quasi judicial determination, by a general, incidental provision like Section 79(c) of the Electricity Supply Act.
lt is obvious that Parliament did not have before it the Standing orders Act, when it passed the Electricity Supply Act and Parliament never meant that the Standing orders Act should stand pr alto repealed by Section 79(c of the Electricity Supply Act.
[366F H] Sukhdev Singh vs Bhagat Ram, ; ; Rajasthan Electricity Board n. Mohan Lal, [1967] 3 S.C.R. 277; held inapplicable.
The true scope of the rule of "ejusdem generis" is that words of a general nature following specific and particular words should be so construed as limited t things which are of the same nature as those specified.
But the rule is one which has to be "applied with caution aud not pushed too far".
It is a rule which must be confined to narrow bounds so as not to unduly or necessarily limit general and comprehensive words.
If a broad based genus could consistently be discovered there is no warrant to cut down general words to dwarf size.
If giant it cannot be, dwarf it need not be.
[369 A B] It is true that in Section 1 3 B the specie specifically mentioned happen to be Government servants.
But they also possess this common characteristic that they are all public servants enjoying a statutory status and governed by statutory rules and regulations.
If the legislature intended to confine the applicability of Section I 3 B to industrial undertakings employing government servants only nothing was easier than to say so instead of referring to various rules specially and following it up with a general expression like the one in the instant case.
[369B D] 6.
The words 'rules and regulations ' have come to acquire a. special meaning when used in statutes.
They are used to describe subordinate legislation made by authorities to whom the statute delegates that function.
The words can have MV other meaning in Sec.
1 3 B. Therefore, the expression "workmen .
whom . any other rules or regulations that may be notified in this behalf means, in the context of Sec.
13 B, workmen enjoying a statutory status, in respect of whose conditions of service the relevant statute authorises the making of rules or regulations.
The expression cannot be construed so narrowly as to mean Government servants only; nor can not be construed so broadly as to mean workmen employed by whomsoever including private employers, so long as their conditions of service are notified by the Govt.
under Sec.
13 B [369D F] The words 'nothing in this Act shall apply ' are not to be interpreted to literally as to lead to absurd results.
The only reasonable construction that an be put upon the language of Section 13 B is that a rule of regulation, it 358 notified by the Government, will exclude the applicability of the Act to the extent that the rule or regulation covers the field.
To that extent and to that extent only "nothing in the Act shall apply".
[307 F G] Raman Nambissan vs State Electricity Board and Thiruvenkataswami vs Coimbatore Municipality, explained.
