Awarding full or partial back wages Plinciples for awarding Employee 's financial viability to pay baek wages lf could be a factor for not awarding full back wage,s.
The management (Appellant) retrenched 56 of its worl;tnell alleging nonavailability of raw material to ntilise the fnll installed capacity, power shcdding limiting the working of the unit to 5 days a week and mounting losses.
As a result of negotiations between the parties, the retrenched workmen were taken back in service.
A few days later, however, the workmen demanded revision of wage scales, but the appellant pleaded inability to revise the pay scales in view of the mounting losses.
Thereafter, the employer reternched 43 workmen.
The dispute resulting out of the retrenchment was referred to adjudication under section 4k of the U.P.
The Labour Court held that the real reason for retrenchment was annoyance felt by the management when the employees refused to agree to the terms oil settlement and that it was not for the reasons stated by the employer.
The Labour Court ordered reinstatement of the retrenched workmen with full back wages.
In the Special leave petition the employer questioned the correctness of the Labour Court 's view that the retrenched workmen should be reinstated.
This Court rejected this prayer and limited the special leave to the question of granting back wages to the retrenched workmen ordered to be reinstated.
^ HELD: 1.
Since the emoloyer 's prayer in the special ieave petition that the retrenched workmen should not be reinstated was rejected by this Court it meant that the Labour Court 's view that retrenchment was unjusified was correct.
For the reasons found by the Labour Court retrenchment was motivated and so invalid.
The workmen were entitled to the relief of reinstatement from the date they were sought to be retrenched.
The order of the Labour Court on the question of reinstatement became final.
[567 C E] 2.
Article 136 of the Constitution does not envisage this Court to be a regular Court of Appeal but it confers a discretionary power on it to grant special leave to appeal, inter Ala, against the Award of any Tribunal.
The scope and ambit of this vide constitutional discretionary power cannot be 564 exhaustively defined.
It cannot be so construed as to confer a right to a party when he has none under the law.
The Court will entertain a petition for special leave in which a question of general public importance is involved or when the decisions would shock the conscience of this Court.
The is intended to be a self contained code and it seeks to achieve social justice on the basis of collective bargaining, conciliation and arbitration.
Awards are given on circumstances peculiar to each dispute and the Tribunals are to a large extent free from restrictions of technical consider rations imposed on Courts.
A free and liberal exercise of the power under Article 136 may materially affect the fundamental basis of such decisions, viz., quick solution of such disputes to achieve industrial peace.
[567 F 568 A] Bengal Chemical & Pharmaceutical Works Ltd, Calcutta vs Their Workmen [1959] Suppl.
2 SCR 136 at 140 referred to.
In the field of industrial jurisprudence a declaration can be given that the termination of service is bad and the workman continues to be in service.
The common law doctrine that contract of personal service cannot be specifically enforced or the doctrine of mitigation of damages does not haunt in this branch of law.
The relief of reinstatement with continuity of service can be granted where termination of service is found to be invalid.
[568 G H] 3.
Where termination of service is questioned as being invalid or illegal and the workman has to go through the litigation, his capacity to sustain himself throughout the protracted litigation is itself so precarious that he may not survive to see the day when relief is granted.
If after such prolonged litigation the workman is not paid his back wages it would amount to a penalty for no fault of his.
The workman whose service has been illegally terminated would be entitled to full back wages except to the extent he was gainfully employed during the enforced idleness.
If the termination is illegal or motivated it may amount to unfair labour practice.
Tn such circumstances reinstatement being the normal rule it should be done with full back wages.
[569 B D] Workmen of Calcutta Dock Labour Board & Anr.
vs Employers in relation to Calcutta Dock Labour Board & ors. , referred to.
Management of Panitole Tea Estate vs The Workmen referred to.
Dhari Gram Panchayat vs Safai Kamdar Mandal approved.
Postal Seals Industrial Co operative Society Ltd. vs Labour Court ll Luck now & Ors.
approved.
For awarding relief of back wages all relevant considerations will enter The verdict of the Tribunal.
Full back wages would be the normal rule and the party objecting to it must establish the circumstances necessitating departure.
The Tribunal will then exercise its discretion But the discretion must be exercised in a judicial and judicious manner.
The reason for exercising discre tion must be cogent and convincing and must appear on the face of the record.
It should not be arbitrary, vague and fanciful but legal and regular.
[570 GE] Susannah Sharn vs Wakefield at 179 referred to.
565 on the question of the employer 's financial viability to pay back wages view of mounting losses the Supreme Court held.
Industry is a common venture, the participants being capital and labour Article 43A. requires the State to take steps to secure participation of workman in the management.
From being a factor of production labour has become a partner in industry.
It is a common venture in pursuit of a desired goal.
If sacrifice is necessary in the overall interest of the industry it would be unfair to expect only labour to make the sacrifice.
It should be common sacrifice.
If sacrifice is necessary those who can afford and have the capacity must bear the brunt.
[571 A F] (b) In the present case there is nothing to show that the Managing Director has made any sacrifice.
In the absence such information the weaker section of society cannot be expected to make a greater sacrifice than the directors In an appropriate case it would be appropriate to direct that till the loss is wiped out the managing directors shall not charge any fees for the services rendered and no dividend shall be paid.
[571 G. 572 E F] (c) As the appellant has turned the corner, and the industrial unit is looking up and started making profits, the retrenched workmen having already been reinstated and started earing their wages it would be appropriate to award 75% of the backs wages to the workmen to be paid in two equal instalments.
[572 D]
