The respondent, who was a displaced person from West Pakistan, was allotted certain land in India and was given its possession.
At the time of consolidation of holdings in 1960 the Consolidation Officer included a part of this land comprising 13 odd acres in the area of the Custodian.
The respondent 's representations protesting against the action of the Consolidation Officer having failed at the different levels, the respondent moved the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution.
The High Court set aside the impugned orders of the Consolidation Officer on the ground that they were wholly without jurisdiction and that the concerned officer was not authorised to allot to the appellant the land which was already comprised in a subsisting valid allotment made to the respondent.
On the question whether the land in dispute which had already stood allotted in favour of the respondent could be allotted in favour of others without notice to the respondent and without affording an opportunity of being heard.
^ HELD: The respondent had succeeded in establishing that permanent proprietary allotment of the land in dispute was validly made in his favour.
Therefore the respondent had enforceable right in respect of the land and it could not be allotted in favour of others.
[1292F G] Although in certain contingencies it would be open to the Managing Officer or the Managing Corporation to cancel the allotment under section 19 of the read with Rule 102 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Rules 1955, it can not be done unless the allottee is given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
[1293F] In the instant case no action for cancellation of allotment was taken under the provisions of the Act and the Rules.
The action of the Naib Tehsildar cum Managing Officer in allotting to the appellant the land which had already stood in the name of the respondent without complying with the relevant provisions of the Act was in flagrant violation of the provisions of the law.
Therefore, the impugned orders were manifestly illegal, arbitrary and unjust and could not be sustained.
[1293H]
