The appellant was a Muafidar of the disputed land, in the erstwhile Bhopal State, while the first respondent cultivated the said lands as his tenant.
When the M. P. L. R. Code, 1959, came into force, the first respondent claimed that the appellant, as the occupant of the lands within the meaning of S.2 (15) of the Bhopal State Revenue Act, 1932, had become a Bhumiswami u/s 158(C) of the Code of l959, while he himself had become an occupancy tenant u/s 185(1)(iv)(b) and as such, was entitled to conferment of Bhumiswami rights u/s 190 of the same Code.
He ' applied to the Tahsildar, Huzur, for mutation of his name as a Bhumiswarni in the Revenue records.
and was directed to deposit compensation equivalent to 15 times of the land revenue.
Thereafter his name was recorded as a Bhumiswami of the holdings, on the deposit of the compensation money.
The Muafidar appellant 's appeal to the sub Divisional officer, against the Tahsildar 's order, and a second appeal to the additional Commissioner.
were dismissed, but the Board of Revenue allowed his revision application holding that he was not an occupant within the meaning of section 2(15) of the Bop Act of ]932.
and that consequently the first respondent was neither a Chime, nor did he become an occupancy tenant under the M.P. Code of 1959, and therefore conferment of Bhumiswami rights on him was erroneous in law.
, The first respondent filed a writ petition against the Revenue Board 's order, which was allowed by the High Court.
Dismissing the appeal by certificate, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
Under section 2(15) of the Bhopal State Land Revenue Act 1932, a person who holds and direct under the Government would be an ` 'occupant", in whatever name the payment of money may be described such as premium, rent, quit rent etc.
On a careful analysis of the definition, it is legitimate to conclude that a Jagirdar or Muafidar is an occupant.
He holds lands under the Government.
On the resumption of the Jagir or the Muafi rights by the Government, the land reverts back to it.
Payment of land revenue or rent for holding land under the Government was not a sine qua non for making the holder of the land an revenue.
[585 A D, 586 D] Begum Suriya Rashid and Ors.
vs State of Madhya Pradesh [19691] 1 SCR 869 held inapplicable.
The rights of Shikmis were enlarged by operation of tile Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code.
Under section 185(l)(iv)(b) a Shikmi became an occupancy tenant, while u/s 190, as an occupancy tenant, he became entitled, under certain conditions, to conferment of Bhumiswami rights of the occupant of he holdings.
A B] 583
