The appellant opened a High School mainly for the benefit of the students of the Christian community in the year 1947.
The necessary sanction was accorded by the Govt.
Of Travancore.
Only boys were admitted in the school till the end of the academic year 1971 72.
In the subsequent year, the management constructed building in the school compound to provide accommodation for girl students.
The Manager applied to the Regional Deputy Director for permission to admit girl students in the school.
The regional Deputy Director refused to give sanction for admission of the girl students.
The main ground of refusal was that the school was not opened as a mixed school and that the school had been running purely as a boy 's school for 25 years.
Another reason given was that there was facility for the education of the girls of the locality in a near by girls school which was established by the Muslims and was also a minority institution.
An appeal filed before the educational authority failed.
Under rule 12(i) of Kerala Education Rules, 1954 all primary schools are deemed to be mixed schools and the admission thereto shall be open to boys and girls alike.
Under the special circumstances the Director may exempt particular institutions so that admission thereto might be restricted to boys or girls.
Rule 12(ii) provides that admission to schools which are specifically recognised as girls ' schools shall be restricted to girls.
However, the Director has power to empower boys below 12 years up to 7th standard to be admitted.
Rule 12(iii) provides that the girls may be admitted in schools for boys if in the town there are no girls ' schools.
The appellant filed a writ petition in the High Court challenging the order of the educational authorities.
The High Court came lo the conclusion that since only boys were admitted in the school for a Long time the self imposed restriction by the management made it a boys ' school and that the authorities have powers under rule 12(iii) to prevent the school from admitting the girls.
The High Court held that the basis of the rules was that as far as possible girls should be given education in girls ' schools only and that it was in the nature of regulation for discipline.
Allowing the appeal the Court, 610 ^ HELD: (1) The ambit and content of article 30 of the Constitution has been the subject matter of consideration and pronouncement by this Court in several decisions.
[614 A] In Re The Kerala Education Bill 1957, [1959] SCR 995; The Ahemdabad St. Xaviers College Society & Anr.
vs State of Gujarat & Anr. ; referred to.
The right conferred on the religious and linguistic minorities to administer educational institutions of their choice is not an absolute right.
The right is not free from regulation.
Just as regulatory measures are necessary for maintaining the educational character and content of minority institutions, similarly regulatory measures are necessary for ensuring orderly, efficient and sound administration of the school in the matter of maintaining discipline, health, morality and so on and so forth.
[615 A C] (2) The dominant object of rule 12 is not for the sake of discipline or morality.
Any appreciation of the deterioration in the moral standard of Students, if co education is permitted in secondary schools, does not seem to be the main basis of the rule, although it may be a secondary one.
[615 E F] (3) The self imposed restriction by the management in vogue for a number of years restricting the administration for boys only is wholly insufficient to cast a legal ban on them not to admit girls.
While granting the permission for opening the school no restriction was imposed for not admitting any girl student.
If the successor school authorities wanted to depart from the self imposed restriction, they could only be presented from doing so on valid, legal and reasonable grounds and not other vise.
The permission in the present case was refused in the interest of the existing Muslim Girls ' School.
If the basis of the rule is that girls should get instructions in girls ' school then the rule violates the freedom guaranteed to the minorities to administer the school of its choice.
However, that is not the dominant object of the rule.
The Christian community in the locality wanted the girls to receive their education in their school.
If rule 12 widely interpreted has empowered the government to prohibit a minority school from admitting girl students for the benefit of another girls ' school, it crosses the barrier of regulatory measures and comes in the region of interference with the administration of the institution, a right which is guaranteed to the minority under article 30.
The rule, therefore, must be interpreted narrowly and should be held not applicable to minority educational institution in a situation like the present one.
The Court.
therefore, quashed the order of the Educational authorities.
[615 G H, 616 A F]
