In connection with the offences under Sections 302 and 376, medical opinion was sought by the Police as to (1) the nature of injuries on the person of the accused.
(2) the accused potency to perform the sexual intercourse and (3) Whether the accused had performed sexual intercourse during the last 24 28 hours, from one Dr. P. K. Mittal, Medical Officer, Nehru Municipal Hospital Abohar.
As according to the Government instructions in force at the relevant time, medico legal cases were to be examined by two doctors, Dr. P. K. Mittal examined the accused in the presence of Dr. Mrs. L. K. Grewal attached to the same hospital.
On examination of the private parts of the accused, the doctors observed the whole of the glans penis and corona of the accused covered with a thick layer of yellowish material which smelt like stigma.
They therefore advised a thorough chemical and microscopic examination of the yellowish material to find out if it was a layer of smegma or not to enable them to answer third query of the police and referred to the accused to the appellant who was posted as Chief Medical Officer, Ferozepur.
The doctors in their forwarding letter stated that they had not at all disturbed the layer so that the appellant would examine the case in its original condition and order the sample of smegma to be taken and sent for chemical examination if he felt like doing so".
The accused could be taken to Ferozepur by the police only two days later.
On going through the letter, the appellant wrote back saying that no special opinion by him was necessary and that Dr. Mittal himself could take the scrapping of the yellowish material and send the same to the chemical examiner Punjab for opinion.
The chemical examiner Punjab, as well as the Professor of Pathology, Medical College, Patiala, whose opinion was sought expressed their inability to carry out any test for smegma as they had no arrangement for the same.
The accused was convicted and sentenced to death under section 302 I.P.C. subject to confirmation of the High Court and to imprisonment for life under section 376 I.P.C. The accused in his appeal claimed benefit of doubt contending that the appellant as well as the other two doctors failed to examine the glans penis of the accused with a view to find out whether there were any injuries thereon or not.
On this argument being raised, the learned Judges constituting the Division Bench felt that it was necessary in the interest of justice to examine the appellant as a court witness.
They, therefore summoned the appellant as a court witness and recorded his statement.
At the conclusion of the examination of the appellant, the learned Judges felt that the appellant had intentionally made a false statement with a view to shield his own guilt and to help the accused.
They accordingly ordered the prosecution of the appellant under section 193 I.P.C.
Allowing the appeal by special leave the Court.
723 ^ HELD: (1) What the courts have to see before issuing the process against the accused is whether there is evidence in support of the allegations made by the complainant to justify the initiation of proceedings against the accused and not whether the evidence is sufficient to warrant his conviction, but this does not mean that the Courts should not prima facie be of the opinion that there are sufficient and reasonable grounds for setting the machinery of criminal law in motion against the accused.
The moment, this guiding principle is overlooked, the prosecution degenerates itself into prosecution which often is fought with evil consequences.
In the instant case, the language in which the observations of the High Court about the exercise of pressure by the appellant on Dr. Mrs. L. K. Grewal are couched shows that the High Court was itself not prima facie satisfied about the validity of the action that it was taking.
[732D F] (2) Prosecution for perjury should be sanctioned by courts only in those cases where it appears to be deliberate and conscious and the conviction is reasonably probable or likely.
There must be prima facie case of deliberate falsehood on a matter of substance and the court should be satisfied that there is reasonable foundation for the charge.
[732G H] In the present case, as the examination of smegma lost all importance after the lapse of the performance of the alleged sexual intercourse, the appellant 's statement was not a matter of substance and the appellant does not appear to have made any false statement with a malafide intention.
In the circumstances, no useful purpose will be served by subjecting the appellant to a lengthy, vexatious and expensive trial which is not likely to end in his conviction.
[732H, 733A B] Chajoo Ram vs Radhey Shyam & Anr.
[1971] 1 SCC p. 744 referred to.
(3) In the instance case (a) the appellant had not intentionally made a false statement.
The words used by the appellant in answer to the question put to him by the High Court taken as whole make it manifest that what the appellant meant to convey was that the accused was never physically produced before him which fact is amply proved by the strong documentary evidence viz. the affidavit of Harjit Singh Head Constable dt.
27th August, 1975 corroborated by the entries in Roznamacha of the Police Station, city Abhor of dt.
17th March, 1973.
(b) The question of disagreement between that two doctors and of refusal on the part of Dr. Mrs. L. K. Grewal to give opinion about smegma were purposely introduced subsequently by someone other than the appellant with some oblique motive and (c) It is well known in the medical world that the examination of smegma loses all importance after 24 hours of the performance of the sexual intercourse.
Non invitation of this fact to the notice of the learned Judges of the High Court has led to the error, regarding the examination of smegma after two or three days after the occurrence.
[728H, 729A D, 730G, 731A, E F] Observation: The show cause notice besides being not happily worded is laconic.
It does not satisfy the essential requirements of law.
Nor does it specify the offending portions in the appellant 's lengthy statements which in the opinion of the High Court were false.
In cases of this nature, it is highly desirable and indeed very necessary that the portions of the witness 's statement in regard to which he has, in the opinion of the Court, perjured himself, should be speci 724 fically set out in or form annexure to the notice issued to the accused so that he is in a position to furnish an adequate and proper reply in regard thereto and able to meet the charge.
[734A B]
