The appellant assessee entered into a contract dated 28th June, 1972 for fabrication, supply erection and installation of Sentinel 's Pull and Push type and Reduction Gear type rolling shutters in sheds Nos. 3 and 4 of the Sidheshwar Sahakari Sakar Karkhana belonging to M/s. C. M. Shah & Co. (P) Ltd as per the terms and conditions of the contract.
The special terms and conditions provided that the actual transportation charges would be in addition to the price stipulated in the contract and the delivery would be 6/8 weeks, ex works from the date of receipt of the final confirmation of the order.
The terms of payment also formed part of the special terms an(l conditions and they provided 25% advance, 65% against delivery and remaining 10% after completion of erection and handing over of shutters to the satisfaction of the company.
The assessee carried out its part of the contract by erecting and installing the rolling shutters.
Since the assessee entertained doubt as to whether the contract was a contract for sale or a contract for work and labour, the assessee made an application dated 16 9 72 to the Commissioner of Sales Tax for determining this question.
The Deputy Commissioner of Sales Tax took the view that the contract was a contract for sale of rolling shutters and the work of erection and installation was merely incidental to the sale and the assessee was therefore liable to pay sales tax on 95% of the amount receivable by it under the contract.
In appeal the Sales Tax Tribunal held the contract to be a composite contract consisting of two parts, one for sale of the rolling shutters and the other for execution of the work of erection and installation.
The High Court on a reference agreed with the tribunal and answered it in favour of the Revenue.
Allowing the appeal by special leave the Court ^ HELD: ( 1 ) The contract was a contract for work and labour and not a contract of sale.
The contract is one single and indivisible contract and the erection and installation of the rolling shutter is as much a fundamental part of the contract as the fabrication and supply.
[655 D E] Vanguard Rolling Shutters & Steel Works vs Commissioner of Sales Tax, U.P. 39 STC 372 applied.
Various component parts do not constitute a rolling shutter until they are fixed and erected on the premises.
It is only when the component parts are fixed on the premises and fitted into one another that they constitute a rolling shutter as a commercial article and till then they are merely component parts and cannot be said to constitute a rolling shutter.
The erection and installation of the rolling shutter cannot, therefore, be said to be incidental to its manufacture and supply.
It is a fundamental and integral part of the contract because without it the rolling shutter does not come into being.
The manufacturer would undoubtedly be the owner of the component parts When he fabricates them, but at no stage does he become the owner of the 645 rolling shutter as a unit so as to transfer the property in it to the customer.
The rolling shutter comes into existence as a unit when the component parts are fixed in position on the premises and it, becomes the property of the customer as soon as it comes into being.
There is no, transfer of property in the rolling shutter by the manufacturer to the customer as a chattel.
It is essentially a transaction for fabricating component parts and fixing them on the premises so as to constitute a rolling shutter.
The contract is thus clearly and indisputably a contract for work and labour and not a contract for sale.
[653 H, 654 A] (2) Whether a particular contract is one for sale of goods or for work and labour depends upon the main object of the parties gathered from the terms of the contract, the circumstances of the transaction and the custom of the trade.
[649 D E] (3) A contract where not only work is to be done but the execution of such work requires goods to be used may take one of three forms.
The contract may be for work to be done for remuneration and for supply of materials used in the execution of the work for a price: it may be a contract for work in which the use of materials is accessory or incidental to the execution or the work; or it may be a contract for supply of goods where some work is required to be done as incidental to the sale.
Where a contract is of the first type, it is a composite contract consisting essentially of two contracts, one for the sale of goods and the other for work and labour.
The second type of contract is clearly a contract for work and labour not involving sale of goods.
while the third type is a, contract for sale where the goods re sold as chattels and some work is undoubtedly done, but it is done only as incidental to the sale.
The primary test is whether the contract is one whose main object is transfer of property in a chattel as a, chattel to the buyer, though some work may be required to be done under the contract as ancillary or incidental to the sale or it is carrying out of work by bestowal of labour and service and materials are used in execution of such work.
[649 F H, 650 F G] (4), To resolve the difficulties experienced in application of the primary test courts have evolved some subsidiary tests.
one such test may be formulated as follows: "The primary difference between a contract for work or service and a contract for sale of goods is that in former there is in the person performing work or rendering service no property in tho thing produced as a whole .
In the case of a contract for sale, the thing produced as a whole has individual existence as the sole property of the party who produced it, at some time before delivery, and the property therein passes only under the contract relating thereto to the other party for price".
[651 B C] Commissioner of Madhya Pradesh vs Purushottam Premji 26 S.T.C. 38; State of Rajasthan vs Man Industrial Corporation, 24 S.T.C. 349; State of Rajasthan vs Nenu Ram, 26 STC 268; referred to.
(5) The provision "ex works delivery" in the contract does not make the contract a contract for sale.
A rolling shutter as a complete unit is not fabricated by the manufactures in his factory but he manufactures only the component parts and it is only when the component parts are fitted into position and fixed on the premises that a rolling shutter comes into being as a commercial article and, therefore, when the contract provides that the delivery af the goods shall be ex works, what is obviously meant is that the com 646 ponent parts shall be delivered to the company at the works of the assessee and once they are delivered, they shall not be liable to be rejected by the company.
But that does not mean that as soon as the component parts are delivered to the company, the contract is fully executed.
The component parts do not constitute a rolling shutter and it is the obligation of the assessee under the contract to fix.
the component parts in position on the premises.
and erect and instal a rolling shutter.
The execution of the contract is not completed until the assessee carried out this obligation imposed upon it under the contract and a rolling shutter is erected and installed at the premises.
[654 C F] (6) The true nature of The contract cannot depend on the mode of payment of the amount provided in the contract.
The parties may provide by mutual agreement that the amount stipulated in the contract may be paid at different stages of the execution of the contract, but that cannot make the contract one for sale of goods if it is otherwise a contract for work and labour.
The payment of the amount due under the contract may be spread over the entire period of the execution of the contract with view either to put the manufacturer or contractor in possession of funds for the execution of the contract or to secure him against any risk of non payment by the customer.
That cannot have any bearing on the determination of the question whether the contract is one for sale or for work and labour.
[654 H, 655 A C] State of Madras vs Richardson & Cruddes Ltd., 21 STC 245 referred to.
