The Appellant was appointed as Principal of the St. Joseph Training College for Women, Ernakulam in the year 1957.
In October 1969, there was an unfortunate incident between the Appellant and on Rajaratnam a lecturer of the College placed on deputation by the Government.
On the basis of a complaint by Rajaratnam, the Managing Board initiated disciplinary proceedings against the Appellant and appointed a retired Principal of a College to be an Inquiry officer.
The Appellant did not participate in the proceedings.
The Inquiry officer held the Appellant guilty of misconduct.
A show cause notice was given to the Appellant.
The Appellant however, filed a suit challenging the validity of the proceedings.
An interim injunction was issued by the Civil Court restraining the Management from implementing the decision, if any.
taken in the meeting.
The Managing Board after due notice to the Appellant found that the charges of misconduct were proved.
Subsequently, the Court held that the dismissal of the Appellant was legal and proper.
During this period the Appellant was functioning as a Principal and had sent two communications to the Secretary to the Government calling for termination of deputation of Rajaratnam.
The Managing Board viewed the sending, of these communications by the Appellant without reference to it as an act of insubordination, and therefore, decided to conduct inquiry against the Appellant and she was suspended pending inquiry.
A substitute Principal was appointed.
The Appellant filed an appeal against the order of suspension and the Vice Chancellor directed that the status quo be maintained.
The substitute Principal filed a suit for an injunction restraining the appellant from functioning or interfering with the discharge of duties of the substitute Principal which was granted by the Munsif.
The Vice Chancellor by his orders held that the orders of dismissal and suspension passed against the Appellant were in breach of natural justice and fair play and were consequently illegal, null and void.
He therefore, directed the Management to allow the Appellant to function as Principal.
The Kerala.
University Act, 1957 was enacted to reconstitute the University of Travancore into a teaching University for the whole of the State of Kerala.
The definition of "teacher" in section 2(j) of the Act is wide enough to take in a Principal.
Section 19 empowers the Syndicate to make ordinances fixing the conditions of service of teachers.
The Kerala University Act 1957 was repealed by the Kerala University Act, 1969.
The earlier ordinances have been saved and continued under the new Act.
Ordinance 33 provides for an appeal to the Vice Chancellor against any order passed by the Management in respect of the penalties including penalty of dismissal.
821 The Management filed a suit in the Munsif 's Court.
The substitute Principal also filed a further suit against the Appellant and the postal authorities for prohibiting the postal authorities from delivering and the Appellant from receiving the articles addressed to the Principal of the College.
The Trial Court dismissed the suits holding that the Appellate power conferred on the Vice Chancellor by ordinance framed by the Syndicate was a valid conferment of power and even after the commencement of the Kerala University Act, 1969, both the Vice Chancellor and Syndicate had concurrent powers of Appeal.
It, therefore, upheld the orders of the Vice Chancellor directing reinstatement of the Appellant in service.
On appeal the District Judge held that the orders of the Vice Chancellor were perfectly valid and with jurisdiction and that his direction to the Management to continue the Appellant as Principal was legal.
The Kerala High Court reversed the judgment of the Courts below holding that the conferment by the Syndicate of the right to appeal to a teacher against the order of dismissal from service to the Vice Chancellor cannot be said to be in excess of the permissible limits of the power to prescribe the duties and conditions of service of teachers in private colleges in terms of section 19(j) of the Kerala University Act, 1957, and the provisions for a right to appeal were not violative of the rights guaranteed to the religious minorities under Article 30(1) and were, therefore, valid.
According to the High Court although the Vice Chancellor had the power to hear an appeal against an order of dismissal he did not have expressly or impliedly, the power to order reinstatement or even to grant a declaration that the services of the appellant had been wrongly terminated.
It was held that a statutory tribunal like Vice Chancellor could not grant such a relief as the same would amount to specifically enforcing the contract of service.
Dismissing the appeals the Court, ^ HELD: 1.
The expression conditions of service includes everything from the stage of appointment to the stage of termination of service and even beyond and relates to matters pertaining to disciplinary action.
The High Court thus, rightly held that the right of the appeal conferred by ordinance 33 (4) forms part of the conditions of service and is, therefore, valid.
[828F G, 829A] N.W.F. Province vs Suraj Narain, 75 I.A. 343, State of U.P. vs Babu Ram, ; and State of M.P. and Ors.
v Shardul Singh ; relied on.
Protection of the minorities is an article of faith in the Constitution of India.
The right is subject to the regulatory power of the State.
Article 30(1) is not a charter for maladministration; however regulation, so that the right to administer.
may be better excised for.
the benefits of the institution, is permissible; but the moment one goes beyond that and imposes what is in truth not a mere regulation but an impairment of the right to administer the Article comes into play and the interference cannot be justified by pleading the interests of the general public.
the interests justifying interference can only be the interests of the minority concerned.
[837C E] 3.
It is clear from the judgment in St. Xaviers College case that 7 out of 9 judges held that the provisions contained in clauses (b) of sub sections 1 and 2 of Section 51(A) of the Act therein providing for the disciplinary control of the 822 Management, over the staff of its educational institution were not applicable to an education institution established and managed by religious and linguistic minorities.
The reasons given by the majority were that the power of the Management to terminate the services of any member of the teaching or other academic and non academic staff was based on the relationship between the employer and his employees and no encroachment can be made on this right to dispense with their services under the contract of employment, which was an integral part of the right to administer.
[842B D] 4.
The High Court went wrong in holding that the Vice Chancellor while exercising the appellate powers under Ordinance 33(4) cannot direct rein statement of a teacher or grant a declaration that his dismissal was wrongful.
It also fell into error in holding that the right of appeal before the Vice Chancellor against the teachers of Private Colleges in the matter of suspension and dismissal was not violative of the rights to religious minorities under Article 30(I) of the Constitution.
[829B C] Ahmedabad st.
Xaviers College Society and Anr.
vs State of Gujarat and Anr.
; ; relied on.
Unlike Article 19, the fundamental freedom under Article 30(1) is absolute in terms; it is not made subject to any reasonable restrictions of the nature the fundamental freedoms enunciated in Article 19 may be subjected to.
All minorities, linguistic or religious have by article 30(1) an absolute right to establish and administer educational institution of their choice, and any law or executive direction which seeks to infringe the substance of that right under Article 30(1) would be to that extent void.
[835F G] Rev. Sidhajbhai Sabhai vs State of Bombay, ; 6.
The conferment of a right of appeal to an outside authority like the Vice Chancellor under Ordinance 33(4) takes away the disciplinary power of a minority educational authority.
The right of the vice Chancellor to veto the disciplinary power of the minority institution is a clear interference with its right.
It amounts to a letter on the right of administration under Article 30(1).
[837E G] 7.
The power of appeal conferred on the Vice Chancellor in ordinance 33(4) is not only a grave encroachment on the right of the institution to enforce and cover discipline in its administration but it is uncanalised and unguided in the sense that no `restrictions ' are placed on the exercise of the power.
The extent of the appellate power of the Vice Chancellor is unlimited and undefined.
The grounds on which the Vice Chancellor can interfere are not defined and indeed, the powers are unlimited.
He can even interfere against the infliction of punishment.
There is complete interference with the disciplinary power of a minority institution.
In the absence of any guidelines, it cannot be held that power of the Vice Chancellor under order 33(4) was merely a check on mal administration.
The ratio of St. xavier Colleges case is fully applicable.
[842G H, 843A B] 8.
Accordingly, the judgment of the High Court setting aside the two orders of the Vice Chancellor upheld by this Court although for different reasons.
[844E. F]
