A notice dt.
5 12 67 calling upon the respondent to remove, within 15 days of the date of receipt of it, culvert erected without the permission from the Municipality by him thereby causing obstruction or encroachment over the main municipal drain, not having been complied with, the Baranagore Municipality through the appellant its Law Assistant filed a complaint against the respondent under s.240(1)(b) read with s.500(1)(b) of the Bengal Municipal Act, 1932.
The respondent 's objection to its maintainability on the plea of bar of limitation under section 533 of the Act was rejected by the trial court, but upheld by the High Court in revision.
Allowing the appeal by special leave the Court, ^ HELD: (1) The offence charged against the respondent concerned, consists not in the erection of an obstruction by him but in his failure to comply with the direction lawfully given to him to remove that obstruction that the offence must be deemed to have been committed by the respondent, if at all, not on the date of the notice viz. December 5, 1967 nor on any anterior date but on the expiry of the period permitted to him for removing the obstruction viz. on the expiry of the 15 days after the receipt of the notice; and that the expression "6 months" which occurs in section 533 of the Bengal Municipal Act means 6 calendar months and not 180 days.
[743E G] (a) section 240(1) of the Act confers by its three clauses various powers on the Commissioners.
Clause (b) on its true reading empowers the Commissioners to issue a notice requiring any person to remove an encroachment which has been erected without permission or which remains erected after the expiry of the period covered by a permission granted in that behalf.
Though clause (b) of section 240(1) does not expressly provide that the Commissioners may permit such time as they think fit for the removal of the encroachment, it is implicit in the power conferred by that clause that by a proper direction of requisition the Commissioners can allow for the removal of the encroachment such time as they consider reasonable in the circumstances of the case.
[741F G, 742A B] (b) section 500(1)(b) of the Act creates a some what artificial offence which does not consist in the original Act of erecting the obstruction or encroachment but in "failing to comply with any direction lawfully given" to a person or "any requisition lawfully made upon him".
By the terms of the very notice, in the instant case, which contained the direction or requisition the respondent was at liberty to remove the encroachment at any time within 15 days after the receipt of the notice.
In other words, failure to comply with direction or requisition occur for the first time within the meaning of section 500(1)(b) on the expiry of 15 740 days after December 5 i.e. to say after the expiry of December 20.
Since the offence under section 500(1)(b) for which the respondent is being prosecuted consists of his alleged failure to comply with the particular direction or requisition and since such failure occurred for the first time after December 20, the period of limitation prescribed by section 533 of the Act for instituting the prosecution will commence to run on the expiry of 20th December.
[742B C D E. F] (2) Section 3(27) of the Bengal General Clauses Act (Act 1), 1899 defines "a month" to mean a month reckoned according to the British calender.
The expression 6 months which occurs in section 533 of the Act must accordingly be construed to mean 6 calendar months and not 180 days.
The offence being alleged to have been committed on the expiry of December 20, 1967 and the prosecution having been instituted on June 19, 1968, the provisions of section 533 have been fully complied with.
[743D E]
