In 1958, the Government of West Bengal, being of the view that the appellant company which enjoyed a monopoly in the supply of gas in Calcutta was negligent in looking after the interest of the consumers appointed a Committee to enquire into the unsatisfactory condition of supply of gas in Calcutta and to suggest remedial measures, including valuation of the Undertaking for the purpose of taking it over.
The Committee reported that the distribution system was in a bad state of disrepair and that the maintenance system was in a very poor state.
It recommended that the distribution system should be taken over immediately under the management of the Government to ensure and maintain supply of gas to consumers in Calcutta.
On the basis of this recommendation, the oriental Gas Company (West Bengal Act XV of 1960) was passed by the State Legislature.
Section 3 of the Act provided for the taking over for a limited period of the management and control and subsequent acquisition of the Undertaking of the Company Section 7 provided for the acquisition of the Undertaking of the Company at any time within a period of five years.
Section 8(1)(b) provided for payment of compensation for the acquisition of the Undertaking of the Company, by the method of cost less depreciation or the method of capitalisation whichever was less.
Section 9(2) provided that the compensation should be paid in bonds carrying interest at 3% p.a. from the date of issue and payable in 20 equal annual instalments.
The Act was amended in 1968.
The amended Act provided for the determination of compensation on the basis of full market value of the Undertaking and payment of compensation in the shape of bonds carrying interest from the date of enactment of the 1968 Act.
In 1970 the Act was again amended.
It provided for the determination of compensation by the method of capitalisation and payment of compensation in bonds carrying interest from the date of acquisition.
Aggrieved by the method of determination of compensation the appellant filed a writ petition under article 32 of the Constitution questioning the vires of section 8(1)(b) and section 9(2) of the Act.
The petitioner contended that (1) the principle of capitalising net profit as the sole factor for determining compensation payable for the acquisition of a public utility undertaking was not a relevant principle because a public utility concern was under an obligation to provide services to the community irrespective of whether its activities resulted in profit or loss; (2) the choice of the period of five years immediately preceding the take over of the management and control of the company for the purpose of calculating the average annual income was arbitrary; (3) at the time when the Undertaking was 618 acquired in 1962 the gilt edged securities were fetching 6% p.a. and therefore a higher multiplier than eight should have been provided and (4) the method of payment of compensation in the shape of bonds payable in twenty years at 3% interest had the effect of reducing the compensation to less than half of what was determined.
Dismissing the petition, ^ HELD: (1) (a) The principles specified by the law for determination of compensation are beyond the pale of challenge, if they are relevant to the determination of compensation and are recognised principles applicable in the determination of compensation for property compulsorily acquired and if the principles are appropriate in determining the value of the class of property sought to be acquired.
The science of valuation of property recognised several principals or methods for determining the value to be paid as compensation to the owner for loss of his property.
If an appropriate method or principle for determination of compensation was applied, the fact that by the application of another principle which was also appropriate a different value was reached, would not justify the court in entertaining the contention that out of the two appropriate methods, one more generous to the owner should have been applied by the Legislature.
If several principles were appropriate and one was selected for determination of the value of the property to be acquired, selection of that principle to the exclusion of other principles was not open to challenge since the selection to be left to the wisdom of the Parliament.
[633 F H] R. C. Cooper vs Union of India, ; followed.
Case law discussed.
(b) It is well established that tangible and intangible property of a public utility undertaking may not necessarily be valued separately and it is a sound principle to treat them as indivisible aqud value the undertaking as an integrated whole.
The authorities also treat capitalisation of net profit as one of the recognised principles of valuatior; of Public Utility Undertakings, though it may not be the best in the sense that it may not yield that result which is most advantageous to the owner of the undertaking.
Any purchaser will put himself the question what profit does the undertaking make ? and how much should he invest to get the return.
He may pay more if the prospects of better income in the future are bright and if the plant, machinery and buildings are in an excellent condition.
He may pay less if the future is not so bright and if the plant, machinery and buildings are in a poor state and require replacement and repair.
He may pay more if the undertaking is possessed of substantial, unencumbered properties.
He may pay less if the lease of land on which the factory is located is about to expire.
Thus the price may vary depending on various factors but the basic consideration is bound to be the profit yielding capacity of the undertaking.
[639 E, G H] In the instant case there is nothing in the writ petition to indicate that lands were purchased by way of investment and not for the purpose of gas works or that the lands were capable of being sold independently of the Undertaking.
The petitioner 's assertions are not borne out by any statement to that ecect in the petition.
Therefore, there would be no justification now to allow the petitioner to amend the petition filed in 1971.
Had there been 619 any substance in this assertion the petitioner would have mentioned it prominently in the petition itself.
It would not have taken it so many years to discover a circumstance claimed to be so very vital.
The case of the petitioner right through had been that the principle of capitalisation of income was irrelevant.
[640 C E] (2)(a).
There is no force in the charge of arbitrariness.
There is nothing wrong with the choice of the period of five years preceding the take over for the purpose of calculating the average annual income.
[640 F G] (b) If the legislature wanted to be unfair to the company, the previous year 's profit could have been taken as criterion on the ground that the value to be ascertained was the value on the date of take over and not somo hypotheticol anterior date, or instead of taking the average of the period of the proceeding five years the legislature could well have taken the average of the preceding three years.
If either of these courses had been adopted compensation would be much less.
Instead, the legislature fairly adopted a five year period for calculating the average annual income.
It may be that in the historical part the undertaking was making much profit It may be that in the past there were lean years.
Neither a specially fat nor a specially lean period from the past could properly be taken into account as that would be.
irrelevant.
The legislature was concerned with the value of the undertaking on or about the date of acquisition.
It, therefore, very properly chose the period of five years immediately preceding The take over.
[640 H; 641 A B] Appleton Water Co. vs Railroad Commission, 154 Wis. 121, 148, , referred to.
Eminent Domain by Alfred Jahr, Valuation by Bright, Principles and Practice of Rating Valuation by Roger Emeny and Hector M. Wilks referred to.
(3) There is equally no force in the argument that the legislature should have specified a higher multiplier than 'eight ' in fixing the compensation.
If the legislature thought that a. return of 12% in the case of large industrial undertaking such as the petitioner 's was reasonable and on that basis adopted the multiplier 'eight ', it is not for this Court to sit in judgment over that decision and attempt to determine a more appropriate multiplier.
The use of the term 'normal cases ' used in Cooper 's case where this Court pointed out that capitalisation of the net annual value of the property at a rate equal in normal cases to the return from gilt edged securities was an important method of determination of compensation, showed that it was not intended to lay down any invariable rule that whenever a method of capitalisation of net profits was adopted, return from gilt edged securities was to be the basis.
That should depend on a variety of circumstances such as the nature of the property, the normal return which could be expected on like investment, the state of the capital market and several such factors.
[641 G H; 642 A]
