Practice and Procedure Conduct of parties to be taken into account while granting relief in writ petition.
The property in dispute was undivided property (composite property) of three brothers, one of whom died and his sons migrated to Pakistan.
One third share of the property was declared evacuee property and vested in the Custodian under the .
It was allotted to the appellant who was a refugee.
The Competent Officer issued individual notices under Section 6 of the to the two remaining brothers of the evacuee and their acknowledgments were placed on record.
Since no claim was filed by anyone, an order was made by the Competent Officer on 31 8 1955 vesting the property in the Custodian under Sec. 11.
As the property was again reported to be composite property, fresh notices were inadvertently issued to the co sharers, but no claim was filed by anyone and an order was again made on 23 3 1957 vesting the property in the Custodian.
Possession of the evacuees one third share in the property was delivered to the appellant under order of Assistant Custodian.
After a lapse of time, the respondents filed an application for 'restoration ' alleging that no notice for separation of the evacuee interest in the property was ever served on them and that they learnt of the vesting order only when the Manager of the evacuee property went to the village to take possession.
The Competent Officer passed an order setting aside the vesting order dated 31 8 1955 and transferred the property to the sons of the deceased brother for Rs. 5,000/ .
The Assistant Custodian of Evacuee Property made an application to the Competent Officer for a review of his order, pointing out a wrong impression.
It was stated that the evacuee interest in the property had already been allotted to the appellant.
The Competent Officer partly allowed the review.
The respondents questioned the power of the Competent officer to review his order, but the objection was rejected.
The respondents filed a writ petition under article 226 of the Constitution.
The High Court quashed the order of review on the ground that in the absence of any provision in the Act for review, it was not permissible for the Competent Officer to review his order.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, 892 ^ HELD: (1) The conduct of the respondents was such as to disentitle them to a writ and the High Court erred in ignoring that important aspect of the matter even though it was sufficient for the dismissal of the writ petition.
[899B] (2) Review is a creature of a statute and cannot be entertained in the absence of a provision therefor.
[897G] Harbhajan Singh vs Karan Singh & Ors., ; ; Patel Chunibhai Dajibhai etc.
vs Narayanrao Khanderao Jambekar & Anr., ; referred to.
Baijnath Ram Goenka vs Nand Kumar Singh, 40 I.A. 54; Ananatharaju Shetty vs Appu Hegde, AIR 1919 Mad. 244, approved.
(3) The earlier two orders of the Competent Officer setting aside the vesting order and transferring the evacuee interest in the property to the respondents were therefor without jurisdiction.
[897H 898A] (4) But when the respondents had themselves unlawfully invoked the review jurisdiction of the Competent officer, which did not exist, to their advantage, and to the disadvantage of the appellant, they could not be heard to say, when the Department invoked the self same jurisdiction on two important grounds, that the review orders of the Competent Officer were void for want of jurisdiction and must be set aside for that reason.
[898H 899B] (5) The High Court failed to appreciate that while it was true that want of jurisdiction to review the order by the Competent Officer could not be cured by waiver, it would not necessarily follow that the Court was obliged to grant a writ at the instance of a party whose conduct was such as to disentitle it for it.
The High Court was exercising its extraordinary jurisdiction and the conduct of the petitioners was a matter of considerable importance.
[898E] (6) The High Court did not take due notice of the fact that the respondents had allowed the passing of the impugned orders, in spite of the individual notices to them.
It did not notice the further fact that when that order had become final because of the failure to file an appeal or an application for revision it was not permissible in view of the specific bar of Sec. 18 for the respondents to move a "restoration" application and to obtain its reversal by the Competent Officer.
[898F G]
