The Municipalities of Punjab are governed by two enactments.
The numerous little ones are statutory bodies created and controlled by the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 and few large ones by the Punjab Municipal Corporation Act, 1976.
For the purpose of the present petitions the provisions run on identical terms.
The State of Punjab in April, 1977 required the various municipal bodies in the State to impose tax on the sale of Indian made foreign liquor @ Re. 1/ per bottle w.e.f. 20 5 1977.
The Municipal authorities having failed to take action pursuant to the directive the State of Punjab directly issued a notification under sec.
90(5) of the Punjab Municipal Corporation Act, 1976 and similar provision of the Municipal Act, 1911.
The petitioner challenged the constitutional validity of the said statutes and levy on the following grounds: 1.
Section 90(2)(b) of the Act suffers from the vice of excessive delegation or legislative abdication.
There are no guidelines for the exercise of the wide fiscal power of the Corporation or Government which make it too unreasonable to be salvaged by article 19(5) and too arbitrary to be equal under article 14.
The order imposing the tax itself is vitiated because: (a) It seeks to impose the tax which is already imposed and, therefore, violates section 90 (4); (b) There is double taxation; (c) It levies too heavy taxation; (d) Picking out from the broad spectrum of luxury goods or intoxicants the Indian made foreign liquor amounts to discrimination; (e) No opportunity of being heard was given; (f) Unequals are being treated equally by imposing Re. 1/ per bottle irrespective of the type of liquor taxed, price of the liquor and alcoholic content.
Dismissing the appeal.
^ HELD: (1) There is nothing in article 265 of the Constitution prohibiting double taxation.
[850 D] 846 Cantonment Board Poona vs Western India Theatres Ltd., AIR 1954 Bom.
261 approved.
(b) The plea that flat rate of Re. 1/ per bottle be it on brandy or other stronger beverage or be it Rs. 50/ or Rs. 500/ per bottle cannot be seriously pressed.
In the field of taxation many complex factors enter the fixation and flexibility is necessary for the taxing authority.
[850E F] Moopil Nair (K.T.) vs State of Kerala, ; ; East India Tobacco Co. vs State of A.P., ; at 406; A. Hajee Abdul Shakoor & Co. vs State of Madras. ; at 230 referred to.
(2) If the Municipal body proposed to impose a tax it is required to offer an opportunity to the residents of area.
No such procedural fetter is to be found under sec.
90(5) if the levy is imposed by the State Government.
It is impossible for the Court to imply invitation of objections. 'No taxation without representation ' is not applicable to a Government controlled by an elected legislature exercising its power of taxation.
[852B, C, D] (3) Sec.
90(4) talks of tax not already imposed.
The Sales Tax imposed by the state legislature under the Punjab General Sales Tax Act 1948 is no bar to the present levy.
Section 90 deals with the levy of taxes for Municipal Corporation.
The injunction is confined to repetition of the taxes which the Municipality has already imposed.
If the Corporation has not already imposed the tax.
the embargo is absent.
It is of no moment that some other body, including the State Legislature has already entered the field.
The question is has the Municipal Committee or Corporation under this Act already exacted a similar tax ? [852F, H, 853BC] (4) The Founding Document of the nation has created the three great instrumentalities and entrusted them with certain basic powers legislative, judicative and executive.
Abdication of these powers by the concerned instrumentalities, amounts to betrayal of the constitution and it is intolerable in law.
The legislature cannot delegate the essential legislative functions.
The legislature is responsible to the people and its representative, the delegate may not be and this is why excessive delegation have been frowned upon by constitutional law.
However, the complexities of modern administration are so bafflingly intricate and bristle with details, urgencies difficulties and the need for flexibility is such that our legislature may not get off to a start if they must directly and comprehensively handle legislative business in all their plenitude and particularisation.
Delegation of some part of legislative power becomes a compulsive necessity for viability.
Of course, every delegate is subject to the authority and control of the principal and exercise of delegated power can always be directed or cancelled by the Principal.
Therefore, even if there be delegation, parliamentary control over delegated legislation should be a living continuity as a constitutional necessity.
[853GH, 854A, B, C, D, E] Devi Das Gopal Krishnan & Ors.
vs State of Punjab & Ors.
, ; at 565; P. N. Kaushal etc.
vs vs Union of India & Ors.
; ; Corp. of Calcutta & Anr.
vs Liberty Cinema, referred to.
The taxes levied under the Act can be utilised only for the purpose of the Act.
There is a clear purpose contained in the provisions about the purpose and limit of the tax.
What is needed for the purpose of the Act by way of financial resources may be levied by the Corporation.
Beyond that not.
Moreover the 847 items on which taxes may be imposed are also specified.
Thus the legislature has fixed the purpose of the taxation, objects of the taxation and limits of the taxation.
[856A B] It is too late in the day to contend that the jurisprudence of delegation of legislative power does not sanction parting with the power to fix the rate of taxation, given indication of the legislative policy with sufficient clarity.
[860 B] When the Government is imposing taxes for the Municipality the Government is bound to know what ought to have been done by the Municipality.
The whole scheme of the statute shows that Government has an important role to play in the running of the municipalities.
The financial control over the corporation is with the State Government.
[865E] As between the two interpretations that which sustains the validity of law must be preferred.
[864E] M. K. Papiah & Sons vs The Excise Commr. & Anr., ; ; Sita Ram Bishambhar Dayal vs State of U.P., ; referred to.
