By section 494 Of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898: " Any Public Prosecutor may, with the consent of the Court, in cases tried by jury before the return of the verdict, and in other cases before the judgment is pronounced, withdraw from the prosecution of any person either generally or in respect of any one or more of the offences for which he is tried, ' and upon such withdrawal, (a) if it is made before a charge has been framed, the accused shall be discharged in respect of such offence or offences ; (b) if it is made after a charge has been framed, or when under this Code no charge is required, he shall be acquitted in respect of such offence or offences.
" The prosecution of M. and others was launched on the first information of the first respondent, and when the matter was pending before the Magistrate in the, committal stage and before any evidence was actually taken, and 'application for the withdrawal of M. from the prosecution was made by the Public Prosecutor under section 494 Of the Code of Criminal Procedure on the ground that " on the evidence available it would not :be just and expedient to proceed with the prosecution of M." The Magistrate was of the opinion that there was no reason to withhold the consent that was applied for and accordingly he discharged the accused.
This order was upheld by the Sessions judge, but on 280 revision, filed by the respondents, the High Court set aside the order and directed the Magistrate to record the evidence and then consider whether it established a Prima facie case against the accused.
The State appealed against the order of the High Court by special leave, while the respondents sought to support the order on the grounds (1) that where the application for withdrawal of the prosecution is made on the ground of no evidence or no adequate or reliable evidence the Magistrate must hold a preliminary enquiry into the relevant evidence, and (2) that in a case tried by jury by a Court of Session, an application by the Public Prosecutor under section 594 Of the Code does not lie in the committal stage.
Held : (1) Though the function of the Court in giving the consent under section 594 of the Code is a judicial one, it is not necessary that the discretion is to be exercised only with reference to material gathered by the judicial method, and what the Court has to do is to satisfy itself that the executive function of the Public Prosecutor in applying for, withdrawal of the prosecution has not been improperly exercised, or that it is not an attempt to interfere with the normal course of justice for illegitimate reasons or purposes.
(2) The word " tried " in section 494 Of the Code is not used in any limited sense and the section is wide enough to cover every kind of inquiry and trial, and applicable to all cases which are capable of terminating either in a discharge or in an acquittal according to the stage at which the application for withdrawal is made.
An order of committal which terminates the proceeding so far as the inquiring Court is concerned is a " judgment " within the meaning of section 494 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Giribala Dasee vs Mader Gazi, Cal 233, and Viswanadham vs Madan Singh,, I.L.R. , approved.
