The facts of only one petition are set out because they are similar to facts in other petitions.
Excel Wear is a partnership firm manufacturing garments for export.
About 400 workmen were employed in the petitioners ' factory.
The case of the petitioners is that the relations between the management and the employees started deteriorating and became very strained from 1976.
The workmen became very militant, aggressive, violent and indulged in unjustifiable or illegal strikes.
Various incidents have been mentioned in the Writ Petition in support of the said allegations.
However, since those facts were seriously challenged and disputed by the workmen, the Court did not refer to them in any detail nor expressed any view one way or the other.
(2) According to the petitioners it became almost impossible to carry on the business.
The petitioners, therefore, served a notice dated 2nd May, 1977 on the Government of Maharashtra, respondent No 2 for previous approval of the intended closure of the undertaking in accordance with section 25(O)(1).
The State Government refused to accord the approval on the ground that the intended closure was prejudicial to public interest.
(3 ) The petitioners contended: (a) A right to close down a business is an integral part of the right to carry on a business guaranteed under article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution.
The impugned law imposes a restriction on the said fundamental right which is highly unreasonable.
excessive and arbitrary.
It is not a restriction but almost amounts to the destruction or negation of that right.
The restrictions imposed is manifestly beyond the permissible bounds of article 19(6) of the Constitution.
(b) A right to carry on a business includes a right not to carry on a business which is like any other right mentioned under Article 19(1) such as the right to freedom of speech includes a right not to speak and the right not to form an association is inherent under the right to form association.
(c) The restrictions are unreasonable because (i) Section 25(o) does not require giving of reasons in the order.
(ii) No time limit is to he fixed while refusing permission to close down.
(iii)Even if the reasons are adequate and sufficient, approval can be denied in the purported public interest of security of labour.
Labour is bound to suffer because of unemployment brought about in almost every case of closure.
1010 (iv) It has been left to the caprice and whims of the authority to decide one way or the other.
No guidelines have been given.
(v) Apart from the civil liability which is to be incurred under sub section (5), the closure, however, compulsive it may be, if brought about against the direction given under sub section (2) is visited with penal consequences as provided in section 25 R. (vi) There is no deemed provision as to the according of approval in sub section (2) as in sub section (4).
(vii)Refusal to accord approval would merely mean technically that the business continues but a factory owner cannot be compelled to carry on the business and go on with the production and thus one of the objectives sought to be achieved by this provision cannot be achieved.
(viii)There is no provision of appeal, revision or review of the order even after sometime.
(ix) Restriction being much more excessive than is necessary for the achievement of the object is highly unreasonable.
(x) There may be several other methods to regulate and restrict the right of closure by providing for extra compensation over and above the retrenchment compensation if the closure is found to be mala fide and unreasonable.
(xi) To direct the employer not to close down is a negation of the right to close.
It is not regulatory.
(xii)If carrying on any business is prohibited in public interest, a person can do another business.
But to prohibit the closure of a running business is destruction of the right to close.
(xiii) The reasonableness of the impugned restrictions must be examined both from procedural and substantive aspects of the law.
Sub section (2) of section 25 D does not make it obligatory for any higher authority of the Government to take a decision.
It may be taken even by a lower officer in the hierarchy.
(4) The respondents ' contentions: (a) Some counsel for the respondents did not dispute that the right to close down a business is an integral part of the right to carry on a business.
They however, contended that the restrictions imposed by the impugned law are quite reasonable and justified to put a stop to the unfair labour practice and for the welfare of the workmen.
It is a progressive legislation for the protection of a weaker section of society.
(b) Some other counsel for the respondents, however, did not accept that a right to close down a business is an integral part of the right to carry on any business.
According to them, the total prohibition of closure only affects a part of the right to carry on the business and not a total annihilation of this.
The restriction imposed was in public interest and there is a presumption of reasonableness in favour of a statute.
Reliance was also placed on social and welfare legislation as expounded by renowned jurists and judges abroad.
It was also contended that the legislation was protected by Article 31C of the Constitution.
1011 (5) Allowing the petitions, the Court ^ HELD: The right to close down a business cannot be equated with a right not to start or carry on n business at all.
The extreme proposition urged on behalf of the employer by equating the two rights and placing them at par is not quite apposite and sound.
If one does not start a business at all, then perhaps under no circumstances, he can be compelled to start one.
Such a negative aspect of a right to carry on a business may be equated with the negative aspect of the right embedded in the concept of the right to freedom of speech, to form an association or to acquire or hold property.
Perhaps under no circumstances, a person can be compelled to speak, to form an association or to acquire or hold a property.
But by imposing reasonable restrictions, he can be compelled not to speak, not to form an association or not to acquire or not to hold property.
A total prohibition of business is possible by putting reasonable restrictions under Article 19(6) on the right to carry on a business.
[1027 B D, 1028 A] Cooverjee B. Bharucha vs The Excise Commissioner and the Chief Commissioner, Ajmer & Ors.; ; ; Narendra Kumar & ors.
vs The Union of India & ors. ; relied on.
However, the greater the restriction, the more the need for strict scrutiny by the Court.
The contention put forward on behalf of the labour unions that the right to close down a business is not an integral part of the right to carry on a business or that it is not a fundamental right at all is also wrong.
In one sense the right does appertain to property.
But such a faint overlapping of the night to property engrafted in article 19(1)(f) or article 31 must not be allowed to cast any shade or eclipse on the simple nature of the right.
However, the right to close down is not an absolute right.
It can certainly be restricted, regulated or controlled by law in the interest of the general public.
[1027 1028 A C] Concept of socialism or socialistic state has undergone changes from time to time, from country to country and from thinkers to thinkers.
But some basic concept still holds the field.
In the case of Akadasi Padhan the question for consideration was whether a law creating a state monopoly is valid under the latter part of Article 19(6).
The Court pointed out the difference between the doctrinaire approach to the problem of socialism and the pragmatic one.
But so long as the private ownership of an industry is recognised governs an overwhelmingly large proportion of our economic structure, it is not possible to say that principles of socialism and social justice can be pushed to such an extreme so as to ignore completely or to a very large extent the interests of another section of the public namely the private owners of the undertakings.
[1030 G H. 1031 E G] Akadasi Padhan vs State of Orissa, [1963] Suppl.
2 SCR 691 referred to.
There are creditors and depository and various other persons connected with or having dealings with the undertaking, whose rights are also affected by the impugned legislation.
[1031 G] Section 25 O (2) does not require the giving of reasons in the order.
In two of the orders in the present cases, it is merely stated that the reasons for the intended closure are prejudicial to public interest suggesting thereby that the reasons given by the employers are correct, adequate and sufficient, yet they are prejudicial to the public interest.
In case of bona fide closures, it would be 1012 generally so.
Yet the interest of labour for the time being is bound to suffer because it makes a worker unemployed.
Such a situation as far as reasonably possible should be prevented.
Public interest and social justice do require the protection of the labour.
But it is not reasonable to give them protection against all unemployment after affecting the interests of so many persons interested including persons who have no connection with the management.
It is not possible to compel the employers to manage the undertaking even if they find that it is not safe or practicable to do so.
They cannot be asked to go on facing tremendous difficulties of management even at the risk of their person and property.
They cannot be compelled to go on incurring losses year after year.
[1032 C F] In the third Writ Petition, the Government has given two reasons, for refusing to grant permission.
Both of them are too vague to give an exact idea in support of the refusal of permission, to, close down.
It says that the reasons are not adequate and sufficient and that the intended closure is prejudicial to the public interest.
The latter reason will be universal in all cases of closure.
The former demonstrates to what extent the order can be unreasonable.
If the reasons given by the petitioner in great detail are correct, as the impugned order suggests they are, it is preposterous to say that they are not adequate and sufficient for a closure.
Such an unreasonable order was possible to be passed because of the unreasonableness of the law.
Whimsically and capriciously, the authority can refuse permission to close down.
[1033 B E] If the Government order is not communicated to the employer within 90 days, strictly speaking, criminal liability in section 25(R) may not be attracted, if on the expiry of that period an employer closes down the undertaking.
But it seems the civil liability under Section 25(O) (5) will come into play even after the passing of the order of refusal of permission to close down on the expiry of the period of 90 days.
Provision in Chapter V(B) of the Act suggests that the object of carrying on production can be achieved by the refusal to grant permission although in the objects and reasons of the amending act such an object seems to be there although remotely and secondly it is highly unreasonable to achieve the object by compelling the employee not to close down in public interest for maintaining production.
The order passed by the authority is not subject to any scrutiny by any higher authority or tribunal either in appeal or revision.
The order cannot be reviewed either.
[1033 F H, 1034 A B] It is not always easy to strike the balance between the parallel and conflicting interest, and it is not fair to unreasonably tilt the balance in favour of one interest by ignoring the other.
In the case of fixation of minimum wages this Court has repeatedly rejected the contention of the employers that he has no capacity to pay minimum wages and therefore his right to carry on the business is affected.
[1034E, 1035 A B] U. Unichoyi & Ors.
vs The State of Kerala. ; relied on.
But this principle, rather, in contrast, illustrates the unreasonableness of the present impugned law.
Nobody has got a right to carry on business if he cannot pay even the minimum wages.
He must then retire from business, But to tell him to pay and not to retire if he cannot pay is pushing the matter to an extreme.
It has been observed that where an industry had been closed and the closure was real and bona fide, there cannot be an industrial dispute after closure.
[1035 B D] 1013 Pipraich Sugar Mills Ltd. vs Pipraich Sugar Mills Mazdoor Union, referred to.
The law may provide to prevent and regulate unfair unjust or mala fide closure.
[1036 C] The reasonableness has got to be tested both from the procedural and substantive aspects of the law.
It is true that Chapter V (B) deals with certain comparatively bigger undertakings and for a few types only but with all this it has not made the law reasonable.
It may be a reasonable law for saving the law from violation of article 14 but certainly it does not make the restriction reasonable within the meaning of article 19(6).
Not to permit the employer to close down is essentially an interference with the fundamental right to carry on the business.
[1036 D, H, 1037 A, G] If a law is otherwise good and does not contravene any of the fundamental rights of the non citizens, non citizens cannot take advantage of the voidness of law for the reason that it contravenes the fundamental rights of the citizens and claim that there is no law at all.
In the case of Ambica Mills this Court has not said that even if there is violation of the fundamental rights guaranteed by article 19(1)(b) and not saved by clause (6) of the said right has been conferred only on the citizens of India and not upon the corporate bodies like a company.
[1()38 A D] State of Gujarat and Anr.
vs Shri Ambica Mills Ltd., Ahmedabad, etc.
; explained.
Bennet Coleman & Co. & ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; , Rustom Cavasjee Cooper vs Union of India, ; relied on.
It was laid down in the case of Bennet Coleman & Co. & Ors.
and Rustom Cavasjee Cooper that if a shareholder 's right is impaired the State cannot impair the right of the shareholder as well as of the company and the Court can strike down the law for violation of fundamental right guaranteed only to the citizens if the challenge is by the company as well as by the shareholders.
The partners can challenge the validity in the name of firm.
In the present case where company is petitioner a shareholder has also been joined with the company to challenge the law. [1038 E F, H, 1039 A] The impugned law is not for giving effect to the policy of the State towards securing any of the principles in Articles 39(1) or 41.
The law does not fit in with the said directive principles.
The argument that it is protected by article 31(C) is not sustainable.
The amendment was prospective and not retrospective.
[1039 H, 1040 A B, E] The argument that when the amendment was brought the proclamation of emergency was in operation and thereafter before emergency was lifted, the amend article 31C had come into force and thus by the continuous process the latter became immune on the ground of violation of article 19 is not maintainable.
[1042 C] As soon as the emergency is lifted the law becomes bad because it was bad when it was enacted, although it could not be taken to be so during the period 1014 of Emergency.
Therefore, article 31C cannot protect the law.
Apart from the fact that article 31C has no application the law was bad for violation of article 19(1)(b) when it was enacted but it was not taken to be bad during the period of emergency.
Its invalidity sprouted out with full vigour on the lifting of emergency.
[1041 H, 1042 C D] Keshavan Madhava Menon vs The State of Bombay, ; Dhirubha Devi Singh Gohil vs The State of Bombay ; ; M.P.V. Sunderaramier & Co. vs The State of A. P. & Anr., ; , Jagannath etc., etc.
vs Authorised Officer, Land Reforms and Ors.
; , ; distinguished.
Bhikaji Narain Dhakras and Ors vs The State of M.P. & Anr., ; ; Basheshar Nath vs The Commissioner of Income Tax, Delhi and Rajasthan and Anr., [1959] Suppl.
1 SCR 528; Deep Chand vs The State of U.P. & ors.
, [1559] Suppl.
2 SCR 8; Mahendra Lal Jaini vs The State of U.P. and ORS.
, [1963] Suppl.
1 SCR 912 referred t(b.
The Court declared section 25 (o) as a whole and Section 25R in so for as it relates to the awarding of punishment for infringement of the provisions of Section 25(o) constitutionally bad and invalid for violation of article 19(1) of the Constitution.
The Court declared the impugned order passed in all the cases to be void and restrained the respondents from enforcing them.
The Court however did not express any opinion on the merits of the case, since the orders fall on the ground of constitutional invalidity.
[1046 A C]
