The appellant who was the Ruler of a princely state entered into a covenant agreeing to merge his state into a union called the United States of Matsya.
The Matsya Covenant, by article Xl Cl.
(2) provided that the ruler of each state shall furnish to the Raj Pramukh an inventory of all the inn movable properties, securities and cash balances held by him as private property and cl.
(3) provided that if any dispute arose as to whether any item of property was the private property of the ruler or the state property it shall be referred to such person as the Government of India may nominate in the decision of that person shall be final and binding on all parties.
The appellant furnished an inventory of all properties claimed to be his private "property.
Sometime later the rulers of the constituent States of Matsya entered into a Covenant with the Rajpramukh of the United State of Rajasthan for merger of their States into the State of Rajasthan in abrogation of the Matsya Covenant.
The Rajasthan Covenant by article XII, Cl.
(2) provided for the settlement of any dispute as to whether the property was private property or state property by reference to such person as the Government of India may nominate in consultation with the Rajpramukh and that the decision of such person shall be final and binding on the parties.
The Ministry of States, Government of India wrote on 14th September, 1949 to the appellant that the settlement of the inventory was an integral part of an overall agreement in respect of all outstanding matters of dispute and did not stand by itself.
After correspondence with the Government of India the appellant received a written communication intimating the decision of the Government of India in respect of 25 items of the property.
The appellant claimed that four buildings which were in occupation of the State Government had been declared as his private properties in the inventory appended to the letter of the Government of India and that the State Govern 63 ment should pay rent to him in respect of those buildings.
This claim of the appellant having been rejected, he filed a suit in the district court for a declaration that the properties were his private properties and that the respondents should be ordered to pay rent to him.
The suit was transferred by the High Court to itself, The High Court dismissed the suit on the ground that adjudication of the dispute was barred by article 363 of the Constitution.
In appeal to this Court it was contended that the letter of 14th September, 1949 was the result of a decision arrived at in pursuance of cl.
(3) of article XI of Matsya Covenant and cl.
(2) of article XII of the Rajasthan Covenant and must be construed as a decision of the Government of India.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
The decision sought to be enforced is an agreement hit by article 363 of the Constitution and the High Court was right in dismissing the suit.
[74H] 2.
The so called decision was nothing but an agreement between the Government of India and the appellant.
The letter clearly stated that the inventory furnished by the plaintiff was discussed with him at New Delhi and that a copy of the final inventory of the appellant 's private properties, which had the approval of the Government of India in the Ministry of States, Was forwarded to him.
Under clause (3) article XI of the Matsya Covenant as also clause (2) of article XII of the Rajasthan Covenant, no approval of the Ministry of States was called for.
What each of these clauses provided was that if any dispute arose as to whether any item of property was the private property of the ruler concerned or of his erstwhile state, it was to be referred to such a person as the Government of India might nominate, and the decision of that person was to be final and binding on all parties concerned.
Neither the Government of India nominated a person to whom the dispute was to be referred; nor did any such person give a decision on the point.
The contents of the letter, are not at all relatable to those of either of the two clauses.
On the other hand, they clearly indicate that the so called "decisions" of the States Ministry contained in the inventory appended to the letter formed really the record of the agreement arrived at between the Ministry of States and the plaintiff as a result of negotiations.
[71D H] 3.
Paragraph three of the letter talks of the "settlement of the inventory '.
which was tc.
be an integral part of an "overall agreement in respect of all outstanding matters of dispute" and was not to stand by itself.
What the said was that all the disputes regarding the property of the Ruler were to be settled by an overall agreement that the contents of the inventory appended to the letter merely recorded the settlement between the appellant and the Ministry and that even those contents were not to be regarded as final settlement of the matters dealt with therein unless they formed part of an agreement embracing all items of property.
[72B C] 4.
In the instant case instead of having the disputes referred for decision to a person nominated by the parties they decided to adopt the method of mutual agreement to settle those disputes.
Such mutual agreement could not 64 be regarded as a decision by a person nominated by the Government of India either under clause (3) of article of Matsya Covenant or clause (2) of article Xll of Rajasthan Covenant.
It must be deemed to be nothing more nor less than an agreement simpliciter even though it was labelled as a decision of the States Ministry.
[72H 73B] 5.
Article 363 of the Constitution bars the jurisdiction of all courts in any dispute arising out of any agreement which was entered into or executed before the commencement of the Constitution by any Ruler of an Indian Sate to which the Government of India was party.
The operation of the Article is not limited to any "parent" Covenant and every agreement whether it was primary or one entered into in pursuance of the provisions of a preceding agreement would fall within the ambit of the Article.
The fact that the agreement contained in the letter dated the 14th September, 1949 had resulted from action taken under the provisions of the Rajasthan Covenant, is no answer to the plea raised on behalf of the respondents that article 363 of the Constitution is a bar to the maintainability of the two suits, although that agreement did not flow directly from the Rajasthan Covenant but was entered into by ignoring and departing from the provisions of clause (2) of article XII thereof.
[73D E]
