The appellant assessees are Military Engineering Services ' contractors and as such carry on business of executing contracts and work on behalf of the Government.
Their contracts are "Lumpsum contracts" where the department supplies the materials at fixed rates.
The revenue was of the opinion that the cost of the materials supplied by the military authorities was liable to be included before applying the flat rate to the assessee 's receipts and estimating the profits for the purposes of tax liability.
The High Court of Punjab and Haryana on a reference at the instance of the Revenue confirmed it following its own earlier Judgments in the case of Brij Bhushan Lal vs C.I.T. Delhi, ( 1971 ) Allowing the appeals by special leave, the Court, ^ HELD: l.
The law relating to 'best judgment assessment ' is same both in the case of income tax assessment and the sales tax assessment.
The authority making a best judgment assessment must make an honest and fair estimate of the income of the assessee and though arbitrariness cannot be avoided in such estimate the same must not be capricious, but should have a reasonable nexus to the available material and the circumstances of the case.
[22G H, 23D E] Commissioner of Income Tax vs Laxminarain Badridas, (1937) S I.T.R. 170 (PC), Raghubar Mandal Harihar Mandal vs State of Bihar, (1957) 7 S.T.C. 770 at p. 778 and State of Kerala vs C. Velukutty, ; referred to.
Ordinarily when a works contract is put through or completed by a contractor the income or profits derived by the contractor from such contract is determined on the value of the contract as a whole and cannot be determined by considering several items that go to form such value of the contract but where certain stores/material is supplied at fixed rates by the Department to the Contractor solely for being used for fixed or incorporated in the works undertaken on terms and conditions mentioned in the contract, the real total value of the entire contract would be the value minus the cost of such stores/matrial so supplied.
Therefore, since no element of profit was involved in the turnover represented by the cost of stores/material supplied by The M.E.S. to the assessee firms, the income or profits derived by the assessee firms from such contracts will have to be determined on the basis of the value of the contracts represented by the cash payments received by the assessee 17 firms from the M.E.S. Department exclusive of the cost of the material/stores received for being used, fixed or incorporated in the works undertaken by them.
[26E H] In Lumpsum contracts of` M.E.S. Department two salient features are always present namely, ( 1 ) there is a Schedule 'B ' which specifies the items of stores/material to be supplied by the Department to the contractor solely for being used, fixed or incorporated in the works together with the fixed rates R at which the same will be supplied and such supply is governed by General Conditions Nos. 10 and 33; apart from the stores/material specified in Schedule 'B ' the contractor also brings his own stores/material on site for the purposes of the works which is also governed by some Paragraphs of General Conditions Nos. 10 and 33; and (2) the final financial liability of the Government is fixed on completion of the contract on the basis of the actual measurements and on the basis of the rates which are already standardised; a detailed measurement is undertaken at the end of the work at which the Garrison Engineer and the Assessee 's representative remain present and the measurements, are entered in Measurement Books and after the measurements final bills are prepared as per the M.E.S. Schedule and payments are made after making adjustments for the advances already made.
[24A D] From the tender documents that are made available to contractor and the aforesaid terms and conditions of the "Lump Sum Contracts" two or three aspects emerge very clearly.
In the first place the contractor becomes aware that certain specified stores/materials will be supplied to him by the Department at fixed rates for being used in the works to be undertaken by him for which he has not to pay from his pocket and it is on that footing that he submits his tender quoting a particular figure for the entire work; Secondly, such stores/material so supplied by the M.E.S. Department has to be used, fixed or incorporated by the contractor in the works undertaken by him and the surplus, if any, that would remain after the completion of the work is to be returned to the Department; thirdly, since for accounting purposes the initial supply is debited to the contractor at the specified fixed rates, credit for the balance of tho stores/materials so returned is also given at the same rates, some adjustment being made in respect of the wear and tear of such stores/material but in regard to the stores material out of such supply as is actually used, fixed or incorporated into the works, no accounting is done viz a viz the contract payment that is made to the contractor.
In other words, in substance and in reality such stores/material always remains the property of the Department and the contractor has merely the custody of it and he files or incorporates the same into the works.
In such circumstances having regard to the terms and conditions on which such supply of stores/materials is made there is not even a theoretical possibility of any element of profit being involved in the turnover represented by the cost of such stores/materials.
It is conceivable that when the contractor himself purchases materials in the open market and supplies the same to the Department by using fixing or incorporating the same in the works.
as in the case of materials other than specified in Schedule 'B ' some profit element would be embedded in the turnover represented by the cost of such martial but when stores/material is supplied by the Government Department at fixed rates for being used, fixed or incorporated in the work on terms indicated above there would be no element of profit involved in the turnover represented by the cost of such material.
[25G H, 26A E] 18 Brij Bhushan Lal vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Delhi, and Haryana); overruled.
M. P. Alexander and Co. vs Commissioner of Income Tax ; Commissioner of Income Tax, Madras vs K. section Guruswami Gounder and K section Krishnaraju ; Trilokchand Chunilal vs Commissioner of Income Tax Gujarat , Additional Commissioner of Income Tax vs Trikamji Punia and Sons, [AP (F.B.)]; approved.
