The appellant 's factory was divided into two sections; manufacturing section and packing material making section.
The packing material making section comprised two sub sections: manufacturing containers and painting containers.
The appellant decided to buy containers from the market and consequently closed down its packing material making section but continued the painting section.
After a lapse of years, the employer served a notice of retrenchment on the two workmen (respondents nos.
3 and 4) and another employee all of whom at that time were working in the painting section alleging that the undertaking is closed.
They were asked to collect their dues under section 25FFF of the .
The Trade Union of the employees submitted a number of demands one of which related to the reinstatement of the two retrenchment workmen with full back wages.
The Government referred all their demands to the Industrial Tribunal but declined to refer the demand relating to reinstatement of the two retrenched workmen.
A few months later, however, the Government referred this demand as well for adjudication.
The Tribunal held ( 1 ) that though in the first instance the Government l? refused to refer the dispute it was competent to make a reference at a later date and (2) that the retrenchment of the workmen was invalid because the appellant did not comply with the provision of section 25F. The appellant 's writ petition was dismissed in limine.
In appeal to this Court it was contended that (1) the Government having once declined to make a reference, had no power to make a reference in respect of the same dispute at a later date unless it had some fresh or additional material before it; and (2) since the painting undertaking was a separate and independent undertaking, the case was governed by section 25FFF and not by section 25F. Dismissing the appeal.
^ HELD: 1.
(i) The Government does not lack the power to make reference in respect of the same industrial dispute which it once declined to refer.
[53G] 46 (ii) The opinion which the appropriate Government is required to form before referring a dispute to the appropriate authority under section 10(1) is about the existence of a dispute or even if the dispute has not arisen it is apprehended as imminent and requires resolution in the interest of industrial peace and harmony.
The power under this section, which is discretionary, can be exercised when the Government is satisfied that an industrial dispute exists or is apprehended.
There must be some material before the Government forms an opinion in respect of the two relevant considerations.
Moreover, the power conferred being administrative in nature the action of the Government in making the reference is an administrative act.
The jurisdictional facts on which the appropriate Government may act are the formation of opinion that an industrial dispute exists or is apprehended, which is a subjective one.
That being so the adequacy or sufficiency of the material on which the opinion was formed is beyond the pale of judicial scrutiny.
If the Governments action is impugned by a party it would be open to such a party to show that what was referred was not an industrial dispute and that the tribunal had no jurisdiction to make the award.
If the dispute was an industrial dispute its factual existence and the expediency of making a reference being matters entirely for the Government to decide, it will not be competent for the court to hold the reference bad merely because there was, in its opinion, no material before the Government on which it could have come to an affirmative conclusion on those matters.
[51E 52B] State of Madras vs C. P. Sarathy, referred to.
(iii) The Government does not lack the power to make the reference in respect of the same industrial dispute which it once declined to refer.
The only requirement for taking action under section 10(l) is that there must be some material before the Government enabling it to form, an opinion that an industrial dispute exists or is apprehended.
How and in what manner or through what machinery the Government is apprised of the dispute is hardly relevant.
Merely because ' the Government rejects a request for a reference or declines to make a reference, it cannot be said that the dispute has ceased to exist.
An industrial dispute may nonetheless continue to remain in existence and if at a subsequent stage.
the appropriate Government is satisfied that it is desirable to make a reference the Government does not lack the power to do so nor is it precluded from making the reference on the only ground that on an earlier occasion it had declined to make the reference.
The expression "at any time" clearly negatives that contention.
[53G, 52G, E, H, 53A B] Western India Match Co. Ltd. vs Western India Match Co. Workers Union & Ors., ; followed.
(iv) Nor again is it necessary that there should be some fresh material before the Government for reconsideration of its earlier decision.
It may re consider its decision on some new facts brought to its notice or for any relevant consideration.
Such relevant consideration may include threat to industrial peace by the continued existence of the industrial dispute and that a reference would at least bring the parties to the talking table.
When the Government declined to make the reference the source of power is neither dried up nor exhausted.
It only indicates that the Government for the time being refused to exercise the power but that does not denude the power.
The power to make a reference remains intact.
Similarly refusal 47 to make the reference does not tantamount to saying that the dispute stands resolved.
On the contrary, refusal to make a reference would further accentuate the feelings and a threat to direct action may become imminent and the Government may as well consider the decision to make the reference.
[53H 54A, 54R D] In the instant case it has not been shown that the dispute had ceased to exists and the very existence of the dispute enables the Government to exercise the power under section 10(i).
[54F] Binny Ltd. vs Their Workmen & Anr.
[19721 3 SCR 518 referred to.
(2) There is no substance in the appellant 's contention that The original demand was some one other than the one which was referred to the Industrial Tribunal later.
The Union had espoused the cause.
Of two workmen and the reference was with regard to the termination of services by retrenchment in respect of the same two workmen.
The language or the format in which the demand is couched is hardly decisive of the matter.
The substance of the matter, is as to what is the grievance of the workmen, complained of by them, or espoused by the Union and what the Industrial Tribunal is called upon to adjudicate.
In this case the demand referred to the Tribunal was the same which was espoused by the Union earlier.
[56F G] Sindhu Resettlement Corporation Ltd. vs The Industrial Tribunal of Gujarat & Ors., [1968] 1 scr 515 held inapplicable.
(3) The tenor of the notice served on the workmen clearly indicated that workmen were rendered surplus and they were retrenched.
On the admission of the appellant it was a case of retrenchment.
[60E] State Bank of India vs N. Sundara Money, ; at 165; Management of Hindustan Steel Ltd. vs The Workmen & Ors., ; referred to.
(4) (i) The notice expressly stated that the workmen were retrenched though it simultaneously stated that the action was taken under section 25FFF However on the facts found by Industrial Tribunal, case of closure of undertaking is not made out.
[60D, F] (ii) The expression "undertaking" cannot comprehend an infinitismally small part of a manufacturing process.
While ascertaining the amplitude of the expression 'undertaking.
in the definition of the expression 'industry this Court gave a restricted meaning to it.
While thus reading down the expression, in the context of section 25FFF, it must mean a separate and distinct business or commercial or trading or industrial activity.
[60G H] Bangalore Sewerage Board .
Rajappa; , 227 referred to.
(iii) The case would squarely fall in section 25F and not be covered by section 25FFF, on a specious plea of closure of an undertaking.
As the company had a container making section which was closed a long time back and yet 48 these three workmen were retained, it cannot be said that the painting section was a recognised sub section eligible for being styled as a part of the undertaking.
If such mini classification is permitted it would enable the employer to flout section 25F with impunity.
These workmen appear not to have been employed initially as painters.
They were doing some other work from which they were brought to the painting section.
They could have as well been absorbed in some.
Other work which they were capable of doing.
If painting was no more undertaken as one of the separate jobs, the workmen would become surplus and they could be retrenched after paying compensation as required by section 25F.
To style a job of a particular worker doing a specific work in the process of manufacture as in itself an undertaking is to give meaning to the expression `undertaking which it hardly connotes.
[61F, B D]
