The respondent was engaged in the manufacture of stoneware pipes and other refractory material at its factory.
It had taken lease of reference.
The respondent issued a notice of closure of the factory and mines, on account of financial difficulties.
The factory was governed by the Madhya Pradesh Industrial Relations Act, 1960 and the Mines were governed by the .
A dispute having been raised by the workmen, the case relating to the factory was referred under section 51 of the State Act to an Industrial Court, while the dispute relating to the Mines was referred under section 10(1) (d) of the Central Act to the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court.
The main question referred under the State Act was whether the proposed closure was proper and justified, while the reference under the Central Act was whether the employers were justified in closing down the mines.
The Industrial Court held that it had no jurisdiction either to inquire into the propriety of the closure or to consider whether there was or was not a real closure, while the Central Government Industrial Tribunal held that though it had no jurisdiction to inquire whether the management 's decision to close down the business was proper and justified, it was entitled to consider whether, in fact, the business was closed.
In writ petitions filed by both sides, the High Court came to the conclusion that the jurisdiction of the Tribunal in industrial disputes is limited to the points specifically referred for its adjudication and to matters incidental thereto and that the Tribunal cannot go beyond the terms of reference made of.
Dismissing the appeals, ^ HELD: 1.
The references being limited to the narrow question whether the closure was proper and justified, the Tribiunals by the very terms of the references, had no jurisdiction to go behind the fact of closure and inquire into the question whether the business was in fact closed down by the management.
[130 E] 2.
The terms of the references show that the point of dispute between there parties was not the fact of the closure of business but the propriety and justification of the respondents decision to close down the business.
The Tribunals. 127 (Chandrachud, C. J.) were not called upon to adjudicate upon the question as to whether under the pretence of closing the business the workers were locked out by the management.
[130 C D] 3.
The history of the dispute indicated that the dispute between the parties related not to the question as to whether the business, in fact, was closed by the management but whether there was any justification or propriety on the part of the management in deciding to close down the business.
There is a clear and unequivocal admission on the part of the workers before the Tribunals that the business was in fact closed by the respondent.
[130F, 131D] 4.
The concept of 'closure ' as envisaged in section 2(8) of the State Act is perhaps wider than what is commonly understood by that expression but that cannot assist the appellant to contend that under the terms of the references, the Tribunals were entitled to enter into the question as to the fact OF the closure.
If ever it was the case of the appellant that there was in fact no closure and there was really an illegal lock out, the reference would have been asked for and made not under section Sl under which it was made, but under section 82.
1132B. D] 5.
The propriety of or justification for the closure of a business in fact and truly effected, cannot raise an industrial dispute as contemplated by the State and Central Acts.
[132 F] The Management of Express Newspapers Ltd. vs Workers and Staff Employed under it and Others ; , 548 referred to.
