Section 6 of the Punjab General Sales Tax Act, 1948 provides that the State Government, after giving by notification, not less than three months ' notice of its intention so to do, may, by like notification add or delete from Schedule and thereupon Schedule shall be deemed to be amended accordingly.
The State Government of the composite State of Punjab issued a notification under section 6 giving its intention to delete from Schedule pure silken fabrics from the list of tax free goods.
Before the issue of any further notification, however, the composite State was reorganised and the Union Territory of Chandigarh was formed.
The Government of the Union Territory of Chandigarh issued a notification amending item 30 of Schedule as intended to be amended by the notification issued by the former government.
In a writ petition filed before the High Court the respondent challenged the notification as invalid on the ground that the earlier notification could not be availed of by the new Government for amending Schedule B.
The appellant claimed that the earlier notification was "law in force".
But the High Court repelled this argumenet It allowed the respondent 's writ Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
There was no "law in force" enabling the newly formed Union 'Territory of Chandigarh to levy any sales tax on pure silken fabrics.
The notification merely notifying the intention of the State Government to add or delete from Schedule any article by itself had no force of law until and unless, on the expiry of the period of three months, a like notification was issued amending the Schedule.
The erstwhile State Government of Punjab could not issue the second notification in respect of the Union Territory after it ceased to be a part of the State of Punjab.
Sales Tax could not be charged on pure silken fabrics by the said State Government merely by virtue of the notification.
It was therefore not a law in force when the composite State was reorganised.
[136D E] 135 3.
No provision is to be found in the Act to show that by a legal fiction the A first notification of intention issued by the erstwhile State Government could be deemed to be a notification issued by the new Government.
[137 B] M/s. Rattan Lal and Co. and another etc.
vs The Assessing Authority, Patiala and another, etc.
AIR 1970 S.C 1742 held inapplicable.
