The respondents were convicted under Section 20 of the Forward Contracts.
(Regulation) Act, 1952.
The District Magistrate found the firms and persons in management of business guilty of the offences with which they were charged and inflicted a consolidated fine of Rs. 2000/ with the direction that they would suffer simple imprisonment for three months in default of payment of fine.
Against their conviction and sentence the accused preferred an appeal to the Sessions Judge.
The Sessions Judge while dismissing the appeals found that the law required imposition of a minimum sentence of fine of Rs. 1000/ for each offence and as the sentence passed by the Trial Court was not in accordance with the law, he referred the matter to the High Court for passing an appropriate, sentence.
The accused also preferred revision petition against the order of the Sessions Judge.
Both the proceedings were heard together The High Court dismissed the revision petition preferred by the accused and accepted the reference by the Sessions Judge and enhanced the sentence so far as the firms are concerned, to a sum of Rs. 3,900/ .
As regards the Managers or the Managing partners the High Court sentenced them to six months rigorous imprisonment.
The Managers or Managing Partners filed miscellaneous petitions before the High Court for review of its order.
The High Court accepted the petition for review and recalled its previous judgment imposing sentence of six months rigorous imprisonment on the petitioners and instead imposed a fine of Rs. 3900/ .
The High Court came to the conclusion that no comprehensive notice was given to the accused to show cause why sentence of film should not have been enhanced to true sentence of substantive imprisonment and that the notice was only to show cause why the fine should not be increased.
The State of Orissa filed an appeal by certificate in this Court The appellants contended.
(1) The High Court had no jurisdiction to review its own judgment.
(2) The High Court erred in holding that proper notice was not issued.
(3) The notice issued to the accused was clear and wide enough to include the imposition of substantive sentence of imprisonment.
The respondent contended: 1.
The High Court has ample jurisdiction under section 561(A) and other provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code to review its own judgment.
Section 369 of the Criminal Procedure Code is not applicable to judgments on appeal passed by the High Court much less to the judgment of the High Court passed in exercise of its criminal jurisdiction, under section 439 1115 Allowing the appeal the Court, ^ HELD: (1) Section 369 as enacted in 1898 provided that no Court other than High Court, when it has signed its judgment shall alter or review the same except as provided in Section 395 and 484 or to correct a clerical error.
The section was redrafted in 1921 which gave power to the High Court to review its judgment only if it is provided by the code or by any other law for the time being in force.
Section 362 of the Criminal Procedure Code 1974 also provides: "that save as otherwise provided by the Code or by any other law no court, when it has signed its judgment or final order disposing of a case shall alter or review the same except to correct a clerical or arithmetical error." [1119 A E] (2) The Letters Patent of the High Court at Bombay, Calcutta and Madras provide that the High Court shall have full power to review a case if such points or points of law are reserved under clause 25 or on it being certified by the Advocate General that there is an error and the points should be further considered.
No other provisions relating to the power of review of the consideration of the High Court was brought to the notice of the Court.[1120 A C] (3) The provisions of Sec. 424 which make the procedure of the Court of original Jurisdiction applicable to the Appellate Court cannot confer the power of review.
[1127 C] (i) The inherent power of the High Court conferred by Sec.
561(A) are restricted to making orders to give effect to any order under the Code or to prevent abuse of the process of any court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice.
Section 561 (A) does not confer increased powers to the Court which it did not possess before that section was enacted.
It only provides that those powers which the Court inherently possessed shall be preserved.
[1121 ,H, 1122 A C] Emperor vs Khweja Nazir Ahmad, AIR 1945 Privy Council 18; Lala Jairam Das & Ors.
vs Emperor, 1945 Law Reports 72 I.A. 120 State of U.P. vs Mohammad Naim, ; at 370 relied on.
(2) Sec.
561(A) was added to the Code in 1923 because doubts were expressed about the existence of such inherent powers in the High Court after the passing of the criminal procedure code.
The inherent powers cannot relate to any of the matters specifically dealt with by the Code.
Inherent powers cannot be invoked to exercise powers which would be inconsistent with any of the specific provisions of the Code.
The inherent power is only for giving effect to orders passed under the code, to prevent abuse of process of any court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice.
[1122 D G] R. J. section Chopra vs State of Bombay, ; distinguished.
Raj Narain & Ors.
vs The State, AIR 1959 All. 315, U. J. section Chopra vs State of Bombay, ; ; Nirbhay Singh vs State of M.P., ; Sankatha Singh vs State of U.P.; , ; Superintendent and Remembrance of Legal Affairs W.B. vs Mohan Singh & Ors., referred to. 1116
