The term "paper" is described as "paper", including newsprint, paper board and strawboard" in section 2(a) (vii) of the as well as in Item 13 in Schedule I to the Gujarat Essential Articles Dealers (Regulation) order 1971.
By a notification dated July 10, 1975, the Schedule 1 of the Regulation order was recast and more items were added.
Item No. 13 of the Regulation order after it was recast by the amendment of 1975 and renumbered as section No. 14 read as follows: "14.
Paper including newsprint, paper, strawboard and exercise note books.
" The appellant is a firm dealing in books and stationery articles.
On a surprise inspection and search of the appellant 's shop it was found that in regard to exercise books the appellant committed breach of the Regulation order, in that he did not display the stock; thereof that he did not write the names of customers on the bills issued to them and that he did not maintain the stock registers properly and thereof a sizable quantity of exercise books were seized.
The Collector found that the appellant was guilty of breach of the Regulation order and directed that the seized stocks of exercise books be confiscated under section 6A of the Act.
In appeal the Sessions Judge set aside the Collector 's order on the ground that exercise books did not fall within the item "paper" as envisaged in the Act and the Regulation order.
In proceedings under article 227, the High Court book the view that the term "paper" was wide enough to cover exercise books, which was nothing but a collection of papers, stitched together by a piece of string or pinned with pins of stappler, and quashed the order of the Sessions Judge.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court: ^ HELD: (1) On a true and proper construction, within its normal dictionary meaning the item "paper" as described in section 2(a)(vii) of the Act and Item 13 in Schedule I to the Regulation order covers an exercise book Such a construction would be in consonance with and carry out effectively the object or purpose of the Act and the Regulation order.
[144H 145A] 139 Black 's Law Dictionary (Revised Fourth Edn. 1968).
Webster 's New World Dictionary (1962 Edn.); Concise oxford Dictionary, referred to.
(2) 'Though section 2(a) of the Act and cl.
2(v) of the Regulation order purport to define 'essential article ' that expression has no meaning of its own and what follows is an enumeration of articles regarded as essential for the purposes of the Act and the order.
[143 F] (3) An inclusive description has been given to the item "paper" in the Act and the Regulation order, but the inclusive part refers to things that may not ordinarily be regarded as paper and, therefore, an extended meaning or description is given to the expression "paper".
Since an exercise book (which is nothing but a collection of sheets of paper intended to be used for writing), squarely t`falls within the dictionary meaning of the word "paper" there was no necessity to mention it in the inclusive part of the description.
[144 F H] (4) The amendment and enlargement of the item ' 'paper ' ' so as to include specifically exercise books was made ex majore cautela to make things abundantly clear and, therefore, no inference as regards the initial legislative intent that it was to exclude exercise books from the expression "paper" under item 13 in Schedule I to the said order as it originally stood can be drawn.
[145 D] (5) It is only when there is some equivocation or ambiguity about a word or provision in a penal statue that the rule of strict or narrow construction in favour of the subject is to be applied but if there is no ambiguity and the act or omission falls clearly within the mischief of the statute then the construction of a penal statute will not differ from that of any other.
[145 H 146A] Maxwell on interpretation of Statutes (12th Edn.) p. 246 referred to.
(6) In the instant case there is no ambiguity or equivocation of the item 'paper" and an exercise book squarely falls within the dictionary meaning of "paper".
[146 B] State of Bihar vs Bhagirath Sharma & Anr., ; distinguished.
