On the strength of the permission granted by the Revenue Divisional Officer, as required under clause 6 of the Orissa Scheduled Areas Transfer of Immovable Property by Scheduled Tribes Regulation 3 of 1956 and Rule 4 made thereunder, to sell his private property to a non scheduled Tribe person for a sum of Rs. 4000/ , Respondent 3 sold his property on January 2, 1964 by a registered deed of sale to the appellant, despite an attachment order passed by the Executing Court on July 13, 1963 on an application dated June 28, 1963 made by Respondent 1 to recover the decretal amount as per the money decree obtained by him on August 18, 1962 against Respondent 3 and his mother Respondent 4.
Later, Respondent No. 1 however, produced the copy of the order passed by the R.D.O. dated October 23, 1963, at the instance of appellant in the Executing Court and got the property put to sale on May 15, 1964.
In the court auction respondent 2 son of respondent 1 purchased the property.
On June 22, 1964, the appellant filed an application under order 21 Rules 89 and 90 and Section 47 and 151 C.P.C. for setting aside the auction sale on the ground that the attachment and the auction sale were void for want of permission from the competent authority under Orissa Regulation 2 of 1956 and also due to fraud committed by the decree holder.
The application was allowed followed by confirmation by the appellate judge, in appeal.
But the High Court in Second Appeal reversed it accepting the contention of res judicata.
Allowing the appeal by special leave, the Court.
^ HELD: 1.
Both clauses 6 of the "Orissa Scheduled Areas Transfer of Immovable Property by Scheduled Tribes Regulation 2 of 1956, and Rule 4 made thereunder, provide that no immovable property belonging to a member of the scheduled Tribe is liable to be attached or sold except in accordance with the permission granted by the competent authority.
Prior to the sale to the private party, the property was undoubtedly attached in execution proceedings on July 13, 1963, but the order of attachment was void, being contrary to the express inhibition contained in clause 6 of Regulation 2 of 1956 read with Rule 4 made thereunder.
[200E G] 2.
The auction sale is bad and invalid: It is elementary that what can be brought to sale in a Court sale is the right, title and interest of the judgment debtor and therefore, the auction purchaser can get nothing more than that right, title and interest.
In the instant case, the appellant having become an owner of the property on account of the 197 Private sale dated January 2, 1964 respondent 3 had no saleable interest left in the property which could be put to auction.
The auction sale therefore cannot displace the title of the appellant which is the same thing as saying that as between the title of the appellant and the so called title of the auction purchaser the appellant 's title must prevail.
[200G H, 201A] Moreover, as the condition imposed by the R.D.O. regarding the price was violated by the auction sale, the auction purchaser cannot get a valid title to the property under that sale.
In the private sale, the appellant purchased the property for Rs. 4,000/ and therefore the condition of the permission was complied with.
But the auction sale was held in satisfaction of the decretal dues which were far less than Rs. 4,000/ the decree itself being in the sum of Rs. 1,000/ and odd and the highest bid at the auction being of Rs. 3,000/ only.[201 B C] 3.
(a) The basic issue being the validity of auction sale in favour of respondent 2, no question of res judicata can arise.
the appellant claims through the judgment debtor and neither the latter nor the decree holder ever disputed that he, the judgment debtor, was a member of the Scheduled Tribe.
On the other hand both of them were conscious of the situation that the property could not be sold without the sanction of the R.D.O., Nowrangpur.
The decree holder himself apprised The Executing Court of that position.
The permission which was granted by the R.D.O., Nowrangpur at the instance of the appellant was produced by respondent 1 in the execution proceedings as if the permission was granted in sis favour for the sale by respondent 3 of his property.
The failure, therefore, of the judgment debtor to raise any particular contention cannot operate as res judicata actually or constructively, either against him or against the appellant.
[201 D F] (b) Whether "Bhotras" fall within any of the sub groups of the Scheduled Tribes enumerated in Part IX of the Schedule to the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950 is a question which could not have been permitted to be raised for the first time in the Second Appeal.
Much less can it be allowed to be raised in this Court in an appeal under article 136 of the Constitution.[200C D]
