A detention order, under section 3(1) of the , was passed by the respondent against the detenu (appellant 's husband) with a view to prevent him from engaging in transporting smuggled gold.
When the detenu was in the custody of the Customs officers, his advocate addressed a letter and sent a telegram to them protesting against his detention and illegal custody beyond 24 hours and also expressing an apprehension that he was being detained with a view to obtain confessional statements under duress.
It was admitted that the advocate 's request for permission to remain present at the time of interrogation of the detenu was turned down by the Customs officers.
The advocate was also told that the detenu would be produced before a Magistrate at 5.30 p.m.
On the day of her request.
But that was not done.
He was produced on the following day and was remanded to judicial custody permitting further interrogation by the Customs officers.
During such interrogation while in judicial custody, the detenu refused to sign the further statements and squarely resiled from his earlier confessional statements disowning the facts therein stated.
While the detenu 's application for bail was pending before the Magistrate, the respondent passed the impugned order.
In her petition under article 226 of the Constitution for the issue of a writ of habeas corpus the appellant contended that the order of the detaining authority was liable to be set aside because full facts of the case were not intimated to it before detention order was passed and, therefore, there was complete non application of mind of the detaining authority to the attendant vital circumstances.
The High Court dismissed the petition.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: (1) The impugned order was invalid and illegal because there was complete non application of the mind of the detaining authority to the most material and vital facts which would have influenced the mind of The detaining authority one way or the other as these were neither placed before it nor considered by the detaining authority.
[223E] (2) It is well settled that if material or vital facts, which would influence the mind of the detaining authority one way or the other on the question whether or not to make the detention order, are not placed before or are not con 216 sidered by the detaining authority it would vitiate its subjective satisfaction rendering the detention order illegal.
The detaining authority must exercise due care and caution and act fairly and justly in exercising the power of detention and if taking into account matters extraneous to the scope and purpose of the statute vitiates the subjective satisfaction and renders the detention order invalid then failure to take into consideration the most material or vital facts likely to influence the mind of the authority one way or the other would equally vitiate t the subjective satisfaction and invalidate the detention order.
[222A B] In the instant case three facts were not communicated to or placed before the detaining authority before it passed the impugned order against the detenu viz., (i) during the interrogation, in spite of the request, neither the presence nor consultation of the advocate was permitted, (ii) in spite of intimation to the advocate by the Customs officers the detenu was not produced before the Magistrate at the appointed time and (iii) the confessional statements were squarely retracted by the detenu at the first available opportunity while he was in judicial custody.
The first two had a bearing on the question whether the confessional statements had been extorted under duress from the detenu or not.
while the third was in relation to the confessional statements which formed the foundation of the impugned order and as such were vital facts having a bearing on the main issue before the detaining authority.
Nizamuddin vs State of West Bengal ; ; Suresh Mahato vs The District Magistrate, Burdwan & Ors.
AIR 1975 SC 728; Nandini Satpathy vs The State of Orissa ; ; applied.
(3) The fact that the request to have the presence or consultation of the h lawyer was made and refused ought to have been intimated to the detaining authority.
Further in passing the detention order the detaining authority based its decision on the detenu 's confessional statements and, therefore, it was obligatory upon the Customs officers to report to the detaining authority the retraction of those statements by the detenu.
In fact of retraction would have its own impact one way or the other on the detaining authority before making up its mind whether or not to issue the impugned order of detention.
[223A B]
