The appellant who was an employee of the State Government in the Horticulture department, was on deputation with the Central Government.
In May, 1952 he was selected by the State Public Service Commission as Landscape Architect on a temporary basis.
From time to time he sought extension of time for joining the post and it was granted.
Eventually when he reported for duty in June, 1953 he was informed that the offer made to him stood cancelled as he did not join in time and that the post had been filled by appointing someone else.
He therefore rejoined the Government of India.
In 1954 the State Service Commission again advertised the post stating that it was a temporary post but was likely to continue.
The appellant was selected for the post and joined it on November 6, 1954.
His period of probation was extended but he was not confirmed in the post.
Eventually the State Government decided to abolish the post of Landscape Architect with immediate effect and the appellant reverted to his substantive post in the State service on November 4, 1958.
The High Court dismissed the appellant 's writ petition.
In appeal to this Court it was contended on his behalf that (i) the order of premature abolition of the post was male fide in that it was the result of inordinate hostility of higher officers towards him; (ii) the discontinuance of the post was due to personal reasons because the higher officers were displeased with him for pointing out irregularities in incurring expenditure and (iii) the order abolishing the post was illegal because it denied the benefit of three months notice for termination of his appointment.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: (1) (a) Although the appellant has based his case almost entirely on mala fides, he has not succeeded in proving the allegation.
[1102G] (b) He did not furnish the necessary particulars for the allegation.
What he had to prove was not malice in its legal sense but males animus indicating that the State Government was actuated either by spite or ill will against him, 1090 or by indirect or improper motives.
It was also not shown that his reversion was ordered for a collateral purpose and not for the ostensible purpose of abolishing an unnecessary post, or by proving that the ostensible purpose of abolishing the post was so unconvincing and absurd as to lack bona fides.
Both direct and circumstantial evidence were admissible to establish lack of bona fides or bad faith, but the appellant has not succeeded in proving the allegation.
[1102 H 1103 B] (c) It is for the person seeking to invalidate an order to establish the charge of bad faith.
Such a charge may be made easily or without any sense of responsibility.
That is why courts examine it with care and attention.
[1103 C] section Pratap Singh vs The State of Punjab, ; at 741; referred to.
(2) It cannot be said that the post was abolished without reason or justification, but with the intention of getting rid of the appellant somehow.
The post was a temporary one all through.
The question of continuation of the post was referred to a special committee presided over by the Minister and that committee came to the conclusion that the post was no longer necessary and should therefore be abolished.
The Cadre Committee to which also a reference was made, made a similar recommendation.
The reason for abolishing the post was that almost all the plans which were needed for the project had been prepared and the Chief Engineer 's Organization would have no difficulty in carrying on the outstanding work.
[1097 H, 1097 E G] State of Haryana vs Des Raj Sengar, ; ; held not applicable.
(3) There is nothing on record to show that the appellant 's alleged exposure of irregularities in the expenditure led to an adverse decision against him.
While the controversy regarding the alleged unauthorised expenditure was raised in December, 1954, the decision to revert him was taken four years later.
[1098 F] (4) There was no term in the order of appointment given to the appellant that he would be entitled to a three months ' notice for termination of his appointment.
The State Public Service Commission specified in the impugned notification that the post was temporary upto February, 1955 but was likely to continue thereafter.
If the appellant knew that the term of the post was to expire in November, 1958, he could not possibly claim that he should have been given three months ' notice.
He was fully aware of his precarious tenure from month to month.
[1099 F H] (5) The earlier order of the Chief Minister dated February 13, 1958 in the appellant 's favour could not give rise to any right as it was not expressed in the name of the Governor as required by article 166 of the Constitution and was not communicated to the appellant.
It was only a provisional order which was open to reconsideration by the Chief Minister and did not bind anyone.
Nothing could, therefore, turn on the Chief Minister 's order dated February 13, 1958, when it was specifically rescinded by his subsequent order dated October 29, 1958.
There could be no question of appellant 's confirmation as Landscape Architect as it was a temporary post all through until it was allowed to lapse on November 4, 1958.
[1101 G 1102 B] 1091 Bachittar Singh vs State of Punjab, [1962] Suppl.
3 SCR 713; referred to.
(6) This was not really a case of abolition of the post of Landscape Architect, for the post was sanctioned upto November 4, 1958 and was allowed to lapse thereafter.
