Agricultural land belonging to the respondents was acquired by the railways for doubling the railway line, compensation payable for the acquired land was fixed at Re. 1/6 per sq.
But the respondent claimed Re. /12/ per sq.
On the ground that the land had a great potential value as a building site.
On reference the Additional District Judge enhanced the rate of compensation to Re. /41 per sq.
and allowed solatium at 15%.
On appeal the High Court enhanced the compensation to Re.
/8/ per sq.
on further appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellants that the courts below had erred in treating the land, which was primarily agricultural land, as abadi land overlooking that it had not been declared as such.
[Per Jaswant Singh & Pathak, J. Sen, J. dissenting] Dismissing the appeals.
^ HELD: (1) Taking all the facts into consideration it cannot be said that the basis on which the Additional District Judge and the High Court proceeded was wrong or that the quantum of compensation awarded by the High Court was in any way excessive or exorbitant.
[188 F] (2) The question as to whether a land has potential value as a building site or not is primarily one of fact depending upon several factors such as its condition and situation, the user to which it is put or is reasonably capable of being put, its suitability for building purposes, its proximity to residential, commercial and industrial areas and educational, cultural or medical institutions, existing amenities like water, electricity and drainage and the possibility of their future extension, whether the nearby town is a developing or a prospering town with prospects of development schemes and the presence or absence of pressure of building activity towards the land acquired or in the neighbourhood thereof.
[ 87F F] (3) In the instant case it was clear from the observations of the Special Land Acquisition officer and the Addl.
District Judge that the land had great potential value as a building site.
Moreover the Spl.
Land Acquisition officer did not lead any evidence worth the name to show the price of comparable sites but remained content with the production only of the sale statement prepared by the Revenue Inspector.
The sale statement consisted mostly of sales relating to the year 1951 which is not relevant to the question on hand.
Without examining the vendors or vendees, the sale statement was not admissible in evidence and could not be relied upon.
From the material on record it was clear that Raigarh was a growing town.
Instead of utilising the land for doubling the railway track 184 the railway had built staff quarters.
On three sides of the land there were pucca buildings and on the fourth side there was a metalled road.
[187G H 188C D. [Per Sen, J.(dissenting)] 1.
Upon compulsory acquisition of property, the owner is entitled to the value of the property in its actual condition at the time of expropriation with all its advantages and with all its possibilities, excluding any advantage due to the carrying out of the claim for the purpose for which the property is acquired.
The value of the acquired property with all its possibilities had to be adjudged on the material on record.
[191 F, H] Vyricharla Narayana Gajapatiraju vs Revenue Divisional officer, Vizagapatnam, 66 IA 104, followed.
The market price must be fixed with reference to the date of the notification under section 4 irrespective of any trend, for an increase to the value thereof.
The basis for determination of the market value of the land within section 23(1)(i) of the Act is the value of the land to the owner.
Only such transactions would be relevant which can fairly be said to afford a fair criterion of the value of the ,, property as at the date of the notification.
That test is clearly not fulfilled in l? the present case[192A B] 3.
In a reference under section 18 of the Act the burden of providing that the amount of compensation awarded by the Collector is inadequate lies upon the claimant, and he must show affirmatively that the Collector had proceeded upon a wrong basis.
The nature and the burden of establishing that he was wrong, depend on the nature of the enquiry held by him.
When the proceedings before the Collector disclose that the award was not reasonably supported by the material before him or when the basis was the application of a "multiple" which could not be justified on any rational ground, the burden can be discharged by a slight evidence.
But that is not the case here.
[191C D] 4.
In the present case the High Court fell into an error in overlooking the fact that the acquired land was agricultural land.
It was recorded as a raiyati land.
The land was not recorded as abadi as wrongly assumed by the High Court.
The claimants admitted that the land was actually under cultivation.
The Revenue Inspector stated that the land was a paddy field and was surrounded by agricultural lands.
That being so the District Judge was clearly wrong in treating the land to be abadi and calculating compensation on the footing of its being a building site.
[189E 190A] 5.
Secondly, the land was lying undeveloped and undiverted.
Unless there was a development scheme the land could not be valued as a building site.
At the time of the notification under section 4(1) there was no recent building activity near about the land.
The land could be put to better use provided it was fully developed as a building site.
The claimants were therefore entitled to the valuation of the land as agricultural land with an additional allowance for its future potentiality as a building site.
[190H 191B] 6.
In fixing the amount of compensation the court has to take into consideration the prevailing market value of the land at the date of the notification unders.
4(1) and such market value has to be determined by reference to the price which a willing seller might have reasonably expected for similar property from 1 a willing purchaser.
In a comparable sale the features are: (1) it must be 185 within a reasonable time of the date of notification under section 4(1), (2) it should be a bona fide transaction; (3) it should be a sale of the land acquired or of the land adjacent to the land acquired and (4) it should possess similar advantages.
[92G 193A] 7.
In the instant case the sale deeds relied upon by the High Court could not obviously be the basis for the determination of the market value of the land.
These sale deeds had clearly been brought into existence by the claimants in quick succession in an attempt to inflate.
the price of the land after they became aware of the proposed acquisition.
The transactions which were examined by the High Court were apparently fictitious and unreal and are speculative in nature and could not be taken into account at all.
[193B C, 193H 194A] 8.
On the evidence produced it could not be said that valuation should be made on the basis of potentiality of the land as building site.
There is complete absence of evidence of building activity of a substantial nature being carried on in the neighbourhood of the acquired land at about the time when the notification was issued.
The claimants themselves did admit that the land was agricultural land.
[195B, 194F C] Raghubans Narain Singh vs The U.P. Govt.
, ; N. B. Jeejabhoy vs The District Collector, Thana, C.A. Nos. 313 to 315 of 1965 decided on Aug 1965: referred to.
In the absence of comparable sales, the only other alternative to adopt is the capitalised value.
Compensation in respect of the agricultural land should be allowed on the basis of 20 years ' purchases.
The capitalisation basis cannot, however, be accepted in a case where there is no evidence of the profits yielded from the land.
[195C]
