The second respondent, a Land Acquisition officer, allegedly, by abusing his official position, concealed the fact that the land which was the subject matter of acquisition was really Khasmahal land belonging to the Government and having made it appear that the first respondent was the undisputed owner of the same, aided and abetted him in getting a huge sum of money as compensation.
The charge sheet was submitted before the Special Judge, and the prosecution requested him to frame a charge against the respondents under sections 5(2) and 5(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act read with section 120B IPC.
The Special Judge, Puri went through the charge sheet, statements made by the witnesses before the police and other documents, and coming to the conclusion that there was no sufficient ground for framing a charge against the respondents, discharged them under section , after giving cogent reasons for passing the order of discharge.
In revision the High Court upheld the Special Judge 's order of discharge.
Dismissing the appeal by special leave, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
The considerations governing the interpretation of section 227 of Cr.
P.C. apply mutatis mutandis to the proceedings under the Prevention of Corruption Act, after the charge sheet is submitted before the Special Judge.
At the stage of section 227, the Judge has merely to sift the evidence in order to find out whether or not, there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused.
The sufficiency of ground would take within its fold, the nature of the evidence recorded`by the police, or the documents produced before the court, which exfacie disclose that there are suspicious circumstances against the accused so as to frame a charge against him.
[231E, 233A B] State of Bihar vs Ramesh Singh, [1978] I SCR 257; K. P, Raghavan & Anr.
vs M. H. Abbas and Anr.
AIR 1967 SC 740; Almohan Das & Ors.
vs State of West Bengal, ; applied.
What has been acquired is merely the Raiyyati or the lessee 's interest, and as the proprietary interest vests in the Government itself, there is no question of either acquiring or claiming compensation for the interest of the Government.
[239B] Collector of Bombay vs Nusserwanji Rattanji Mistri & Ors., ; ; and The Special Land Acquisition officer, Hosanagar vs K. section Ramachandra Rao & Ors., AIR 1972 SC 2224: applied. 230
