The appellant who was working as Joint Director, Family Planning in the Directorate General of the All India Radio was prematurely retired from ser vice.
She made a representation, but it was rejected.
In her writ petition under article 226 of the Constitution she alleged that she had a long and clean record of nearly three decades but that baseless allegations had been made against her, because of malicious vendetta of the then Chairman of the Central Board of Film Censors.
She also alleged that the impugned order was arbitrary and capricious and that the retiring authority had not applied its mind to the record of her case.
The writ petition was dismissed in limine.
On the appeal, the first respondent conceded that there was nothing on the record to justify the impugned order, and that the Government was not in a position to support that unfair order.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: (1) There was nothing on the record to show that the Chairman of the Central Board of Film Censors was able to influence tho Central Government m making the impugned order.
It was not therefore the case of the appellant that there was actual malicious intention on the part of the Government in making the alleged wrongful order so as to amount to malice in fact.
[205E] (2) Malice in its legal sense means malice such as may be assumed from the doing of a wrongful act intentionally but without just cause or excuse or for want of reasonable or probable cause.
[205G] .
Shearer & Anr.
vs Shields, at p. 813 referred to.
(3) It was not necessary to examine the question of malice in law as it was trite law that if a discretionary power had been exercised for an unauthorised purpose, it was generally immaterial whether its repository was acting in good faith or in bad faith.
[205H 206A] 203 Pilling vs Abergele Urban District Council.
[1950] 1 K.B. 636: referred to.
(4) The principle which is applicable in such cases is that laid down by Lord Esher M.R. in at p. 375, and followed in 3.
[206C D] (5) When a public body is prompted by a mistaken belief in the existence of a non existing fact or circumstance it will be an error of fact.
That is so clearly unreasonable that what is done under such a mistaken belief might almost be said to have been done in bad faith.
[206E] (6) When the respondent conceded that there was nothing on record to justify the impugned order, that order must be set aside for it amounts to an abuse of the power which was vested in the authority concerned as it had admitted the influence of extraneous matter.
[206H 207A] (7) It will be a gross abuse of legal power to punish a person or destroy her service career in a manner not warranted by law by putting a rule which makes a useful provision for the premature retirement of Government servants only in the "public interest", to a purpose wholly unwarranted by it, and to arrive at quite a contradictory result.
[206F] (8) An administrative order which is based on reasons of fact which do not exist must be held to be infected with abuse of power.
[206G]
