The respondent obtained an ex parte maintenance award for a sum of Rs. 250/ p.m. from the Court of competent jurisdiction under Sec.
125 Crl.
Subsequently, as a result of a compromise between the parties and resumption of cohabitation an application was made by the respondent praying that her application for maintenance be dismissed and the execution proceedings for recovery of maintenance be withdrawn.
Though the Trial Court did not proceed to recover the arrears of maintenance it did not set aside the award.
As the respondent was betrayed, she proceeded to enforce the order for maintenance.
The petitioner resisted the application on the ground that resumption of cohabitation, after the original order for maintenance revoked the said order.
This plea having been rejected right through the petitioner came up by way of special leave.
Dismissing the petition, the Court, ^ HELD: the Criminal Procedure Code is complete on the topic and any defence against an order passed under section 125 Crl.
P.C. must be founded on a provision in the Code.
Section 125 b a provision to protect the weaker of the two parties, namely, the neglected wife.
If an order for maintenance has been made against the deserter it will operate until vacated or altered in terms of the provisions of the Code itself, if the husband has a case under section 125(4)(S) or section 127 of the Code it ii open to him to initiate appropriate proceedings.
But until the original order for maintenance is modified or cancelled by a higher court or is varied or vacated in terms of section 125(4) or (S) or section 127, its validity survives.
It is enforceable and no plea that there has been cohabitation in the interregnum or that there has been a compromise between the parties can hold good as a valid defence.
[294G H, 295A] A statutory order can ordinarily be demolished only in terms of the statute.
That being absent in the present case the Magistrate will execute the order for maintenance [295 B] Fazal Din vs Mt. Fatima, A.I.R 1932 Lahore P. 115; approved.
Natesan Pillai vs Jayammani, A.I.R. 1960 Madras, U. Po Chein vs Ma Sein Mya, A.I.R. 1931 Rangoon, 89, Ampavalli Veerabhadrudu vs Ampavalli Gaviramma 1955 A.l.
R. (Crl.) p. 244; over ruled.
