The appellant was detained under section 3(1) of the Conservation of Foreign Exchange an(1) Prevention of Smuggling Activities Act, 1974 with a view to prevent him from smuggling goods.
Two representations made by him against his detention were forwarded by the Government to the Advisory Board with its comments.
He was later produced before the Advisory Board.
On receipt of the Advisory Board 's report that there was sufficient cause for detention, the order of detention was confirmed by the Government.
The High Court dismissed his petition under article 226 of the Constitution.
In appeal the appellant challenged the order of detention on the ground that (1) it was in violation of the right guaranteed under article 22(5) inasmuch as the Government withheld consideration of the representations made by him till after the hearing by the Advisory Board, and (2) the impugned order of detention was bad due to non application of mind of the detaining authority inasmuch as the facts alleged clearly and distinctly showed that the appellant did not himself smuggle the goods.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: (1)(a) There was no warrant for the submission that the disposal of the representations made by the Government was not in conformity with article 22(5) of the Constitution.
[319H] (b) It is well settled that in case of preventive detention of a citizen, Art 22(5) of the Constitution enjoins that the obligation of the appropriate Government to afford the detenu an opportunity to make a representation and to consider that representation is distinct from the Government s obligation to constitute a Board and to communicate the representation, amongst other material, to the Board to.
enable it to form its opinion and to obtain such opinion.
[321E] Abdul Karim & ors.
vs State of West Bengal; , ; Pankaj Kumar Cluakrabarly & ors.
vs State of West Bengal; , , Khuairul Haque vs The State of West Bengal W. P. No. 246 of 1969, decided on September 10, 1969, Jayanarayan sukul vs State of West Bengal; , Dhurus Kanu vs State of West Bengal, AIR 1975 SC 571; referred to.
(c) The constitutional safeguards embodied in article 22(5) must be read into the provisions of section 8(b) of the Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Preventional of Smuggling Activities Act, 1974 to prevent any arbitrary executive action.
Merely because there is no express provision in section 8(b) of the Act placing an obligation to forward the representation made by the detenu along 316 with the reference to the Advisory Board unlike the provisions contained in section 9 of the and section 10 of the , it cannot be said that there is no obligation cast on the Government to consider the representation made by the detenu before forwarding it to the Advisory Board.
[325C; 322D E] Thaneshwar Singh vs The Union of India & ors.
, Cr. W. No. 6 of 197 decided on September 25, 1978 (Delhi High Court); over ruled.
(d) When the liberty of the subject is involved, whether it is under the or the or the , it is the bounden duty of the Court to satisfy itself that all the safeguards provided by the law had been scrupulously observed and that the subject was not deprived of his personal liberty otherwise than in accordance with his.
[322 G] (e) When any person is detained in pursuance of an order made under any law providing for preventive detention the authority making the order shall, as soon as may be, communicate to such person the ground on which the order had been made and shall afford him the earliest opportunity of making representations against the order.
These procedural safeguards are ingrained in our system of judicial interpretation.
The power of preventive detention by the Government under the Act is necessarily subject to the limitations enjoined on the exercise of such power by article 22(5) of the Constitution.
[323A] Khudiram Das vs The State of West Bengal & ors. ; referred to.
In the instant case there was no infraction of constitutional safeguards enshrined under article 22(5) and there was no failure on the part of the Government to discharge its obligations under that article.
Quite clearly the Government had forwarded the appellant 's two representations alongwith its comments to the Advisory Board.
A perusal of the comments of the Government make it clear that the Government had already formed an opinion that the order of detention was in conformity with its powers under the law.
It cannot be said that in rejecting the appellant 's representations the Government was influenced by the views expressed by the Board.
At the hearing the Board had not indicated its mind as to whether there was sufficient cause for detention.
It is, therefore, irrefutable that the Government had taken a decision uninfluenced by what transpired at the hearing before the Board.
The matter was dealt with by the Government all: all levels, and the detaining authority had come to an independent conclusion of its own by applying its mind to the facts and circumstances of the case.
[325D H] (2)(a) The intention of the legislature in enacting section 3(1) was to treat the smuggling of goods and abetting the smuggling of goods as grounds separate and distinct and both are separate grounds for detention i.e. to take in all such activities which result in accomplishment of smuggling of contraband goods. 'the term 'smuggling ' as defined in section 2(e) of the Act read with section 2(39) and s 111 of the Customs Act, is wide enough to include and make liable not only the actual smugglers but also persons abetting the smugglers, of contraband goods as well as all persons dealing with any such goods.
A wider meaning is given to the term 'smuggling ' in section 2(e) of the Act with a view to broaden the scope of Preventive detention.
In a case like the present where a wide 317 spread network is employed by a person, it cannot be said that he was not Engaged in the act of smuggling.
The appellant was not only the person who instigated, organised and facilitated the smuggling of the contraband goods but he was really a person to whom the goods belonged.
The facts set out in the ground of detention make it clear that the appellant was the person who was actually engaged in the act of smuggling of contraband goods into the Indian Customs waters For all intents and purposes the appellant was the actual smuggler and not a mere abettor His " activities were such that his case would be covered by both clauses (i) and (ii) of section 3(1) of the Act.
[326G H; 327A B] (b) Assuming that the appellant was merely an abettor in the smuggling of contraband goods on this occasion, still his activities in this transaction afforded sufficient grounds for the prognosis that he would have himself included in actual smuggling of the balance of contraband goods by remaining behind in the foreign country.
[329D]
