Ranbir Singh is Jagir Singh 's son from his separated first wife.
Ill 1971 he and his mother applied for maintenance under section 488 of Cr.P.C., 1898.
Although Ranbir Singh was a major, maintenance was awarded to him on the ground that he was a student unable to maintain himself.
In April 1974, the new Cr.
P.C. came into force, and under section 127 jagir Singh applied for cancellation of the maintenance order, on the ground that the major son WAS not prevented from maintaining himself through any infirmity or abnormality, and is not entitled to maintenance under the new code.
The respondent contended that the maintenance order had been validly passed under the old Code, and continued to remain in force notwithstanding the enactment of the new Code but the Magistrate cancelled the maintenance order, Ranbir Singh 's Revision Application was dismissed by the Sessions Court, on the ground that the order made under section 488 of the Cr.P.C., 1898 would not survive under section 484(2) of the Cr.
P.C. 1974 due to the absence of a corresponding provision under the new Code, enabling his maintenance.
He then applied to the High Court for a Revision.
The High Court allowed the Revision holding that 9. 125 of the Cr.
P.C., 1974 did correspond with section 488 of the Cr.
P.C. 1898.
The appellant contended that Ranbir Singh 's Revision application to the High Court was barred by section 397(3), Cr.P.C., 1974, and was incompetent, and that his right to invoke revisional jurisdiction of a superior court became exhausted when he moved the Sessions Court in Revision.
He further contended that the maintenance order was not saved either by section 484(2), Cr.
P.G 1974 or section 6 and 24 of the General Clauses Act.
The respondent submitted that his Revision application before the High Court could be treated and maintained, as, one directed against the Sessions Judge 's order rejecting his Revision application, or It could be treated as one under article 227 of the Constitution.
Allowing the appeal, the Court.
^ HELD: (1) The power under Act.
227 is discretionary.
The power of judicial superintendence under it could only be exercised sparingly to keep subordinate courts and Tribunals within the bounds of their authority, and not to collect mere errors.
Where the statute banned the exercise of revisional 283 powers by the High Court, it would require very exceptional circumstances to A warrant interference under article 227, since the power of superintendence was not meant to circumvent statutory law.
By the 42nd.
Amendment Act, clause (5) was added in article 227, which is a verbatim reproduction of section 224(2) of the Government of India Act, 1935, conferring powers of administrative superintendence only, and not the power of judicial superintendence.
[287F H, 288A] (2) In the Cr.
Of 1974 the District Magistrate is divested of his revisional jurisdiction over inferior criminal courts.
In addition, there are two important changes apparently designed to avoid delay and to secure prompt justice.
The first change is introduced by section 397(2) which bars the exercise of revisional power in relation to any interlocutory order passed in any appeal, enquiry, trial or other proceeding.
The second change is introduced by section 397 (3) under which any person aggrieved by an order of an inferior criminal court, is given the option to approach either the Sessions Judge or the High Court, and once he exercises the option, he is precluded from invoking the revisional jurisdiction of the other authority.
The object is, to prevent a multiple exercise of revisional powers and to secure early finality to orders.
[286C F] For vs Bishop of Chestor, ; ; Maxwell (11th Edn. page 109); applied.
(3) Whenever an Act is repealed and re enacted, there are bound to be changes and modifications.
To say that a modified provision dealing with the same subject matter in substantially the same manner as the original provision is not a "corresponding provision", would be to practically nullify the effect of a "Repeal and Savings" provision like section 484 (2) (b) of the new Code.
"To correspond" does not usually, or properly, mean to be identical with but to harmonise with, or to be suitable to.
There are no words in section 484 (2) (b) limiting its application to orders made, and sentences passed, which are not inconsistent with the provisions of the new Code.
All that section 484(2)(b) says is that such statutory instruments shall be deemed to be made under the corresponding provisions of the new Code.
Their validity will have to be tested like any other statutory instrument made under the provisions of the new Code.
There validity will have to be tested like any other statutory made under the provisions of the with the provisions of the new Code.
and they will have to answer the test whether they are inconsistent with the provisions of the new Code.
But in ease of judicial orders made, and sentences passed, such orders and sentences which have attained finality and which have created rights in parties, do not have to answer the test of being consistent with the provisions of the new Code.
[289F H, 290B E] Butterworth 's (Words and Phrases legally defined)(2nd Edn Vol.
I), Shorter oxford English Dictionary (3rd Edn.
I); Sackville West vs Holmsdale (Viscount), [1870] LR. ; applied.
(4) Section 125 of the new Code corresponds to section 488 of the Cr.P.C., 1898 notwithstanding the fact that under the Cr.P.C. Of 1974, a child who has attained majority, and who does not suffer from any infirmity, is not entitled to be maintained b`y the father.
Once an order under section , is deemed to be an order under section 125 of the Cr.
P.C. 1974, it must be to deemed for all purposes, including the application of section 127 of the new Code.
[290B, G] 20 817 SCI/78 284 Nanak Chand vs Chandra Kishore Aggarwal & Ors., ; ; referred to.
