The appellant who was working as an investigator in the office of the Chief Controller of Imports and Exports was charged, found guilty and convicted and sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment for 18 months on each count for an offence under Sections 5(1) (d) and 5(2) of the Prevention OF Corruption Act, 1947 and section 161 I.P.C. and a fine of Rs. 200/ or in default to undergo further rigorous imprisonment under section 5(2) of the Act.
His appeal to the High Court was dismissed and the conviction and sentence were confirmed.
Special leave was granted by the Supreme Court limited to the question.
Of validity of sanction accord under section 6 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947.
The appellant died during the pendency of the appeal and his near relatives were granted permission to continue the appeal.
Dismissing the appeal, the.
Court ^ HELD 1.
The preliminary objection of the State as to the abatement of the appeal because of the death of the appellant taking into account preparedness to conclude that the sentence might he set aside must be negatived.
[352D] (a) As per the proviso to section 394(2) of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973, where the appeal is against the conviction and sentence of imprisonment and the appellant dies during the pendency of the appeal, any of his near relatives may, within the time prescribed therein, apply to the appellate Court before which the appeal is pending for leave to continue the appeal and if the leave is granted the appeal shall not abate.
[352A B] (b) The appellant, in the, instant case, has preferred the appeal against his conviction and sentence of imprisonment and also sentence of fine.
After his death his near relatives as contemplated in the Explanation to sub section (2) of section 394 Crl.
P.C., applied to continue the appeal and were granted leave to continue the appeal.
Therefore, the near relations of the deceased can continue the appeal and even if the respondent State concedes that the sentence of fine be set aside yet the appeal would not abate if leave is granted o the near relation of the deceased to continue the appeal.
[352C D] 349 2. 'The sanction accorded, for prosecution of the appellant under section 6 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 by the Joint Chief Controller of Imports and Exports is valid in law: [355H, 356A] (a) The instant case is governed by Central Civil Services (Classification, Control & Appeal) Rules, 1965 and in view of S.R.O. 631 issued by the President, in exercise of the power conferred by sub rule (2) of rule 11, clause (b) of sub rule (2) of rule 14, and sub rule (2) of rules 23 of the Central Civil Services (Classification, Control & Appeal) Rules, 1957, which order was saved by rule 34 of the 1965 Rules.
[353C D] (b) Rule 12(1) and (2) of 1965 Rules is in pari materia with rule 14 of 1957 Rules.
Rule 2 of 1965 Rules confers power on the President to impose any of the penalties specified in rule 11 on any Government servant.
Sub rule (2) (b) provides that any person appointed to a Central Civil Post included in the General Central Service by the authority specified in this behalf by a general or special order of the President or where no such order has been issued, by the appointing authority specified in the Schedule in this behalf, may impose any of the penalties specified in rule 11 which includes the penalty of removal from service.
Therefore, the President has the power to issue any general or special order to confer power to impose penalties as specified in rule 11 on any authority other than the one specified in the Schedule in this behalf.
If the order issued by the President.
S.R.O. 631 under corresponding rule 11 and the relevant rules bearing on the subject of 1957 Rules is not shown to be inconsistent with any of the Rules included in 1965 Rules, obviously such order would be saved under rule 34.
There being no inconsistency as contemplated by Rule 34, indisputably the order issued by the President S.R.O. 631 along with the schedule would be saved.
Once S.R.O. 631 is saved, the relevant entry in the schedule in respect of the origination of C.C.I.E. would be saved.
Accordingly the entry in the order issued by the President would supplant the corresponding entry in 1965 Rules and would have to be substituted for the entries in the relevant item in the Schedule.
The necessary consequence would be that in the case of the organization of The C.C.I.E. for all posts in Headquarters office, lt. C.C.I.E. would be both the appointing and the disciplinary authority having tho power to remove from service such persons belonging to Class III services.
Now, the appellant was indisputably holding a post in Class III service in the Headquarters office of the organisation of C.C.I.E.
He was at the relevant time holding the post of Investigator which is admittedly a Civil Post in Class III service in the office of C.C.I.E.
Indisputably, therefore.
C.C.I.E. would be both the appointing and disciplinary authority with power to remove him from service.
Therefore, Jt.
C.C.I.E. would be competent to accord sanction as envisaged by section 6(1)(c) of the Act.
[355B H] The fact that the administrative department in respect of the office of C.C.I.E. is the Ministry of Foreign Trade & Supply does not make any difference because C.C.I.E. is a separate office with its own establishment.[1354A] R. J. Singh Ahluwalia vs State of Delhi, A.L.R. ; distinguished.
