The appellants are a Company registered under the Companies Act, 1913 and provide transport facilities to their employees at a nominal rate from certain pick up places to their factories at Pimpri and Chinchvad in district Pune (Maharashtra) in their transport vehicle registered as "private service vehicle" within the meaning of the Bombay Motor Vehicles Rules 1959.
The Bombay High Court held that the transport vehicle provided to the employees by the company would be a public service vehicle and therefore, the respondents sought to levy a tax on passengers under the charging section 3 of the Bombay Motor Vehicles Taxation on Passengers) Act, 1958.
A challenge to the said levy having been rejected by the Commissioner of Pune the appellant obtained special leave of this Court.
Allowing the appeals, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
The preamble to the Bombay Motor Vehicles (Taxation on Passengers) Act, 1958 clearly reveals that the dominant object of the Act was to impose tax on certain classes of public service vehicles.
In other words, the Preamble indicates that vehicles which could not be termed as public service vehicles fell beyond the ambit of the taxing provisions of the Act.
[359 G H] 2.
Though the Act and Rules made thereunder do not define the term "public service vehicle", it is clear that, from the Preamble of the Act that the tax can be levied only on passengers who are carried by a stage carriage which is of` the nature of Public Service Vehicle.
[361A B] 3.
Section 3 of the Act which authorises the levy of tax on all passengers carried by road in state carriages contains two essential ingredients (1) that the transport concerned must carry passengers by road, and (2) that each passengers must be carried in stage carriages, that is to say, as defined in Section 2(7) of the Act, passengers must be carried for hire or reward at separate fares paid by or for individual passengers, either for the whole journey or for stages of the journey.
[360F G] 4.
A combined reading of section 7 (1) which defines 'passenger ' and section 2(7) which defines 'stage carriage.
Of the Act clearly indicates that the tax would be leviable only if the passengers are carried on a public service vehicle.
[361A] 358 5.
The word 'Public ' has got a well known connotation and means a carriage to which any member of the public can have free access of payment of the usual charges.
It cannot by any process of reasoning or stretch of imagination be deemed to include employees of a private company who are given facilities not as members of the public but as holding a status namely, the employees of that company.
Thus, qua public the employees from a separate class and cannot be said to be public as contemplated by rule 2(i).
[361 C] 6.
In the present case: (a) The transport service which was registered as a private service vehicle falls squarely within the ambit of the definition of 'private vehicle service in the Bombay Motor Vehicles Rules, 1959.
[361E] (b) The transport provided to the employees of the company was reserved for them only and no other member of the public even if he wanted to pay full charges could be carried on the said vehicle.
In these circumstances, therefore, it cannot be said that the transport vehicle provided to the employees by the appellants could be a public service vehicle in any sense of the term.
Such a transport vehicle, being not a public service vehicle within the meaning of the provisions of the Bombay Motor Vehicles Act, the view taken by the Bombay High Court is clearly erroneous.
[361F G, 362B]
