The six employees in the Tin Plate Co. of India Ltd. were adjudged insolvents.
They were members in a Provident Fund of the said company, having certain amounts standing to their credit in the Fund.
The appellants creditor of the said employees filed applica tions under section 4 of the Insolvency Act against the company and Trustees of the Fund for orders that amounts standing to the credit of the insolvents in the Provident Fund account were their properties and had vested in the court and were available for distribution amongst the creditors and therefore should be brought into court.
The respondent pleaded in answer that the amount standing to the credit of each insolvent in the Provident Fund represented the contributions of the company and of the employees and that the corpus was a trust fund in the hands of the trustees of the fund; so they were not properties of the insolvents over which they had a disposing power and that they were not debts due to the insolvents.
It was said that according to the rules governing the Provident Fund the monies become payable to the employee or any other member of his family only on the happening of certain contingencies such as retirement, discharge, dismissal or death and that till then no right accrued to the insolvent.
It was further urged that the trustees could not be removed from the custody and control of the fund by the Official Receiver.
On a construction of the Rules of the Provident Fund, the Insolvency Court held in favour of the creditor.
On appeal, the High Court held that under the rules of the Fund, the insolvents had no present disposing power over the monies standing to their credit and that the Fund had vested in the Trustee.
On appeal to the Supreme Court: Held that it is reasonably clear from these rules that a subscriber has a present interest in the Fund though the moneys may become payable to him, or his nominee or heirs only in the future.
Even where there is a declaration about the nominee who is to receive payment after the subscriber 's death, the fund would still be the property of the subscriber in the hands of the nominee for the satisfaction of his debts, as there is no present gift to take effect immediately.
It could not be maintained that the subscribers had no right, title or interest in the fund or that such interest as they may possess was dependent upon a possible contingency which may or may not occur.
The amount standing to the credit of a subscriber even if payable in future would be a debt due by the company to him within the meaning of section 60 of the Code and hence liable to attachment and sale.
A person cannot enter into any arrangement or agreement by which his own title will cease in the event of bankruptcy for it would then be a fraud perpetrated on the Insolvency Law.
The liability of the estate to be attached by creditors on a bankruptcy or judgment is an incident of the estate, and no attempt to deprive it of that incident by direct prohibition would be valid.
Notwithstanding the rules of the Fund in the present case, the subscribers have an interest in the moneys which can vest in the Official Receiver on their adjudication.
The word "property" in the Insolvency Act is used in the widest possible sense which includes even property which may belong to or is vested in another but over which the insolvent has a disposing power which he may exercise for his own benefit; and this part of the definition has reference obviously to powers of appointment and the power of a Hindu father who is the managing ember of a joint family.
The fact that on the date of the adjudication the insolvent could not transfer the property does not militate against the view that he has a vested interest in the same.
Banchharam Mojumdar vs Adyanath Bhattacharjee, ([1909] I.L.R. , Dugdale vs Dugdale ([1888] 38 Ch. D. 176), Ex parte Dever.
In re Suse and Sibeth ([1887] , Hudson vs Gribble ([1903] 1 K.B. 517), D. Palaiya vs
T. P. Sen and another (A.I.R. 1935 Pat. 211), Secretary, Burma Oil Subsidiary Provident Fund (India) Ltd. vs Dadibhar Singh (A.I.R. 1941 Rang.
256), Gajraj Sheokarandas vs Sir Hukamchand Sarupchand and another (A.I.R. 1939 Bom.
Anandrao alias Adkoba s/o Risaram ji vs Vishwanath Watuji Kalar and others, (A.I.R. 1944 Nag. 144), Ismail Jokaria & Co. vs Burmah Shell Provident Trust Ltd. (A.I.R. 1942 Sind 47), Bishwa Nath Sao vs The Official Receiver ([1936] I.L.R. 16 Pat. 60), and Sat Narain vs Behari Lal and Others ([1924] 52 I.A. 22), referred to.
