The plaintiff (appellant), his father and step brother were owners of lands in a village in the former State of Hyderabad.
Coming to know that the two brothers and father were contemplating to migrate to Pakistan, defendant No. 1 suggested to the plaintiff that he would manage their properties but that since he was not in good health, a nominal power of attorney might be granted in favour of defendant No. 34.
The power of attorney (Ext.
Pl) was granted tc defendant 34 by all of them.
It was later supplemented by another deed (Ext. P2).
The plaintiff alleged that sometime thereafter he realised that the two defendants in collusion with each other transferred his lands to others for no consideration or inadequate consideration and that thereby a fraud was perpetrated upon him by the defendants.
Thereupon, it was further alleged, the plaintiff and his brother published in the newspapers and the official gazette a notice cancelling the power of attorney granted to defendant No. 34.
The plaintiff sued the defendants for recovery of possession of lands and certain other benefits.
The defendants on the other hand claimed that the two documents being valid the plaintiff could not resile from them.
They also alleged that the plaintiff was not the full and absolute owner of the lands but was a benamidar.
The trial court dismissed the plaintiff 's suit holding that the documents were valid The High Court upheld the trial court 's order.
It however held that the plaintiff was the absolute owner of the suit properties Dismissing the appeals. ^ HELD 1(a) There is no force in the contention that it is impermissible for three persons to jointly grant a power of attorney in favour of defendant No. 34.
Co principals may jointly appoint an agent to act for them and in such a case they become jointly liable to him and may jointly sue him.
[430C,F] (b) The relation of agency arises when one person, called the agent, has authority to act on behalf of another called the principal and consents so to act.
The relationship has its genesis in contract.
In order to show that it is imper 425 missible for three principals to jointly constitute an agent by a common power of attorney it should be shown that the provisions of Contract Act or the general law of contract have been violated by such a contract.
[430E] In the instant case there is no such violation.
Halsbury 's Laws of England Vol.
1 4th Edn.
para 726 referred to. 2.
There is no force in the contention that since the two documents confer a joint power of attorney in respect of properties of the three co principals, the agent could look after the joint properties of the donors alone and not their individual affairs.
What a power of attorney authorises depends on its terms and the purposes for which it was executed.
Where someone other than the person Who has the right to act in respect of certain things, has under a contract of agency, the right to act on behalf of the principal, the authority conferred by the written instrument has to be strictly construed.
Ordinarily the power of attorney is construed strictly by courts.
It is equally well established that in considering a contract it is legitimate to take into account the surrounding circumstances for ascertaining the intention of the parties.
[430H, 431A, 431H 432A, F] Bryant, Powis and Bryant Ltd vs La Banque du Peuple, at 177, Modi & Co. vs Union of India, referred to.
In the instant case in Ext.
P1 at three places the expressions used are" our power of attorney to act on our behalf and we empower the said person` '. 'on our behalf in all departments", and lastly, "acts done and effected by the agent shall be deemed to be acts done and effected by the principals.
" The power of attorney having keen granted by three co principals in favour of one agent the expression "on our behalf" would hardly be decisive of the scope of authority conferred by the deed.
The surrounding circumstances clearly established that each of the co principals had his land, each of them could not have access to this land and therefore could not manage them, and with a view to migrating to Pakistan each of them apparently wanted to dispose of his lands and collect cash and therefore for this purpose each of them wanted to constitute defendant No. 34 to be his agent in respect of his individual property.
1432C. G, 433F] 3.
A general power of attorney is not a compulsorily registrable document.
When those who executed a deed admit having executed it, the tact that the Sub Registrar failed to endorse that the executants were known to him would not render the deed invalid.
Nor is there a legal obligation on the part of the Sub Registrar to make an endorsement that the persons executing a deed were either personally known to him or were identified by someone known to him.
[434C, B] 4.
There is no force in the submission that the authority given under exhibit P1 was only to manage the property and not to sell it.
P1 clearly shows that apart from the power to manage the property a further power to purchase and sell lands was conferred on the agent.
The general power of attorney conferred wide authority on defendant No. 34 to file suits, defend actions.
engage lawyers.
purchase and sell land and execute sale deeds and so on.
[434D E, 435A] 5.
A document will be considered as a whole for interpretation of particular words or directions.
An ordinary authority given in one part of the instrument will not be cut down because there are ambiguous and uncertain expressions elsewhere.
A power of wide amplitude conferring wide authority cannot by 9 978 SCI/78 426 construction be narrowed down to deny an authority which the donor expressly wanted to confer.
[436B] Halsbury 's Laws of England 4th Edn.
1 para 733; referred to.
(a) By a catena of decisions of this Court it is well established that Order 41 Rule 27 C.P.C. does not confer a right on a party to produce additional evidence before an appellate court.
But if the court hearing the action requires any document to enable it to pronounce judgment, it has the jurisdiction to permit additional evidence to be produced.
If the High Court considered production of registered sale deeds essential to enable it to pronounce judgment, there is no reason why this Court should interfere with the discretionary power properly exercised by the High Court in the interest of justice.
[439E F] 7.
(a) The contention that defendant No. 34 who was the constitute attorney acted as a mere rubber stamp in certain transactions has no force.
Section 41 of the Transfer of Property Act provides that where, with the consent, express or implied of the person interested in immovable` property, a person is the ostensible owner of such property and transfers the same for consideration, the transfer shall not be voidable on the ground that the transferor was not authorised to make it.
[436D, 437F] (b) Even if the father of the plaintiff could be said to be the ostensible owner of the land and he purported to sell the land, the plaintiff had acquiesced in the sale and accepted the consideration.
He would therefore be estopped from challenging the tile which was transferred pursuant to the sale.
[437E] Ramcoomar vs Macqueen, 1872 I.A. 11 Bengal LR 46; referred to.
(a) The contention that the plaintiff was a benamidar cannot be accepted.
The genesis of the concept of benami is that consideration for a transfer must flow from one person and the transfer is taken in the name of the other person and the consideration so flowing for the transfer was not intended to be a "gift in favour of the person in whose name the transfer is taken.
All these ingredients of benami ale absent in the instant case.
[440H] (b) Section 82 of the provides that where property is transferred to one person for a consideration paid or provided by another person, and it appears that such person did not intend to pay or provide such consider for the benefit of the transferee, the transferee must hold the property for the benefit OF the person paying or providing, the consideration.
[440F] (c) The plaintiff 's father held a high office in the Nizam 's Government.
He might have influenced the Nizam to grant the land to his son.
There is no evidence to show that the patta was for consideration.
Even if the Nizam in appreciation of the service rendered by the plaintiff 's father granted the land to the plaintiff it could not be said that any consideration flowed from the father of the plaintiff so as to make him a benamidar.
[440E, G]
