Section 14 of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 prohibits a court from making any order or decree in favour of a landlord for recovery of possession of any premises except under certain circumstances.
One of the grounds on which the landlord can make an application to the Rent Controller for recovery of possession is provided in section 14(1)(e) of the Act is that the premises let for residential purposes are required bonafide by the landlord for occupation a a residence for himself and that the landlord has no other reasonably suitable residential accommodation.
In September, 1975 the Central Government decided that Government servants who owned houses in the Union Territory of Delhi should, within three months from 1st October, 1975, vacate Government accommodation let out to them.
By the Delhi Rent Control Act (Amendment) Ordinance, 1975 the Act was amended and eventually the Amendment Act, 1976 replaced the Ordinance.
By a deeming provision the Act came into force on the date of the Ordinance i.e. 1st December, 1975.
Section 14A which was added by the amendment Act provides that a, land lord who, being a person in occupation of any residential premises allotted to him by the Central Government is required to vacate such residential accommodation on the ground that he owns in the Union Territory of Delhi a residential accommodation, a right shall accrue to such landlord to recover immediately possession of the premises let out by him.
Section 25B provides for special procedure for disposal of application for eviction under section 14(1) (e) and section 14A, Section 25B provides that when an application is filed by the landlord under either section 14(1)(e) or section 14A, the tenant shall not contest the prayer for eviction unless he files an affidavit and obtains leave from the Controller.
Sub section (5) requires that the affidavit filed by the tenant should disclose such facts as would disentitle the landlord from, obtaining, an order for the recovery of possession of the premises on the ground specified in section 14 (1)(e) or section 14A.
The appellant (landlord) let out his residential accommodation in New Delhi to the respondent (tenant).
The landlord was a Government servant who had been allotted Government accommodation in New Delhi.
On 9th December.
1975 the Government issued a notice to the landlord calling upon him to vacate Government accommodation allotted to him.
Tn the meantime the landlord retired from service on 30th November, ]975.
On 9th December, 1975 the landlord filed a petition for eviction of the tenant from his house.
The tenant raised three objections as to the maintainability of the petition: (i) that the landlord could not invoke the provisions of section 25B(5) because he was not a Government servant on the date of the petition; (ii) that since the ground on 8 978SCI/78 410 which eviction was sought in the petition was the same which had already been filed by the landlord and was pending before the Rent Controller, the petition could not be entertained, and (iii) that the premises occupied by him were let out for residential or professional purposes and therefore the landlord was not entitled to ask for eviction as the premises were not let for residential purposes alone.
The Rent Controller rejected all the contentions and refused leave to the tenant to defend the landlord 's eviction petition.
He held that (i) the question whether the landlord was a Government servant or not on the date when the notice was received and on the date when he filed a petition was irrelevant so long as he satisfied the requirements laid down in section 14(1), (ii) the ground for eviction under section 14A was a new cause of action and different from the one raised in the previous petition and, therefore the petition was not barred, (iii) it was not necessary for an application under section 14(1) that the building should have been let for residential purposes as required under section 14(1) (e), it is sufficient if the landlord required the premises for residential accommodation .
Allowing the tenant 's revision, the High Court held that since the landlord had retired from service On 30th November, 1975 before the Ordinance came into force, the tenant was not liable to vacate the premises independently of his ownership in the Premises in dispute.
Allowing the appeal.
^ HELD: 1 (a) Section 14A does not require that the person who was in, occupation of the premises allotted by the Government should be a Government servant.
The policy decision of 9th September.
1975 related only to Government servants who were in occupation of premises allotted to them by the Government.
But later the Government seemed to have realised that some provision should be made to get possession of the premises let to persons other than Government servants and who owned their own houses in Delhi and whose premises had been let out to tenants.
Although the circular dated 9th September, 1975 as well as the notice served by the Government on the landlord support the view that the intention of the Government was to enable only those Government servants who were in occupation of Government accommodation and who owned houses to get immediate possession .
section 14A does not restrict the right to recover immediate possession to Government servants alone.
Therefore, taking into account the object of the Act, the meaning of the word "person" cannot be confined to Government servants because Government accommodation was provided not only to Government servants but to others as well.
[417C F] Nihal Chand vs Kalyan Chand lain.
; at p. 190, referred to.
(b) It is not necessary in a petition for eviction under section 14A to specify that the premises were let for residential purpose only.
The words used in section 14A are clearly different.
This section contemplates the owning by the landlord in Delhi of a residential accommodation.
If he owns a residential accommodation he had the right to recover immediately possession of any premises let out by him.
If the premises were one intended for residential accommodation it would not make any difference if the premises were let for residential as well 411 as other purposes.
Evendif the residential accommodation was let for professional or commercial purposes, the premises would not cease to be for residential accommodation.
Moreover the requirement in section 14(1)(e) that to enable the landlord to recover possession the premises ought to have been let for residential purposes is not found in section 14A(1).
[421A C] Busching Schmitz Private Ltd. vs P. T. Mengham & Anr. ; , referred to.
The submission that as a previous application for possession by the land lord was pending, a petition under section 14A would not be permissible has no force because the grounds on which the application for possession was file under section 14A(1) Are different and ale based on special rights conferred on the class of persons who occupied Government accommodation.
[421D] (a) The scope of section 25B is very restricted, for leave to contest can only be given if the facts are such as would disentitle the landlord from obtaining an order for recovery of possession on the ground specified in section 14A. Leave to contest an application under section 14A(1) cannot be said to be analogous to the provisions of grant of leave to defend envisaged in the C.P.C. [422C & A] (b) The provisions of section 25B and section 25C are applicable to both applications under section 14(1)(e) and under s 14A. By the introduction of section 25C the condition imposed in section 14(6) is varied.
The condition imposed under section 14(6) is made not applicable to persons who satisfy the requirements under section 14A meaning thereby that this restriction will be applicable only to an application under section 14(1)(e).
Section 25C(2) makes it clear that not only in the case of an application under section 14(1)(e) but also under section 14A the term of six months prescribed in section 14(7) is reduced to two months.
By prescribing a specific period of two months under section 25C(2) it is made clear that even an applicant under section 14A would have to satisfy the conditions laid down by s.25C, that is, period of two months should elapse before the landlord is ' entitled to obtain possession from the date of an order for recovery of possession.
[423D G]
