The appellant imported wolfram ore.
The Customs Authorities classified the said ore under the residuary Item 87 of the Indian Customs Tariff and charged duty at the rate of 60% ad valorem.
Metallic ores (Item 26) and cobalt, chromium, tungsten magnesium etc.
[Item No. 70(7)] are allowed to be imported free of duty.
The aforesaid classification was upheld by the Assistant Collector of Customs and the appeal to the Commissioner of Customs was dismissed.
The appellant 's revision petition under section 131 of the Customs Act to the Government was also dismissed.
n In the appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that the imported ore contained a concentrate of 74% of tungsten from wolfram and the rest were impurities, that the concentration was the result of 'selective mining ' process which involves crushing, washing and magnetic separation that in better quality ore the content may be as high as 79% and that even after being subjected to such process, the ore concentrate does not cease to be tungsten 'ore ' within the contemplation of Item 70(7) of the Indian Customs Tariff.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
The goods imported had to be classified as imported ore, falling either under Item 26 or Item 70(7) of the Import Tariff, and no duty was leviable on them.
The appellants are entitled to refund of duty paid by them.
[475 E] 2.
The mere fact that the percentage of tungsten in the ore concentrate in the instant case is about 75% does not take the case out of the ratio of this Court 's decision in Minerals & Metal Trading Corporation of India Ltd. vs Union of India & Ors., [471 H] 3.
There is ample authority for the view that the tungsten content in the wolfram ore of marketable quality may vary from 60 to 79%, and a concentration within these limits of the metal in the ore can be attained simply by a process of a "selective mining", that is by physical process not involving any chemical change in the metal.
Wolframite of ordinary merchantable quality contains 60 to 70% of tungsten, while wolframite ore of better commercial quality contains 75 to 79% of the metal.
[473 C, 475D] "Tungsten" by C.J. Smithells Chapman Hall Introduction.
referred 4.
The finding of the appellate Collector of Customs that such a high degree (75% ) of the tungsten metal virtually free from impurities in the material, could be attained only by some chemical manufacturing process and not merely by 470 crushing, washing or magnetic separation, is not based on any evidence whatever.
It is contrary to the opinion of experts and authorities on the subject, which were brought on the record.
[475B]
