In support of their demand for reinstatement of certain dismissed union leaders a number of workmen, including the appellants had gone on an indefinite peaceful strike.
The Company (respondent) put up a notice that the strike was illegal and that the striking workmen were liable to disciplinary action for misconduct.
A week later, the company issued individual notices to the appellants and other workmen calling upon them to report for duty, failing which their absence would be construed as voluntary abandonment of service and that their names would be struck off the muster rolls.
A few days later the company informed the workmen concerned that by not reporting for duty they had confirmed its presumption that they were no longer interested to continue in its service that they had totally abandoned its service.
The names of the appellants had been struck off the rolls.
In final settlement of the workers ' claims for gratuity, leave salary and a month 's salary a cheque was sent to each of the appellants.
But the appellants returned the cheques to the company pointing out that they were interested in the service of the company and that they had neither voluntarily abandoned the service nor did they wish to do so and that they would report for work as soon as the strike was called off.
Thereafter, although there were prolonged negotiations between the union and the company, the company did not take them into its service.
Since a dispute was pending before an Industrial Tribunal application was made under section 33A of the .
The Tribunal rejected the workers ' demand for reinstatement.
In appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellants, that (i) removing their names from the rolls was illegal and arbitrary; (ii) the appellants had not voluntarily abandoned the company 's service and (iii) since termination of service could only be in accordance with standing orders, and since the standing orders in this case did not provide for treating the workmen as having abandoned the service in case they were absent in connection with a strike, the company 's action in terminating the appellants ' services was illegal.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: The impugned action of the company and the award of the Tribunal were illegal.
[619 E] 1.
To constitute abandonment there must be total or complete giving up of duties so as to indicate an intention not to resume the same.
Failure to perform duties pertaining to an office must be with actual or imputed intention on 614 the part of the officer to abandon and relinquish the office.
The intention may be inferred from the acts and conduct of a party and is a question of fact which could be determined in the light of surrounding circumstances in each case.
Temporary absence is not ordinarily sufficient to constitute abandonment of office.
[617 D F] Buckingham Co. vs Venkatiah & Ors., ; ; referred to.
The absence of workmen from duty was purely temporary and cannot be construed as their voluntary abandonment of the company 's service.
There was nothing in the surrounding circumstances or the conduct of the workmen indicating or suggesting an intention on their part to abandon service.
To abandon service means to detach, unfasten, undo or untie the binding knot or link which holds one to the office and obligations and privileges that go with it.
[618 C E] In the instant case the workmen went on a peaceful strike.
By their letters they unequivocally intimated to the company that they did not intend to abandon service.
They had returned the cheques sent to them by the company.
Union of India vs Gopal Chandra Misra ; referred to.
Since there was no provision in the certified standing orders, by virtue of which the company could have terminated the services of the workmen, the impugned action amounted to change in the conditions of service of the workmen during the pendency of the industrial dispute which adversely affected them.
[619 A] Express Newspapers (P) Ltd. vs Michael Mark & Anr., ; applied.
In cases where reinstatement had been directed by the Court it is the rule that the entire back wages must follow as a matter of course.
In the special circumstances of this case the workmen are entitled to wages at 75% for the entire period from the date of termination of their services to the date of reinstatement.
