An order of detention under the was passed in December 1974 against the appellant.
But it could not be executed because the detenu was absconding and could not be apprehended 'despite a proclamation made under section 7 of the Act.
More than three years after the order was passed, the appellant surrendered in February, 1978.
His application for a writ of habeas corpus was rejected by the High Court.
In his appeal against the judgment of the High Court as well as in a petition under article 32 of the Constitution raising grounds not raised before the High Court, the appellant contended that ( I ) the detention order made more than three years before its execution must be considered to have lapsed without fresh application of the mind of the detaining authority to the facts and circumstances of the case, (2) all the four persons who had made statements against the detenu had resiled from their earlier statements long before the order of detention and the failure of the detaining authority to consider such vital material vitiated the order of detention.
and (3) the detention order was not based upon any "rationally probative" material, inasmuch as it was based upon an intelligence report, not disclosed to the detenu and that this had resulted in denial to the detenu of his fundamental right under article 22(5) of the Constitution Dismissing the appeal and writ petition, ^ HELD: 1.
It is well settled that the purpose of detention under the COFEPOSA is not punitive but preventive, that is to say, its purpose is to prevent organised smuggling activities and to conserve and augment Foreign Exchange, that the maximum period of detention under the Act is one year, and that there must be a 'live and proximate link ' between the grounds of detention and the avowed purpose of detention.
But in appropriate cases the Court can assume that the link is 'snapped ' if there is a long and unexplained delay between the date of the order of detention and the arrest of the 634 detenu.
Where the delay is not only adequately explained but is found to be the result of the detenu 's recalcitrant or refractory conduct in evading arrest, there is warrant to consider the 'link ' not snapped but strengthened.
[638 B D] In the instant case, the order was made in December, 1974.
He was absconding, a proclamation was published in several leading newspapers that he was a person absconding and a reward was of offered for his apprehension.
Despite all this he could not be arrested until he surrendered in February, 1978.
Therefore the submission pseud on delay had no force.
[638 E F] 2.
There is no force in the contention that material facts which might influence the mind of the authority one way or the other, were not placed before it and that this vitiated the order of detention.
The detaining authority took into consideration the circumstance that there were 'adjudication ' proceedings, that the currency which the appellant was carrying was confiscated and that a penalty of Rs.5,000/ was imposed on him.
The order of adjudication by which the currency was confiscated and penalty was imposed did refer to the circumstance that persons who had made incriminating statements against the detenu had resiled from those statements.[638 H 639B] 3.
It cannot be said that the detenu had been denied a reasonable opportunity of making a representation merely because particulars which he never desired in respect of a ground which was not vague were not furnished to him.
The ground was specific enough.
If the detenu wanted any more particulars such as the name of the intelligence officer or other information, he could have asked for them before making his representation.
That he never did.
It was not as if any privilege had been claimed by the Government in respect of the intelligence reports.
The intelligence reports were produce before the High Court at the hearing of the writ petition.
There was no complaint that the detenu wanted to peruse the reports but was denied the opportunity of doing so.
[649 B, 639 H 640 A]
