The appellant is a limited company which is primarily engaged in the business of manufacture and sale of sugar and it has a cold storage plant and a steel foundry.
With reference to a news item dated 10th October 1968 in the National Herald in which it was stated that the State of Uttar Pradesh had decided to give exemption from sales tax for a period of three years under section 4A of the U.P. Sales Tax Act to all new industrial units in the State with a view to enabling them "to come on firm footing in developing stage", the appellant addressed a letter dated 11th October 1968 to the Director of Industries stating that in view of the sales tax holiday announced by the Government the appellant intended to set up a Hydrogenation plant for manufacture of Vanaspati and sought for confirmation that this industrial unit which it proposed to set up, would be entitled to sales tax holiday ' for a period of three years from the date it commenced production.
The Director of Industries by his letter dated 14th October 1968, confirmed that "there will be no sales tax for three years on the finished product of your proposed Vanaspati factory from the date it gets power connection for commencing production".
Thereafter when the appellant 's representative met the 4th respondent, who was at that time the Chief Secretary to the Government as also Advisor to the Governor and apprised the latter that the appellant was setting up the Vanaspati factory solely on the basis of the assurance given on behalf of the Government that the appellant would be entitled to exemption from sales tax for a period of three years from the date of commencement of commercial production at the factory, the 4th respondent reiterated the assurance made.
Again the appellant, by its letter dated 13th December 1968, requested the 4th respondent "to please confirm that we shall be allowed sales tax holiday for a period of three years on the sale of Vanaspati from the date we start production".
The 4th respondent replied on 22nd December 1968 that "the State Government will be willing to consider your request for grant of exemption from U.P. Sales Tax for a period of three years from the date of 642 production" and asked the appellant to obtain the requisite application form and submit a formal application to the Secretary to the Government in the Industries department, and in the meanwhile "to go ahead with the arrangements for setting up the factory".
The appellant in the meantime had submitted an application dated 21st December 1968 for a formal order granting exemption from sales tax under section 4A of the U.P. Sales Tax Act.
The appellant was also subsequently informed by the letter dated 23rd January 1969 of the 4th respondent categorically that the proposed Vanaspati factory of the appellant "will be entitled to exemption from U.P. Sales Tax for a period of three years from the date of going into production and that this will apply to all Vanaspati sold during that period in Uttar Pradesh itself".
The appellant, on the basis of these unequivocal assurances, went ahead with the setting of the Vanaspati factory and made much progress.
By the middle of May 1969, the State Government started having second thoughts on the question of exemption and the appellant was requested to attend a meeting "to discuss the question of giving concession in Sales Tax on Vanaspati products".
The appellant immediately by its letter dated 19th May 1969 pointed out to the 5th respondent that so far as the appellant was concerned, the State Government had already granted exemption from sales tax by the letter of the Chief Secretary dated 23rd January, 1969, but still, the appellant would be glad to send its representative to attend the meeting.
The appellant 's representative did attend the meeting held on 3rd June 69 and reiterated that so far as the appellant was concerned, it had already been granted exemption from sales tax and the State Government stood committed to it The State Government, however, went back upon the assurance and a letter dated 20th January 1970 was addressed by the 5th respondent intimating that the Government had taken a policy decision that new Vanaspati units in the State which go into commercial production by 30th September 1970, would be given only partial concession in Sales Tax at different rates on each year of production.
The appellant, by its letter dated 25th June 1970, pointed out to the Secretary to the Government that the appellant proposed to start commercial production of Vanaspati with effect from 1st July 1970 and stated that, as notified in the letter of 20th January 1970, the appellant would be availing of the exemption granted by the State Government and would be charging Sales Tax at the rate of 3 1/2% instead of 7% on the sales of Vanaspati manufactured by it for the period of one year commencing from 1st July 1970.
The factory of the appellant thereafter went into production from 2nd July 1970 and the appellant informed the Secretary to the Government about the same by its letter dated 3rd July 1970.
The State Government, however, once again changed its decision and on 12th August 1970, a news item appeared in the 'Northern Indian Patrika ' stating that the Government had decided to rescind the earlier decision i.e. the decision set out in the letter dated 20th January 1970, to allow concession in the rates of Sales Tax to new Vanaspati Units.
The appellant thereupon filed a writ petition in the High Court of Allahabad asking for a writ directing the State Government to exempt the sales of Vanaspati manufactured by the appellant from Sales Tax for a period of three years commencing from 2nd January 1970 by issuing a notification under section 4A of the U.P. Sales Tax Act from the appellant for the said period of three years.
The plea based on the 643 doctrine of promissory estoppel was, however rejected by the Division Bench of the High Court principally on the ground that the appellant had waived the exemption, if any, by accepting the concessional rates set out in the letter of the respondent dated 20th January 1970.
Allowing the appeal by certificate, the Court, ^ HELD: 1.
The view taken by the High Court, namely, that even if there was an assurance given by the 4th respondent on behalf of the State Government and such assurance was binding on the State Government on the principle of promissory estoppel, the appellant had waived its right under it by a accepting the concessional rates of sales tax set out in the letter of the 5th respondent dated 20th January, 1970 is not correct.
[656 D E] 2.
Waiver is a question of fact and it must be properly pleaded and proved.
No plea of waiver can be allowed to be raised unless it is pleaded and the factual foundation for it is laid in the pleadings.
[656 E F] In the instant case: (a) the plea of waiver was not taken by the State Government in the affidavit filed on its behalf in reply to the writ petition, nor was it indicated even vaguely in such affidavit.
It was raised for the first time at the hearing of the writ petition.
That was clearly impermissible without an amendment of the affidavit in reply or a supplementary affidavit raising such plea.
[656 F] (b) It was not right for the High Court to have allowed the plea of waiver to be raised against the appellant and that plea should have been rejected in limine.
If waiver were properly pleaded in the affidavit in reply, the appellant would have had an opportunity of placing on record facts showing why and in what circumstances the appellant came to address the letter dated 25th June 1970 and establishing that on those facts there was no waiver by the appellant of its right to exemption under the assurance given by the 4th respondent.
But in the absence of such pleading in the affidavit in reply, this opportunity was denied to the appellant [656F H] 3.
Waiver means abandonment of a right and it may be either express or implied from conduct, but its basic requirement is that it must be "an intentional act with knowledge".
There can be no waiver unless the person who is said to have waived is fully informed as to his right and with full knowledge of such right, he intentionally abandons it.
[657A, B] In the instant case, on the facts, the plea of waiver could not be said to have been made out by the State Government: There was nothing to state that at the date when the appellant addressed the letter dated 25th June 1970, it had full knowledge of its right to exemption under the assurance given by the 4th respondent and that it intentionally abandoned such right.
It is not possible to presume in the absence of any material placed before the Court, that the appellant had full knowledge of its right to exemption so as to warrant an inference that the appellant waived such right by addressing the letter dated 25th June 1970.
It is difficult to speculate what was the reason why the appellant addressed the letter 25th June 1970 stating that it would avail of the concessional rates of sales tax granted under the letter dated 20th January 1970.
[657 D E] 644 Earl of Darnley vs London, Chathan and Dover Rly.
Co. (Proprietors etc.), @ 57 Craine vs Colonial Mutual Fire Insurance Co. Ltd. ; ; Martindala vs Faulkner ; quoted with approval.
The doctrine called 'promissory estoppel ', 'equitable estoppel ', 'quasi estoppel ', and 'new estoppel ' is a principle evolved by equity to avoid injustice where a promise is made by a person knowing that it would be acted on and it is person to whom it is made and in fact it is so acted on and it is inequitable to allow the party making the promise to go back upon it.
Though commonly named promissory estoppel it is neither in the realm of contract nor in the realm of estoppel.
The basis of the doctrine is the inter position of equity, which has always true to its form stepped in to mitigate the rigours of strict law.
[658 E G] 5.
The true principle of promissory estoppel is that where one party has by his words or conduct made to the other a clear and unequivocal promise which is intended to create legal relationship effect a legal relationship to arise in the future, knowing or intending that it would be acted upon by the other party to whom the promise is made and it is infact so acted upon by the other party, the promise would be binding on the party making it and he would not be entitled to go back upon it, if it would be inequitable to allow him to do so having regard to the dealings which have taken place between the parties, and this would be so irrespective whether there is any pre existing relationship between the parties or not.
Equity will in a given case where justice and fairness demand, prevent a person from insisting on strict legal rights even where they arise, not under any contract, but on his own title deeds or under statute.
[662 B D] To the applicability of the doctrine of promissory estoppel it is not necessary that there should be some contractual relationship between the parties.
Nor can any such limitation, namely, that the doctrine of promissory estoppel is limited in its operation to cases where the parties are already contractually bound and one of the parties induces the other to believe that the strict rights under the contract would not be enforced be justifiably introduced to curtail the width and amplitude of the doctrine.
The parties need not be in any kind of legal relationship before the transaction from which the promissory estoppel take its origin.
The doctrine would apply even where there is no pre existing legal relationship between the parties, but the promise is intended to create legal relations or affect a legal relationship whish will arise in future.
[660 G H, 661 A, F G].
Jorden V. Money, , Hughes vs Metropolitan Railway Co., , Birmingam & District Land Co. vs London and North Western Rail Co., ]1888] ; discussed and questioned.
Central London Property Trust Ltd. vs High Trees House Ltd., [1947] K.B. p. 130:: ; explained.
Evenden vs Guildford City Association Football Club Ltd., @ 272 :: @ 255; Crabb vs Arun District Council.
@ 875:: @ 858 CA; quoted with approval.
645 6.
The doctrine of promissory estoppel cannot be inhibited by the same limitation estoppel in the strict sense of the term.
It is an equitable principle evolved by the Courts for doing justice and there is no reason why it should be given only a limited application by way of defence and it should only be a shield and not a sword to found a cause of action.
It can be the basis of a cause of action.
[662 D E, 663 E F].
There is no qualitative difference between 'proprietary estoppel ' and 'promissory estoppel '.
Both are the off springs of equity and if equity is flexible enough to permit proprietary estoppel to be used as a cause of action, there is no reason in logic or principle why promissory estoppel should also not be available as cause of action, if necessary to satisfy the equity.
[665 G H] Central London Property Trust Ltd. vs High Trees House Ltd .
[1947]1 K.B.P. 130: ; Combe vs Combe ; ; Beesly vs Hallwood Estate Ltd. ; Municipal Corporation of Bombay.v Secty.
of State I.L.R. @ 607; Mooregate Mercantile Co. Ltd. vs Twichings,s ; referred to.
Crabb vs Arun District Council @ 875 explained.
Ramsden vs Dysen,[1866] L.R H.L. 129; Dunlop Pneuntafic Tyre Co. vs Saifridge & Co. Ltd. ; discussed.
Law is not a mausoleum.
It is not an antique to be taken down, dusted admired and put back on the shelf.
It is rather like an old but vigorous tree having its roots in history, yet continuously taking new grafts and putting out new sprouts and occasionally dropping dead wood.
It is essentially a social process, the end product of which is justice and hence it must keep on growing and developing with changing social concepts and values.
Otherwise, there will be estrangement between law and justice and law will cease to have legitimacy Though 'continuity with the past is a historical necessity ', 'conformity is not to be turned into a fetish '.
[668 H, 669 A B].
Therefore, despite the fact that allowing promissory estoppel to found a cause of action would seriously dilute the principle which requires consideration to support a contractual obligation, this new principle, which is a child of equity brought into the world with a view to promoting honesty and good faith and bringing, law closer to justice should not be held in fetters but allowed to operate in all its activist magnitude.
so that it may fulfil the purpose for which was conceived and born.
[668 F G].
Robertson v Minister of Pensions.
Evenden Guldford city Association Football Club Ltd. [1975] 3 All.
E.R. p. 269.
Candler vs Crane Christmas & Co. @ 178; quoted with approval.
A promise may, in the United States, derive contractual enforceability if it has been made by the promisor knowing or intending that it would be acted on and the promisee has altered his position in reliance on it, notwithstanding that there is no consideration in the sense in which that word is used in English 646 and Commonwealth jurisprudence.
However, the basic requirement for invoking this principle must be present namely that the fact situation should be such that injustice can be avoided only by enforcement of the promise.
The doctrine of promissory estoppel has been used in the United States to reduce, if not to destroy, the prestige of consideration as an essential of valid contract and also used in diverse other situations as founding a cause of action: [670 D E, 673 B].
Alleghany College vs National Chauteaque Country Bank 57 Am L. R. 980; Drennan vs Stat Paving Company [1958] 31 California 2nd 409; referred.
Under the English law, the judicially formed view is that the crown is not immune from liability under the doctrine of promissory estoppel and the view taken by Denning J., in that the crown cannot escape its obligation under the doctrine of promissory estoppel by "praying in aid the doctrine of executive necessity" still holds the field.
[674 D].
Robretson vs Minister of Pensions [1949] 1 K. B. 227; quoted with approval: Rederiaktiebolaget Amphitrities.
vs The King ; referred to.
Howell vs Falmouth Boat Construction Co. Ltd. ; explained 10.
Even in the United States, the trend in the State Courts, of late, has been strongly in favour of the application of the doctrine of promissory estoppel against the Government and public bodies "where interests of justice, morality and common fairness clearly dictate that course".
It is being increasingly felt that "the Government ought to set a high standard in its dealings and relationships with citizens and the word of a duly authorised Government agent, acting within the scope of his authority, ought to be as good as a Government bond".
The Government would not be estopped "by the acts of its officers and agents who without authority enter into agreements to do what the law does not sanction or permit" and "these dealing with an agent of the Government must be held to have notice of limitations of his authority".
But if the acts of omissions of officers of the Government are within the scope of their authority and are not otherwise impermissible under the law, they "will work estoppel against Government".
[676 F H, 677 A D] Federal Crop Insurance Corporarion vs Maroill ; 92 L. ed.
discussed and explained.
Valsonavich vs United States p. 96; quoted With approval.
Where the Government makes a promise knowing or intending that it would be acted on by the promisee and, in fact, the promisee, acting in reliance on it, alters his position, the Government would be held bound by the promise and the promise would be enforceable against the Government at the instance of the promisee notwithstanding that there is no consideration for the promise and the promise is not recorded in the form of a formal contract as required by Article 299 of the Constitution.
[682 G H, 683 A].
647 It is elementary that in a Republic governed by the rule of law, no one, a however high or low is above the law.
Every one is subject to the law as fully and completely as any other and the Government is no exception.
It is indeed the pride of constitutional democracy and rule of law that the Government stands on the same footing as a private individual so far as the obligation of the law is concerned; the former is equally bound as the latter.
On no principle can a Government committed to the rule of law, claim immunity from the doctrine of promissory estoppel.
The Government cannot be heard to say that it is under no obligation to act in a manner that is fair and just or that it is not bound by considerations of 'honesty and good faith '.
In fact the Government should be held to a high "standard of rectangular rectitude while dealing with its citizens".
[683 A C].
Gangaes Manufacturing co vs Surajmull and Ors., I.L.R. ; Municipal Corporation of Bombay vs The Secretary of State, I,L.R. 29 Bomb.
588; approved.
Collector of Bombay vs Municipal Corporoaton of rlle City of Bombay and Ors.
; ; Union of India vs Indo Afghan Agencies, ; ; followed.
Ransden vs Dyson,[1866] L.R. 1HL 170; referred to.
Robertson vs Minister of Pensions, [1949] 1 K. B. 227; quoted with approval as the correct law.
The doctrine of executive necessity, regarded as sufficient Justification for the Government to repudiate even its contractual obligations was emphatically negatived in the Indo Afghan Agencies case and the supremacy of the laws was established, [683 C D].
Therefore, it is not open to Government to claim immunity from the applicability of the rule of promissory estopped and thereby repudiate a promise made by it on the ground that such promise may fetter its future executive action.
If the Government wants to preserve its freedom of executive action from being hampered or restricted, the Government should not make a promise knowing or intending that it would be acted on by the promisee and the promisee would alter his position relying upon it.
But, if the Government makes such a promise and the promisee acts in reliance upon it and alters his position the Government would be compelled to make good such promise like any other private individual.
[683 D F].
The law cannot acquire legitimacy and gain social acceptance unless it accords with the moral values of the society.
It should be the constant endeavor of the Courts and the legislatures to close the gap between law and morality and bring about as near an approximation between the two as possible.
The doctrine of promissory estopped is a significant judicial contribution in that direction.[683 F G].
Since the doctrine of promissory estoppel is an equitable doctrine, it must yield when the equity so requires.
If it could be shown the by Government that having regard to the facts as they have transpired, it would be inequitable to hold the Government to the promise made by it, the Court would not raise an equity in favour of the promisee and enforce the promise against the Government.
648 The doctrine of promissory estoppel would be displaced in such a case because on the facts, equity would not require that the Government should be held bound by the promise made by it.
[683 G H, 684 A] When the Government is able to show that in view of the facts, as they have transpired public interest would be prejudiced if the Government were required to carry out the promise, the Court would have to balance, the public interest in the Government carrying out a promise made to a citizen which has induced the citizen to act upon it and alter his position and the public interest likely to suffer if the promise were required to be carried out by the Government and determine which way the equity lies.
It would not be enough for the Government just to say that public interest requires that the Government should not be compelled to carry out the promise or that the public interest would suffer if the Government were required to honour it.
The Government cannot claim to be exempt from the liability to carry out the promise 'on some indefinite and undisclosed ground of necessity or expediency ', nor can the Government claim to be the sole judge of its liability and repudiate it 'on an exparte appraisement of the circumstances.
[684 A D] In order to resist its liability, the Government should disclose to the Court the various events necessitating its claim to be exempt from the liability and it would be for the Court to decide whether those events are such as to render it inequitable to enforce the liability against the Government.
[684 D E].
Mere claim of change of policy would not be sufficient to exonerate the Government from the liability: the Government would have to show precisely the changed policy with the reason and justification therefor, to enable the Court to judge for "itself which way the public interest lies and what equity of the case demands.
It is only if the Court is satisfied, on proper and adequate material placed by the Government, that over riding public interest requires that the Government should not be held bound by the promise but should be free to act unfettered by it that the Court would refuse to enforce the promise against the Government.
[684 E F] The essence of the rule of law is that the Court would not act on the mere ipse dixit of the Government, for it is the Court which has to decide and not the Government, whether the Government should be held exempt from liability.[684 F G] The burden would be upon the Government to show that the public interest in the Government acting otherwise than in accordance with the promise is so overwhelming that it would be inequitable to hold the Government bound by the promise and the Court would insist on a highly rigorous standard of proof in the discharge of this burden.
But even where there is no such over riding public interest, it may still be competent to the Government to resile from the promise 'on giving reasonable notice, which need not be a formal notice, giving the promisee a reasonable opportunity of resuming his position ' provided of course it is possible for the promisee to restore status quo ante.
If, however, the promisee cannot resume his position, the promise would become final and irrevocable.
[684 G H, 685 A].
Emmanuel Ayodeji Ajayi vs R. T. Briscoe, [1964] 3 All.
E.R. 556; referred to 649 14.
So far as the doctrine of promissory estoppel is concerned, no distinction can be made between a private individual and a public body.
This doctrine is also applicable against a public body like a municipal council.
However, this doctrine cannot be applied in teeth of an obligation or liability imposed by law.
It cannot be invoked to compel the Government or even a private party to do an act prohibited by law.
There can also be no promissory estoppel against the exercise of legislative power.
The Legislature can never be precluded from exercising its legislative function by resort to the doctrine of pro missory estoppel.
[688C, G H 689 A].
Century Spinng and Manufacturing Co. Ltd. & Anr.
vs The Ulhasnagr Municipal Council and Anr.
[1970] 3 SCR 854; Turner Mossison and Co. Ltd. vs Hunngerfard Investmetn Trust Ltd.[1972] 3 S.C.R. 711; discussed & followed.
M. Ramanatha Pillai vs The Stare of Kerala & Anr.
5 @ 526; Assistant Cusrodian vs Brij Kishore Agarwala & Ors. ; , explained and held inapplicable.
Sate of Kerala vs Gwalior Rayon Silk Manufacturing Co. Ltd. ; @ 688; reiterated.
Malhortra and Sons & Ors.
vs Union of India and Ors.
A.I.R. 1976 J & K p. 41 approved.
Excise Commissioner U.P. Allahabad vs Ram Kumar ; Bihar Eastern Gangetic Fishermen Cooperative Society Ltd. vs Sipali Sangil and Ors.
[1978] 1 S R 375; ; ; Radha Krishan Agarwal vs State of Bihar and Ors. ; ;: ; ; explained.
In order to attract the applicability of the doctrine of promissory estoppel, it is not necessary that the promisee, acting in reliance on the promise, should suffer any deteriment.
What is necessary is no more than that there should be alteration of his position in reliance on the promise.
If detriment were a necessary element, there would be no need for the doctrine of promissory estoppel because, in that event in quite a few cases, the detriment would form the consideration and the promise would be binding, as a contract.
If by deteriment is meant injustice to the promisee which would result if the promisor were to resile from his promisee, then detriment would certainly come in as a necessary ingredient.
The detriment in such a case is not some prejudice sneered by the promisee acting on the promise, put the prejudice which would be caused to the promisee, if the promisor were allowed to back on the promise.
It is not necessary for the promisee to show that he has acted to his detriment.
All that he has to show is that he has acted to reliance on the promise and altered his position.
[694 A B, F G, 695 E, 694 D].
Central London Property Trust Ltd. V. High Trees House, [1947] K.B. p. 130:: [1956] 1 All.
E.R. 256, W. J. Alan & Co. Ltd. vs El Nasar Export and Import Co. [1972] 2 All.
E.R. p. 127, @ p. 140, Tool Metal Manufacturing Co. Ltd. vs Tunosten Electric Co. Ltd. [1955] All.
E. R. 657; [1975] 1 W. L. R. 761 Emmaulel Ayodeji 650 Ajya V. R. T. Briscoe Karnmins Ballrooms Ltd. vs Zenith Investments (Torquay) Ltd. , Grurldt vs the Boulder Pty.
Gold Mines Ltd. ; ; quoted with approval.
In the instant case.
The facts necessary for involving the doctrine of promissory estoppel were clearly resent and the Government was bound to carry out the representation and exempt the appellant from sales tax in respect of sales of Vanaspati effected by it in Uttar Pradesh for a period of three years from the date of commencement of the production.
[693 F G] (a) The letter dated 23rd January 1969 was a representation on behalf of the Government, the representation having been made by the 4th respondent in his capacity as the Chief Secretary of the Government categorically to the effect that the appellant would be entitled to exemption from sales tax in respect of the sale of vanaspati effected in Uttar Pradesh for a period of three years from the date of commencement of production.
This representation was made by way of clarification in view of the suggestion in the appellant letter dated 2 nd January 1969 that the financial institutions were not prep ed to regard the earlier letter of the 4th respondent dated 22nd December 1968 as a definite commitment on the part of the Government to grant exemption from sales tax.
[692 H, 693 A B] (b) The representation made by the 4th respondent was a representation within the scope of his authority and was binding on the Government in as much as the 4th respondent, who was at the material time the Chief Secretary to the Government and also Adviser to the Governor discharging the functions of the Government during the President 's Rule had authority to bind the Governor.
Moreover the averment to this effect in the Writ Petition was not denied by the State in the affidavit in reply filed on its behalf [693 C D].
(c) This representation was made by the Government knowing or intending that it would be acted on by the appellant because the appellant made it clear that it was only on account of the exemption from sales tax promised by the Government that the appellant had decided to set up the factory for manufacture of Vanaspati.
In fact the appellant relying on this representation of the Government, borrowed moneys from various financial institutions, purchased plant and machinery from M/s. De Smith (India) Pvt. Ltd., Bombay and set up a Vanaspati factory at Kanpur.
[693 E F]
