The Government of India notified its decision that certain deductions in the minimum cane price, on the basis of recovery of sugar from sugarcane will be allowed to sugarcane factories in U.P. on the cane supplied to them on and after May 1, 1955 but that the deductions will be allowed only on "unbonded cane" crushed by each factory and not on "bonded cane", the latter of which shall have to be purchased by each factory at the minimum cane price already fixed for the season.
In exercise of the powers delegated to him under section 3 of the , the Cane Commissioner U.P. issued a Notification on June, 1, 1955, whereunder "the producers of sugar by vacuum pan process were allowed to make deductions as specified in the Schedule thereto from the minimum price of per maund of cane fixed for the season 1954 55 in respect of the unbonded sugarcane crushed on and after May 1, 1955.
The appellant firm taking advantage of this Notification granting concession in the minimum price, made payment to Laskar Co operative Cane Development Union Ltd; after making deductions in respect of 2 lac maunds of sugarcane supplied to it, under an agreement entered into pursuant to the offer made to it on March 22, 1955.
However, on December 21, 1955 the Cane Commissioner issued a Recovery Certificate under Sections 17 and 18 of U.P. Sugarcane (Regulation of Supply and Purchase) Act, 1953 against the appellant firm for a sum of Rs. 53,879.10 being the amount deducted by the appellant firm while making payments to Laskar Co operative Union.
On a challenge to legality of the Recovery Certificate, the dispute was referred to the sole arbitrator, the District Cane Officer under Rule 108 of the U.P. Sugarcane (Regulation of Supply and Purchase) Rules, 1954.
The arbitrator found that the supply of sugarcane was "bonded cane" and therefore gave an award that the appellant was not entitled to the concession and was liable to pay the minimum price therefor.
An appeal to the Divisional Commissioner having been dismissed, the appellant firm filed a Writ Petition in the Allahabad High Court which also was rejected.
A further special appeal also proving unsuccessful the appellant firm appealed to the Supreme Court after obtaining a certificate of fitness.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: 1.
Neither the expression "bonded sugarcane" nor "unbonded sugar cane" has been defined either in the Statute or in the U.P. Sugarcane Supply and Purchase Order, 1954.
Having regard to the ordinary dictionary 779 meaning of the said expressions, the expression "bonded sugarcane" must mean Sugar Cane secured by a bond or deed.
[783 G H, 784 A] 2.
Under the Notification of the Cane Commissioner dated June 1, 1955 certain deductions from the minimum price per maund of cane fixed for the season 1954 55 had been notified in respect of the "unbonded sugarcane" crushed on or after May 1, 1955.
In other words, the concession is granted in respect of the supply of 'unbonded sugarcane in contradistinction with supply of 'bonded sugarcane.
There is nothing in the Notification to suggest that any particular bond or a bond in accordance with the provisions of the U.P. Sugarcane Supply and Purchase Order 1954 was intended and therefore supply of bonded sugarcane ' would mean supply of sugarcane which has been secured by a bond or an agreement and such supply will not be entitled to the concession.
On a plain reading of the Notification in question, therefore, it will appear clear that since the supply of two lac maunds of sugarcane made by respondent No. 4 to the appellant firm had been secured by the agreement that was entered into between the parties on May 4, 1955 the said supply will have to be regarded as supply of "bonded sugarcane" and as such the appellant firm was not entitled to the concession in the minimum price payable in respect thereof to respondent No. 4, Laskar Co operative Cane Development Union.
[784 B E] 3.
On a fair reading of the sub cls.
(2) and (3) of cl. 3 of the Order two or there things become at once clear.
In the first place sub cl.
(2) uses the expression 'may ' and provides that a cane grower or cane growers ' cooperative Society may within 14 days of the issue of an order reserving an area for a factory make an offer to supply the cane grown in the reserved area to the factory.
That the period of 14 days mentioned in this subclause is not imperative or mandatory is also clear from sub cl.
(4) which confers power upon the Cane Commissioner to extend the date for making offer in respect of any reserved area.
Secondly, sub cl.
(3) uses the expression 'shall ' indicating that an imperative obligation is cast upon the factory to accept the offer within 14 days from the receipt of the offer.
Reading the two sub clauses together, it becomes clear that if a cane grower or cane growers ' Co operative Society makes an offer within 14 days mentioned in sub cl.
(2) it is obligatory upon the occupier of the factory to accept that offer within 14 days of the receipt of the offer; this only means that if the offer is made by cane grower or cane growers ' Co operative Society beyond the period specified in sub cl.
(2) or the extended time under sub cl.
(4) it would not be obligatory but optional for the occupier of the factory to accept the said offer but if such offer made beyond the prescribed or extended period is accepted by the occupier of the factory a binding agreement comes into existence between the parties and sugarcane supplied thereunder would be bonded sugarcane ', more so when the agreement is entered into in the prescribed form.
Merely because the offer from the cane grower or cane growers ' Co operative Society emanates after the expiry of the period mentioned in sub cl.
(2) it does not mean that the parties are preventive from entering in to an agreement in the prescribed form and if they do, as was the case here, the sugar cane supplied there under would be 'bonded sugarcane '.
Therefore, considering the question in the context of sub cl.
(2) and sub cl.
(3) of the U.P. sugarcane supply and Purchase Order 1954, also the appellant firm was not entitled to the benefit of the Cane Commissioner 's Notification dated June 1, 780 4.
The contention that sugarcane supplied by the cane growers or cane growers ' Co operative Society could be regarded as "bonded sugarcane" only if offer of the Canegrower or the Canegrowers Co operative Society emanates within the period prescribed by sub clause (2) and the same is accepted by the occupier within the period prescribed by sub cl.
(3) is not correct.
[786 D F] 5.
The true effect of sub clauses (2) and (3) read together is that the compulsion or obligation to accept the offer on the part of the occupier of the factory arises only when the offer is made by the cane grower or Cane growers ' Co operative Society within the time prescribed by sub cl.
(2) or the extended time under sub cl.
(4) but if the offer is made after the expiry of that period it is optional for the factory occupier to accept it or not but in cases where he accepts such offer a binding agreement comes into existence, and the sugarcane supplied thereunder becomes "bonded sugarcane".
[786 E M].
In the instant case the offer of additional quantity of two lac maunds of sugarcane was undoubtedly made long after the expiry of the period of sub cl.
(2) but the same was accepted by the appellant firm and a binding agreement came into existence and what is more a binding agreement was executed by the parties in the prescribed Form 'C '.
Further the conduct on the part of the appellant firm in referring the dispute to arbitration and filing an appeal against the arbitrator 's award under the relevant Rules clearly shows that the parties, particularly the appellant firm, treated the agreement dated May 4, 1955 as one under the Act and the U.P. Sugarcane Supply and Purchase Order, 1954.
[786 F H]
