There was a dispute between the appellant, a factory owner and his employees in regard to wages, during the period of their lay off.
The prosecution alleged that on the day of the occurrence when the workers gathered outside the factory and raised innocuous slogans demanding their wages, the appellant came out and fired a shot from his revolver, which hit a worker resulting in his death.
The appellant on the other hand alleged that a large number of labourers who collected outside the factory, shouted very abusive slogans, threatening that they would not leave him alive and showered brickbats at the factory premises causing damage to the appellant 's property.
Apprehending imminent danger to his life and property, his driver fired a shot from the revolver which resulted in the death of the deceased.
The trial court, with whose findings the High Court agreed, found that the workers might have hurled brickbats into the factory premises; but they did not break the barbed wire on the boundary wall nor did they try to scale the boundary wall.
that they did not carry any sticks, that no brickbats hurled by the workers could enter the appellant 's office and therefore his version that some brickbats damaged the glass on his office table was incorrect and that it was the appellant and not his driver that fired his revolver which resulted in the death of the deceased.
The High Court, agreeing with the trial court, held that though the appellant had the right of private defence of property it did not go to the extent of causing death and, therefore, he exceeded his right of private defence.
Holding that the offence fell under Exception 2 to section 300 IPC the High Court convicted him under section 304, Part I.
In appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that in the exercise of his right of private defence the appellant was entitled to and justified in law in using force even to the extent of causing death although he never intended to kill the deceased or anyone.
On the facts and circumstances of the case, it did not come within clause 4thly of section 300; or even if it fell within that provision, on the application of exception 2, he could only be convicted under Part II of section 304 and not under Part I. Even if his conviction were maintained, imposition of fine would meet the ends of justice.
Dismissing the appeal in part, ^ HELD: The appellant could be convicted only under Part II of section 304 and not Part I. [813 C].
806 (1) The High Court was right in not finding the appellant guilty of having committed culpable homicide amounting to murder within clauses Firstly, Secondly or Thirdly and finding him guilty with the aid of clause 4thly where the intention to cause murder is absent but "the person committing the act knows that it is so imminently dangerous that it must, in all probability, cause death or such bodily injury as is likely to cause death".
The clause further says that the person "commits such act without any excuse for incurring the risk of causing death or such injury as aforesaid.
" The appellant must have committed the act with the knowledge that it was imminently dangerous and in all probability must cause death or such bodily injury as was likely to cause death.
Dehors Exception 2, he had no excuse for committing the said act.
[813 D E] In the present case the workers ' demand for wages was not legal.
The workers raised provocative slogans and did throw brickbats damaging the appellant 's property and endangering it to further damage.
But that by itself could not give any right of private defence of person to the appellant.
There is no evidence to show that the workers had broken the barbed wire or that some of them tried to scale the boundary wall.
It may well be that some of them tried to raise their heads above the boundary wall.
The appellant came out of his office and fired the shot, which could not be merely to scare away the crowd of workers.
He could and did fire the shot so that it could pass over the boundary wall almost grazing it.
The bullet which must have passed just over the boundary wall could and did hit the deceased killing him instantaneously.
[812C 813C] 2.
(a) In the matter of exercise of the right or private defence of property or person the onus is on the accused to establish this right not on the basis of the standard of proving it beyond doubt but on the theory of preponderance of probability.
He might or might not take this plea explicitly or might or might not adduce any evidence in support of it but he can succeed in his plea if he is able to bring out materials on the record on the basis of evidence of the prosecution witnesses or on other pieces of evidence to show that the apparently criminal act which he committed was justified in exercise of his right of private defence of person or property or both.
But the exercise of this right is subject to the limitation and exceptions provided in section 99 of the Code.
As to when the right of private defence of the body extends to causing death is provided for in section 100.
[813 F 814 A] (b) The appellant had not only the right of private defence of his property but also his body to a limited extent within the meaning of section 101 subject to the restrictions mentioned in section 99.
This did not extend to the inflicting of so much harm to the deceased and causing his death, nor does the right of private defence of property available to an accused extend to causing death, unless it is covered by any of the clause of section 103.
[814 B] (c) When mischief is caused to property it must be shown that it was caused under such circumstances as may reasonably cause apprehension that death or grievous hurt would be the consequence if such right of private defence was not exercised.
A mere claim of such apprehension is not enough.
The court on objective tests and on the facts and circumstances of each case must arrive at the conclusion that the situation was such as was likely to reasonably cause such apprehension.
[814 D E] 807 (d) The right of private defence of property in the appellant 's case extended to causing of any harm other than death.
The appellant did exceed this right of private defence and the murder which he committed was within the meaning of clause '4thly ' of section 300 squarely and fell within Exception 2 thereof.
[814 F] (e) The appellant exceeded the right given to him by law and caused the death of the deceased against whom he was exercising such right of defence.
He did so without premeditation and without any intention of doing more harm than was necessary for the purpose of such defence.
He thought that by indulging in this imminently dangerous act he would be able to scare away the labourers and stop them from continuing their unjustified agitation, the raising of the slogans and the throwing of brickbats.
But then, although the intention was not to kill or cause such bodily injury as was sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death, yet he must have committed the act knowing that it was so imminently dangerous that it must in all probability cause death of the worker or workers standing on the other side of the boundary wall.
[814 G H] 3.
If the accused commits an act while exercising the right of private defence by which death is caused either with the intention of causing death or with the intention of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death then he would be guilty under Part I.
On the other hand if before the application of any of the Exception of section 300 it is found that he was guilty of murder within the meaning of clause "4thly" then no question of such intention arises and only the knowledge is to be fastened on him that he did indulge in an act with the knowledge that it was likely to cause death but without any intention to cause it or without any intention to cause such bodily injury as was likely to cause death.
In the instant case the appellant could be convicted only under Part II of section 304 and not Part I. [815A C]
