The appellant Dr. M. C. Gupta and the sixth respondent Dr. R. N. Tandon, were appointed to the post of 'Professor in medicine in State Government Medical Colleges.
The appointments were made by the State Government, on the recommendation of U.P. Public Service Commission, which had earlier with the assistance of four medical experts, selected them through an interview.
The respondents No. 1, 2 and 3 who were also candidates for the post filed a writ petition in the High Court, challenging the selection and appointment of Dr. M. C. Gupta and Dr. R. N. Tandon, though no mala fides were attributed to the Commission.
A Single Judge of the High Court issued a writ quashing the selection, on the ground that neither of the two selected doctors had the requisite teaching experience and that neither of them was qualified for selection as Professor of Medicine.
In appeal, the appellate Bench of the High Court confirmed the order quashing the selections, and further quashed the order of appointment, remitting the matter to the Commission, directing it to make fresh selection in consonance with the interpretation put upon the relevant regulation, by the court.
Allowing the three connected appeals, one by Dr. M. C. Gupta, and two by the State of U.P., the Court ^ HELD .
I. Medicine includes cardiology.
The Medical Council of India, a body composed of experts, have in the regulations clearly manifested their approach when they said that cardiology is a specialist branch under medicine.
Where general subject such as medicine or surgery is being dealt with, in a regulation, the specialist branch under it would be covered, though not vice versa, because if one wants to hold a post in the specialist branch, he must of necessity have teaching experience in the specialist branch.
[859 G, 860 D, 861 E].
If general regulation 4 is properly analysed for the purpose of computing research experience, the prerequisite is that the research must be done after obtaining the requisite post graduate qualification.
It has no reference to the post held by the person engaged in research at the time of conducting the research, and, to say that holding of the post specified in the regulation, is a pre requisite while conducting research, is to read in regulation 4, what is not prescribed thereunder.
[862 D F].
Teaching experience in foreign teaching institutions can be taken into account, but, they must be some recognised institutions of repute and not any institution outside the territory of India.
865 G, 866 C].
854 State of Bihar & Anr.
vs Dr. Asis Kumar Mukherjee & Ors., ; ; followed.
Vade Mecum : In view of the twilight zone of Court 's interference in appointment to posts requiring technical experience made consequent upon selection by Public Service Commission, aided and advised by experts having technical experience and high academic qualifications in the specialist field, probing teaching/research experience in technical subjects, within the framework of Regulations framed by the Medical Council of India, under section 33 of the and approved by the Government of India, the courts should be slow to interfere with the opinion expressed by the experts, unless there are allegations of mala fides against them.
[857E G].
University of Mysore & Anr.
vs C. D. Govinda Rao & Anr., ; applied.
State of BIhar & Anr.
vs Dr. Asis Kumar Mukherjee & Ors., ; ; explained.
