In relation to a land owner or a tenant, the term "permissible area" as defined in section 2(3) of the Punjab Security of Land Tenures Act, 1953 means thirty standard acres and where such thirty standard acres on being converted into ordinary acres exceed sixty acres such sixty acres, Clause (ii) (b) of the proviso enacts that if a displaced person who has been allotted land in excess of thirty standard acres but less than fifty standard acres, the permissible area shall be equal to his allotted area.
The Explanation states that for the purposes of determining the permissible area of a displaced person the provisions of proviso (ii) shall not apply to the heirs and successors of the displaced person to whom land is allotted.
The appellants ' father, a displaced person, owned considerable agricultural land in West Pakistan.
After his migration to India and subsequent death, in lieu of the land abandoned in Pakistan 124 standard acres were allotted in his name.
Mutation of the property was sanctioned in favour of the appellants and permanent rights were conferred in their names.
Alleging that they were 'small land owners ' as defined in the Act, and that they required the land for self cultivation they applied for ejectment of the respondent No. 2 who at that time was in possession of the land.
The Assistant Collector, rejected their request, their appeal to the Collector was dismissed and revision application to Commissioner and Financial Commissioner were also rejected.
In their writ petition under article 226 of the Constitution they contended that if the "permissible area" is computed under proviso (ii) to section 2(3) of the Act, the holding of each of them would be below the permissible limit of thirty standard acres; that since the allotment was made in standard acres, the 'permissible area ' of each of them would be 30 standard acres notwithstanding that on conversion into ordinary acres it exceeds sixty ordinary acres.
A single Judge of the High Court dismissed their writ petition.
On appeal, the Full Bench of the High Court held that since the appellants were not displaced persons, the concession of an enhanced permissible area under proviso (ii) to section 2(3) was not available to them and their permissible area would be sixty ordinary acres, each, and since the holding of each of them exceeded sixty ordinary acres they were not 'small land owners ' and so could not seek ejectment of the tenant.
847 On further appeal to this Court it was contended, (1) that the words "such thirty standard acres" in the definition exclude conversion into ordinary acres where the area already held in standard acres falls below thirty standard acres; (2) that they were small land owners because each of them was holding only 24 standard acres and the Explanation to section 2(3) had no application to them because the land was allotted to their father who was a displaced person; and (3) that while computing the "permissible area" uncultivated Banjar land which does not fall within the definition of "land" for the purposes of the 1953 Act had wrongly been included.
Rejecting contentions (1) and (2), ^ HELD: 1.
The language of section 2(3) proclaims in no uncertain terms the legislative imperative that no land owner or tenant shall hold land exceeding 30 standard acres or 60 ordinary acres.
The words "such thirty acres" occurring in the definition cannot be construed to limit the conversion into ordinary acres only to a case where the holding is thirty standard acres and not less.
The concept of standard acre being "a measure of area convertible into ordinary acres of any class of land according to the prescribed scale with reference to the quantity of yield and quality of soil" has been introduced in the definition of "permissible area" to emphasise the qualitative aspect of a landholding and the maximum limit of sixty acres delineates its quantitative aspect.
[850 G, F] 2.
The appellants were not displaced persons within the meaning of proviso (ii) to section 2(3).
They were heirs of a displaced person who died after his migration of India.
Therefore, proviso (ii) had no application to the appellants.
The Explanation clearly excludes application of proviso (ii) to their case, which is fully covered by the substantive part of the definition of "permissible area" under which the maximum they could hold was sixty ordinary acres.
At the material time, each of them was holding land in excess of the sixty ordinary acres and therefore, they were not 'small land owners. ' [851 D F] Accepting the third contention and allowing the appeal and remitting the case to the Collector concerned.
[852 F].
HELD that 3.
(a) Banjar Qadim and Banjar Jadid cannot be taken into account while computing the surplus area under the Act because, not being occupied or let for agricultural purposes or purposes subservient to agriculture, it does not fall within the purview of 'land ' under the Act.
[852 B C] Nemi Chand Jain vs Financial Commissioner, Punjab, AIR 1964 Punj. 373; approved.
(b) The Assistant Collector should ascertain the extent of the Banjar Qadim and Banjar Jadid and Gair Mumkin area of the appellants at the relevant date and recompute their permissible area after excluding such areas.
[852 G].
