(14 of 1947) section 18 Applicability of.
The appellant company had its establishments in a number of States in the country.
In its establishment at Kanpur there were two unions, one of which, the Shramik Sangh, was affiliated to the Federal Union comprising of some of the trade unions in the various establishments while the other, the Karamachari Union, was not.
A demand relating to revision of dearness allowance among others, was raised by both the Unions at Kanpur.
The Shramik Sangh and the appellant entered into a settlement.
Karamchari Union which was not a party to the settlement, made an application to the State Government to constitute a conciliation board for reference of the dispute.
The Board was constituted.
In the meantime, however, to bring the settlement within the purview of the U.P. the Shramik Sangh applied for the constitutation of a conciliation board.
A conciliation board was constituted and the memorandum of settlement arrived at between the parties was registered even though the dispute on the same point raised by the Karamchari Union was pending before the Conciliation Board all the while.
The dispute raised by the Karamchari Union was, therefore, referred to a Tribunal under s 4K of the Act.
The Tribunal rejected the appellant 's contention that it had no jurisdiction to adjudicate on the dispute.
On appeal to this Court it was contended that it was implicit in the various provisions of the U.P. Act that a settlement arrived at before a Conciliation Board by a Union of the majority of workmen was binding on all the workmen and that in the absence of a provision like section 18 of the it was not permissible for the Karamchari Union to contend that the settlement would bind only the members of the Shramik Sangh and in any event reference of the dispute to a Tribunal was without jurisdiction.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
The State Government rightly took the view that the controversy raised by the Karamchari Union was an industrial dispute.
[922 G H] 2.
A reading of the relevant provisions of the U.P. , clearly shows that there is nothing in the Act to require that the dispute 912 or difference should be raised by all the workmen of the industry, or by everyone of them, or even by a majority of them.
It is enough if the controversy is between the employer on the one side and workmen on the other.
There is also nothing in the Act to require that the workmen raising the controversy should form a majority of the employees, the reason being that where it is found that the controversy affects, or will affect, the interests of workmen as a class, the law envisages that, in the interest of industrial peace, it should be examined and decided in one of the modes provided by it.
[917 D F] 3.
An individual dispute cannot, however, be said to be an industrial dispute unless the other workmen associate themselves with it.
No hard and fast rule can be laid down to decide when and by how many workmen an industrial dispute could be raised within the meaning of the Act, or whether a minority union or even an unrecognised union, could raise an industrial dispute.
It is enough if there is a potential cause of disharmony which is likely to endanger industrial peace, and a substantial number of workmen raise a dispute about it, for then it is permissible to view it as an industrial dispute within the meaning of clause (1) of section 2 of the Act, and to refer it for adjudication to a tribunal.
[917 F H] 4.
The settlement arrived at with the Federal Union did not bind the Karamchari Union as it was not a party to it and was not affiliated to the Federal Union.
Section 18 of the Central Act provides that a settlement arrived at by agreement between the parties otherwise than in the course of conciliation proceedings shall be binding on the parties to the agreement.
[918 E] 5.
Moreover, the settlement arrived at with the Shramik Sangh was under the provisions of the U.P. Act and, therefore, section 18 of the Central Act had no application.
There is no provision similar to it in the U.P. Act.
[918 G] 6.
There was no occasion for invoking section 7 of the U.P. Act.
That section is mainly intended to serve the purposes contemplated by section 3 of the Act, namely, securing the public safety or convenience or the maintenance of public order or supplies and services essential to the life of the community or for maintaining employment etc.
It cannot therefore be said that the settlement arrived at by the Sangh became binding on all workmen including the Karamchari Union which was not a party to it nor is there any other provision in the Act or the Rules making the settlement binding on the Karamchari Union.
Nor again can it be said that section 3(d) of the U.P. Act justifies the argument that merely because a union, consisting of a majority of workers, can represent all the workmen, the settlement arrived at before a conciliation board would bind those who are not parties to it.
[919 B, C, F G] 7.
In the absence of any prohibitory provision in the Act it cannot be said that the State Government had no jurisdiction to make a general reference under section 4K of the U.P. Act merely because the settlement was made by a majority union and was binding on the Shramik Sangh.
The Tribunal has found it as a fact that the Karamchari Union represented a substantial number of the workmen of the company at Kanpur, and there is no reason why they should be debarred from raising a dispute for the benefit of all the workmen as a class.
It is well recognised, that "collective bargaining" can take place between the employer and a bona fide labour union and there is nothing on the record to show that the Karamchari Union was not a bona fide union.
[920 A C] 913 In the instant case the Shramik Sangh entered into the settlement in collusion with the company and the Conciliation Board finalised the settlement even though the Karamchari Union 's dispute was still pending.
No effort was made to make it a party to the proceedings.
Although, to begin with, a both the Shramik Sangh and the Karamchari Union were opposed to the settlement earlier arrived at by the Federal Union the Shramik Sangh changed its stand and endorsed the settlement of the Federal Union when it was placed on the notice board.
The Tribunal also found as a fact that the settlement was not even put on the notice board of the company.
In these circumstances if the State Government had decided to make a reference of the dispute to the Tribunal it could not be said that it did not apply its mind to the controversy or committed an illegality in doing so.
[920 H 921 C] 8.
Even assuming that the earlier settlements were in the nature of a package deal arrived at between the company and the Federal Union it cannot be said that there was any legal bar to the reference of the dispute regarding one particular item of the package deal for adjudication by the tribunal so as to vitiate the reference.
The company brought this aspect of the matter specifically to the notice of the State Government.
The point does not, however, relate to the jurisdiction or the maintainability of the reference under section 4K for it is essentially a matter for the Tribunal 's examination with due regard to the evidence before it.
[921 F G] Herbertsons Ltd. vs Workmen of Herbertsons Ltd. & Ors. ; and New Standard Engg.
Co. Ltd. vs M. L. Abhyankar & Ors., ; held inapplicable.
