In the eviction suit filed by the respondents against the appellant under the West Bengal Premises Tenancy Act, 1956, on the ground that the appellant was in arrears of rent, that he had sub let the premises and that the respondents required the premises for their personal use, the appellant deposited the arrears of rent within a period of 30 days i.e. within the time but did not deposit the interest due on the arrears as required by section 17(i) of the Act.
The respondents therefore, filed an application under section 17(3) of the Act to strike off the appellant 's defence for failure to deposit the interest.
The said application was accepted by the Trial Court and, therefore, the respondents filed a civil revision application in the Calcutta High Court against that order which was dismissed on April 4, 1968.
During the pendency of the said revision application, section 17A was newly introduced in the 1956 Act with retrospective from 26 8 1967.
By that section tenants were given the right, if the proceedings for eviction was not disposed of, to apply within 30 days of the said date for setting aside the order for striking off the defence.
In view of the challenge by way of revision application in the High Court against the order striking off his defence the appellant did not take recourse to the provisions of the newly introduced section 17A of the West Bengal Premises Tenancy Act.
After the dismissal of the revision petition, the appellant filed an application under the new section 17A of the Act praying that the order dated July 25, 1963 passed by the Trial Court, striking off his defence be set aside.
Along with the said application, an application to condone the delay under section 5 of the Limitation Act was also filed.
The Trial Court dismissed both the applications and the High Court confirmed that order in revision.
Allowing the appeal by special leave, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
The true meaning and effect of section 39 is that if any special period of limitation is prescribed by the Act, that period will govern the proceeding under the Act in preference to the period, if any, prescribed by the Limitation Act.
But apart from such an over riding effect of the period of limitation prescribed by the Act, not only that the other provisions of the Limitation Act do not stand excluded or superseded, but they are expressly made applicable by section 39 of the Act.
[949 A B] 2.
Section 39 of the West Bengal Premises Tenancy Act, 1956, which is clear and specific, leaves no doubt that the provisions of the Limitation Act 946 would apply to proceedings under the West Bengal Premises Tenancy Act, subject to the condition that if there is a provision in the West Bengal Act relating to limitation, that provision would prevail over the provisions of the Indian Limitation Act relating to limitation.
Since the West Bengal Act prescribed a specific period of limitation for filing an application for setting aside an order striking out the defence, namely a period of 30 days commencing on August 26.
1967 when the first Ordinance came into force, that period would undoubtedly apply to the making of the application under section 17A of the Act.
Since the appellant did not file his application under section 17A before the due date, that is to say, before September 25, 1967, the application must be held to be barred by limitation.
But, by reason of section 39 of the Act, all other provisions of the Limitation Act would be attracted including section 5 of the latter Act.
[948 D F] In the instant case since the appellant did not file his application under section 17A of the Act, before the due date, that is to say, before September 25, 1967, the application under section 17A is barred by limitations.
However, the application filed by him under section 5 of the Limitation Act for condonation of delay is maintainable.
[948 A B, G] M/s. Pakarmal Gurudayal vs Sagarmal Bengani approved.
When a Court condones the delay caused in filing a proceeding, it does not extend the period of limitation prescribed by law for filing it.
It treats the proceeding as if it is filed within limitation, which it has the power to do if sufficient cause is shown for not filing the proceeding within the prescribed period.
[949 B C]
