Both the appellants were officers of Indian Oil Corporation.
The Corporation invited tenders from experienced contractors for rock cutting, filling and levelling of certain land acquired by it.
On the notified date it opened the tenders received from eleven contractors.
But in the meantime since it made a change in the specification of work to be done it asked the tenderers to submit revised tender.
The direction to submit fresh tenders was restricted only to the original 11 tenderers.
Even so it was alleged that a tender form was issued by the appellants to A 4, who was not one of the 11 tenderers.
there was again a change in the specification of the work to be done at the suggestion of foreign collaborators.
The appellants were alleged to have asked the concerned officers of the Corporation to make a fresh survey along with A 4, keeping in view the suggestion of the foreign collaborators.
Eventually the contract was given to A 4.
The prosecution alleged that (1) the conduct of the appellants showed their keenness to have the contract entrusted to A 4.
(2) the issue of work order was inflated with figures relating to rock cutting and filling; and (3) the appellants removed certain original documents from the departmental files and substituted in their place fabricated material.
The appellants who were charged with offences under section 120B and section 109 IPC and section 5(2) read with section 5(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 were convicted and sentenced to undergo imprisonment.
On the question whether the appellants had been rightly convicted under section 5(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act.
Allowing the appeals, ^ HELD: 1.
An analysis of the circumstantial evidence adduced by the prosecution did not lead to the unerring certainty that the appellants acted with any dishonest or corrupt motive or abused their position.
[904 F] 2.
(a) It is well settled that abuse of position, in order to come within the mischief of section 5(1)(d) of the Act, must necessarily be dishonest so that it may be proved that the accused caused deliberate loss to the department.
Further it is for the prosecution to prove affirmatively that the accused, by corrupt or illegal means or by abusing his position, obtained any pecuniary advantage for some other person.
[892 G; 893 A].
(b) Again, the fundamental rule relating to the proof of guilt based on circumstantial evidence is that there is always danger that conjecture or suspicion might take the place of legal proof.
In such cases the mind is apt to take a pleasure in adapting circumstances to one another and even in straining them a 876 little, if need be to force them to form parts of one connected whole and the more ingenious the mind of the individual the more likely it is, in considering such matters, to over reach and mislead itself to supply some little link that is wanting, to take for granted some fact consistent with its previous theories and necessary to render them complete.
[893 B D].
(c) In cases where the evidence is of a circumstantial nature, the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should in the first instance be fully established, and all the facts so established should be consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused.
Again, the circumstances should be of a conclusive nature and should be such as to exclude every hypothesis but the one proposed to be proved.
In other words there must be a chain of evidence so far complete as not to give any reasonable ground for a conclusion consistent with the innocence of the accused and it must be such as to show that within all human probability the act must have been done by the accused.
[893 D F].
M. Narayanana Nambiar vs State of Kerala, [1963] Supp.
2 SCR 724; Major section K. Kale vs State of Maharashtra, ; ; Hanumant Govind Nergundkar vs State of M.P., [1952] SCR 1091, AIR 1952 SC 343; Palvinder Kaur vs State of Punjab, ; ; Charan Singh vs State of U.P., AIR 1967 SC 529; referred to.
(d) The principle that inculpatory fact must be inconsistent with the innocence of the accused and incapable of explanation on any other hypothesis than that of guilt does not mean that any extravagant hypothesis would be sufficient to sustain the principle, but that the hypothesis suggested must be reasonable.
[893 G].
Govinda Reddy vs State of Mysore, AIR 1960 SC 29; referred to.
In the instant case the conduct of the appellants in preferring A 4 to any new contractor did not savour of dishonest intentions on their part.
Although the notice was sent by registered post to the 11 original tenderers there is nothing in that notice or elsewhere on the record to indicate that other contractors were precluded from submitting their tenders or that the corrigendum extending the date for submission of the tenders was neither intended to be published nor was it actually published.
The High Court had missed this fact.
The High Court was also wrong in thinking that out of the nine contractors who submitted their revised tenders eight were from the original nine tenderers and the ninth was A 4.
In fact five of the contractors that submitted the fresh tenders were fresh tenderers.
Moreover none of the officers of the Finance and Engineering Department of the Corporation who handled the file relating to the grant of contract ever raised any objection regarding the improper reception or entertainment of A 4 's tender.
This showed that there was nothing wrong about the issue of tender Form to A 4 or its entertainment by the appellants.
The contract in question was not a specialised job requiring any extra ordinary skill.
A 4 was the Corporation 's old and tried contractor who had previously executed a number of works including rock cutting.
(2) Though it cannot be gainsaid that the second appellant had been extremely negligent in not scrutinising the papers, he affixed his signature in a routine manner to the work order prepared by his subordinates without realising 877 the importance of his act, placing implicit faith in the integrity of the latter.
[900 E F] (3) There is no clear, cogent and convincing evidence to show that the appellants had a hand in the removal of the level plans from the departmental file relating to the contract and substitution of the faked plans.
[900 G].
