Articles 32 and 136 When root of the grievance and the fruit of writ are not individual but collective courts power is one of affirmative structuring of redress to make it meaningful and socially relevant Decisional guidelines to be given.
The State of Kerala appointed a Commission to recommend which sections of the people required special treatment under article 15(4) having regard to their social and educational conditions.
That Commission recommended equitable allocation of seats on the bais of education backwardness of the Malabar area.
Substantially founding itself on these recommendations the these recommendations the State Government evolved a formula, which by polling all applications for admission to the four medical colleges in the state one consolidated list was prepared and candidates were selected strictly according to the marks secured by them.
This scheme having been struck down by the High Court, a fresh expert committee was appointed to examine the quo modo of admissions to medical colleges.
The Government on the basis of these recommendations decided that seats available for the medical course might be distributed for the students of the two 1, Universities of Kerala and Calicut in the ratio of the candidates registered for the pre degree and B. Sc.
course in them.
In a writ petition under article 226 the High Court held that the scheme of selection for admission to the medical colleges on an assessment of merits of students drawn from different universities with no uniformity of standards is objectionable and the linkage of the division of seats with the registered student strength of the universities bears no nexus and is violative of article 14 of the Constitution.
On the question of the validity of the scheme of selection for admission to the medical colleges.
^ HELD : 1.
Current conditions warrant the classification of student community on the zonal basis not as a legitimation of endless perpetuation but as a transient panacea for a geo human hadicap which the State must actively strive to undo.[980E] 2.The principal of reservation with weightage for the geographical area of the Malabar district is approved.[980 G] 3 The reasoning of the High Court that there is such substantial difference in the pre degree courses and evaluations between the sister universities within the same State that the breach of article 14 by equal treatment of the marks un 975 equally secured by the examinees in the two Universities may be spelt out.
Every inconsequential differentiation between two things does not constitute the vice of discrimination, if law clubs them together ignoring vanial variances.
Article 14 is not a voodoo which visits.
with invalidation every executive or legislative fusion of things or categories where there are no pronoanced inequalities.
Mathematical equality is not the touchstone of constitutionality.
[983 E F] State of Jammu & Kashmir vs Triloki Nath Khosa & Anr. ; at 42 referred to.
A large latitude is allowed in this area to the State to classify or declassify based on diverse considerations of relevant pragmatism and the judiciary should not "rush in" where the executive varily treads.
[984 A] 5.
Many colleges are run by the State or institutional managements where pre degree or degree courses are undertaken, The teachers move from one university jurisdiction to the other, the teaching material is inevitably of a like nature, the subjects taught must ordinarily be alike.
The examiners are usually drawn from within the State or neighbouring States.
Even the composition of the academic bodies in the two universities may have common members.
The University Act themselves are substantially similar.
To surmise discrimination from possibilities is alien to the forensic process in the absence of hand facts.
Gross divergences exist amoung Universities affecting the quality of the teaching and the inaiking.
the anomalies of grading and the absurdity of equating the end product on the blind assumption that the same marks mean the same excellence.
But not glib surmises but solid facts supply the sinews of discriminatory inequality or equality.
Some backward universities and colleges have degenerated into degree dealers bringing rapid discredit to Indian Academic status.
[984 D F] 6.
The vagarious element in marking and moderation of marks may be a fact of life, but too marginal to qualify for substantial difference unless otherwise made out Indeed.
there may be differences among the colleges under the same University.
among the examiners in the same University.
Such fleeting factors or eohemeral differences cannot be the solid foundation for a substantial differentiation which is the necessary pre condition for quashing an executive or legislative act as too discriminatory to satisfy the egalitarian essence of Art 14.
[984 H 985 A] 7.
The functional validation of the writ jurisdiction is an appropriate examination of the substantiality of the alleged disparity.
[985 B] 8.
The corner stone of classification adopted for medical admission.
by the Government was University wise allocation.
By itself.
this approach had constitutional sanction.
[986 C] D. N. Chanchala vs State of mysore & Ors. etc.
[1971] Supp.
SCR 608; relied on 9.
The discriminatory vice,if University wise classification and consequential allocation of seats were resorted to, was pressed therein but repelled.
The fundamental `educational realities and resultant resolution of the legal imbrogliro are instructively presented therein, which have special relevance to the instant case because the social facts, constitutional confrontations and administrative answers in the Kerala and Karnataka litigations are similar.
[986 D, 986 H 987 A] 976 10.The injection of the University wise student strength is drawing the redherring across the trail an irrelevance that invalidates the scheme.
There is no nexus between the registered student strength and the seats to be allotted.
The fewer the colleges the fewer the pre degree or degree students.
And so, the linkages of the division of seats with the registered student strength would make an irrational inroad into the University wise allocation.
Such a formula would be a punishment for backwardness, not a promotion of the advancement.
The discriminatory paring down based on unreason cannot be upheld.
[990 G H] 11.
Law is not unimaginative, especially in the writ jurisdiction where responsible justice is the goal.
The court cannot adopt a rigid attitude of negativity and sit back after striking down the scheme of Government leaving it to the helpless Government caught in a crisis to make do as best as it may, or throwing the situation open to agitational chaos to find a solution by demonstrations in the streets and worse.
In the instant case unable to stop with merely declaring that the scheme of admission accepted by Government is ultra vice and granting the relief to the petitioner of admission to the medical colleges, the need for controlling its repercussions calls for judicial response.
[991 H 992 A] 12.
An incisive study of the exercise of the writ power in India may reveal that it limits its actions by quashing or nullifying orders proceeding on a violation of law, but stops short of a reconstruction whereby a valid scheme may replace a void project.
This is symptomatic of an obsolescent aspect of the judicial process, its remedial shortcomings in practice and the need to innovate the means, to widen the base and to organise the reliefs so that the Court actualises social justice even as it inhibits injustice.
[978 A B] 13.
This community perspective of the justice system explains why the Court has resorted to certain unusual directions and has shaped the ultimate complex of orders in these proceedings in a self acting package.
Chronic social disability cannot be amenable to instant administrative surgery and law shall not bury its head, ostrich fashion, in the sands of fiction and assume equality where the opposite is the reality.
[978 C, 980 C] 14.
The rule of law runs close to the rule of life and where socieal life, as between one part of the State and another, is the victim of die hard disparties, the constitutional mandate of equal justice under the law responds to it pragmatically and permits classification geared to eventual equalisation.
The writ of this Court binds the parties on record who must abide by the directions issued necessitated by the exigency of the situation and the need to do justice.
[993 D] 16.
The court system belongs to the people and must promote constructive justice; and all institutions, including the Governments and Universities, likewise belong to the people.
This commitment is the whet stone for doing justice in the wider context of social good.
[993 E F] 17.
Leaving the Judgment of the High Court in the conventional form of merely quashing the formula of admission the remedy would have aggravated the malady, confusion, agitation, paralysis.
The root of the grievance and the fruit of the writ are not individual but collective and while the "adversary system" makes the Judge a mere umpire, traditionally speaking, the community orientation of the judicual function, so desirable in the Third World remedial juris 977 prudence, transforms the courts ' power into affirmative structuring of redress so as to make it personally meaningful and socially relevant.
Frustration of invalidity is part of the judicial duty; fulfilment of legality is complementary.
This principle of affirmative action is within the court 's jurisdiction under Art 136 and article 32 and the present cases deserve its exercise.
Decisional guidelines given.[994 B F]
