In his suit for declaration that he was the Mahant of a Ders, the plaintiff (respondent) claimed that the late Mahant who had previously executed the power of attorney in favour of the defendant (appellant) cancelled it and summoned the General Assembly of the Udasi Bhekh which was attended by other Mahants of the Udasi Bhekh and tendered his resignation on the ground of old age and ill health, that the late Mahant treated him as Sadaq Chela and that he made him a Mahant by applying Tilak and performing the Pagri ceremony at the Udasi Bhekh.
The defendant on the other hand claimed that it was he who was the chela of the late Mahant who, before his passing away executed two wills appointing him as the successor to the gaddi and that the proceedings making the plaintiff as Mahant were the result of fraud and undue influence exercised by the plaintiff over the late Mahant.
Decreeing the suit the Subordinate Judge held that neither party referred to any particular usage or custom of appointing a Mahant, that upto 1948 the practice was for the Ruler of the erstwhile State of Nabha to appoint a Mahant, but that in this case the plaintiff was duly and validly installed as the Mahant in the presence of and with the approval of the Udasi Bhekh and that no fraud or undue influence alleged by the defendant was established.
The High Court confirmed all the findings of the trial court.
On further appeal to this Court the defendant (appellant) contended that (1) the late Mahant was coerced into appointing the plaintiff as his successor and (2) the appointment of plaintiff was invalid in that he was not a chela of the late Mahant.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1 (a) On the question whether the late Mahant was subjected to any pressure to appoint the plaintiff as Mahant, both the courts have concurrently found that he was subjected to no such pressure.
There is no reason for interference with a concurrent finding of fact by the two courts below.[1017 A B] (b) The submission that the High Court did not consider the complaint said to have been made by the late Mahant that he had been coerced into appointing the plaintiff as Mahant is without basis.
The High Court did refer to the complaint.
It confirmed the finding of the trial court that the late Mahant who was previously under the influence of the appellant had again come under his influence when he made the complaint.
The presence 1013 of the police at the installation ceremony far from advancing the appellant 's case, destroys the case that the Mahant acted under coercion.
[1017 C D] 2(a) In the matter of succession to the office of Mahant the custom prevalent in various institutions is that in order to entitle a chela to succeed, he must be appointed or nominated by the reigning Mahant during his life time or shortly before his death and this may be done either by a written declaration or some sort of testamentary document.
Even where a Mahant has the power to appoint his successor, it is customary in various Mutts that such appointment should be confirmed or recognised by the members of the religious fraternity to which the late Mahant belonged.
When a Mahant resigns during his life time and installs his successor, on the gaddi the fraternity is made aware of the proposed vacancy in the office and is given an opportunity of confirming or refusing to confirm the nominee.
[1016 D, E, G] In the instant case the document executed by the late Mahant on the date of the installation of the plaintiff as Mahant was attested by all the visiting Mahants of the Udasi Bhekh who assembled at the Dera.
The plaintiff was described as Sedaq Chela of the late Mahant.
This document showed that the late Mahant accepted the plaintiff as chela and appointed him as his successor.
[1017 E 1018 A] (b) The Subordinate Judge found that none of the three earlier Mahants of the Dera who succeeded to the gaddi was a chela of each of his predecessors.
[1018 B] Mahant Satnam Singh vs Bawan Bhagwan Singh, AIR 1938 PC 216; referred to.
Mukherjea 's Hindu Law of Religious & Charitable Trusts (Third Edition) referred to.
