The appellant who was charged with an offence under section 5(2) read with s.5(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act was acquitted by the Special Judge.
But the High Court on appeal by the State, reversed the judgment of he Special Judge and convicted him.
In appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that there was no evidence to show on what materials the sanctioning authority applied its mind before granting the sanction under s.6 of the Act.
The entire proceedings are void ab initio.
Allowing the appeal.
^ HELD: 1 (a).
The prosecution of the appellant was without valid sanction and, therefore, cognizance taken by the Special Judge was without jurisdiction.
[1011 G] (b) Any case instituted without proper sanction must fail because this being a manifest defect in the prosecution, the entire proceedings are rendered void ab initio.
It is incumbent on the prosecution to prove that a valid sanction had been granted by the sanctioning authority after it was satisfied that a case had been made out constituting the offence.
This should be done in two ways: either (i) by producing the original sanction which itself contains the facts constituting the offence and the grounds of sutisfaction or (ii) by adducing evidence aliunde showing the facts placed before the authority and the satisfaction arrived at by it.
[1010 B D] In the present case no evidence, either primay or secondary, had been led to prove the contents of the note placed before the sanctioning authority nor were the witnesses examined in a position to state the contents of the note.
The grant of sanction is not an idle formality but a solemn and sacrosanct act which affords protection to government servanats against frivolous prosecutions and must therefore be strictly complied with before any prosecution could be launched against public servants.
[1010G] (b) There is no force in the argument of the State that the Court should presume the facts on the basis of evidence given by one of the witnesses and the order implementing the sanction mentioning those facts.
What the Court 1008 has to see is whether or not the sanctioning authority at the time of giving the sanction was aware of the facts constituting the offence and applied its mind for the same.
Any subsequent fact coming into existence after the resolution had been passed is wholly irrelevant.
[1010 F] (c) There is equally no force in the State 's contention that even if no facts were mentioned in the resolution it must be presumed that the sanctioning authority was satisfied that the accused had received a bribe.
There is no question of a presumption being available .o the sactioning authority because at that stage the occasion for drawing a presumption never arises since there is no case in the Court.
[1011 B] (d) The presumption does not arise automatically but only on proof of certain circumstances that is to say, where it is proved by evidence in Court that the money said to have been paid to the accused was actually recovered from his possession.
It is only then that the Court may presume the amount received would be deemed to be an illegal gratification.
The question of sanction arises before the proceedings come to the Court and the question of drawing a presumption does not arise at this stage.
[1011 C] (e) The prosecution cannot be given a chance to produce any material before the court at the appellate stage to satisfy that the sanctioninf authority had duly applied its mind before giving the sanction.
The prosecution had been afforded a full and complete opportunity at the trial stage to produce whatever material it liked and it had chosen to examine two witnesses; but for reasons best known to it, it did not produce the note which formed the subject matter of resolution of the sanctioning authority.
[1011 E] (f) In a criminal case this Court would not ordinarily direct fresh evidence to fill up a lacuna deliberately left by the prosecution.
The liberty of the subject was in jeopardy and it cannot be allowed to put in jeopardy again at the instance of the prosecution which failed to avail of the opportunity afforded to it.
[1011 J]
