The appellant was put up for trial under section 420 of the Indian Penal Code and section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act of 1947 for obtaining a total sum of Rs. 23 12 0 from the Government as T.A., being second class railway fares for two journeys, one from Ajmer to Abu Road and the other from Ajmer to Reengus, without having actually paid the said fares.
The prosecution proved from the railway books and registers that no such second class tickets were issued at Ajmer on the relevant dates and the same witness who proved this also proved that tickets were not always issued and the passengers could pay the fare in the train and if the second class was fully booked, no further tickets were issued till the train arrived,in which case passengers sometimes bought third class or inter class tickets and thereafter paid the difference to the guard of the train, if they could find second class accommodation on the arrival of the train.
There was no proof that one or other of those courses were not followed by the appellant and the prosecution instead of proving the absence of any such payments, in the same way as it had proved the non issue of second class tickets, relied on Illustration (b) to section 106 of the Evidence Act and contended that it was for the appellant to prove that he had actually paid the second class fares.
200 Held, that Illustration (b) to section 106 of the Evidence Act had no application, the evidence adduced by the prosecution did not warrant a conviction and the accused should, having regard to the long lapse of time, be acquitted.
That section 106 of the Evidence Act does not abrogate the well established rule of criminal law that except in very exceptional classes of cases the burden that lies on the prosecution to prove its case never shifts and s, 106 is not intended to relieve the prosecution of that burden. ' On the contrary, it seeks to meet certain exceptional cases where it is impossible, or disproportionately difficult, for the prosecution to establish facts which are especially within the knowledge of the accused and which can be proved by him without difficulty or inconvenience.
But when knowledge of such facts is equally available to the prosecution if it chooses to exercise due diligence, they cannot be said to be especially within the knowledge of the accused and the section cannot apply.
Attygalle vs Emperor, (A.I.R. and Seneviratne vs
B., ([1936] 3 All E.R. 36), referred to.
That illustrations to a section do not exhaust its full content even as they cannot curtail or expand its ambit, and in applying section 106 the balance of convenience, the comparative labour involved in finding out and proving the facts and the ease with which the accused can prove them must be taken into consideration.
That cases coming under sections 112 and 113 of the Indian Railways Act to which Illustration (b) to section
106 has obvious application stand on a different footing.
