Plaintiffs and defendants were descendants of a common ancestor who was the founder of a trust.
Defendant No. 1, at the relevant time, was the managing trustee of the trust.
On partition and sale of family properties a house, which was the suit property, was purchased for the trust.
Soon thereafter defendant No. 1 sold it to his son.
Before the sale, however, the tenant of the house who was a man of substance, offered a much higher price than what was paid by the son but the defendant sold it to his son.
In the plaintiffs ' suit challenging sale of the trust property to the managing trustee 's son for a lesser consideration the defendant claimed that the property had to be sold because his son who was the owner of adjacent property raised a dispute claiming easementary rights over the property.
The suit was decreed by the trial court but on appeal the High Court held that the consideration was adequate and fair, that the sale was bona fide and that no ulterior motive could be attributed to the defendant no 1 in the sale.
The High Court, therefore, dismissed the suit.
Allowing appeal, ^ HELD: (a) The sale had to be viewed with suspicion The High Court committed an error of law in ignoring important aspects of law which had direct bearing on the controversy before it.
[1181A] (b) It is well recognised that a person in a fiduciary position like a trustee is not entitled to make a profit for himself or a member of his family.
He is not allowed to put himself in a position in which a conflict may arise between his duty as a trustee and his personal interest.
[1180E] (c) The control of the trustee 's discretionary power prescribed by section 49 of the Trusts Act and the prohibition contained in section 51 that the trustee may not use or deal with the trust property for his own profit or for any other purpose unconnected with the trust and the equally important prohibition in section 52 that the trustee may not directly or indirectly buy the trust property on his own account or as an agent for a third person, cast a heavy responsibility upon him in the matter of discharge of his duties as trustee.
The rule prescribed by these sections cannot be evaded by making a sale in the name of the trustee 's partner or son, for that would, in fact and substance, indirectly benefit the trustee.
[1180F G] (d) Where a trustee makes the sale of a property belonging to the trust, without any compelling reason in favour of his son, without obtaining the 1178 permission of the court concerned, it is the duty of the court to examine whether the trustee has acted reasonably and in good faith or whether he has committed a breach of the trust by benefiting himself from the transaction in an indirect manner.
[1180H] (i) In the instant case defendant No. 1 was the trustee of the property.
It was his duty to be faithful to the trust and execute it with reasonable diligence in the manner in which an ordinary prudent man of business would conduct his own affairs.
He could not occasion any loss to the trust and it was his duty to sell the property, if that was so necessary to sell, to the best advantage of the trust.
[1181D] (ii) The High Court was wrong in blaming the plaintiffs that they had brought the suit on account of personal grouse and spite.
Assuming that they were so actuated, their action was eminently for the advantage of the trust created by their ancestor in which they had a substantial and direct interest.
[1181D] (iii) Defendant No. 1 was not able to explain how the sale was beneficial to the trust.
Income by way of rent which the property was fetching was far more than interest which the sale proceeds fetched when they were invested in fixed deposits in a Bank.
He was therefore unable to explain how he acted as a man of ordinary prudence in slashing down the income of the trust by making the sale.
[1181G] (iv) When defendant No. 1 sold the trust property to his son at a lesser price than was otherwise available, he did not act in accordance with law in the discharge of his fiduciary relationship with the trust.
He sold the property to his son in disregard of his statutory duty which no man of ordinary prudence would have done.
[1182C] (v) Assuming that defendant No. 1 made a gesture of goodwill in favour of the trust when he allowed the sale of the family property to the trust, he could not possibly absolve himself from what he did in selling it off to his son at a lesser price than was offered by another reason.
[1182F] (vi) Assuming that there was some difficulty in respect of rights of easement between the trust and the defendant 's son who was the immediate neighbour of the property, that could have been a lever in the hands of the trustee to make a bargain for higher consideration from his son who was equally interested in the property.
A man of prudence would not have sold his property for a considerably lesser amount than that offered to him by another person and agreed to sell it just because a co sharer was causing trouble and offering a few lesser price.
[1183A B]
