After having fallen out and parted company with his wife Kanchan in the year 1963, the appellant, belonging to Telli community contracted a second marriage prevalent amongst his community with Gopi on 20th March 1969.
A complaint filed by his first wife ended in his conviction under section 494 I.P.C. and sentence of two years R.I. and a fine of Rs. 2,000/ , the conviction and sentence having been upheld by the Rajasthan High Court.
Dismissing the appeal by special leave, the Court, ^ HELD: 1.
The second marriage was a valid marriage according to the custom of the nata marriage prevalent in the Telli community which requires the following two essential ceremonies: (a) that the husband should take a pitcher full of water from the head of the prospective wife, and (b) that the wife should wear chura by the husband.
The prosecution through PWs.
2, 3, 4 and 5 having proved that these ceremonies have been duly performed, that there was such a custom which requires the said ceremonies having been admitted by the defence witnesses 3 and 5 and the validity of the first marriage not having been disputed, Section 494 I.P.C. applies in terms and the appellant must be held to have committed the offence of Bigamy as contemplated by section 494 I.P.C. [1176A E] 2.
The combined effect of section 17 of the Hindu Marriage Act and section 494 I.P.C. is that when a person contracts a second marriage after the coming into force of the said Act while the first marriage is subsisting, such a person commits the offence of bigamy.
[1174 E] Section 17 of the makes it absolutely clear that the provision has to be read in harmony and conjunction with the provisions of section 494 I.P.C., the essential ingredients of which are: (i) that the accused spouse must have contracted the first marriage (ii) that while the first marriage was subsisting the spouse concerned must have contracted a second marriage, and (iii) that both the marriages must be valid in the sense that the necessary 1172 ceremonies required by the personal law governing the parties had been duly performed and (iv) the second marriage must have become void by virtue of the fact that it had taken place in the life time of one of the spouses.
[1173F H] 3.
Where a spouse contracts a second marriage while the first marriage is still subsisting the spouse would be guilty of bigamy under section 494, I.P.C. if it is proved that the second marriage was a valid one in the sense that the necessary ceremonies required by law or by custom have been actually performed.
The voidness of the marriage under section 17 of the is in fact one of the essential ingredients of section 494 because the second marriage will became void only because of the provisions of section 17 of the .
Therefore, the contention that the second marriage being void section 494 I.P.C. will have no application is not correct.
[1175F G] Bhaurao Shankar Lokhande and Anr.
vs State of Maharashtra and Ors., [1965]2 S.C.R. 837; Kanwal Ram and Ors.
vs The Himachal Pradesh Administration, [1966]1 S.C.R. 539 and Priya Bala Ghosh vs Suresh Chandra Ghosh; [1973]3 S.C.R. 961 applied.
[Bigamy being a serious offence for which the maximum punishment is seven years, the Court while maintaining the conviction reduced the sentence to one year.]
