On receipt of information that smuggled gold was stored in it, a large number of senior officials of the Customs Department surrounded the flat belonging to the brother in law of the appellant and started searching it.
According to the prosecution, while the search was on, the appellant was found peeping from outside through the grille forming part of the flat, and started running away, on seeing that the search was being carried on in the flat.
He was chased by the Customs Staff and caught.
Later his confession was recorded.
Along with the appellant several other persons had also been tried for the same offence.
The trial court convicted and sentenced the appellant of an offence under section 120B IPC read with section 135(1)(a) of the Customs Act.
On appeal the High Court found that the charge under section 135(1)(a) and (b) of the Customs Act was not sustainable but holding that the offence under other heads was proved, it upheld the appellant 's conviction and sentence.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant that the confession was the result of an assault on him by the Customs Officials, which not being voluntary was inadmissible in evidence under section 24 of the Evidence Act.
Allowing the appeal.
^ HELD: 1.
(i) It is unsafe to regard the appellant 's confession as voluntary and therefore trustworthy.
The concerned Customs Officials were "persons in authority" within the meaning of that expression used in section 24 of the Evidence Act.
The confession may well have been obtained in a manner which would bring it within the ambit of section 24 of the Evidence Act.
The appellant has been able to prove the existence of circumstances which make it highly probable that his confession is hit by the mandate in section 24.
[1169H 1170A, 1166C] (ii) Although there is no direct evidence that force was used on the appellant to extract a confession the surrounding circumstances prevalent at the relevant time in the Customs House where the statement was recorded indicate that all was not well with the manner in which the interrogation of various accused was being carried on.
They indicate that the Customs Officials did not stick to ethical standards in the performance of their duties and exhibited much zeal in bringing the captives to book and had transgressed the limit set by law.
[1166E, 1169B] (iii) One of the accused in this case was found to have seven injuries on his person.
The stand of that accused that he was coerced into making a confession, received support from the testimony of the doctor who examined 1161 him so that the probability appears to be that the accused received his injuries on the hands of the Customs staff.
In the absence of an explanation of the prosecution as to the situation in which he was beaten, it is reasonable to presume that the stand taken by him was correct and that the injuries were inflicted as a measure of coercion adopted to secure his confession.
Taking these circumstances into consideration, it is unsafe to regard the appellants confession too as voluntary.[1166F, 1168C, 1169G] Besides, the plea that he had been coerced into making the confession was taken at the earliest opportunity i.e. on the day following his release from custody on bail.
[1169D] 2.
Being a close relation of the owner of the flat, the appellant was perhaps sharing the flat with him and so had duplicate set of keys; his brother in law might have given the Bandi found on the appellant not for the purpose of carrying the gold but just for use as an ordinary raiment.
It is also possible that the appellant became nervous, that he thought that he would be implicated in the crime and therefore, might have started running away on seeing the Customs Officers in the house.
Therefore, these factors on which the High Court relied for sustaining his conviction cannot be regarded as incriminating circumstances.
[1165F 1166A]
