The appellant was sentenced to death for the murder of one and also sentenced to seven years rigorous imprisonment for having robbed the murdered man of his goods, It was established by the evidence on the record that the deceased, a shop keeper of village Jarwal had gone to Lucknow to purchase goods for his shop.
On his return journey he got down from the train at about 10 p.m.
He had with him a box, a balti, a gunni bag and a jhola and other things.
He engaged the appellant 's cart to take him and his goods to his village.
Two other persons also got on to the cart.
Neither the deceased, nor the articles which were with him nor the cart reached Jarwal.
In the morning the body of the deceased was found near a bridge in the vicinity of Jarwal.
During investigation on the fourth day after the occurrence the appellant gave the key of his kothri to the police and from the kothri, a dhoti, a box, a balti, a chadar, a gunny bag and a jhola were recovered which were identified as belonging to the deceased.
A big knife was also recovered from the kothri which the appellant disowned but could not explain how it was found in his home.
The appellant on examination before the Sessions Judge under section 342 of the Code of Criminal Procedure stated that the deceased asked him to take his goods 'in the cart at about 10 p.m. when he got down at the Railway Station.
Two other men were also in the cart who got down at the Sugar Mill gate near the Railway Station.
At Raduayan Bridge three men enquired if the deceased was in the cart.
The deceased responded and got down from the cart asking the appellant to halt his cart near Jarwal Bazar Bridge where he waited for the deceased up to 192 4 a.m. but he did not turn up.
Not knowing the house of the deceased he took the dead man 's goods to his own house as his buffaloes were very hungry.
He stated further that he had handed over all the articles of the deceased person to the police which he had locked in the kothri.
Held, that recent and unexplained possession of the stolen property while it would be presumptive evidence against a prisoner on the charge of robbery would similarly be evidence against him on the charge of murder.
All the facts which tell against the appellants especially his conduct indicating consciousness of guilt, point equally to the conclusion that he was guilty as well of the murder as of the robbery.
The Emperor vs Sheikh Neamatulla ([1913] , Queen Empress vs Sami and Another ([1890] I.L.R. 13 Mad. 426), Emperor vs Chintamoni Shahu (A.I.R. , In re Guli Venkataswami (A.I.R. 1950 Mad. 309), and Bamprashad Mukundram Rajput vs The Crown (A.I.R. , referred to.
