The respondents were charged with an offence under section 302, I.P.C. The prosecution case was that on the night of occurrence (which was a moonlight night) the deceased and the prosecution witnesses attended a drama in the Ramlila Grounds of the village and when the deceased, after taking two samosas and tea, was returning home some time past midnight, the respondents shot him dead and that this was seen by them from a distance of 150 yards from the scene of occurrence.
The trial court, believing the prosecution version, convicted the respondents.
On appeal the High Court rejected the prosecution story and acquitted both the respondents.
The State came in appeal to this Court by special leave.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: It is well settled that this Court, in special leave, would not normally interfere with an order of acquittal unless there are cogent reasons for doing so or unless there is a gross violation of any procedure of law which results in serious miscarriage of justice.
[2H] Having regard to the glaring defects in the prosecution story this is not a case in which this Court should interefere with the order of acquittal.
[3B] In the present case, though it was a moon lit night according to the almanac the moon would have covered three fourths distance on the night of occurrence.
Even in the moonlight it would have been difficult for the witnesses to identify the assailants; even if they did, the possibility of mistake in identification could not be completely excluded.
According to an authority, when the moon is at the quarter, it is possible to recognise persons at a distance of from 21 ft; in bright moonlight at from a distance of 23 to 33 ft. and at the very brightest period of the full moon at a distance of from 33 to 36 ft.
In tropical countries the distance for moonlight may be increased.
Therefore, it would not have been possible for the eye witnesses to identify the assailants from a distance of 150 yards.
[3E G] After the assailants had given a call and fired at the deceased the witnesses would not have flashed the torch light, as suggested by the prosecution, and exposed themselves to the risk of being shot at.
Even if the torches were lighted, in view of the distance, it would not have been possible for the witnesses to identify the assailants with certainty.
[4B] Secondly, the medical evidence had shown that the stomach of the deceased was empty and the large intestines too were empty.
Therefore, the evidence 2 of the witnesses that the deceased took two samosas after the drama at midnight and before the attack is completely falsified by medical evidence.
Another prosecution witness stated that the deceased having had stomach ulcers never took any food at night.
Apparently until the deposition of the first witness was complete the prosecution did not realise the gravity of the statement made by him and deliberately introduced a change on a vital issue which by itself is an important circumstance throwing doubt on the prosecution case.
While witnesses may lie, circumstances would never.
Tho evidence of the doctor, based on conclusive evidence cannot be belied.
[4F H]
