Section 10(a) (iii) of the empowers the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission to enquire into any restrictive trade practices upon an application made to it by the Registrar of Restrictive Trade Agreements.
Section 13(2) provides that "any order made by the Commission may be amended or revoked at any time in the manner in which it was made.
" Section 55 provides that any person aggrieved by an order made by the Central Government or the Commission under section 13 or section 37 may prefer an appeal to the Supreme Court on one or more of the grounds specified in section 100, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
On the date on which the Act came into force section 100 C.P.C. specified three grounds on which a second appeal could lie to the High Court one of them being that the decision appealed against was contrary to law.
By an amendment made in 1976 s.100 was substituted by a new section which provides that a second appeal shall lie to the High Court only if the High Court is satisfied that the case involves a substantial question of law.
The appellant, who was a manufacturer of jeep motor vehicles, their spare parts and accessories, submitted for registration to the Registrar of Restrictive Trade Agreements, standard distributorship agreements entered into by it with its distributors.
After registering the agreements, in his application to the Commission, the Registrar alleged that certain clauses in the agreement related to restrictive trade practices and that some of them were prejudicial to public interest.
The appellant, in reply to the Commission 's notice, stated that it did not wish to be heard in the proceedings before the Commission, pointing out at the same time that there was nothing in the impugned clauses of the agreement which could be said to constitute restrictive trade practices the reasons whereof had already been explained in its reply.
1039 The Registrar filed before the Commission an affidavit in support of his application but that too did not contain any further or additional material than what was set out in his application.
No other evidence, oral or documentary, was produced by him before the Commission in support of the allegation that the agreement constituted a restrictive trade practice.
By its order dated May 14, 1976 the Commission declared certain clauses of the appellant 's distributorship agreement to be void.
While correspondence was going on between the Registrar and the appellant on the submission of a revised distributorship agreement, this Court in Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co. Ltd. vs Registrar of Restrictive Trade Practices, ; gave its interpretation on the relevant provisions of the Act.
Thereupon the appellant made an application to the Commission pointing out that it did not contest the enquiry proceedings under section 37 in the first instance because the Commission 's decision in the Telco case was directly applicable; but now that that decision had been reversed by the Supreme Court in appeal, its order dated May 14, 1976 needed amendment/modification.
An application under section 13 (2) read with regulation 85 was accordingly made for revocation, amendment or modification of the Commission 's order of May 14, 1976.
The Commission rejected this application by an order dated 28th February 1978.
In its appeal under section 55 of the Act impugning the Commission 's order dated 28th February 1978 the appellant contended that (1) the Registrar 's application alleging restrictive trade practices did not set out any facts showing how the appellant 's trade practices were restrictive in nature and that the Registrar 's application not having been made in accordance with the law laid down by this Court in Telco case the impugned order of the Commission was liable to be revoked or modified under section 13(2); (2) the order did not give any reasons for its decision and so was vitiated; and (3) the order was a continuing order because it required the appellant not merely to cease but also desist from the restrictive trade practices set out in the order and was, therefore required to be continually justifiable and since it was, contrary to the law laid down in Telco case it was liable to be revoked or amended; in any event the decision of this Court being subsequent to the making of the Commission 's order, there was enough justification for revoking or modifying the order under section 13(2) of the Act.
The respondent, on the other hand, contended that (1) on an application of the rule of interpretation enacted in section 8(1) or the General Clauses Act, reference in section 55 to section 100 C.P.C. must be construed as a reference to the new section 100, C.P.C. and so construed an appeal to the Supreme Court would lie only if the case involved "a substantial question of law" and not otherwise and since in this case no such question was involved, the appeal was not maintainable; (2) section 13(2) could not be used by the appellant as a substitute for section 55; and (3) by reason of its subsequent conduct in acquiescing in the Commission 's order and unconditionally accepting it, the appellant was precluded from raising any contention against its validity in appeal to this Court.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: The appeal is maintainable under section 55 of the Act.
[1064 C] 1(a) On a proper interpretation of section 55 it must be held that the grounds speci 1040 fied in the then existing section 100 CPC were incorporated in section 55 and the substitution of the new section 100 did not affect or restrict the grounds as incorporated in section 55.
In any event, the present appeal raises substantial questions of law, and so is maintainable.
[1064 C] (b) There is a distinction between a mere reference to or citation of one statute in another and an incorporation.
Where there is a mere reference to or citation of one enactment in another without incorporation, section 8(1) of the General Clause Act applies and the repeal and re enactment of the provision referred to or cited has the effect set out in that section and the reference to the provision repealed is required to be construed as reference to the provision as re enacted.
But where a provision of one statute is incorporated in another, the repeal or amendment of the former does not affect the latter.
The effect of incorporation is as if the provision incorporated were written out in the incorporting statute and were part of it.
Once the incorporation is made, the provision incorporated becomes an integral part of the statute in which it is transposed and thereafter there is no need to refer to the statute from which the incorporation is made and any subsequent amendment made in it has no effect on the incorporating statute.
[1060 C G] Collector of Customs, Madras, vs Nathella Sampathu Chetty & Anr., ; ; New Central Jute Mills Co. Ltd. vs The Assistant Collector of Central Excise, Allahabad 63 at 69; Council vs Hindustan Co operative Insurance Society Ltd., 58 I.A. 259, Ramswarup vs Munshi & Ors. ; ; Bolani Ores Ltd. vs State of Orissa, ; ; referred to.
(c) Section 55 is an instance of legislation by incorporation and not legislation by reference.
In enacting section 55 the legislature did not want to confer an unlimited right of appeal but wanted to restrict it.
It found that the grounds set out in the then existing section 100 CPC were appropriate for restricting the right of appeal and hence incorporated them in s.55.
The legislature could never have intended to limit the right of appeal to any ground or grounds which might from time to time find place in section 100 without knowing what those grounds were.
[1063 B D] (d) Secondly, the Act is a self contained code and it is not possible to believe that the legislature could have made the right of appeal under such a code dependent on the viscititudes of a section in another statute.
[1063 F] (e) That apart, an indissoluble link between section 55 and section 100, CPC would lead to a startling result.
If, for example, section 100 were repealed, section 55 would be reduced to futility and the right of appeal under the Act would be wholly gone.
It would be absurd to place on the language of section 55 an interpretation which might in a given situation result in denial of the right of appeal altogether and thus defeat the plain object and purpose of the section.
[1063 H] (f) Even assuming that the right of appeal under s.55 is restricted to the ground specified in the new section 100 CPC the present appeal would still be maintainable because it involves a substantial question of law relating to the interpretation of section 13(2) of the Act.
[1064 D] 1041 (g) The test for determining whether a question of law raised in an appeal is a substantial question of law is to see whether it is of general public importance or whether it directly or substantially affects the rights of parties and if so whether it is an open question in the sense that it is not finally settled by this Court or by the Privy Council or by the Federal Court or is not free from difficulty or call for discussion of alternative views.
[1064 E] Sir Chunilal V. Mehta & Sons Ltd. vs The Century Spinning and Manufacturing Co. Ltd., [1962] Supp.
3 SCR 549; referred to.
In the present case the appeal clearly involves a substantial question of law within the meaning of the Act, because the interpretation of section 13(2) directly and substantially affects the rights of the parties and is not finally settled by this Court.
2(a) The words "in the manner in which it was made ' occurring in section 13(2) have no bearing on the content or the scope and ambit of the power but merely indicate the procedure to be followed by the Commission in amending or revoking an order made by it.
[1064 H] (b) The power conferred under section 13(2) is of the widest amplitude and in this respect it is unlike section 22 of the English Act.
This power is intended to ensure that the order passed is and continues to be in conformity with the requirements of the Act, and the trade practice condemned by the order is really and truly a restrictive trade practices and it must therefore, be construed in a wide sense so as to effectuate the object and purpose of the grant of the power.
[1065 B] (c) The powers under section 13(2) and section 55 are distinct and independent powers and one cannot be read as subject to the other.
The scope and applicability of section 13(2) is not cut down by the provision for appeal under section 55.
It is perhaps because the right of appeal given under section 55 is limited to a question of law that a wide and unfettered power is conferred on the Commission to amend or revoke an order in appropriate cases.
[1066 A] (d) The conferment of such wide and unusual power under section 13(2) was necessary to ensure that an erroneous order is capable of being corrected.
An order made under section 37 or under any other provision of the Act may affect not only the parties before the Commission but also others such as the whole net work of distributors or dealers who were not before the Commission.
It may also affect the entire trade in the product.
There may be some Facts or circumstances having a crucial bearing on the determination of the enquiry which, if taken into account, may result in a different order being made or some fact or circumstance may arise which may expose the invalidity of the order or render it bad.
There may be a material change in the relevant circumstances subsequent to the making of the order.
Therefore, by its very nature.
the order of the Commission is transient or pro tempore and must be liable to be altered or revoked according as there is material change in the relevant economic facts and circumstance.
[1366 B E] (e) But howsoever large may be the power under section 13(2), it cannot be construed to be so wide as to permit a rehearing on the same material without anything more with a view to showing that the order was wrong on facts.
[1067] 1042 (f) When Regulation 85 says that the provisions of section 114 and O. XLVII, r. 1 CPC shall as far as may, be applied to the proceedings under section 13(2) it cannot be read to mean that an application under section 13(2) can be maintained only on the grounds set out in section 114 and O. XLVII r. 1.
This regulation does not in any manner limit the width and amplitude of the power under section 13(2).
A good part of it is procedural in nature and has nothing to do with the grounds on which an application under section 13(2) may be maintained.
The words "as far as may" occurring in its last part do not indicate that an application under section 13(2) can be maintained only on the grounds set out in section 114 and O. XLVII, r. 1, CPC.
All that they indicate is that the provisions of section 114 and O. XLVII, r. 1 are to be invoked only to the extent applicable, and if in a given case they are not applicable they may be ignored; but that does not mean that the power conferred under section 13 (2) would not be exercisable in such a case.
The reference to the provisions of section 114 and O. XLVII, r. 1 does not limit the grounds on which an application may be made under section 13(2).
Clearly, therefore, even if a case does not fall within section 114 and O. XLVII, r. 1, the Commission would have power in an appropriate case to amend or revoke an order made by it in the exercise of its power under section 13(2).
[1067 E H] 3(a) The power of the Commission under section 13(2) was exercisable in the present case and the order dated 14th May 1976 was liable to be revoked.
[1077 B] (b) The submission of the distributorship agreement for registration under section 33 cannot be construed as admission on the appellant 's part that the clauses in the agreement constituted restrictive trade practices.
The appellant had possibly submitted the agreement for registration on the erroneous view (which was also the view of the Commission in the Telco case) that the moment an agreement contains a trade practice falling within any of the clauses of section 33(1) the trade practice must, irrespective of whether it falls within the definition of section 2(o) or not, be regarded as a restrictive trade practice and the agreement must be registered.
The question whether a particular trade practice is restrictive or not is essentially a question of law based on the application of the definition in section 2(o) to the facts of a given case and no admission on a question of law can ever be used, in evidence against the make of the admission.
Therefore, even assuming that there was an admission in submitting the agreement for registration it could not be used as evidence against the appellant in the enquiry under section 37.
[1075 C G] (c) There was nothing in the conduct of the appellant which would amount to acquiescence or raise an estoppel against it.
The appellant did not at any time, accept the impugned order knowing that it was erroneous.
There can be no acquiescence without knowledge of the right to repudiate or challenge.
[1068 H] (d) Neither did the failure of the appellant to prefer an appeal amount to acquiescence on its part because an application under section 13(2), which is An alternative and a more effective remedy, was available to it.
[1069 G] (e) The fact that the appellant did not implement the impugned order by entering into revised distributorship agreements with its distributors also showed that there was no acquiescence on its part so far as the order dated 14th May 1976 was concerned.
[1070 C] 1043 (f) Estoppel can arise only if a party to a proceeding had altered his position on the faith of a representation or promise made by another.
In the instant case there is nothing to show that the Registrar had altered his position on the basis of the application for extension of time made by the appellant.
[1107 D] 4(a).
The order of the Commission was bad because it was based on no material and, could not possibly have been made by the Commission.
[1076 A B] (b) The definition of restrictive trade practice in the Act is, to some extent, based on the rule of reason evolved by American courts while interpreting a similar provision in the Sherman Act.
The rule of reason normally requires ascertainment of facts or features peculiar to the particular business, its condition before and after the restraint was imposed, the nature of the restraint and its effect, actual or probable, the history of the restraint and the evil believed to exist, the reason for adopting the particular restraint and the purpose sought to be attained.
It is only on a consideration of these factors that it can be decided whether a particular act, contract or agreement imposing the restraint is unduly restrictive of competition so as to constitute restraint of trade.
Certain restraint of trade are unreasonable per se because of their pernicious effect on competition and lack of any redeeming virtue; they are conclusively presumed to be unreasonable and, therefore, illegal without elaborate enquiry as to the precise harm they have caused or the business execuse for their use.
In such cases illegality does not depend on a showing of the unreasonableness of the practice and it is unnecessary to have a trial to show the nature, extent and degree of its market effect.
[1074 A, B; 1075 A B] (c) It is now settled law that every trade practice which is in restraint of trade is not necessarily restrictive trade practice.
If a trade practice merely regulates and thereby promotes competition it would not fall within the definition even if it is to some extent in restraint of trade.
Therefore, the question whether a trade practice is a restrictive trade practice or not has the decided not on any theoretical or a priori reasoning.
but by inquirie whether it has or may have the effect of preventing distorting or restricting competition.
The peculiar facts and features of the trade would be very much relevant in determining this question.
[1072 H] (d) In the Telco case this Court laid down that an application by the Registrar under section 10(a) (iii) must contain facts which in his opinion constitute restrictive trade practice and show or establish as to how the alleged clauses constitute restrictive trade practice in the context of the facts.
But even if the application does not set out any facts or features showing how the trade practices complained of by the Registrar are restrictive practices, the Registrar can still, at the hearing of the enquiry, in the absence of any demand for particulars being made by the opposite party produce material before the Commission disclosing facts or features which go to establish the restrictive nature of the trade practice complained of and if that is done, the defect in the application would not be of much consequence.
[1070 G H] In the instant case the burden of producing the necessary material that the impugned trade practices had the actual or probable effect of diminishing or destroying competition and were therefore restrictive trade practices was on the Registrar who made on application before the Commission.
No material 1044 beyond reproducing the impugned clauses of the agreement and the words of the relevant sections having been produced, the application of the Registrar was contrary to the law laid down by this Court.
Therefore, the Commission had no basis for making its order dated 14th May 1976.
(e) The argument that the trade practices referred to in the offending clauses were per se restrictive trade practices and in any event, even if any supporting material was necessary, it was to be found in the admission of the appellant contained in its letter submitting the distributorship agreement for registration was without any force.
When the issue before the court is whether a practice trade practice set out in an agreement has or may have the effect of preventing, distorting or restricting competition so as to constitute a restrictive trade practice, it is the actual or probable effect of the trade practice which has to be judged and there is no question of contradicting, varying, adding to or substracting from the terms of the agreement by admitting extraneous evidence.
The various factors stated earlier are required to be taken into account only for the purpose of determining the actual or probable effect of the trade practice referred to in the particular clause.
In such a case it is not right to shut out oral evidence to determine the actual or probable effect of the trade practice.
[1078 D E] (b) It is not section 33(1) which invalidates a clause in an agreement relating to a trade practice but it is the restrictive nature of the trade practice as set out in section 2(o) which makes it void.
[1079 E] (c) When a question of restrictive trade practice arises in relation to a clause in an agreement it is the trade practice in the clause that has to be examined for determining its actual or probable effect on competition.
A clause in an agreement may proprio vigore impose a restraint.
Where such restraint produces or is reasonably likely to produce the prohibited statutory effect it would clearly constitute a restrictive trade practice and the clause would be bad.
[1108 D E] Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co. Ltd., Bombay,, vs The Registrar of the Restrictive Trade Agreement New Delhi, ; , applied.
Observations in Hindustan Lever Ltd. vs M.R.T.P. ; ; disapproved.
(d) In a case where a clause in agreement does not by itself impose any restraint but empowers the manufacturer or supplier to take some action which may be restrictive of competition, the mere possibility of action being taken, which may be restrictive of competition, would not in all cases affect the legality of the clause.
What is required to be considered for determining the legality of the clause is whether there is a real probability that the presence of the clause itself would be likely to restrict competition.
This is basically a question of market effect and cannot be determined by adopting a doctrainaire approach.
Each case would have to be examined on its own facts from a business and commonsense point of view.
It cannot, therefore, be said that in every case where the clause is theoretically capable of being so utilised as to unjustifiably restrict competition it would constitute a restrictive trade practice.
[1081 E H] 1045 6(a).
The order dated 14th May 1976 was clearly vitiated by an error of law apparent on the face of the record inasmuch as it contained only the final and operative order without giving any reasons in support of it.
[1083 E] (b) The two conditions precedent before the Commission can pass a cease and desist order are (i) it must be found that the trade practice complained of is a restrictive trade practice and (ii) where such a finding is reached the Commission must be satisfied that none of the "gateways" pleaded in answer to the complaint exists.
[1082 D E] (c) In the instant case the appellant did not appear before the Commission and no 'gateways" were pleaded and therefore the question of the Commission arriving at a satisfaction in regard to "gateways" did not arise.
Nonetheless the Commission was required to be satisfied that the trade practices complained of were restrictive trade practices.
The order dated 14th May 1976 did not contain any discussion showing that the Commission had reached the requisite satisfaction.
It gave merely bald directions without any reasons.
The ex parte character of the order did not absolve the Commission from the obligation to give reasons in support of the order because the appellant would have been entitled to prefer an appeal even against on ex parte order and in the absence of reasons, the appellant would not be in a position to attack the order in appeal.
It is well established that every quasi judicial order must be supported by reasons.
[1082 E H] N.M. Desai vs Textiles Ltd., C.A. 245 of 1970, dec.
On 17th Dec., 1975; Simons Engineering Co. vs Union of India, [1976] Supp.
SCR 489; followed.
