The appellant idol, a juristic person, was exercising the rights, through the Shebait, Mohanta Srimati Dandi Swami, of a Darpatnidar in the land in suit.
By a lease deed (exhibit A), dated July 10, 1941, the appellant granted to the respondents a lease of the suit land for the purpose of raising and taking sand out of the land for a period of nine years ending on July 13, 1949.
Subsequently, on April 27, 1950, the appellant made a similar grant (exhibit I) for another nine years expiring on April 13, 1959, but this grant was called "licence".
The respondents did not pay the licence fee for the period 1362 (14 4 1955) to 1365 B.S.
The appellant thereupon issued notice dated March 31, 1966, terminating the 'licence ' and then filed a suit No. 37 of 1960 for ejectment of the respondent in the Court of the Munsiff, Chandernagore.
The trial court having dismissed the suit, the appellant filed a first appeal which was allowed.
In second appeal the High Court restored the decree of the trial court.
In appeal by special leave to this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellant: (a) The transaction evidenced by the document (exhibit I) dated April 277 1950 was a 'license ' for taking away sand and not a 'lease ' of immovable property.
Therefore, the appellant intermediary will be considered to be in Khas possession of the holding on the date of vesting (April 1, 1955) through the licensee and as such.
entitled to retain it under Section 6 of the Bengal Estates Acquisition Act.
1953; (b) Section 28 of the Bengal Estates Acquisition Act, 1953 is not applicable because there was no 'mine ' in the suit land, as defined in the Central Act 67 of 1957; the sand deposits naturally exist on the surface and not below it and mere collection and removal of the sand from the surface did not constitute mining operations.
therefore, it could not be said that the suit land was comprised in a mine or appertained to a mine within the meaning of the said Section 28; (c) Even if the land was a 'mine ' or appertained to a mine, the mine was being worked by the appellant through a licensee, and as such, was being 19 'directly worked ' by the appellant intermediary within the contemplation of Section 28 of the Bengal Estates Acquisition Act, and therefore, the land would be deemed to have been leased to the appellant by the Government.
Rejecting these contentions, and dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: A.
In ascertaining whether a document evidences a 'lease ' or a 'licence ', regard must be had to the substance of the transaction and not merely the words or the form in which it is dressed.
[26F] .
The document (exhibit I the Agreement), in the instant case reveals the following characteristics.
which show that in fact and substance, it is a 'lease" and not a 'licence ': [27E, 32C] (i) A right to "raise ' and "take out" and remove sand "lying inside" the land in dispute was granted by the plaintiff to the defendant.
The words "raise" and "take out sand" from "inside" the land are wide enough to include not only the "right to carry out all the operations" necessary for extracting sand, but also to take it away and appropriate it.
Construed in the context of the document as a whole, these words put it beyond doubt that right to carry out "mining operations" [within the definition in Cl.
(d) of section 3 of the Central Act 67 of 1957] for winning sand and to appropriate it, were granted.
[27F G] (ii) The rights were granted for a period of 9 years, commencing from April 27.
[27H] (iii) These rights were granted for a "price" fixed on yearly basis, irrespective of the quantity of sand extracted.
The "price" fixed is Rs. 66/ per annum.
This consideration is payable in the month of Chaitra every year.
In case of default, the First Party (grantee) shall not be entitled "to raise the sand next year" and the Second Party (grantor) shall have a right to recover the arrears of rent together, with interest at 12% by bringing a suit against the First Party.
[28A B] (iv) "The Second Party will be entitled to take Khas possession of land" "at the end of the stipulated period.
This condition, (contained in paragraph 4 of exhibit 1) read along with the other parts of the document necessarily implies that if the First Party continues to pay the "price", as stipulated, (a) he shall be entitled to enter into and remain in exclusive khas possession of the land for the purpose of carrying out the mining operations for the full stipulated period of 9 years and (b) the Second Party (plaintiff) will not be entitled to retake khas possession of the land and revoke the so called "licence" before the end of the said period of 9 years.
[28B D] The term "lease" occurring in the definition of "mining lease" given in cl.
(c) of section 3 of the Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act is not used in the narrow technical sense in which it is defined in section 105 of the .
A mining lease may not meticulously and strictly satisfy in all cases, all the characteristics of a "lease" as defined in the .
Nevertheless, in the accepted legal sense, it has always been regarded as a lease in this country.
[29E G] In the instant case the transaction evidenced by exhibit I not only falls within the definition of a mining lease under Act, 67 of 1957, but also partakes of 20 all the essential characteristics of a "lease" defined in section 105 of the .
[30 A B] Balakrishna Pal vs Jagannath Marwari, ILR ; approved Raj Kumar Thakur Girdhari Singh vs Megh Lal Pandey LR 44 I.A. 246; Gowan vs Christie, ; differed.
The negative definition of "immovable property" given in section 3, Para 1 of the , is not exhaustive.
Therefore, applying the definition given in section 3(26) of the General Clauses Act (X of 1897) to the expression used in the , except as modified by the definition in the first clause of section 3 every interest in immovable property or a benefit arising out of land, will be 'immovable property ' for the purpose of section 105, .
[30E G] A right to carry on mining operations in land to extract a specified mineral and to remove and appropriate that mineral, is a right to enjoy immovable property within the meaning of section 105, more so, when it is coupled with a right to be in its exclusive khas possession for a specified period.
The right to enjoy immovable property spoken of in section 105, means the right to enjoy the property in the manner in which that property can be enjoyed.
If the subject matter of the lease is mineral land or a sand mine, it can be enjoyed and occupied by the lessee by working it as indicated in section 108 of the which regulates the rights and liabilities, of lessors and lessees of immovable property, [30G H, 31A] Nageshwar Bux Roy vs Bengal Coal Company, [1930] LR 58 IA 29; applied.
H. V. Low & Co. Ltd. vs Joyti Prasad Singh Deo, Cal. 699; LR 58 IA 392.
differed from.
Commissioner of Income Tax, Bihar and Orissa vs Kumar Kanakhaya Narain Singh, ILR (XX) Patna 13; approved.
The true character of the transaction evidenced by the document (exhibit 1) being that of a 'lease ' and not a 'licence, ' Section 6(1)(i) of the West Bengal Estates Acquisition Act, 1953 will not cover the appellant 's case and give him a right to retain the land in dispute, even if section 28 of that Act was out of the way.
[32C D.] B.
The definition of "mining operations" and "mine", in the Central Act 67 of 1957 are very wide.
The expression "winning of mineral" in the definition of "mining operations is spacious enough to comprehend every activity by which the mineral is extracted or obtained from the earth, irrespective of whether such activity is carried out on the surface or in the bowels of the earth.
Mines and minerals need not always be sub soil and there can be minerals on the surface of the earth.
[24G] B. Dass vs State of U.P. ; , reiterated.
It is true that in the definition of "mine", the term "excavation" in the ordinary dictionary sense means "hole", "hollow" or "cavity made by digging out".
But the word "any" prefixed to "excavation" in the context of the phrase "for the purpose of searching for or obtaining mineral" gives it a 21 much more extensive connotation, so that every "excavation", be it in the shape of an open cast cavity or a sub terranean tunnelling, will fall within the definition of 'mining operations '.
The essence of 'mining operations ' is that it must be an activity for winning a mineral, whether on the surface or beneath the surface of the earth.
[24H, 25A B] In tho instant case, the land in dispute has large deposits of sand, which is a minor mineral.
The sand was admittedly being excavated and removed by the respondent lessee.
The land was, thus, at the date of vesting, "com prised in or appertained to a 'mine ' within the meaning of section 28 of the West Bengal Estates Acquisition Act, 1953.
[25B C] C.
The phrase "being directly worked by him" in section 28 of the West Bengal Estates Acquisition Act, 1953, will not take in a case where the mine was being worked through a lessee or licensee to whom the right to conduct mining operations and to take away the mineral had been granted by the intermediary in consideration of receiving a periodic rent, royalty or a like amount.
[25E F] The word "directly" means "in a direct way, without a person or thing coming between", immediately as directly responsible.
The use of the expression "directly" in the context of the word "worked", followed by the words "by him" unmistakably shows that the legislative intent was to allow only those intermediaries to retain land comprised in or appertaining to a mine, as lessees under the State, who immediately before the date of vesting, were working the mine under their immediate control, management and supervision.
[25C E] Section 28 of the West Bengal Estates Acquisition Act, 1953 denies the right to retain the land comprised in a mine or appertaining to a mine, if, at the material date, it was not being directly worked by the intermediary but through a licensee, or other agency to whom the right to conduct mining operations had been granted by the intermediary.
In that respect, the provisions of s.28 are contrary to those of section 6(1)(i), which give to an intermediary a right to retain land held by him in khas for the purpose mentioned therein through a licensee.
In this situation, according to the legislative mandate in section 27, the provisions of section 6(1) (i) must yield to those in section 28.
[26 B C] Thus, even on the assumption that the respondent was at the material date, holding the land in Khas through a licensee and fulfilling all other conditions which entitled him to retain under section 6 (1) (i), then also, the case being in conflict with section 28, the latter section would prevail over the former.
[26D & 32E]
