The plaintiff 's (respondent 's) father and the defendants (appellants) were entitled to receive a defined share in the offerings made at a holy shrine.
On her father 's death the plaintiff claimed his share in the offerings alleging that both under the law of inheritance and by virtue of her father 's will executed in her favour, she was entitled to his share; but the defendants interfered with her right to collect that share.
In the plaintiff 's suit the defendants contended that only members belonging to four specified sub castes were entitled to receive the offerings and the plaintiff having lost her sub caste by reason of her marriage outside those sub castes she was not entitled to her father 's share.
But this argument was rejected by the trial court which held that on the death of the baridar (turnholder) his heirs inherited his right to receive offerings just as they inherited his other property and that therefore, the plaintiff was entitled to the offerings both under the Hindu Succession Act and the will executed by her father.
On appeal a Division Bench of the High Court held that where offerings were received by persons independently of any obligation to render services, they were alienable and attachable and that the custom which restricted the right to a share in the offerings only to members of the four specified subcastes, could not be given effect to in view of the provisions of the Hindu Succession Act and that therefore, the plaintiff was entitled to succeed to the right though she did not belong to any of the sub castes.
On further appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that (1) the right of the baridar was not a transferable right and (2) the right to a share in the offerings and the duties attached to it must be regarded as an office like that of a shebait and cannot be regarded as heritable property.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: The right of the baridar was a transferable right.
To begin with, the right to a share in the offerings, according to the settlement record prepared for the village and a resolution passed by the Dharmarth Committee, was restricted to the four sub castes, and similarly the baridars did not perform any duties in return.
Sometime later, however, certain obligations, such as to provide permanent servants, to look after visitors and the like, were superimposed on that right.
Though the right to receive a share in the offerings was subject to the performance of those duties none of them 210 was in nature priestly or required a personal qualification.
All of them were of a non religious or secular character which could be performed by the baridar 's agents or servants incurring expense on his account.
When the right to receive the offerings made at a temple is independent of an obligation to render services involving qualifications of personal nature, (such as officiating the worship) such a right is heritable as well as alienable.
[217 B H] Balmukand & ors.
vs Tula Ram & ors., AIR 1928 All. 721 approved.
(a) The right of the baridars cannot be equated with the right and duties of a shebait.
The baridars were not managers of the shrine in the sense that a shebait is in relation to a temple in his charge.
The overall management of the temple vested in the Board of Trustees known as Dharmarth Committee.
[218 E] (b) It is not correct to say that shebaitship is neither more nor less than an office and is not heritable property.
Shebaitship cannot be described as a mere office.
In addition to certain responsibilities it carries with it a definite right to property.
It is well established that in the concept of Shebait, both the elements of office and property, duties and personal interest are mixed up and one element cannot be detached from the other.
Old texts as courts have recognised heriditary office of shebaitship as immovable property.
A B] Angurbala Mullick vs Debabrata Mullick, ; Ram Rattan vs Bajrang Lal & ors. ; followed.
The right to share the offerings being a right coupled with duties other than those involving personal qualifications and being heritable property, it will descend in accordance with the dictates of the Hindu Succession Act in supersession of all customs to the contrary in view of section 4 of that Act.
[220 H] In the instant case, in the light of section 4 of the Hindu Succession Act the requirement that the right could not be exercised by a person not belonging to any of the four sub castes becomes ineffective.
[220 H]
