Rule 60 of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Rules, 1955 defines "emulsifying agents" and "stabilising agents" to mean substances which, when added to food, are capable of facilitating a uniform dispersion of oils and fats in acqueous media or vice versa and/or stabilising such emulsions.
One of the agents mentioned, among others, in the rule is brominated vegetable oils.
Rules 61 declares that no emulsifying or stabilising agents shall be used in any food except where they are used as specifically permitted.
The proviso to the rule states that certain emulsifying or stabilising agents including brominated vegetable oils shall not be used in milk and cream.
A food inspector visited an Ice cream factory and collected a sample of chocolate ice cream.
In the inventory of the sample prepared by him it was stated that "this is prepared of covering chocolate, vegetable ghee and ice cream".
The Public Analyst, to whom the sample was sent for analysis, stated that the sample was adulterated "as the butyro refractometer reading at 40 degree C was found 6.4 in excess and the Baudouin test was found positive of the extracted fat.
" The factory, its owner and the employee who sold the ice cream, were prosecuted under the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act.
The trial court acquitted the factory but convicted and sentenced both its owner and the employee.
On appeal the Additional Sessions Judge acquitted both the accused.
On further appeal the High Court acquitted the factory owner but convicted the employee (appellant before this Court).
The High Court pointed out that vegetable ghee could not be made to serve as an emulsifying agent because r. 61 forbids addition of brominated vegetable oil to milk or cream and without milk and/or cream manufacture of ice cream was inconceivable and that the appellant 's stand had been that vegetable ghee had been used and not that any brominated vegetable oil got into the ice cream by way of an emulsifying or stabilising agent.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1 (a) The sample of ice cream obtained from the appellant was not shown to have been adulterated within the meaning of the Act and the Rules.
[316 D] (b) The prohibition contained in the proviso to r. 61 does not apply to ice cream, kulfi and chocolate ice cream covered by sub item A.11.02.08, wherein it is clearly stated that these three milk products may contain permitted stabi 314 lisers and emulsifiers not exceeding 0.5 per cent by weight.
Clearly, therefore, brominated vegetable oils could have formed a part of the chocolate ice cream to the extent of 0.5 per cent by weight, without the article being treated as adulterated under the rules.
What the proviso to r. 61 prohibits is the use of certain emulsifying and stabilising agents only in milk and one of its products, namely, cream and not in other milk products such a malai, dahi, cheese, ice cream and chocolate ice cream.
Had the intention of the rule been to prohibit the use of the said agents in all milk products, the expression would have been "shall not be used in milk and milk products" and not "shall not be used in milk and cream".
[318 C E] 2.
It was for the prosecution to prove affirmatively that the sample contained an ingredient which made it adulterated and any stand taken by the accused could hardly be used as evidence, unless its truth was otherwise established.
The prosecution had completely failed to prove that the ingredient objected to by it was a substance other than a brominated vegetable oil or that if it was oil of that description, its quantity was in excess of 0.5% by weight.
The analyst 's report did not indicate the presence in the sample of brominated vegetable oil beyond the prescribed maximum of 0.5% by weight or of unbrominated vegetable, oils.
[318G H]
