As per the decree in a partition suit dated August, 18, 1909 Motabhai and two sons of Mohanbhai being two predecessors in interest of the plaintiffs respondents were burdened with the responsibility of paying an yearly maintenance allowance of Rs. 42/ to Bai Vajia appellant on Magsher Sud 2 of every year.
The decree further provided that in the event of default in payment of such allowance continuing for a period of a month after the due date, Bai Vajia would be entitled to take possession of the land allotted to them under the decree viz. Survey Nos. 31, 403, 591, 611, 288 and 659/3 in lieu of the maintenance awarded to her and would enjoy the income thereof without however being competent to sell, mortgage, bequeath, gift or otherwise transfer the same.
The decree declared that any alienation made by Bai Vajia in contravention of the direction given by the decree in that behalf would be void.
By clause 8 of the decree Motabhai and sons of Mohanbhai were also deprived of the right of alienation of the land during the lifetime of Bai Vajia.
Default having been made in the payment of maintenance to her according to the terms of the decree, the appellant, took out execution and obtained possession of the lands in question, which she continued to enjoy till October 21, 1963 when she made a sale of Survey No. 31 in favour of one D. P. Desai.
The sale was challenged by the plaintiffs in Civil Suit No. 110/66 which was decreed by the trial Court.
The District Court in first appeal confirmed it and the High Court in second appeal upheld the decree of Bai Vajia.
Allowing the appeal of the Legal Representative by special leave.
the Court.
^ HELD: 1.
A combined reading of sub sections (1) and (2) of Section 14 of the and the Explanation following sub section (1) makes it clear, that sub section (2) does not operate to take property acquired by a Hindu female in lieu of maintenance or arrears of maintenance (which is property specifically included in the enumeration contained in this Explanation) out of the purview of sub section (1).
[311 D E] 2.
For the applicability of sub section (1) of Section 14 two conditions must coexist namely.
(1) the concerned female Hindu must be possessed of property; and 292 (2) such property must be possessed by her as a "limited owner".
If these two conditions are fulfilled, the sub section gives her the right to hold the property as a full owner irrespective of the fact whether she acquired it before or after the commencement of the Act.
[309 D F] The Explanation declares that the property mentioned in sub section (1) includes both movable and immovable property and then proceeds to enumerate the modes of acquisition of various kinds of property which the sub section would embrace.
Two such modes are "in lieu of maintenance or arrears of maintenance", and "any such property held by her as Stridhana" immediately before the commencement of the Act.
It, therefore, follows that the Legislature in its wisdom took pains to specify all kinds of "Stridhana" in the Explanation and declared that the same would form "property" within the meaning of that word as used in sub section (i).
This was done "to achieve a social purpose by bringing about change in the social and economic position of women in Hindu Society".
It was a step in the direction of practical recognition of equality of the sexes and was meant to elevate women from a subservient position in the economic field to a pedestal where they could exercise full powers of enjoyment and disposal of the property held by them as owners, untrammelled by artificial limitations placed on their right of ownership by a society in which the will of the dominant male prevailed to bring about a subjugation of the opposite sex.
It was also a step calculated to ensure uniformity in the law relating to the nature of ownership of 'Stridhana '.
This dual purpose underlying the Explanation must be borne in mind and given effect to when the section is subjected to analysis and interpretation, and sub section (2) is not to be given a meaning which would defeat that purpose and negative the legislative intent, if the language used so warrants.
A D] 3.
It is true that it is only some kind of "limited ownership" that would get enlarged into full ownership and that where no ownership at all vested in the concerned Hindu Female, no question of the applicability of subsection (1) of section 14 of the Act, would arise.
[306 B C] 4.
A plain reading of sub section (1) of section 14 of the Act makes it clear that the concerned Hindu female must have limited ownership in property, which limited ownership would get enlarged by the operation of that sub section.
If it was intended to enlarge any sort of a right which could in no sense be described as ownership, the expression "and not as a limited owners", would not have been used at all and becomes redundant, which is against the well known principle of interpretation of statutes that the Legislature does not employ meaningless language.
[306 H, 307 A] Eramma vs Veerappanna and Ors., ; Mangal Singh and Ors.
vs Srimati Rattno & Anr., ; ; reiterated.
Limited ownership in the concerned Hindu female is thus a sine qua non for the applicability of sub section (1) of section 14 of the Act.
In a case where this condition is fulfilled the Hindu female represents the estate completely and the reversioners of her husband have only a spes succession is i.e. a mere chance of 293 succession which is not a vested interest and a transfer of which is a nullity.
The widow is competent to protect the property from all kinds of trespass and to sue and be sued for all purposes in relation thereto so long as she is alive.
Ownership in the fullest sense is a sum total of all the rights which may possibly flow from title to property, while limited ownership in its very nature must be a bundle of rights constituting in their totality not full ownership but something less.
[308 E H] When a widow holds the property for her enjoyment as long as she lives, nobody is entitled to deprive her of it or to deal with the property in any manner to her detriment.
The property is for the time being beneficially vested in her and she has the occupation, control and usufruct of it to the exclusion of all others.
Such a relationship to property falls squarely within the meaning of the expression "limited owner" as used in sub section (1) of Section 14 of the Act.
[308 H, 309A] 6.
In the instant case: Bai Vajia became a full owner of the land in dispute under the provisions of sub section (1) of section 14 of the Act and that sub section (2) thereof has no application to her case, the land having been given to her as a limited owner and in recognition of her pre existing right against property.
So long as she lived, she was to have full enjoyment of and complete control over the land, barring any right to alienate it.
Such a right was also taken away from Motabhai and two sons of Mohanbhai.
The arrangement meant that whatever rights existed in relation to the land during the life time of Bai Vajia were exercisable by her alone and by nobody else.
Not even the said three persons could deal with the land in any manner whatsoever, and if they did, Bai Vajia had the right to have their acts declared null and void during her life time.
After the land was made over to her she became its owner for life although with a limited right and therefore only as a limited owner.
Under the decree the land vested in Motabhai and sons of Mohanbhai only so long as they were not dispossessed of it at the instance of Bai Vajia in accordance with the terms stated therein.
As soon as Bai Vajia took possession of the land, no rights of any kind whatsoever in relation thereto remained with them and thus they ceased to be the owners for the span of Bai Vajia 's life.
[311 G H, 312 A D] V. Tulasamma and Ors.
vs Sesha Reddy, [1977] 3 S.C.R. 261; discussed in extenso and followed.
