The respondent, who originally belonged to the Madras Ministerial Service, was allotted to the State of Kerala as a lower division clerk on the reorganisation of States.
On the ground that he belonged to a community which was educationally backward the State Government of Madras appointed him as a lower division clerk relaxing the requirements of r. 29 of the Special Rules for Madras Ministerial Service which prescribed minimum general educational qualification for appointment to service under the State Government.
In 1957 the State Government of Kerala issued an order providing that, until common service rules were framed, every officer in the service of the new State of Kerala would be bound by the service rules of Travancore Cochin or Madras, to which he belonged prior to November 1, 1956.
Thereafter in supersession of all earlier rules the Kerala State and Subordinate Service Rules, 1958 were framed.
Rule 1 of the General Rules in Part II stated that the rules in that part shall apply to all State and Subordinate Services and the holders of all posts appointed before or after the date on which those rules came into force.
The Special Rules contemplated by r. 2(16) of Part I had however, not been framed.
Rule 28(b) (ii) of Part II provided that all promotions or appointments by transfer [other than those mentioned in cl.
(i) of this rule] shall be made in accordance with the seniority, subject to the person 's fitness for appointment.
In 1961, persons who did not possess the general minimum educational qualifications but were appointed as lower division clerks, were allowed to sit for a qualifying test for promotion to upper division clerks.
In the gradation list of officiating lower division clerks prepared, the respondent was shown at No. 1 place.
Even so, when two vacancies of upper division clerks occurred, two persons junior to him in the gradation list were promoted ignoring the respondent.
In his writ petition under article 226 of the Constitution the respondent contended that the exemption granted to him removing the bar of educational qualification enured to him for all purposes, and therefore, promotions of two juniors, ignoring r. 28(b)(ii) under which seniority was the basis for promotion, amounted to denial of equal treatment guaranteed under articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
243 A single Judge of the High Court dismissed the petition on the ground that the exemption granted was for the limited purpose of enabling the respondent to be appointed and continued in the post of lower division clerk but that it did not remove the bar of minimum qualification for promotion.
On appeal the division bench reversed the order of the single Judge, and directed the Government to promote him and determine his rank in the cadre of upper division clerks.
On appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that (1) the Special Rules contemplated by r. 2 of Part I read with the State Government 's order of 1957, were the Special Rules contained in the Madras Ministerial Service Rules; (2) even if r. 28(b)(ii) was applicable it was well within the power of the State Government to prescribe a test to judge the fitness of persons who were exempted from the minimum educational qualifications when appointed as lower division clerks and (3) there was a reasonable basis for classifying those persons who did not possess the minimum educational qualification as a category apart from those who possessed such a qualification.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1 (a) The Special Rules, for the purposes of Kerala Rules of 1958, would be as defined in r. 2(16) of Part I.
That definition contemplated that Special Rules would be framed by the Governor but no such rules had been framed.
[248 H] (b) In the matter of promotion as on upper division clerk the respondent was governed by r. 28(b)(ii) in Part II.
[249 A] 2.
It cannot be said that the impugned notification merely "supplemented" or filled up a gap in the statutory rules.
It tended to superimpose or super add by an executive flat on the statutory rules something inconsistent with the same.
If the statutory rules framed by the Governor or any law enacted under article 309 is silent on any particular point, the government can fill up that gap and supplement the rule by issuing administrative instructions not inconstant with the statutory provisions already framed or enacted.
[253 D; 250 C] In the instant case, however, it could not be said that there was a gap in the statutory provisions in the matter of promotion from the cadre of lower division clerks to that of upper division clerks.
3(a) The classification made by the impugned government order was not only unfair and irrational but also, virtually amounted to abandonment of the test of seniority cum fitness provided in r. 28(b)(ii).
[252 G H] (h) By virtue of section 3 of the Kerala Public Services Act, 1968, the 1958 Rules were deemed to have been made under the Act and were continued until superseded by rules made under that Act.
No Special Rules relating to upper division clerks having been made the General Rules in Part II would be applicable to upper division clerks, also.
[250 E] (c) The 1958 Rules superseded all earlier rules.
The General Rules did not provide any minimum general educational qualification for promotion to 244 the cadre of upper division clerks.
There is nothing in r. 28(b)(ii) or elsewhere, which provides that a lower division clerk would be presumed to be unfit for promotion to upper division unless he possessed the minimum general educational qualification or passed the qualifying test.
[250 G H] There is nothing to show that the respondent was considered for promotion but was found unfit.
[251 B] (d)(i) The impugned notification prescribed the qualifying test for promotion, not for all, but only for one category of persons with reference to the manner in which they initially entered service.
The respondent and others like him, appointed as lower division clerks after granting them exemption, had been singled out for this discriminatory treatment.
[251 F] (d)(ii) There is nothing on record to show that the duties discharged by the clerks of the upper division were substantially different from those in the lower division.
[251 G H] (iii) The statutory rule did not warrant the classification made by the impugned order.
It impinged upon the statutory rule inasmuch as it laid down that even if a lower division clerk who entered service as a result of exemption from possessing minimum educational qualification satisfied the criterion of seniority cum fitness prescribed by this rule, he shall not be considered for promotion unless he qualified in the test.
The relevant rule did not provide any minimum general educational qualification for promotion to upper division.
[252 A B] Roshan Lal Tandon vs Union of India, ; ; followed.
State of Jammu & Kashmir vs Triloki Nath Khosa & Ors. ; ; held inapplicable.
Though ordinarily the court would not issue a direction requiring the government to promote an aggrieved employee and thereafter determine his rank in the cadre, in the peculiar facts of this case the respondent satisfied the two fold criterion for promotion laid down in r. 28(b)(ii) and since the existence of both the criteria for promotion were not in dispute the High Court was justified in issuing the direction, it did.
[253 A B; E]
