The power of attorney by which the plaintiff constituted the defendant as his agent, authorised the defendant amongst other things to discharge debts and invest moneys on behalf of the plaintiff.
In the suit filed by the plaintiff, the relief claimed was for directing the defendant to render true and correct accounts of all transactions entered into by him and for amounts received by him on behalf of the plaintiff.
In his written statement the defendant gave details of amounts invested by him in banks and other relevant details.
An issue whether the suit had been properly valued and proper court fee had been paid was answered by the trial court in favour of the plaintiff.
On appeal by the plaintiff, the High Court held that since the plaintiff had quantified the amount payable by the defendant, the suit should have been valued on the basis of amount quantified and that not having been done, the suit had not been properly valued.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: (1) The estimate of the relief as given by the plaintiff was adequate and reasonable and was not an under estimate.
[392C] (2) The High Court was in error in holding that the plaint was clear, that apart from the money which the defendant was liable to pay to him as his agent the plaintiff had quantified the amount payable by the defendant.
The suit was not only for accounting of the amounts received but also for an account of the transactions of the defendant as power of attorney agent.
Had the defendant been able to establish that in the course of his management he had invested moneys according to the power of attorney, he would have properly accounted for his management.
The defendant himself had stated that the suit was for accounting of his management as power of attorney agent.
He pleaded that the moneys had been remitted to the plaintiff by investment or otherwise.
[389H 390B] (3) The amount of the court fee payable in suits for accounts as provided for in section 7(iv)(f) of the Court Fees Act, 1870 is according to the amount at which relief sought is valued in the plaint or memorandum of appeal.
In a suit for accounts it is not possible for the plaintiff to estimate correctly the amount which he may be entitled to because in a suit in which the plaintiff asks for accounting regarding the management by a power of attorney agent he might not know the state of affairs of the defendant 's management and the amount to which he would be entitled to on accounting.
[390G H] 386 (4) Even where section 35 of the Tamil Nadu Court Fees and Suits Valuation Act, 1955 is applicable, it is necessary that the plaintiff should give a fair estimate of the amount for which he seeks relief.
Order VII R. 11 CPC casts a duty on the court to reject a plaint when the relief claimed is under valued.
[391 D E] Chillakuru Chenchurami Reddy vs Kanupuru Chenchurami Reddy, I.L.R. , approved.
(5) Before coming to the conclusion that the suit is under valued the court will have to take into account that in a suit for accounts the plaintiff is not obliged to state the exact amount which would result after taking all the account.
If he cannot estimate the exact amount he can put a tentative valuation upon the suit for accounts which is adequate and reasonable.
The plaintiff cannot arbitrarily and deliberately under value the relief.
All that is required is that there must be a genuine effort on the part of the plaintiff to estimate his relief and the estimate should not be a deliberate under estimation.
[391 H 392 B]
