The original vendor of the lands in dispute sold them to the first vendee.
In the meantime three decrees for pre emption were passed in favour of the pre emptor and against the vendor and his vendees.
After satisfying the conditions imposed in the decrees regarding deposit of certain sums of money the pre emptor sold the lands to the appellants.
In the execution petition filed by the appellants the original vendor as well as the first vendees filed their objections challenging the right of the appellants to execute the decrees on the ground that the right of pre emption being a personal right of the pre emptor, the decrees could not be assigned and that the present appellants being subsequent vendees from the pre emptor were not entitled to execute the decrees granted in his favour.
Rejecting the objections of the first vendees the executing court held that the appellants were entitled to execute the decrees.
On appeal the Additional District Judge held that the pre emptor having complied with the directions contained in the decree his title to the lands was perfected and that the appellants were entitled to recover possession under section 146, CPC.
In execution second appeals of the first vendees the High Court held that the right of pre emption being a personal right, the decree for pre emption would be a personal decree and was not assignable and even if the pre emptor had complied with the provisions of Or.
XX r. 14 CPC, the appellants would not be entitled to execute the decree for possession because the decree was not assigned and section 146 would not help the present appellants.
Allowing the appeals, ^ HELD: 1(i) The question whether the right of pre emption was a personal right or it created an interest in property was concluded by the decision of this Court between the same parties in an earlier round of litigation.
The earlier litigation being inter partes and, therefore, binding on the respondents, it cannot be reopened or re examined at the instance of the respondents.
[226 H 227 B] (ii) The contention that decree in a suit for pre emption is a personal decree and creates no interest in land must fail.
[228 B] (iii) The distinction between a voluntary inter vivos transfer and an involuntary transfer such as by way of inheritance is immaterial as for as the present case is concerned because the question in terms disposed of by 223 this Court in the earlier case is that the pre emptor having complied with O. XX, r. 14 had become the owner of the lands and his legal representatives on his death were rightly substituted in the proceedings.
[227 H 228 A] Hazari & Ors.
vs Neki & Ors.
, ; ; referred to.
Section 146 CPC provides that where some proceedings could be taken or application could be made by a person under the Code of Civil Procedure any other person claiming under him is entitled to make and maintain such an application.
The only limitation on the exercise of this right is in the expression, 'save as otherwise provided by this Code, ' occurring in the section.
[229 E] 3.
If the assignee of a decree can avail himself of the provisions contained under Or.
XXI R. 16 by establishing that he is such an assignee he must only avail himself of that provision.
But if he fails to establish his title as a transferee by assignment in writing or by operation of law within the meaning of Or.
XXI r. 16, there is nothing in that provision which prohibits him from availing himself of section 146 if the provision of that section can be availed of by him.
[230 E] Jugal Kishore Saraf vs Raw Cotton Co. Ltd., ; ; referred to.
In the instant case though the sale deed in respect of land would show that the decree itself was not assigned, the lands having been sold by the decree holder after perfecting his title and purchased by the present appellants, they would be persons claiming under the original pre emptor decree holder and if he could have made an application for execution of the decree as decree holder, the applications for execution by the present appellants would be maintainable under section 146, and they are therefore entitled to execute the decrees for possession.
[231 C D] Smt.
Saila Bala Dassi vs Smt.
Nirmala Sundari Dassi & Anr., ; ; referred to.
