At the further hearing of the case on release of under trials in the State of Bihar, ^ HELD: (a)(i) The expression 'protective custody ' is an euphemism calculated to disguise what is really and in truth nothing but imprisonment.
It is an expression intended to appease the conscience.
This so called 'protective custody ' is nothing short of a blatant violation of personal liberty guaranteed under article 21 of the Constitution, because there is no provision of law under which a woman can be kept in jail by way of 'protective custody ' or merely because she is required for the purpose of giving evidence.
[395C D] (ii) The Government in a social welfare state must set up rescue and welfare homes for the purpose of taking care of women and children who have nowhere else to go and who are otherwise uncared for by society.
[395E] (b) The under trial prisoners against whom charge sheets have not been filed by the police within the period of limitation provided for in sub section (2) of section 468 cannot be proceeded against at all and they would be entitled to be released forthwith, as their further detention would be unlawful and in violation of their fundamental right under article 21.
[397 G] (c) The provision of section 167(5) of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 requiring the investigating officer to satisfy the Magistrate on the necessity of continuation of the investigation beyond a period of six months has not been complied with, because there are quite a few cases where the offences charged against the under trial prisoners are triable as summons cases and yet they are languishing in jail for a long number of years far exceeding six months.
[398C] And the Court directed that: (a) All women and children in the jails in the State of Bihar under 'protective custody ' should be released and taken forthwith to welfare homes or rescue homes and should be kept there and properly looked after.
[395F] (b) The State Government should scrutinise the cases of under trial prisoners and release such of them who are not liable to be proceeded against by reason of the period of limitation provided in section 468 Cr.
P.C. having expired.
[397H] (c) The State Govt.
should inquire into those cases where the investigation has been going on for a period of more than six months without the satisfaction 394 of the Magistrate as envisaged in section 167(5) and to release the under trials unless the necessary orders of the Magistrate are obtained within one month.
[398D E]
