The appellant was convicted by the Additional Session 's Judge Alipore for the murder of his son and sentenced to death.
The reason given by the Sessions Judge was that the murder was "cruel and brutal" and that the facts showed the "grim determination" of the accused to kill the deceased.
The Sessions Judge made no reference to the motive of the accused for the commission of the murder.
The High Court while confirming the conviction and sentence observed that the accused had previously murdered his wife, suspecting her infidelity that the sentence of imprisonment imposed on him for the murder of his wife had no sobering effect, that he suspected that the deceased in the present case was not his own son and so he murdered him without any mercy or remorse, and that he, therefore deserved no mercy.
Allowing the appeal by special leave limited to the question of sentence, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
There were no "special reasons" justifying the imposition of the death penalty.
[371 F] (a) The Sessions Judge was wrong in imposing the sentence of death without even a reference to the reason why the appellant committed the murder.
[371 C] (b) The observation of the High Court that the appellant deserved no mercy because he showed no mercy smacks very much of punishment by way of retribution.
[371 C] (c) From the evidence, it is clear that the appellant was a moody person who had for years been brooding over the suspected infidelity of his wife and the injury of having a son foisted on him.
The mere use of adjectives like "cruel and brutal" does not supply the special reasons contemplated by section 354(3) of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973.
[371D E] Rajendra Prasad vs State of Uttar Pradesh, ; , applied.
"Special reasons" are reasons which are special with reference to the offender, with reference to constitutional and legislative directives and with reference to the times, that is, with reference to contemporary ideas in the fields of criminology and connected sciences.
Special reasons are those which lead inevitably to the conclusion that the offender is beyond redemption, having due regard to his personality and proclivity, to the legislative 356 policy of reformation of the offender and to the advances made in the methods of treatment etc.
Section 354(3) of the 1973 Code has narrowed the discretion of sentence for murder.
Death sentence is ordinarily ruled out and can only be imposed for "Special reasons".
Judges are left with the task of discovering "special reasons".
[368 D E, 370E F] (a) Apart from Section 354(3), there is another provision in the Code which also uses the significant expression "Special reasons".
It is Section 361, Section 360 of the 1973 Code re enacts, in substance, Section 562 of the 1898 Code and provides for the release on probation of good conduct or after admonition any person not under twenty one years of age who is convicted of an offence punishable with fine only or with imprisonment for a term of seven years or less, or any person under twenty one years of age or any woman who is convicted of an offence not punishable with death or imprisonment for life, if no previous offence is proved against the offender, and if it appears to the Court having regard to the age, character or antecedents of the offender, and to the circumstances in which the offence was committed, that it is expedient that the offender should be released on probation of good conduct or after admonition.
If the Court refrains from dealing with an offender under Section 360 or under the provisions of the Probation of Offenders Act, or any other law for the treatment, training, or rehabilitation of youthful offenders, where the Court could have done, so, Section 361, which is a new provision in the 1973 Code makes it mandatory for the Court to record in its judgment the "Special reasons" for not doing so.
Section 361 thus casts a duty upon the Court to apply the provisions of Section wherever it is possible to do so and, to state "special reasons" if it does not do so.
[368F H, 369A B] (b) In the context of Section 360, the "Special reasons" contemplated by Section 361 must be such as to compel the Court to hold that it is impossible to reform and rehabilitate the offenders, after examining the matter with due regard to the age, character and antecedents of the offender and the circumstances in which the offence was committed.
This is some indication by the legislature that reformation and rehabilitation of offenders, and not mere deterrence are now among the foremost objects of the administration of criminal justice in our country.
Section 361 and Section 354(3) have both entered the Statute Book at the same time and they are part of the emerging picture of acceptance by the Indian Parliament of the new trends in criminology.
Therefore, the personality of the offender as revealed by his age, character, antecedents and other circumstances and the tractability of the offender to reform must necessarily play the most prominent role in determining the sentence to be awarded.
Special reasons must have some relation to these factors.
[369B E] 3.
Criminal justice is not a computer machine.
It deals with complex human problems and diverse human beings.
It deals with persons who are otherwise like the rest of us, who work and play, who laugh and mourn, who love and hate, who yearn for affection and approval, as all of us do, who think learn and forget.
Like the rest of us they too are the creatures of circumstances.
Heredity, environment, home neighbourhood, upbringing, school, friends, associates, even casual acquaintences, the books that one reads, newspapers, radio and TV, the economics of the household, the oppor 357 tunities provided by circumstances and the calamatics resulting therefrom the success and failure of one 's undertakings the affairs of the heart, ambitions and frustrations, the ideas and ideologies of the time, these and several other ordinary and extra ordinary incidents of life contribute to a person 's personality and influence his conduct.
Differently shaped and differently circumstanced individuals react differently in given situations.
A judge has to balance the personality of the offender with the circumstances the situations and the reactions and choose the appropriate sentence to be imposed.
A judge must try to answer a myriad question such as was the offence committed without premeditation or was it after due deliberation ? What was the motive for the crime ? Was it for gain ? Was it the outcome of a village feud ? Was it the result of a petty drunken, street brawl, or a domestic bickering between a helpless husband and a helpless wife ? Was it due to sexual jealousy ? Was the murder committed under some, stress, emotional or otherwise ? What is the background of the offender ? What is his social and economic status ? What is the level of his education or intelligence ? Do his actions betray a particularly callous indifference towards the welfare of society, or on the other hand, do they show a great concern for humanity and are in fact inspired by such concern ? Is the offender so perpetually and constitutionally at war with society that there is no hope of ever reclaiming him from being a menace to society ? Or is he a person who is patently amenable to reform ? [369 E H, 370 A C] (a) Judges in India have the discretion to impose or not to impose the death penalty.
It is one of the great burdens which judges in this country have to carry.
In the past, the reasons which weighed in the matter of awarding or not awarding the sentence of death varied widely and there was certainly room for complaint that there was unequal application of the law in the matter of imposition of the sentence of death.
[367C D] (b) There cannot be any higher basic human right than the right to life and there can not be anything more offensive to human dignity than a violation of that right by the infliction of the death penalty.
It is in the light of the right to life as a basic concept of human dignity, in the context of the unproven efficacy of the death penalty as a deterrent and in the background of modern theories of criminology based upon progress in the fields of science, medicine, psychiatry and sociology and in the setting of the march of the movement for abolition of Capital Punishment, that Judges in India are required to decide which sentence to impose in a case of murder, death or imprisonment for life? [366D, 367B C] Furman vs Georgia, 33 Lawyers Edn.
2nd Series 346 referred to.
(c) Realising that discretion, even judicial, must proceed along perceptive lines, but, conscious, all the same that such discretion cannot be reduced to formulate or put into pigeon holes, this Court has been at great pain ever since Ediga Annamma to point out the path along which to proceed.
In the latest pronouncement of this Court in Rajendra Prasad vs State of Uttar Pradesh, several relevant principles have been enunciated to guide the exercise of discretion in making the choice between the penalties of death and life imprisonment.
[367F G] Ediga Annamma vs State of A.P. , Rajendra Prasad vs State of U.P. ; referred to.
358 4.
Among the several theories of punishment the reformative theory is irrelevant where death is the punishment since life and not death can reform; the preventive theory is unimportant where the choice is between death and life imprisonment as in India; the retributive theory is incongruous in an era of enlightenment and inadequate as a theory since it does not attempt to justify punishment by any beneficial results either to the society or to the person punished.
Equally, the denunciatory theory is as inadequate as the retributive theory since it does not justify punishment by its results.
[359H, 360A B, 361B] 5.
(a) The very nature of the penalty of death makes it imperative that at every suitable opportunity life imprisonment should be preferred to the death penalty.
[359E] Furman vs Georgia, ; Edn. 346; relied on.
(b) All studies made on the subject whether capital punishment is the most desirable and most effective instrument for protecting the community from violent crime than other penalties say, a sentence of imprisonment for long terms, have led to the conclusion that the death penalty is inconsequential as a deterrent.
[361 F] (c) There is no positive indication that the death penalty has been deterrent.
In other words, the efficacy of the death penalty as a deterrent is unproven.
[365A] 6.
The death penalty, rather than deterring murder, actually deters the proper administration of criminal justice.
[365 A B] (a) There is the absolute finality and irrevocability of the death penalty.
Human justice can never be infallible.
The most conscientious judge is no proof against any mistakes.
Cases are unknown where innocent persons have been hanged in India and elsewhere.
[365B C] (b) Some Judges and Jurists have an abhorrence of the death penalty that they would rather find a guilty person not guilty than send even a guilty person to the gallows.
The refusal of juries to convict persons of murder because of the death penalty is a well known phenomenon throughout the world.
A perusal of some of the judgments of the Superior Courts in India dealing with cases where Trial Courts have imposed sentence of death reveals the same reluctance to convict because the result would otherwise be to confirm the sentence of death.
Thus a guilty person is prevented from conviction by a possibility that a death penalty may otherwise be the result.
[365C D] (c) Yet a more 'grievious injury ' which the death penalty inflicts on the administration of Criminal Justice is that it rejects reformation and rehabilitation of offenders as among the most important objectives of Criminal Justice, though the conscience of the World Community speaking through the voices of the Legislature of several countries of the world has accepted reformation and rehabilitation as among the basic purposes of Criminal Justice.
Death penalty is the brooding giant in the part of reform and treatment of Crime and Criminals, 'inequitably sabotaging any social or institutional programme to reformation '.
It is the 'fifth column ' in the administration of criminal justice.
[365E G] (d) There is also the compelling class complexion of the death penalty.
A tragic by product of social and economic deprivation is that the 'have nots ' 359 in every society always have been subject to greater pressure to commit crimes and to fewer constraints than their more affluent fellow citizens.
So, the burden of capital punishment falls more frequently upon the ignorant, the improverished and the underprivilege.
[365 G H]
