Two joint stock companies entered into agreements with a former Princely State for the grant of agricultural land on payment of fair and equitable land revenue.
Later the two companies formed into a partnership firm.
On the merger of the State with the Union of India, the Assessing Authority under the U.P. Agricultural Income tax Act issued notices to the two companies to submit their returns of agricultural income, which the companies did.
In writ petitions filed by the companies challenging the assessment orders, the High Court accepted the contention that since the lands were neither assessed to land revenue nor were they assessed to any local rate or cess as required by section 2(a) of the Act, they were not assessable to agricultural income tax and remanded the cases to the Assessing Authority for determination of this question.
Before the Assessing Authority, on remand the companies raised for the first time the contention that since no notice had been issued to the firm of which they were partners, the assessment was invalid.
The Assessing Authority rejected this contention.
He also held that the lands satisfied the requirements of s.2(a).
In writ petitions filed by the two companies a single Judge of the High Court upheld the contention that the Assessing Authority committed an error of law in assessing the two partners without assessing the firm.
This view was affirmed by a Division Bench on appeal.
On further appeal to this Court it was contended that in the absence of a prohibition in the Act, the two companies could be validly assessed to tax without assessing the firm.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
The Assessing Authority was not in error in assessing tax on the returns submitted by the two companies and therefore the argument that assessment of the companies, without assessing the firm, was not legal, is without substance.
[425 H 426 A] 2. "Person" defined in the section means an individual and includes a firm or a company.
[423 G] 3.
There is nothing in the Act prohibiting the Assessing Authority from proceeding against individuals forming a partnership.
Section 18 enables the authorities, while proceeding with assessment of a firm or a company, not to 420 determine the tax payable by the firm or the company but to proceed to determine the agricultural income of each member of the firm.
The provisions do not apply to a case where the returns were submitted by the partners and the assessment made on that basis.
The section would be applicable if assessment proceedings against a firm are stopped and the share of the individual is to be determined under the provisions of section 18.
[424 F] 4.
The well established position under the Income Tax Act (Central Act) with regard to assessment of firms is that where a firm has not made a return it is open to the department to assess a partner directly in respect of his share of the firm 's income without resorting to the machinery provided under the Act and without making an assessment on the firm, the only prohibition being against double taxation.
[424 H] C.I.T. vs Murlidhar Jhawar & Purna Ginning & Pressing Factory, SC; referred to.
Secondly, the plea that assessment proceedings ought to have been taken against the firm, was not taken by them in the first instance either before the Assessing Authority or before the High Court.
This plea cannot be allowed to be taken at a later stage.
The assessees submitted their returns on the basis of their respective incomes.
[425 F 426 A] 6.
The Assessing Authority has correctly come to the conclusion that the agreement between the parties provided for payment of land revenue.
[426 F G]
