Under section 61(1)(b) of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 the respondent by its Notification dated May 15, 1946 levied a profession tax of Rs. 15/ per annum on each of the partners of a firm.
Bharat Industries Chheharta i.e. the appellants in the appeal.
By the Notification dated July 4, 1958 the tax was raised to Rs. 200/ per annum.
The validity of the demand made by the respondent at the rate of Rs. 200/ from each of the partners of the firm was challenged, pleading that the Municipal Committee in levying the tax on the individual partners had exceeded its statutory powers under section 61(1)(b) of the Municipal Act in as much as the term 'person ' occurring in section 61(1)(b) of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911, construed in the light of the definition given in section 2(40) of the Punjab General Clauses Act included a 'firm ' and since the trade carried on by the firm is one, the tax could be levied only on the firm, and not on the partners individually.
The Trial Court dismissed the suit.
First appellate court reversed the decree and the High Court in Second Appeal confirmed it.
A Letters Patent Appeal, preferred by the respondent was allowed and the Trial Court 's decision dismissing the suit was restored.
Dismissing the appeal by special leave, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
It is clear, from a plain reading of Section 61(1)(b) that a tax leviable under clause (b) is in terms, a tax on 'persons ', which expression includes natural persons.
Its incidence falls on individuals, who belong to a class practising any profession or art, or carrying on a trade or calling in the municipality.
To hold that persons who are collectively carrying on a trade in the municipality cannot be taxed individually, would be to read into the statute words which are not there.
There are no words in clause (b) or elsewhere in the statute which expressly or by necessary implication, exclude or exempt persons carrying on a trade collectively in the municipality from being taxed as individuals.
To attract liability to a tax under this clause it is sufficient that the person concerned is carrying on a trade in the municipality, irrespective of whether such trade is being carried on by him individually or in partnership with others.
[467G, 468H, 469A B] 2 'Partnership ' as defined in Section 4 of the , is the relation between persons who have agreed to share the profits of a business carried on by all or any of them for the benefit of all.
A firm or partnership is not a legal entity separate and distinct from the partners.
Firm 464 is only a compendious description of the individuals who compose the firm.
The business being carried on by all or any of the partners, all of them are jointly and severally responsible for the liabilities incurred in the course of the business as each one is considered as an agent of the other.
Such partners can be taxed as persons, in their individual.
[468 D H] 3.
In order to be authorised a tax under clause (b) of Section 61(1) must satisfy two conditions: First, it must be a tax on persons.
Second, such persons must be practising any profession or art or carrying on any trade or calling in the municipality.
Both the conditions necessary for levying a tax under clause (b) of sub section (1) of Section 61 of the Municipal Act existed in this case.
The appellants are 'persons ' and they are carrying on a trade in Chheharata Municipality.
[467H, 468A C] 4(i) Where a Revenue Statute provides for a person aggrieved by an assessment thereunder, a particular remedy to be sought in a particular forum, in a particular way, it must be sought in that forum and in that manner, and all other forums and modes of seeking it are excluded.
[470D E] (ii) From a conjoint reading of sections 84 and 86, it is plain that the Municipal Act, gives a special and particular remedy for the person aggrieved by an assessment of tax under this Act, irrespective of whether the grievance relates to the rate or quantum of tax or the principle of assessment.
The Act further provides a particular forum and a specific mode of having this remedy, which is analogous to that provided in Section 66(2) of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922 Section 86 forbids in clear terms the person aggrieved by an assessment from seeking his remedy in any other forum or in any other manner than that provided in the Municipal Act.
Therefore, Sections 84 and 86 of the Municipal Act bar by inevitable implication, the jurisdiction of the Civil Court where the grievance of the party relates to an assessment or the principle of assessment under the Act.
[470B D, E F] (iii) In the facts and circumstances of the case, it is clear (a) that in assessing the appellants individually, and not collectively to the tax in question, the Municipal Committee did not abuse its powers under the Act, (b) in levying the profession tax it did not travel beyond or act contrary to the provisions of sections 61(1)(b) of the Act, and (c) that the Committee acted under the Act.
The Civil Courts jurisdiction, therefor, to entertain and decide the suit was barred.
[471E G] Firm Seth Radhakishan vs Administrator, Municipal Committee, Ludhiana ; followed.
