At the resumed hearing of the petition for release of under trials in the State of Bihar.
^ HELD: (1) The procedure under which a person may be deprived of his life or liberty should be 'reasonable fair and just. ' Free legal services to the poor and the needy is an essential element of any 'reasonable fair and just 'procedure.
A prisoner who is to seek his liberation through the court 's process should have legal services available to him.
[537 C, D] Meneka Gandhi vs Union of India, [1978] 1 SCC 248; M.H. Hoskot vs State of Maharashtra, ; ; Gideon vs Wainwright; , ; 9 L. ed.
at 799; John Richard Argersinger vs Raymond Hamlin, ; 35 L. ed.
2d 530 at 535 36; referred to (2) Article 39A also emphasises that free legal service is an inalienable element of 'reasonable, fair and just 'procedure for without it a person suffering from economic or other disabilities would be deprived of the opportunity for securing justice.
The right to free legal service is therefore, clearly an essential ingredient of 'reasonable, fair and just ' procedure for a person accused of, an offence and it must be held implicit in the guarantee of article 21.
This is a constitutional right of every accused person who is unable to engage a lawyer and secure legal services, on account of reasons such as poverty, indigence or incommunicado situation and the State is under a mandate to provide a lawyer to an accused person if the circumstances of the case and the needs of justice so require, provided of course the accused person does not object to the provision of such lawyer.
[539 F 540 A] (3) The poor in their contact with the legal system have always been on the wrong side of the law.
They have always come across "law for the poor" rather than "law of the poor".
The law is regarded by them as something mysterious and forbidding always taking something away from them and not as a positive and constructive social device for changing the socio economic order and improving their life conditions by conferring rights and benefits on them.
The result is that the legal system has lost its credibility for the weaker sections of the community.
It is, therefore, necessary to inject equal justice into legality and that can be done only by a dynamic and activist scheme of legal services.
[541 E F] 533 4.
The urgent necessity of introducing a dpnamic and comprehensive legal services programme impressed upon the Government of India as also the State Governments.
That is not only a mandate of equal justice implicit in article 14 and right to life and liberty conferred by article 21 but also the compulsion of the constitutional directive embodies in article 39A. [542 D] 5.
The State cannot avoid its constitutional obligation to provide speedy trial to the accused by pleading financial or administrative inability.
The State is under a constitutional mandate to ensure speedy trial and whatever is necessary for this purpose has to be done by the State.
It is also the constitutional obligation of this Court, as the guardian of the fundamental rights of the people as a sentinel on the qui vive, to enforce the fundamental right of the accused to speedy trial by issuing the necessary directions to the State which may include taking of positive action, such as augmenting and strengthening the investigative machinery, setting up new courts, building new court houses, appointment of additional judges and other measures calculated to ensure speedy trial.
[543 D E] (6) The courts in the United States have adopted a dynamic and constructive role in regard to prison reform by utilising the activist magnitude of the Eighth Amendment.
The courts have ordered substantial improvements to be made in a variety of archaic prisons and jails through its decisions.
[543 F] Rhem vs Malclm, , Jackson vs Bishop, 571, Holl vs Sarver, ; ; Jones vs Wittenberg, ; Newman vs Alabama, ; Gates vs Collier, 349 F. Suppl. 881; referred to.
(7) The powers of this Court in protection of the Constitutional rights are of the widest amplitude and this Court should adopt an activist approach and issue to the State, directions which may involve taking of positive action with a view to securing enforcement of the fundamental right to speedy trial.
But in order to enable the court to discharge this constitutional obligation, it is necessary that the court should have the requisite information bearing on the problem.
[543 H 544 A] Directed that: (a) On the next remand dates when the under trials are produced before the Magistrates or the Sessions Courts the State Government should provide them a lawyer at its own cost for the purpose of making an application for bail and opposing remand provided that no objection is raised to such a lawyer on their behalf.
[540 B] (b) The State Government and High Court to furnish particulars as to the location of the courts of magistrates and courts of sessions in the State of Bihar together with the total number of cases pending in each of these courts as on 31st December, 1978 giving year wise break up of such pending cases and also explaining why it has not been possible to dispose of such of those cases as have been pending for more than six months.
[544 D]
