The respondent, an officer belonging to the Indian Administrative Service, was due to retire on February 1, 1962.
Since a departmental enquiry in respect of some charges levelled against him was pending, he was retained in service, in the first instance, for a period of three months beyond the date of his retirement or till the termination of departmental proceedings whichever was earlier.
This date was, however, extended from time to time and eventually on August 28, 1963 an order under r. 16(2) of the All India Services (Death cum Retirement) Rules, 1958 was passed.
That Rule provides that "a member of the service under suspension on a charge of misconduct shall not be required or permitted to retire from service but shall be retained in service until the enquiry into the charges against him is concluded and a final order is passed.
" The charges levelled against the respondent were (1) that he completely failed to take any effective preventive measures against widespread disturbances which broke out in the district, (2) that he showed complete lack of leadership and failed to give proper directions to his subordinate officers, (3) that he did not personally visit the scene of disturbances; (4) that he did not keep the Government informed of the extent of disturbances; and (5) that he showed complete inaptitude, lack of foresight, capacity to take firm and quick decision and, that therefore, he proved himself completely unfit to hold any responsible position.
On the report of the enquiry officer that all the charges (except one) were substantially proved, he was removed from service.
Striking down the order of his removal from service, the High Court held that (i) negligence and efficiency in the performance of one 's duty would not constitute misconduct so as to attract punishment of removal from service and (ii) under r. 16(2) an officer could be retained in service only for the purpose of holding or completing disciplinary proceedings for misconduct and since in this case there was no enquiry into what could be called misconduct, his retention in service beyond his date of retirement was void.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1(a) No case, stricto sensu, for a disciplinary proceeding for misconduct had been made out against the respondent.
Any deficiency in the discharge of one 's duties would not constitute misconduct.
The enquiry held 505 was to establish that the respondent was not fit to hold a responsible post; it did not establish any misconduct on his part to deserve the punishment.
[516 H] (b) Conduct which is blameworthy on the part of a government servant in the context of the Conduct Rules would be misconduct, that is if a government servant conducts himself in a way which is not consistent with due and faithful discharge of his duties it is misconduct.
Similarly, disregard of an essential condition of the contract of service may constitute misconduct.
So too an error or omission resulting in serious or atrocious consequences may amount to misconduct.
But competence for the post, capability to hold and discharge the functions attached to it with requisite efficiency are different from some act or omission on the part of its holder so as to be called misconduct.
A single act or omission or error of judgment while holding a post of responsibility unaccompanied by serious or atrocious conduct would not constitute misconduct.
[511 G H] Pierce vs Foster, 17 QB 536 at 542; Laws vs London Chronicle (Indicator Newspapers),[1959] 1 WLR 698; section Govinda Menon vs Union of India, ; ; P.H. Kalyani vs Air France, Calcutta, ; ; referred to.
(c) The All India Services (Conduct) Rules, 1954 prescribe a code of conduct for members of the service, such for example as, that every member shall at all times maintain absolute integrity and devotion to duty and that an act or omission contrary to or in breach of the prescribed norms of conduct would constittute misconduct for disciplinary proceedings.
But the Rules are not exhaustive.
In the absence of an exhaustive or self contained code, therefore it would not be correct to say that only that act or omission would constitute misconduct for the purposes of Discipline and Appeal Rules which is contrary to the provisions of the Conduct Rules.
[511 C E] In the instant case all that the charges framed against the respondent show is that he was not a very efficient officer.
They did not specify any act or omission in derogation of or contrary to Conduct Rules, except the general rule (r.3) prescribing devotion to duty.
Lack of leadership, inaptitude, lack of foresight, lack of firmness and indecisiveness which are deficiencies in the personal character or ability of a Government servant would not by themselves constitute misconduct for the purpose of disciplinary proceedings.
They may be relevant while considering an officer 's promotion to higher post or for his retention in a higher post but they cannot be elevated to the level of acts of omission or commission contemplated by Discipline and Appeal Rules for imposing punishment.
When the respondent was sought to be removed from service as a disciplinary measure by way of penalty, a clear case of misconduct should have been established.
(d) In the context of disciplinary proceedings, misconduct does not mean misbehaviour involving some form of guilty mind or mens rea.
Gross or habitual negligence in the performance of one 's duty may not involve mens rea but yet it may constitute misconduct for disciplinary proceedings.
[513 D] 2(a) The respondent was no longer in service on the date on which the order removing him from service was made and to retain him in service 506 beyond the period of his normal retirement with a view to punishing him was wholly unjustified.
[517 C D] (b) Since the State Government had no power to retain him in service under r. 16(1)(a) of the Retirement Rules beyond August 1, 1962 it could not continue the enquiry thereafter.
Although under r. 16(1)(b) the Central Government had power to retain him in service beyond six months of the date of his retirement, no order had been passed by it.
[515 H] (c) Before r. 16(2) (which provides that a member of the service under suspension on a charge of misconduct shall not be required or permitted to retire from service until the enquiry into the charges against him is concluded and a final order passed) would be attracted it must be shown that a member of the service was under suspension on a charge of misconduct and an enquiry was being conducted against him.
No misconduct having been alleged against the respondent, it cannot be said that r. 16(2) was attracted and that he was deemed to have been retained in service until the enquiry was concluded.
[516 F G]
