Under the Punjab Police Service Rules, 1959, recruitment to Punjab Police Service (Deputy Superintendent of Police) is made from two sources, namely 80% by promotion and 20% through direct recruitment.
Under Rule 10, seniority in the cadre of Deputy Superintendent of Police is reckoned according to the date of confirmation.
Consideration for nomination to Indian Police Service is done according to seniority cum merit.
Respondents 1 and 2 in C.A. 2903/78 who were promotees to the cadre of Deputy Superintendents of Police in February, 1961 and January, 1961 respectively were not confirmed even though appellants and respondents 5 to 8 who were recruited to the same cadre by direct appointment commencing from May, 1961 to May, 1965 were confirmed.
They, therefore, filed a Writ Petition praying for a direction to confirm them in the Punjab Police Service, adhering to the quota rule at the time of confirmation as well.
They alleged that as seniority in the cadre of Deputy Superintendent of Police is reckoned under rule 10, according to date of confirmation failure to confirm in the post available to them in breach of the relevant rules, had resulted in the denial of equality of opportunity in public service enshrined in article 16 of the Constitution at the time of consideration of their cases for nomination to the Indian Police Service which is done according to seniority cum merit.
Allowing the Writ Petition and directing the State to confirm them, the learned single judge held that the quota rule would operate not only at the time of initial recruitment but also at the time of confirmation, as he was of the opinion that the quota rule is linked with the seniority rule.
Two Letters Patent Appeals, one filed by appellant No. 1 and another by the State, were heard along with another Writ Petition filed by one Ram Rakha urging identical contentions.
The Writ Petition was allowed and the appeals were dismissed by a common judgment modifying the direction given by the learned single judge to the extent that the State should consider the case of the Writ petitioners for confirmation afresh according to quota rule and then refix their inter se seniority.
Dismissing the appeals, by special leave the Court 585 ^ HELD: 1.
When a first appointment or promotion is made on probation for a specific period and the employee is allowed to continue in the post after the expiry of the period without any specific order of confirmation he should be deemed to continue in his post as a probationer only in the absence of any communication to the contrary in the original order of appointment or promotion or the Service Rules.
In such a case, an express order of confirmation is necessary to give the employee a substantive right to the post.
From the mere fact that he is allowed to continue in the post after the expiry of the specific period of probation he should not be deemed to have been confirmed.
This is so, when the relevant rules permitted extension of the Probationary period for an indefinite time.
[592 A C] Sukhbans Singh vs State of Punjab, ; , G. section Ramaswamy vs The Inspector General of Police, Mysore State Bangalore, ; State of U.P. vs Akbar Ali, ; referred to.
Where the rules provide for a fixed period of probation with a power in the Government to extend it up to a specific period and not any unlimited period, either by express provision or by necessary implication, at the end of such specified period beyond which the Government had no power to extend the probation, the probationer, if he continues beyond that period, should be deemed to have been confirmed in the post.
[592 C E] State of Punjab vs Dharam Singh, ; explained.
Rule 8 of the Punjab Service Rules, 1959 prescribes a period of probation of two years and the proviso confers power to extend the period of probation by not beyond one year meaning thereby that in any case the Government would not have the power to extend the period of probation beyond a period of three years.
[593 A B] In this situation, (a) the ratio of Dharam Singh 's case would mulatis mutandis apply and the direct recruits who completed the period of probation of two years and in the absence of an extension of probationary period would be deemed to be confirmed by necessary implication.
[593 B C] (b) If seniority is to be reckoned from the date of confirmation and if promotees are not confirmed for years together in some cases, while direct recruits who came much later got confirmed and ipso facto became senior to the promotees, if quota rule is only applied at the time of initial recruitment, this undesirable result is wholly unavoidable.
[593 C D] 4.
Where recruitment to a cadre is from two sources and the Service Rules prescribe quota for recruitment for both sources, a question would always arise, whether the quota rule would apply at the initial stage of recruitment or also at the stage of confirmation.
Ordinarily, if quota is prescribed for recruitment to a cadre, the quota rule will have to be observed at the recruitment stage.
The quota would then be co related to vacancies to be filled in by recruitment but after recruitment is made from two different sources they will have to be integrated into a common cadre and while so doing the question of their inter se seniority would surface.
[593 F G] 586 Seniority is ordinarily determined from the date of entry into cadre on the principle of continuous officiation.
Confirmation in a post would ordinarily depend upon such circumstances as satisfactory completion of probationary period, efficiency in the discharge of duty, capacity to discharge functions of the post, availability of permanent vacancy etc.
Now, if seniority is to be determined according to the date of confirmation and the quota rule is not made relatable to confirmation in various posts falling vacant in the cadre it would directly impinge upon the seniority of members of the service.
[593 G H, 594 A] section B. Patwardhan and Ors.
vs State of Maharashtra; , @ 797; referred to.
A harmonious reading of rules 3, 4, 6, 8, and 10 makes it clear that the quota rule is operative both at the time of initial recruitment and at the time of confirmation.
The recruitment to Punjab Police Service is from two sources.
Recruits from both the sources have to be on probation.
Adopting the construction that the proviso to Rule 8 (b) permitting a maximum period of probation of three years at the end of which the direct recruit would automatically be confirmed unless his services are dispensed with simultaneously enjoying seniority from the date of such automatic confirmation without applying quota rule at the time of confirmation would put the promotee to an unintended disadvantage who may be continued in an officiating capacity without confirming him and consequently denying or relegating him down in seniority for years as has happened in the case of respondents 1 and 2.
Such an approach would be wholly unreasonable more so when there was not the slightest suggestion that their services were not satisfactory and that the confirmation was denied on any such ground, thereby directly affecting their places in the seniority list.
[594 C F, H] If the other view that the quota rule would apply both at the time of recruitment and at the time of confirmation, is adopted rule 10 which provides for seniority according to the date of confirmation would certainly be saved from the vice of unreasonableness.
[594 G] The quota rule is linked up with the seniority rule.
Quota rule is linked up with seniority rule because, not the date of entry in service determines the seniority but the date of confirmation determines seniority.
Quota rule being inextricably intertwined with the seniority rule any delinking would render the seniority rule wholly unreasonable.
After recduitment, members of the service, though drawn from two different sources direct recruits and promotees constitute a single integrated cadre.
They discharge identical functions, bear similar responsibilities and, acquire an equal amount of experience in the respective assignments.
If quota rule were to be applied at the stage of initial recruitment and wholly ignored at the time of confirmation the rule would suffer from the vice of unreasonableness and would offend article 16, because, in that event, while direct recruits would get confirmation automatically, the promotees would hang out for years as has happened in the case of respondents 1 and 2 and if they are not confirmed they would never get seniority and their chances of being considered for promotion to the higher post would be wholly jeopardised.
[595 A B, C, D E] section G. Jaisinghani vs Union of India and Ors. ; @ 717 and 718; section B. Patwardhan vs State of Maharashtra, ; @ 797; followed.
587 6.
Where recruitment is from two sources and the seniority in the cadre is determined according to the date of confirmation to accord utmost fair treatment a rotational system has to be followed while giving confirmation.
The quota rule would apply to vacancies and recruitment has to be made keeping in view the vacancies available to the two sources according to the quota.
If the quota rule is strictly adhered to there will be no difficulty in giving confirmation keeping in view the quota rule even at the time of confirmation.
A roster is introduced while giving confirmation ascertaining every time which post has fallen vacant and the recruit from that source has to be confirmed in the post available to the source.
This system would breakdown the moment recruitment from either source in excess of the quota is made.
In fact a strict adherance to the quota rule at the time of recruitment would introduce no difficulty in applying the rule at the time of confirmation because vacancies would be available for confirmation to persons belonging to different sources of recruitment.
The difficulty would arise when recuruitment in excess of the quota is made and it would further be accentuated when recruits from one source viz. direct recruits get automatic confirmation on completion of the probationary period, while the promotees hang out for years together before being confirmed.
[596 F H, 597 A B] Mervyn Coutindo and Ors.
vs Collector of Customs, Bombay and Ors.
, ; A. K. Subraman and Ors.
vs Union of Indian and Ors.
, [1975] 2 SCR 979; explained and distinguished.
