The Madhya Pradesh Local Authorities School Teachers (Absorption in Government Service) Act provided for absorbing teachers serving in Middle Schools and Primary Schools managed by local authorities in Government service.
The relevant rule for absorption enacted under the Act in rule 3 and rule 3(b) read as follows: "3(b)For absorption on the post of Head Master/Principal of a High/ Higher Secondary School, the person concerned should possess the post graduate degree and should have worked on the post for a minimum period of 7 years in the same institution and should have 10 years ' teaching experience in any recognised institution of Madhya Pradesh".
On the question of interpretation of the words "should have worked on the post for a minimum period of seven years" the High Court was of the view that the period during which a Head Master/Principal worked as incharge Principal ought to be taken into account for computing the period of 7 years.
Dismissing the special leave petitions by the State the Court, ^ HELD : 1.
While computing the period of 7 years for the purpose of rule 3(b) what is determinative is performing duties and discharging functions of the post of Head Master/Principal irrespective of the capacity in which the post was held.
[635 C] 2.
The absorption of a person as Principal under rule 3(b) does not depend on rank but on the nature of functions and duties that is incumbent discharges for a particular number of years (i.e.) the duties of a Principal for a period of seven years.
The language, in the instant case, indicates emphasis on work being done while on the post irrespective of capacity.
[635 B C] Ramrattan vs State of M.P. and Ors., I.L.R. 1964 M.P. 242; State of Madhya Pradesh vs Gokul Prasad,[1971] M.P.L.J. 609; Girja Shanker vs S.D.O. Harda and Ors., A.I.R. 1973 M.P. 104; distinguished.
On a pure grammatical construction of the expression "should have worked on the post for a minimum period of seven years in the same institution".
it is clear that the person claiming to be absorbed must have worked on the post of Head Master/Principal of a High/Higher Secondary School for a minimum period of 7 years, the emphasis being on the experience gamed by working on the said post.
A person in charge of the post also works and 631 discharges the duties and functions of the post of which he has taken charge.
Even an officiating incumbent of the post does discharge the functions and duties of the post.
If the rule expressly did not make any differentiation between the persons working as a confirmed holder of substantive post and an incharge or officiating holder of the post, there is nothing in the expression itself which by necessary implication excludes service in any other capacity except as a confirmed Head Master/Principal in a substantive post.
[633 D E, G H] Confirmation in a post being one of the glorious uncertainties of service as observed by this Court in section B. Patwardhan 's case, it is rational to believe that the framers of the rule did not want to attach any importance to the capacity in which the post is held but the emphasis was on working on the post meaning thereby discharging the duties and performing the functions assigned to the post.
[634 C D] section B. Patwardhan and Ors.
vs State of Maharashtra and Ors.
, ; ; applied.
