The purpose of law and justice (Dharma) is promotion of cohesion and not production of fission.
A judgment often possesses a sublime essence and a humdrum component.
The sublime element consists in the optimistic endeavour to bring parties together so that the litigation may not cut them as under, especially when they are blood relations like sisters.
The present appeal in its happy conclusion, holds out the higher lesson that hate and fight are dissolved by basic human fellowship, even after bitter litigative struggle, if the Bench and the Bar pursue consensual justice and bring into play conciliatory processes and successfully persuade the parties to see reason and right beyond bare law.
If the effort succeeds, the court and counsel derive spiritual fulfilment and get satisfaction.
The finest hour of justice arrives propitiously when parties, despite falling apart, bury the hatchet and weave a sense of fellowship or union.
[640 D] The present case is not merely a just adjustment of a bitter litigation but a path finder for the subordinate courts in dealing with family or like disputes.
[643 B] The text and the context and the application of traditional rules of statutory interpretation, in a given case, might leave the position in an unsatisfactory dilemma of dual import.
Even an equitable approach may not necessarily help reach a just solution because equity shifts as the situation varies.
Contradictory positions taken by different High Courts add to the difficulty and result in the deleterious uncertainty of the law.
The Supreme Court may resolve the conflict by exercising its preference guided by the language and the milieu and following the customary canons of statutory interpretation.
While its decision will be binding on account of article 141 of the Constitution it may still be fallible because the intendment of Parliament is best brought out by legislative clarification in some cases.
[640 H] The appellant and the respondent were step sisters daughters of a common father but of different mothers.
The father who owned vast properties had died before the coming into force of the .
The respondent 's mother who inherited her husband 's estate died after the coming into force of the 1956 Act.
The High Court dismissed the appellant 's claim for a half share in the properties under section 15(1)(a) of the Act.
The specific point of claim, whether a son and daughter in the setting of section 15(1)(a) of the Act, includes step son and step daughter or embraces only the son and daughter of the deceased female propositus, has escaped the Parliament 's attention while passing the legislation.
[At the Court 's suggestion the parties came to a compromise assisted by counsel on both sides.] 640 Tulzapurkar, J. Parliament should clarify its intention regarding section 15(1)(a) of the Act. ^
