While implementing the provisions of the Punjab Excise Act, 1914 as in force in the Union Territory of Delhi, the concerned authority used to hold auction for grant of licence in Form L 10 for selling country liquor and at one such auction held on 29th March 1978, the petitioners ' bids were accepted and they were granted licences in Form L 10 for the period 1st April 1978 to 31st March 1979.
The licence included a condition to sell a bottle of 750 ml. of country liquor at Rs. 15/ which was inter alia made up at excise duty (styled as still head duty) at the rate of Rs. 10.23 and profit of licensee at the rate of Rs. 2/ .
In W.P. 716/78, validity of the levy of 'still head duty ' was challenged by certain petitioners inter alia on the ground that it was nothing but countervailing duty and in the absence of manufacture of liquor in Delhi, countervailing duty on the import of liquor cannot be constitutionally levied.
This contention found favour with a learned single judge of the Delhi High Court and a number of Letters Patent Appeals were filed against that Judgment.
During the pendency of these appeals President of India promulgated an Ordinance purporting to amend the Punjab Excise Act, 1914, styled as Punjab Excise (Delhi Amendment) Ordinance, 1979 with retrospective effect, conferring power on the Government under the provisions of the Act to levy 'special duty ' on the import of country liquor in Delhi at rates not exceeding that set out in Schedule I A which was introduced in the Act by the Ordinance.
Pursuant to the Ordinance amending the Principal Act, the Delhi Fiscal Duty Order, 1979 was issued levying special duty at the rates set out in the order on import of country liquor into Delhi.
Some of the petitioners questioned the validity generally of the Ordinance and specifically of the impost of special duty in Civil Writ No. 16/79.
A Division Bench of the Delhi High Court heard the Letters Patent Appeals and the Writ Petition No. 116/79 and by a common judgment held the ordinance as well as the impost of the special duty thereunder valid, dismissed the Writ Petition and allowed the Letters Patent Appeals.
652 Dismissing the special leave petitions, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
Scheme underlying distribution of Legislative power in Part XI Chapter I and especially Articles 246 and 248 is that except the matters specifically enumerated in List II (State List) in the Seventh Schedule, Parliament 's plenary power to legislate extends to all conceivable matters which can be topic of legislation, and even this limitation on its power vanishes when Parliament legislates for part of the territory of India not included in a State.
The three dimensional picture becomes complete, viz. (i) to select topic for legislation (ii) enactment of legislation on the topic and (iii) to impose tax in respect of such subject matter of legislation by reference to article 248 which confers power to make any law with respect to any matter not enumerated in Lists II and III including the power to impose tax not mentioned in either of those lists.
Under article 246 (4) Parliament has power to make laws with respect to any matter for any part of the territory of India, not included in a State notwithstanding that such matter is a matter enumerated in the State List.
Power of Parliament thus to legislate with respect to any matter for Delhi, territory not included in a State is unabridged or unfettered by the entries in the State List.
Further residuary power of legislation including the power to levy tax is conferred on Parliament by the combined operation of Articles 246(4), 248(1) and (2) and Entry 97 in the Union List.
That power is untrammelled by the limitations prescribed by Article 246(2) and (3) and Entry 51 of State List and is plenary and absolute subject only to such restrictions as imposed by the Constitution.
[659 G H, 660 A C] Mithan Lal vs State of Delhi, ; @ 451; referred to.
While legislating for the Union Territories the Parliament unhampered by Articles 246(2) and (3) but enriched by Article 248(1) and (2) could legislate on any of the topics either in the List I and III or in List II or in exercise of the residuary power under Entry 97.
There is nothing in the Constitution to prevent Parliament from combining its powers under one or other Entry with its power under Entry 97.
Parliament can rely on the powers under specified Entries I to 96 List I and supplement them with the powers under Entry 97 List I and Article 24 or even the powers under Entries in the concurrent list.
There is no dearth of legislative competence of Parliament to enact legislation for a territory not included in a State because the power to legislate takes within its sweep matters included in all the three lists and added to it is the residuary power on matters not specifically included in any entry in any of the three lists.
[661 D G] If exercise or countervailing duty could be levied on country liquor manufactured or imported into Delhi, Parliament would not lack competence to levy the same only because levy of such duty on alcoholic liquors for human consumption is within the competence of a State.
As country liquor is not manufactured in Delhi, the Parliament could not under Entry 51 of the State List levy either excise or countervailing duty on it.
Merely because Parliament could not levy countervailing duty on country liquor imported into Delhi because country liquor is not manufactured in Delhi it does not exhaust the power of Parliament to levy some other duty on the import of liquor if it is otherwise constitutionally permissible.
[660 D F] Union of India vs H. section Dhillon, ; ; followed.
653 3.
With the advancement of society, expanding horizons of scientific and technical knowledge, probe into the mystery of creation, it is impossible to conceive that every imaginable head of legislation within human comprehension and within the foreseeable future could have been within the contemplation of the founding fathers and was, therefore, specifically enumerated in one or the other of the three Lists, meaning thereby that three Lists were exhaustive of Governmental action and activity.
Demands of welfare State, hopes and aspirations and expectations in a developing society and the complex world situation with inter dependence and hostility amongst nations may necessitate legislation on some such topics that even for visionary they could not have been within the contemplation of the founding fathers.
Complex modern governmental administration in a federal set up providing distribution of legislative power coupled with power of judicial review may raise such situations that a subject of legislation may not squarely fall in any specific entry in List I or II.
Simultaneously on correct appraisal it may not be covered by any entry in List II though apparently or on a superficial view it may be covered by an entry in List II.
In such a situation Parliament would have power to legislate on the subject in exercise of residuary power under Entry 97, List I and it would not be proper to unduly circumscribe, corrode or whittle down this power by a process of interpretation by saying that subject of legislation was present to the mind of the framers of the Constitution because apparently it falls in one of the entries in List II and thereby deny power to legislate under Entry 97.
The history of freedom struggle demonstrates in unequivocal terms the importance of residuary power of legislation being conferred on Parliament.
Accordingly, once the power of Parliament to legislate on a topic is not expressly taken away by any constitutional provision, it remains intact under Entry 97 of List I. [662 G H, 663 A D] Undoubtedly excise and countervailing duties on alcoholic liquors for human consumption were within the contemplation of the framers of the Constitution.
That is a specific topic of legislation in List II.
It does not exhaust a conceivable levy that can be legitimately imposed on such items if otherwise they could be legally imposed on such items by reference to constitutional power to levy the same.
And Entry 97 is a complete answer to the contention.
[663 D E] His Holiness Kesavananda Bharati Sripadagalavaru vs State of Kerala, ; explained and discussed.
I. C. Golaknath vs State of Punjab, ; referred to.
Union of India vs H. section Dhillon, ; , affirmed.
Terminal tax is entirely different from the special duty sought to be imposed by the impugned Ordinance.
The impost is on entry of country liquor into Delhi to be recovered by the Delhi Administration for its own use.
Delhi Administration and Delhi Municipal Administration are entirely different, and, therefore, it cannot be said that Entry 52 excludes the power of the Parliament to levy tax on import of country liquor in Delhi.
[663 F G] 5.
If on the same subject the legislature chooses to levy tax twice over there is no inherent invalidity in the fiscal adventure.
More so when Special Duty levied by Parliament and the terminal tax imposed by the Municipal Administration on the import of liquor in Delhi can be traced to independent source of power.
[664 A B] 654 Avinder Singh and Ors.
vs State of Punjab and Ors.
; ; followed.
The idea conveyed by the expression "colourable legislation" is that although apparently a legislature in passing a statute purported to be within the limits of its powers, yet in substance and in reality it transgressed those powers, the transgression being veiled by what appears, on proper examination, to be a mere pretence or disguise.
Applying this test it is difficult to say that the impugned impost is either a camouflage or a colourable legislation.
[664 G H] Merely because a statute was found to be invalid on the ground of legislative competence that does not permanently inhibit the legislature from re enacting the statute if the power to enact the same is properly traced and established.
In such a situation it would not be correct to say that the subsequent legislation would be merely a colourable legislation or a camouflage to re enact the invalidated previous legislation.
[665 E F] K. C. Gajapati Narayan Deo vs State of Orissa, ; , Maharana Sri Jayvant Singhji Ranmal Singhji etc.
vs State of Gujarat, [1962] Suppl.
2 SCR 411 @ 440, Patel Gordhandas Hargovindas vs Municipal Commissioner, Ahmedabad, ; , Prithvi Cotton Mills Ltd. and Ors.
vs Broach Borough Municipality and Ors., ; referred to.
The expression 'excisable article ' which alone can be the subject matter of levy special duty is merely descriptive of the goods subject to change.
It is only an identifying mark, a tag, which would attract special duty.
If liquor was manufactured in Delhi it would be an excisable article.
It is that article on which, if manufactured in Delhi excise duty could be levied which when imported would provide the taxing event for the levy of special duty because in the absence of manufacture in Delhi countervailing duty cannot be imposed upon it.
The expression is used for identifying the subject matter of impost and nothing more need be read into it.
[666D E] 8.
There is no fundamental right to do trade or business in intoxicants.
The State under its regulatory powers, has right to prohibit absolutely every form of activity in relation to intoxicants its manufacture, storage, export import, sale and possession.
In all their manifestations these rights are vested in the State and indeed without such vesting there can be no effective regulation of various forms of activities in relation to intoxicants.
[666 H, 667 A] If there is no fundamental right to carry on trade or business in liquor, there is no question of its abridgement by any restriction which can be styled as unreasonable.
The State under its regulatory power has a right to control or even to prohibit absolutely every form of activity in relation to intoxicants apart from anything else, its import too.
This power of control is question of society 's right to self protection and it rests upon the right of the State to act for the health, moral and welfare of the people.
Liquor traffic is a source of pauperism and crime.
Such an impost, therefore, is one in the public interest for preserving public health and public moral and is not one as infringing the interstate freedom of trade and commerce.
All taxes are imposed in public interest.
[667 F H, 668 A B] In the instant case the Preamble to the impugned Ordinance clearly recites that the special duty on the importation of country liquor into Delhi an endeavour towards bringing about prohibition of consumption of alcoholic drinks, and, 655 therefore, it is a step in the direction of safeguarding public health and with a view to realising the goal fixed in Article 47 of the Constitution.
It is a fiscal measure and the one safeguarding public health and even public morals because it is well recognised that liquor trade is instinct with injury to individual and community and has serious side effects recognized everywhere in every age.
Not to control alcohol business is to abdicate the right to rule for the good of the people.
[669 B, G H, 670 A] Har Shanker and Ors. etc.
vs Dy.
Excise and Taxation Commissioner and Ors.
; , State of Bombay vs R.M.D. Chamarbaughwala; , ; P. N. Kaushal and Ors.
vs Union of India and Ors.
, ; ; applied.
Crowley vs Christansen, ; quoted with approval.
P. N. Kaushal and Ors.
vs Union of India and Ors.
, ; ; referred to.
There is no substance in the contention that the retrospectivity of the Ordinance is illegal and invalid.
The argument overlooks the twin objects sought to be achieved by the measure namely, validating an import which was found to be invalid on the ground that it was countervailing duty which could not have been legitimately imposed and also the object to safeguard public health and public moral [670 B D] Prithvi Cotton Mills Ltd. and Anr.
vs Broach Borough Municipality and Ors., ; applied.
The altruistic grievance of the petitioner by proxy for consumers strikes as hollow because even with the impost the petitioners ' profit of Rs. 2/ per bottle is guaranteed and they are in no way adversely affected by the impost because the levy is passed on to consumers, except for the detention of their money for a day or two when they pay in advance while taking the bottles from the Warehouse and recovers it when they sell the bottle and this detention of their money for a period of two days is a triviality and is a part of any business.
[670 E F]
