By a will the testator bequeathed certain properties to each of his three sons.
With regard to his third son (NP) the testator provided in Clause 5 of the will that if he had no male issues "my heirs shall take the aforesaid properties" after his life time.
NP died in 1957 without any male issue.
His widow (plaintiff appellant) filed a suit for declaration of her title to the properties on the ground that her husband got the same absolutely by way of partition and that she, as his heir, inherited the properties or in the alternative for a declaration of her right to the properties on a true construction of the testator 's will.
(Defendants 1 and 2 were the sons of the testator 's eldest son while defendants 3 to 7 were the daughters and defendant 8 the widowed daughter in law of the testator 's second son.) The trial judge of the High Court decreed the plaintiff 's suit holding that on the termination of the life interest given to NP who died sonless the properties devolved on the heirs of the testator as if on intestacy, that the plaintiff was entitled to 1/3 share of the properties, and that the remaining 2/3 share should be share by the defendants.
Defendants 1 and 2 appealed to a Division Bench of the High Court, claiming that as the only heirs of the testator they were entitled to get the entire property of NP who had only a life interest in it.
Construing cl. 5 of the will, the Division Bench held : (1) that by his will the testator had made his heirs as an "artificial" class of ultimate residuary legatees; (2) that the mandate implicit in the words "if there are no male issues as aforesaid" is that such class of legatees or heirs of the testator would be ascertained and worked out at that point of time when NP died sonless and at no other; (3) that this class of heirs of the testator was to be ascertained on the death of NP on the hypothesis that the testator had been upto the time of NP 's death, but according to orthodox Hindu Law prevailing at the time of the testator 's death in 1928; (4) that neither Hindu Women 's Right to Property Act, 1937, nor the was applicable because the testator actually died long before the coming into force of these two enactments and he did not die intestate; (5) that according to Hindu Law prevailing at the time of the testator 's death in 1928, respondents 1 and 2 would be the only persons entitled to the property on the death of NP, to the exclusion of the latter 's widow, the plaintiff.
701 Allowing the appeal.
^ HELD: 1(a) On a proper construction of the will the testator could not be said to have created or carved out an "artificial" class of heirs and made a residuary bequest in their favour.
It is well established that the term "heirs" used in a will must be construed in a legal sense and cannot normally be limited to "issues" only.
It must mean all persons who are entitled to the property of another under the law of inheritance.
[705E F] Angurbala Mullick vs Debabrata Mullick, [1951] 2 SCR 1125 at p. 1144; referred to.
(b) The expression "my heirs" used in cl. 5 of the will must be construed as equivalent to "my legal heirs".
The words "if there are no male issues my heirs shall take the aforesaid properties" are not words of gift over to any artificial class of heirs.
[705G] 2.
Construction of clause 5 of the will brings out expressly or by inevitable implication, these instructions of the testator: (a) In the event of NP 's death, without male issue, the property would devolve on the testator 's heir.
(b) Such heirs of the testator would be ascertained according to Hindu Law of intestate succession.
(c) Ascertainment of these "heirs" of the testator, is to be done at the time of NP 's death on the hypothesis that the testator lived up to and died a moment after NP 's death.
(d) It logically follows from (a), (b) and (c) that these heirs of the testator would be ascertained according to the , which was the law in force on 31 1 57 when NP died sonless and succession opened out.
[706 D F] 3.
On the port and scope of cl. 5 of the will, as spelled out above, ascertainment of the testator 's heirs on whom the property would devolve on NP 's death, is to be done according to sections 8 to 10 of the .
At that point of time, the plaintiff (who would be assumed to be the widow of a "predeceased" son) and the defendants would all be the heirs of the testator, falling in Class I of the Schedule referred to in section 8, and in accordance with Rules 3 and 4 in Section 10 of the Act, the plaintiff would be entitled to 1/3rd share, in the property, while the remaining 2/3rd share shall go equally to the branches of Ramaswami and Vedivelu.
[707 DE]
