The appellant was being prosecuted for offences under sections 120 B, 420, 471 and 468 read with section 34 I P.C., Section 167 (72) of the Sea Customs Act and Section 5(2) read with section 5(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act 1947.
At the time when the charge sheet was filed and the special judge took cognizance against the appellant sometime in October, 1970, the appellant ceased to be a public servant and, therefore, no sanction under Section 6 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 was obtained.
The departmental enquiry against the appellant ended in his dismissal but the President of India allowed his appeal and set aside the order of removal from service passed by the Collector of Customs against him with directions to treat the period of absence from 5 9 1967 till the date of reinstatement as under suspension, and to institute de novo proceedings against the appellant after rectifying the defect in the charge sheet.
While the departmental proceedings were going on, the trial against the appellant proceeded to its logical end except the arguments being heard.
The appellant on being reinstated filed an application before the special Judge praying that all further proceedings be dropped as the prosecution against the appellant was initiated in the absence of a proper and valid sanction having been obtained under Section 6 of the Prevention of Corruption Act.
The special Judge rejected it and the High Court confirmed the rejection.
Dismissing the appeal by special leave, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
Section 6(1) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 applies only where at the time when the offence was committed the offender was acting as a public servant.
If the offender had ceased to be a public servant then section 6 would have no application at all.
Furthermore, the point of time when the sanction has to be taken must be the time when the Court takes cognizance of an offence and not before or after.
If at the relevant time, the offender was a public servant no sanction under section 6 was necessary at all.
[835E F] In the instant case, no sanction under section 6 of the Act was necessary, as the appellant had ceased to be a public servant at the time when the cognizance of the case was taken against him by the special Judge.
[836E] section A. Venkataraman vs The State, ; C. R. Bansi vs State of Maharashtra, ; followed.
833 2.
A deeming provision cannot be pushed too far as to result in a most anomalous or absurd position.
A deeming provision should be confined only for the purpose for it is meant.
[837C, 838A] Commissioner of Sales Tax, U.P. vs The Modi Sugar Mills Ltd., ; ; Braithwaite & Co. India Ltd. vs Employees ' State Insurance Corporation; , ; Bengal Immunity Co. Ltd. vs State of Bihar and Ors., ; Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay City vs Elphinstone Spinning and Weaving Mills Co. Ltd., 40 I.T.R. 142; applied.
In the instant case: (a) The order of the President reinstating the appellant and creating a legal fiction regarding the period of suspension must be limited only so far as time period of and the incidents of suspension were concerned and could not be carried too far as to project it even in cases where actions had already been taken.
[838A B] (b) The dismissal was not a nullity so as to vitiate all proceedings.
The order passed by the President was not an order on merits.
It was merely an order passed by the President in an appeal an a departmental enquiry and the appellant succeeded because of a manifest defect in the charge sheet.
The President never intended that the appellant should be deemed to have been reinstated even for the purpose of section 6 of the POCA, 1947 so as to nullify actions completed, consequences ensued or transactions closed.
In fact when the President observed that the appellant shall be deemed to have been placed under suspension from the date of the original order of dismissal it merely meant that for the purpose of certain civil consequences flowing from the order of the President namely the grant of subsistence allowance or other benefits the order would be deemed to be retroactive in character.
[837A C] (c) At the time when actual cognizance by the Court was taken the appellant ceased to be a public servant having been removed from service.
If some years later he had been reinstated that would not make the cognizance which was validly taken by the Court in October, 1970, a nullity or render it nugatory, so as to necessitate the taking of a fresh sanction.
[838B C]
