Section 7 of the Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act 1961, provides that on and from the date of commencement of the Act no person shall, except as otherwise provided in the Act, but subject to the provisions of Chapter VIII, be entitled to hold land in excess of the ceiling area.
Section 22 provides that where on or after the date of commencement of the Act (6th April, 1960) but before the notified date (2nd October, 1962) any person has transferred any land held by him by sale, gift etc.
the Authorised officer within whose jurisdiction such land holding of the major part thereof is situated may, after notice to such person and other persons affected by such transfer or partition and after such inquiry as he thinks fit to make, declare tho transfer or partition to be void if he finds that the transfer or the partition, as the case may be, defeats any of tho provisions of the Act.
Tho alienations in all the cases took many forms ranging from stridhana to bona fide sale and they were executed between the date of commencement of the Act and notified date.
The Land Tribunal held that the alienations were void because but for the alienations the holders would have had the lands in excess of the ceiling prescribed by the Act.
On the interpretation of section 22 of the Act, the High Court was of the view that the section covered only those sham, nominal and bogus transfers which are intended to defeat the provisions of the Act and which are inconsistent with the object provided in section 7.
It was also held that transactions entered into in anticipation of the Ceiling Act would not be hit by the provisions preventing such transfers except where they were mala fide or colourable; and that tho the word "defeat" in section 22 should be taken as having been used to import a sinister motive.
It was therefore held that under section 22 the Authorised officer is entitled to declare as void only those transfers which are sham and nominal entered into with the avowed object of defeating the provisions of the Act without any bona fide intention to transfer title.
^ HELD: (1) If any transfer defeats the provisions of the Act by reducing the extent of surplus land in excess of the ceiling available from any person such transaction, bona fide or not, is void in the matter of computation of the permissible area and the surplus area.
The Authorised officer is within his power if he ignores it as void for purposes of section 22, section 7 and other ceiling related provisions.
[1132C] 1122 (2) Looking at the words of section 22 in the light of the scheme of prohibition of transfers to preserve the surplus land for distribution there is no justification for importing into section 22 more than its words convey.
The section says what it means.
A simple scan of the provision reveals that any transfer, gift, surrender, settlement or other alienations may be declared void by the Authorized Officer, if he finds that the transfer or the partition defeats any of the provision of this Act.
The trichotomy is obvious: There must be a transfer or other n alienation; it must have taken place during the period mentioned in the section; it must have the effect of defeating any of the provisions of the Act.
if these three elements are present, the Authorised officer must void the transfer.
There is no rule for importing a fourth principle that the transfer should be sham, nominal or bogus nor is there any additional consideration that if the transfer is bona fide for family necessity or other urgency then it is good even though it defeats the provisions of the Act.
The provision seeks to provide social justice for the landless and it defeats the purpose if, by the interpretative process, soft justice to large land holders is brought about.
[1130B D] (3) The literal meaning of the section is that any transfer or other alienation mentioned in it which reduces or impairs the otherwise available extent of surplus land beyond the ceiling defeats the provisions of the Act.
This is the plain meaning of the section which gives no room for doubt or justification for importation of any further condition like sham, bogus etc.
(4) The High Court was wrong in its view that the Act being confiscatory one, the public authority "invested with the power to enquire into and to invalidate a transfer should act reasonably, and that such a power should be construed beneficially in favour of the subject who is affected by the statute.
" The approach of the High Court is inept and inapplicable when once considers agrarian reform legislation whose avowed purpose is to take away as much extent of land as policy dictates so that distribution thereof among the landless may be achieved.
When a whole legislation is geared to deprivation of property, rules which have frowned upon confiscatory legislation cannot apply at all.
The jurisprudential principles in such a situation cannot be the same as have been inherited from a culture which postulates the State vs the subject.
[1126E G] (5) While dealing with welfare legislation of so fundamental 3 character as agrarian reform, the Court must constantly remember that the statutory pilgrimage to destination social justice should be helped, not hampered, by judicial interpretation.
It is true that Judges are constitutional invigilators and statutory interpreters; but they are also responsive and responsible to Part IV of the Constitution.
The judiciary, in its sphere, shares the revolutionary purpose of the constitutional order and when called upon to decode social legislation it must be animated by the goal oriented approach.
[1123E H]
