^ HELD: (Per Sarkaria, J.) The records of this case be submitted to the Hon 'ble Chief Justice for C constituting a larger Bench which would resolve the doubts, difficulties and inconsistencies pointed out by Kailasam J. in his order, particularly in its last paragraph.
(Per Kailasam, J.) 1.
Before the amendment of Section 367(5) of the Code of Criminal Procedure by the Criminal Procedure Code (Amendment) Act 1955 (Act 26 of 1955) was introduced, the normal sentence for an offence of murder was death and the lesser sentence was the exception.
After the introduction of the amendment it was not obligatory for the court to state the reasons as to why the sentence of death was not passed.
By the amendment the discretion of the court in deciding whether to impose a sentence of death or imprisonment for life became wider.
The court was bound to exercise its judicial discretion in awarding one or the other of the sentences.
By the introduction of Section 354(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973, the normal sentence is the lesser sentence of imprisonment for life and if the sentence of death is to be awarded, special reasons will have to be recorded.
In other words, the court, before imposing a sentence of death, should be satisfied that the offence is of such a nature that the extreme penalty is called for.
[1203A C] 2.
In a number of decisions, this court has reiterated the position that under section 354(3) of the 1973 Code, the court is required to state the reasons for the sentence awarded and in the case of sentence of death special reasons are required to be stated.
[1203D] Balwant Singh vs State of Punjab [1976] 2 S.C.R. 684; Ambaram vs The State of Madhya Pradesh ; and Sarveshwar Prasad Sharma vs Slate of Madhya Pradesh [1978] I S.C.R. 560 referred to.
In Jagmohan Singh vs State of U.P. ; in which the constitutional validity of imposition of death sentence was challenged, this Court held that the deprivation of life is constitutionally permissible if that is done according to the procedure established by law and that it cannot be held that capital sentence is per se unreasonable and not in the public interest.
It was also held that the Judges are invested with very wide discretion in the matter of fixing the degree of punishment and that discretion in the matter of sentence is liable 20 409SCI/79 1194 to be corrected by superior courts, that exercise of judicial discretion on well recognised principles is, in the final analysis, the safest possible safeguard for the accused.
[1204C D] 4.
Section 367(5) of the Criminal Procedure Code which came into force on April 1, 1974, after the judgment in Jagmohan Singh 's case, provides that the judgment shall state the special reasons where a sentence of death is award ed for an offence punishable with death or in the alternative with imprisonments life or imprisonment for a term of years.
The requirement that courts should state the special reasons for awarding the death sentence would indicate that the normal sentence for an offence punishable either with death or with imprisonment for life is imprisonment for life and that if the court considered that sentence of death is appropriate on the particular facts of the case it should give special reasons.
[1204 G H] 5.
But in Rajendra Prasad vs State of U.P. ; , the majority of a Division Bench of this Court held that "special reasons" necessary for imposing the death penalty must relate not to the crime as such but to the criminal.
The death sentence can be awarded only in certain restricted categories where a crime holds out a durable And continuing threat to social security in the setting of a developing country and poses a grave peril to society 's survival and when an economic offender intentionally mixes poison in drugs and knowingly and intentionally causes death for the sake of private profit and so on.
The decision is in many respects contrary to the law laid down by the Constitution Bench of this Court in Jagmohan Singh 's case.
The court in this case has proceeded to make law as regards the conditions that are necessary for imposition of a sentence of death under section 302 I.P.C. and to canalisation of sentencing discretion and has embarked on evolving working rules on punishment bearing in mind the enlightened flexibility of social sensibility.
In doing so the Court has exceeded its power conferred on it by law.
Courts have no power to legislate and to frame rules to guide the infliction of death penalty.
[1205C F] 6.
So far as the enacted law is concerned, the duty of the court is to interpret and construe the provisions of the enactment.
Courts must take it absolutely for granted that the Legislature has said what it meant and meant what it has said.
Judges are not at liberty to add or to take from or modify the letter of the law simply because they have reason to believe the true sentence legis is not completely or correctly expressed by it.
Though the courts are free to interpret, they are not free to overlook or disregard the constitution and the laws. [1207B D] 7.
It is for the court to administer the law as it stands.
In awarding sentence or death, the court has to take into consideration the various aspects regarding a crime and the reason for committing the crime and pass the appropriate sentence, and if it is death sentence, to give reasons as required by the Code of Criminal Procedure.
If in deciding a case on particular facts a principle is stated, it would be binding as a precedent.
If courts resort to rule making, it will not be binding as a precedent.
If the courts are to embark on rule making the question arises whether the responsibility can be undertaken by a bench of three Judges with majority of 2: 1.
There is no machinery by which the court could ascertain the views of the various cross sections of the society, which is a pre requisite before any law making is resorted to.
1195 Rajendra Prasad 's ease the court embarked on framing rules prescribing conditions for the imposition of death sentence.
The view of the majority that in awarding a sentence the criminal is more important than the crime is not warranted by the law as it stands today.
The general principles laid down in Rajendra Prasad 's case are not the ratio decidendi of the case.
The enunciation of the reasons or the principle on which a question before a court has been decided is alone binding as a precedent.
The concrete decision alone is binding between the parties to it but it is the abstract ratio decidendi ascertained on a consideration of the judgment in relation to the subject matter of the decision which alone bas the force of law and which, when it is clear what It was, is binding.
Statements which are not necessary to the decision, which go beyond the occasion and lay down a rule that is unnecessary for the purpose in hand have no binding authority on another court, though they may have merely persuasive efficacy.
Decisions upon matters of facts are not binding on any other court [1207G H; 1202D F] Tribhuvandas vs Ratilal ; = 70 Bom.
L. R. 73; Amritsar Municipality vs Hazara Singh A.I.R. ; and Quinn vs Leatham 1901 A.C. 495 at p. 506; referred to.
In Rajendra Prasad 's case the conclusion of the majority was that as nothing on record suggested that the accused was beyond redemption and since the record did not hint that such an attempt was made inside the prison there was no special reason to award death sentence.
The utmost to which this case can be considered as an authority is that if in similar circumstances when a person stabs two persons several times it would not furnish special reasons for inflicting the death penalty.
In the second case (Kunjukunju) the majority was of the view that the test should be whether the accused was a social security risk altogether beyond salvage by therapeutic life sentence was neither in accordance with the requirements of the Code of Criminal Procedure nor law laid down by the Constitution Bench.
Therefore, it cannot be followed as a precedent.
Similarly, in the third case (Dubey 's case) also the majority view that it would be illegal to award capital punishment without considering the correctional possibilities inside the prison and that the accused being young and of malleable age and other circumstances bearing on the offender called for the lesser sentence is not in conformity with the decisions of this Court or the requirements of the law.
[1213H; 1214A H] 9.
In the instant case the appellant was released after undergoing a term of imprisonment for the murder of his wife.
After release he lived with his cousin.
When his cousin 's son and wife objected to his stay with the family he inflicted a fatal injury on the son and two daughters of his cousin when they were asleep and caused grievous injury on another daughter The courts below came to the conclusion that the appellant acted in a very cruel manner.
They have rightly characterised the offence as heinous and held that the only appropriate sentence was the extreme penalty of death.
The trial court and the High Court were right in their conclusions.
[1215 C E] [Rajendra Prasad 's case cannot be treated as a binding precedent yet as it is a decision of a division bench of this Court.
The papers were directed to be placed before the Hon 'ble the Chief Justice for constituting a larger bench to decide the case.]
