Clause (g) of Section 15 of the City of Nagpur Corporation Act, 1948 lays down that "no person shall be eligible for election as a Councillor if he is under the provisions of any law for the time being in force, ineligible to he a member of any local authority.
Under sub section (4) of the Life Insurance Corporation of India (Staff) Regulations, 1960, "No 'employee shall canvass or otherwise interfere or use his influence in connection with or take part in an election of any legislature or local authority".
However proviso (iii) to the said sub section lays down that "the Chairman may permit an employee to offer himself as a candidate for election to a local authority and the employee so permitted shall not be deemed to have contravened the provisions of the regulation so as to attract punishment under.
Regulation 39, ibid.
The appellant (in C.A. 2406/77) and a returned candidate as a councillor from ward No. 34 of Nagpur was an employee of the Life Insurance Corporation.
The had not sought or got the Chairman 's permission to stand for the election, with the result the election petition filed by his nearest rival respondent 1 and appellant in C.A. 356 of 1978 on this sole ground of taboo Was accepted by the Court 's below.
The direction given by the trial court declaring respondent 1 and an elected candidate was however set aside by the High Court and hence C.A. 356 of 1978 against that part of the decision by respondent 1 in C.A. 2406/77.
Allowing C.A. 2406/77 and dismissing C.A. 356/78.
the Court ^ HELD [Per Krishna Iyer J.] 1.
The impact of Regulation 25(4) is not to impose ineligibility on an L.I.C. employee to be a member of a municipal Corporation.
Its effect is not on the candidature but on the employment itself.
The sole and whole object of Regulation 25 read with Regulation 39, is to lay down a rule of conduct for the L.I.C. employees.
Among the many things forbidden are for instance prohibition of acceptance of gifts or speculation in stocks and share.
Obviously neither Regulation 32 can be read as invalidating a gift to an L.I.C. employee under the law of gifts, nor Regulation 33 as nullifying transfer of stocks and shares speculatively purchased by the L.I.C. employee.
Likewise, Regulation 1079 25 while it does mandate that the employee shall not participate in an election ,4, to a local authority cannot be read as nullifying the election or disqualifying the candidate.
The contravention of the Regulation invites disciplinary action which may range from censure to dismissal [1088H, 1089A B, 1091G] 2.
Section 15(g) of the City of Nagpur Corporation Act, 1948 relates to the realm of election law and eligibility to be a member of a local authority.
Ineligibility must flow from specific provision of law designed to deny eligibility or to lay down disqualification.[1089] 3.
If a rule of conduct makes it undesirable, objectionable or punishable for an employee to participate in election to a local authority, it is a distortion, even an exaggeration out of proportion, of that provision to extract out of it a prohibition of a citizen 's franchise to be a member in the shape of a disqualification from becoming a member of a local authority.
The thrust of Regulation 25 is disciplinary and not disqualificatory.
Its intent imposes its limit, language used by a legislature being only a means of communicating its will in the given environment.
This is clear from the fact that the Chairman is of the power under Proviso (iii) to Section 25(4) to permit such participation by an employee depending on the circumstances of each case.
Even the range of punishment is variable.
[1089C E] 4.
There is no ground in public policy to support the plea to magnify the disciplinary prescription into a disenfranching taboo.
To revere the word to reverse the sense is to do injustice to the art of interpretation.
Permission is a word of wide import and may even survive the death of the person who permits.
Equally clearly, where a statute does not necessarily insist on previous permission, it may be granted even later to have retrospective effect, or permission once granted may be retracted.
[1089, H, 1090A] 5.
The strictly literal construction may not often be logical if the context indicates a contrary legislative intent.
Courts are not victims of verbalism but are agents of the functional success of legislation, given flexibility of meaning, if the law will thereby hit the target intended by the law maker.
A policy oriented understanding of a legal provision which does not do violence to the text or the context gains preference as against a narrow reading of the words used.
So viewed, the core purpose of Regulation 25(4) is not to clamp down disqualifications regarding elections but to lay down disciplinary forbiddance on conduct of government servants qua government servants contravention of which would invite punishment.
This is a purpose oriented interpretation.
[1087H, 1088A, 1090E] Dr.
Hutton vs Phillips, 45 Del. 156, 160, 70A. 2d 15, 17 (1949); quoted with approval.
Sarafatulla Sarkar vs Surja Kumar Mondal A.I.R. 1955 Cal.
382 (DB); Uttam Singh vs section Kripal Singh A.I.R. 1976 Punj.& Har. 176, approved.
Narayanaswamy Naidu vs Krishnamurthy and Anr.
I.L.R. ; explained 6.
Another persuassive factor based on a broader constitutional principle supporting the semantic attribution is this : The success of a democracy to 1080 'tourniquet ' excess of authority depends on citizen participation.
An inert citizenry indifferent to the political process is an 'enemy of the Republic 's vitality.
Indeed, absolutism thrives on inaction of the members of the polity.
Therefore activist involvement in various aspects of public affairs by as many citizens as can be persuaded to interest themselves is a sign of the health and strength of our democratic system.
Local self Government and adult franchise give constitutional impetus to the citizens to take part in public administration, of course, this does not mean that where a plain conflict of interests between holding an office and taking part in the political affairs of government exists, a disqualification cannot be imposed in public interest.
The rule is participation, the exception exclusion.
Viewed from that angle if government servant or an employee of the L.I.C. participate in local administration or other election it may well be that he may forfeit his position as government servant or employment, if dual devotion is destructive of efficiency as employee and be subject to disciplinary action a matter which depends on a given milieu and potential public mischief.
[1091C F] 7.
In election law, a defeated candidate cannot claim a seat through an election petition, merely out of speculative possibilities of success.
[1092B] 8.
It is true that there is no common law rule applicable in this area and election statutes have to be strictly construed, but that does not doctrinally drive the Ccurt to surrender to bizarre verbalism when a different construction may inject reasonableness into the provision.
Section 428 of the Corporation Act aims at sense and when a plurality of contestants are in the run other than the one whose selection is set aside predictability of the next highest becomes a misty venture.
The rule in section 428 contains the corrective in such situations and the pregnant expression against whose election no cause or objection is found gives jurisdiction to the Court to deny the declaration by the next highest and to direct a fresh election when the constituency will speak.
[1092C E] Pyale Saheb Gulzar Chhotumiyan Sawazi vs Dashrath Wasudeo and Ors.
1977 Mah.
L.J. p. 246; approved.
Sukhdev Singh vs Bhagatram, [19751 3 S.C R. 619; [1975] I SCC 421, held inapplicable.
Per Tulzapurkar J. (contra) 1.
The words "any law for the time being in force" occurring in Section 15(g) of the City of Nagpur Corporation Act, 1948 in the context refers to the law in force at the relevant time, that is, at the time of nomination or election when the question of disqualification or ineligibility arises for consideration.
On proper construction Regulation 25(4) of the L.I C. (Staff) Regulations 1960 read with section 15(g) of the Corporation Act imposes a disqualification on or creates an ineligibility for the employees of Life Insurance Corporation to stand for election to any local authority.
[1097D E] (a) In the first place the heading of the Regulation clearly shows that it deals with the topic and intends to provide a prohibition against standing for election.
Secondly, cl.
(4) of the said Regulation in plain and express terms provides: (No employee shall . take part in an election to any local authority").
In other words, by using negative language it puts a complete 1081 embargo subject to proviso (iii)] upon every employee from taking part in an election to any local authority.
[1097F H] (b) To say That Regulation 25(4) merely creates a prohibition against standing for election but does not create any ineligibility or disqualification to stand for an election is merely to a quibble at words.
There s no distinction between a legal prohibition against a person standing for election and the imposition of an ineligibility or disqualification upon him so to stand.
[1097H, 1098A] (c) It is true that the purpose of framing Staff Regulations was and is to decline the terms and conditions of service of the employees of the L.I.C and that being the purpose it is but natural that a provision for imposition of penalties four breach of such Regulations would also be made therein.
In fact the validity of such prohibition contained in the concerned Regulation rests upon the postulate that it prescribes a code of conduct for the employees and as such it would be within the Regulation making power conferred on the L.I.C. under section 49 of the L.I.C. Act 1956 but while prescribing a code of Conduct the Regulation simultaneously creates a disqualification or ineligibility for the employee to stand for election to any local authority.
[1098A C] (d) To construe Regulation 25(4) as merely prescribing a code of conduct breach whereof is made punishable under Regulation 39 and not imposing a disqualification or.
ineligibility upon the employees to stand for election to a local authority would amount to rendering a residuary provision like section 15(g) in the Corporation Act otiose.
[1098C D] 3.
The cases falling within the aspects emerging from Regulation ` and proviso (iii) to Regulation 25(4) are completely taken out of the prohibition contained in Regulation 25(4).
Proviso (iii) to Regulation 25(4) is similar to the proviso tc.
section 15 of the Corporation Act under which a disqualification under cls.
(e) (f) (g) or (i) could be removed by an order of the Provincial Government in that behalf and obviously when any one of those disqualifications is removed by an order of the Provincial Government under the proviso the case would clearly be outside section 15.
Tn other words the two aspects (i) that certain employees under Regulation 2 would not be governed by the Staff Regulations at all and would not therefore be hit by the prohibition and (ii) that upon permission being obtained from the Chairman under proviso (iii) the employee would be outside the prohibition have no bearing on the questions of proper construction of Regulation 25 (4).
[1098E F] In the instant case the returned candidate suffered a disqualification or rather was under an ineligibility under Regulation 25(4) read with section 15 (g) of the Corporation Act 1948 which vitiated his election; if he were keen on active participation in the democratic process it was open to him to do so by either resigning his post or obtaining the Chairman 's permission before offering his candidature but his right as a citizen to keep up the Republic 's vitality by active participation in the political process cannot be secured to him by a purpose orientated construction of the relevant Regulation [1011D F] G. Narayanaswamy Naidu vs C. Krishnamurthy and Anr.
I.L.R. ; explained and approved.
13 409 SCI/79 1082 Md Sarafatulla Sarkar vs Surja Kumar Mondal, A.I.R. distinguished.
Uttam singh vs section Kripal Singh and Anr., A.I.R. 1976 P HELD FURTHER (Concurring) of 1978 should be dismissed.
The declaration granted to the appellant by the learned Assistant Judge under section 428(2) of the Corporation Act, 1948 should never have been granted.
It is true that the election petitioner secured the next highest number of votes but that by itself would not entitle him to meet a declaration in his favour that he be deemed to have been duly elected as a Councillor from Ward No. 34.
[1102G H] 5.
Section 428(2) is not that absolute for the relevant part of sub section
(2) provides that if the election of the returned candidate is either.
declared to be null and void or is set aside the District Court "shall direct that the candidate, if any, in whose favour next highest number of valid votes is recorded after the said person or after all the persons who have returned at the said election and against whose election the case or objection is found shall be deemed to have been elected".
The words "against whose election no cause or objection is found" give jurisdiction to the District Court to deny the declaration to the candidate who has secured the next best votes.
[1103A B] 6.
The High Court has rightly taken the view that there was no material on record to show how the voters, who had voted for the returned candidate, would have Cast their votes had they known about the disqualification.
[1103B C] Observation 1.
Judges and lawyers always clamour for legislative simplicity and when legislative simplicity is writ large on the concerned provision and the text of the provision is unambiguous and not susceptible to dual interpretation, it.
would not be permissible for a court, by indulging in nuances semantics and interpretative acrobatics to reach the opposite conclusion than is warranted by its plain text and make it plausible or justify it by spacious references to the object, purpose or scheme of the legislation or in the name of judicial activism.
[1093A B] 2.
Prefaces and exordial exercises, perorations and sermons as also theses almost every judgment irrespective of whether the subject or the context or language that needs simplification, have ordinarily no proper place in judicial pronouncements.
In any case.
day in and day out indulgence in these in almost every judgment irrespective of whether the subject or the context or the occasion demands it or not, serves little purpose, and surely such indulgence becomes indefensible when matters are to be disposed of in terms of settlement arrived at between the parties or for the sake of expounding the law while rejecting the approach to the Court at the threshold on preliminary grounds such as non maintainability laches and the like.
Judicial activism in many cases is the result of legislative inactivity and the role of a Judge as a law maker has been applauded but it has been criticised also lauded when it is played within the common law tradition but criticised when it is carried to extremes.
[1101F H, 1102A B] 1083 Pathak, J, (Concurring) 1.
Section 15 of the Nagpur Corporation Act declares a person ineligible for election as a Councillor on any one of the several grounds.
He may be ineligible because he is not a citizen of India, that is the say, he lacks in point of legal status.
He may also be intelligible in point of lack of capacity defined by reference to disqualifying circumstances, for example, he may nave beer adjudged by a competent court to be of unsound mind.
The disqualification 1 may be found, by nature of clause (g) under the provisions of any subsisting law.
But the law must provide that he is ineligible to be a member of any local authority.
The law must deal with ineligibility for membership, and in the context of section 15, that must be ineligibility for election.
lt must be a law concerned with elections.
Clause (g) is a residual clause.
not uncommonly found wherever provision of an election law sets forth specified category of disqualified or ineligible person and thereafter includes a residual clause, leaving the definition of remaining categories of the other laws.
These other laws must also be election laws.
An example is the Representation of the people Act, 1951 which is relevant to Article 102(1)(e) and Article 191 (I)(e) of the Constitution.
Since section 15 of the Nagpur Corporation Act is a provision of the election law, clause (g) must be so construed that the law providing for ineligibility contemplated therein must also be of the same nature, that is to say, election law.
[1104G H, 1105A C] 2.
Regulation 25(4) of the (Staff) Regulations is not a law, dealing with elections.
Chapter III of the (Staff) Regulations, in which Regulation 25 is found, deals with 'conduct, discipline and appeals ' in regard to employees of the Life Insurance Corporation of India.
A conspectus of the provision contained in the Chapter, from section 20 to SO shows that it deals with nothing else.
This is a body of provisions defining and controlling the conduct of employees in order to ensure efficiency and discipline in the Corporation, and providing for penalties (Section 39) against erring employees.
Regulation 25 prohibits participation in politics and standing for elections.
Regulation 25(4) forbids an employee not only from taking part in an election to any legislature or local authority, but also from canvassing or otherwise interfering or using his influence, in connection with such an election.
If he does, he will be guilty of a breach of discipline, punishable under Regulation 39.
Regulation 25(4) is a norm of discipline.
In substance it is nothing else.
In substance, it is not a provision of.
election law.
It cannot be construed as defining a ground of electoral ineligibility.
All that it says to the employee is: ' while you may be eligible for election to a legislature or local authority by virtue of your local status or capacity.
you shall not exercise that right if you wish to conform to the discipline of your service." [1105D G] 3.
The right to stand for election flows from the election law Regulation 25(4) does not take away or abrogate the right; it merely seeks to restrain the employee from exercising it in the interest of service discipline.
If in fact the employee exercises the right, he may be punished under Regulation 39 with any of the penalties visited on an employee a penalty which takes its colour from the relevance of 'employment, and has nothing to do with the election law.
No penalty under Chapter III of the (Staff) Regulations can provide for invalidating the election of an employee to a legislature or a local authority.
[1105G H, 1106A] 1084 When the restraint on standing for election imposed by Regulation 25(4) has to be removed, it is by the Chairman of the Life Insurance Corporation of India under the third proviso.
When he does so, it is as a superior in the hierarchy of service concerned with service discipline.
He does not do so as an authority concerned with elections.
Therefore Regulation 25(4) of the staff Regulations is not a law within the contemplation of Section 15(g) of the Nagpur Corporation Act.
Samarth must therefore, succeed in his appeal.
That being so, Marotrao must fail in his.
Samarth having been duly elected to the office of Councillor Marotrao cannot claim the same office for himself.
[1106A C,D] G. Narayanaswamy Naidu vs C. Krishnamurthy & Anr.
ILR [1958] Mad.
S 13, disapproved.
Md. Sarafatulla sarkar vs Suraj Kumar Mandal, A.I.R. Uttam Singh vs
section Kirpal Singh, AIR 1976 Punj.
& Har. 176; approved.
