There was a dispute between the appellants and the complainant 's party over the 'turns of water ' for irrigation of their agricultural lands.
The dispute was settled by a patchwork mediation but it was of no avail.
On the fateful day, the complainant 's party were making merry with alcohol in the house of the prosecution witness when the 3rd appellant joined them.
His unwelcome presence resulted in frayed tempers, and beatings of the 3rd appellant.
The latter, bent on reprisal for the flagellation and humilation, waited till sundown and returned armed with friends and weapons.
He ignited the attack by instigation and the 1st and 2nd appellants fired with their guns as a result of which 3 members of the complainants ' party died on the spot.
At this situation, PW 14 brought out his licensed gun from his house, and thereupon both sides started firing and a number of persons sustained gun shot injuries on their person.
In the midst of this firing, the lambardar of the village appeared on the scene and made an attempt to pacify both the sides, but he also received gun shot injuries as a result of which he died two days later.
A fourth person made a dying declaration that he had been shot by the appellants.
The Sessions Court held the appellants guilty under Section 302 I.P.C. and sentenced them to death, and the High Court on appeal confirmed the sentence.
Allowing the appeal to this court, ^ HELD: [Per Krishna Iyer & Desai, JJ.] 1.
Death sentence on death sentence is Parliament 's function.
Interpretative non application of death sentence when legislative alternatives exist is within judicial discretion.
[1065B] 2.
The dignity of man, a sublime value of the Constitution and the heart of penelogical humanisation, may find expression through culturisation of the judicial art of interpretation and choice from alternatives.
If the Court reads the text of section 302 Penal Code, enlightened by the fundamental right to life which the Founding Fathers of the Constitution made manifest, the judicial oath to uphold the Constitution will unfold profound implications 1060 beyond lip service to Form VIII of the Third Schedule and this lofty obligation and cultural Constitutional behest validates the exploration of the meaning of meanings wrapped in the uncharted either/or of the text of section 302 IPC.
[1065E F] 3.
Courts read the Code, not in judicial cloisters but in the light of societal ethos.
Nor does the humanism of our Constitution holistically viewed, subscribe to the hysterical assumption or facile illusion that a crime free society dawn if hangman and firing squads were kept feverishly busy.
[1066A B] 4.
The myopic view that public executions backed by judicial sentences will perform the funeral of all criminals and scare away potential offenders is a die hard superstition of sociologically and psychologically illiterate legalism which sacrifices cultural values, conveniently turns away from the history of the futility of capital penalty over the ages and unconsciously violates the global reality that half the world has given up death penalty, de jure or de facto, without added calamity, and the other half is being educated out of this State practised lethal violence by powerful human rights movements at once secular and spiritual.
[1067B C] 5.
The jurisprudence of sentencing in Free India has been a Cinderella and the values of our Constitution have not adequately humanised the punitive diagnostics of criminal courts, which sometimes, though rarely, remind us of the torture some and trigger happy aberrations of the Middle Ages and some gory geographic segments, soaked in retributive blood and untouched by the correctional karuna of our Constitutional culture.
[1068G] 6.
After Ediga Annamas 's case ; the law of punishment under section 302 IPC has been largely settled by this court and the High Courts are bound thereby.
[1068H] 7.
Rajendra Prasad 's case ; and Bishnu Deo Shaw 's case [1979] 3 SCR p. 355 have indubitably laid down the normative cynosure and until over ruled by a larger bench of this court that is the law of the land under article 141.
To discard it is to disobey the Constitution and such subversiveness of the rule of law, in a crucial area of life and death, will spell judicial disorder.
Today, the law is what Rajendra Prasad, in its majority judgment, has laid down and that has been done at unmistakable length.
Willy nilly, that binds judges and parties alike.
[1068H 1069A, 1069C] 8.
Counting the casualties is not the main criterion for sentencing to death, nor recklessness in the act of murder.
The sole focus on the crime and the total farewell to the criminal and his social personal circumstances mutilate.
sentencing justice.
[1069B] 9.
The forensic exercise at the sentencing stage, despite the purposeful section 235(2) Cr.
P.C., has been a functional failure because of the casual way the punishment factors are dealt with, as if the nature of the crime was the sole determinant of the punishment.
In Rajendra Prasad 's case it has been explained how the prosecution must make out, by special factors, why the graver penalty should be inflicted.
Evidence may be led and arguments addressed by both sides, but in practice section 235(2) has been frustratingly ritualised.
[1069D E] 1061 10.
Section 302 of the Penal Code, read with section 354(3) of the Criminal Procedure Code demands special reasons four awarding the graver sentence.
[1070El ll.
Taking the cue from the English legislation on abolition, the majority opinion suggested that life imprisonment which strictly means imprisonment for the whole of the man 's life but in practice amounts to incarceration for a period between 10 and 14 years may, at the option of the convicting court, be subject to the condition that the sentence of imprisonment shall last as long as life lasts where there are exceptional indications of murderous recidivism and the community cannot run the risk of the convict being at large.
This takes care of judicial apprehensions that unless physically liquidated the culprit may at some remote time repeat murder.
[1071F G] 12.
The gallows swallow, in most cases, the social dissenter, the political dissenter, the poor and the under privileged, the member of minority groups or one who has turned tough because of broken homes, parental neglect or other undeserved adversities of childhood or later.
Judicial error leading to innocent men being executed is not too recondite a reality.
Evidence in Court and assessments by judges have human limitation.
[1071H 1072Bl 13.
A Full Bench of the Madras High Court in Athapa Goundan 's case (AIR 1937 Mad.
695) sentenced him to death.
He was duly executed as also several others on the ratio of that ruling.
This Full Bench decision was, however, over ruled ten years later by the Privy Council in Had it been done before Goundan was gallowed many judicial hangings could have been halted.
[1072C] (A) In the instant case the earlier provocation came from the deceased 's side by beating up Appellant No. 3.
The parties, including the prosecution group were tipsy.
There had been antecedent irrigation irritation between them.
There was no pre planned, well laid attack, hell bent on liquidating the enemy.
[1069E] (B) The sentences of death in the present appeal are liable to be reduced to life imprisonment.
[1071E] (Per Sen, J. dissenting) 1.
The question of abolition of capital punishment is a difficult and controversial subject, long and hotly debated and it has evoked during the past two centuries strong conflicting views.
[1072H] 2.
The question whether the scope of death sentence should be curtailed or not is for the Parliament to decide.
The matter is essentially of political expediency and, as such, it is the concern of the statesmen, and, therefore, the domain of the Legislature land not the Judiciary.
[1073A] 3.
It is not within the province of this Court while dealing with an appeal confined to sentence under article 136, to curtail the scope of death sentence under section 302 l.
P.C., 1860 nor is it constitutionally or legally permissible for this Court while hearing such an appeal to lay down that on grounds of compassion and humanism the sentence of death on a conviction for murder under section 302, as a rule of universal application be substituted by a sentence 1062 of imprisonment for life, irrespective of the gravity of the crime and the surrounding circumstances i.e., virtually abolish the extreme penalty.
[1072G] 4.
Section 302 I.P.C., 1860 confers upon the Court a discretion in the matter of the punishment to be imposed for an offence of murder and the Court has to choose between the sentence of death and a sentence of imprisonment for life while under section 354(3) Cr. P.C., 1973 the Court is enjoined with a duty to record 'special reasons ' in case the extreme penalty is awarded.
But the question whether the death sentence should be awarded or not must, be left to the discretion of the Judge trying the accused and the question of sentence must depend upon the facts and circumstances obtaining in each case.
A sentence of death when passed, is subject to confirmation by the High Court under section 366(1) of the Code.
The accused also has a right of appeal to the High Court under section 374(2) against the sentence.
Thereafter an appeal lies to this Court by special leave under article 136 on the question of sentence.
It would, therefore, be manifest that it is neither feasible to define nor legally permissible for this Court to limit or circumscribe the connotation of the expression 'special reasons ' occurring in section 354(3) of the Code so as to bring about a virtual abolition of the death sentence.
[1073B E] 5.
A decision on a question of sentence depending upon the facts and circumstances of a particular case, can never be regarded as a binding precedent, much less 'law declared ' within the meaning of article 141 of the Constitution so as to bind all courts within the territory of India.
[1073F] 6.
According to the well settled, theory of precedents every decision contains three basic ingredients: (i) findings of material facts, direct and inferential.
An inferential finding, of facts is the inference which the Judge draws from the direct, or perceptible facts, (ii) statements of the principles of law applicable to the legal problems disclosed by the facts, (iii) Judgment based on the combined effect of (i) and (ii).
For the purposes of the parties themselves and their privies, ingredient No. (iii) is the material element in the decision for it determines finally their rights and liabilities in relation to the subject matter of the action.
It is the judgment that estops the parties from reopening the dispute.
However for the purposes of the doctrine of precedents, ingredient No. (ii) is the vital element in the decision.
This indeed is the ratio decidendi.
It is not everything said by a judge when giving judgment that constitutes a precedent.
The only thing in a judge 's decision binding a party is the principle upon which the case is decided and for this reason it is important to analyse a decision and isolate from it the radio decidendi.
[1073G 1074B] 7.
The ratio decidendi may be defined as a statement of law applied to the legal problems raised by the facts as found, upon which the decision is based.
The other elements in the decision are not precedents.
[1074C] Qualcast (Wolverhampton) Ltd. vs Haynes L.R. 1959 A.C. 743 referred to.
Even where the direct facts of an earlier case appear to be identical to those of the case before the Court, the Judge is not bound to draw the same inference as drawn in the earlier case.
[1074D] 1063 9.
There are no rationes decidendi much less any ratio decidendi in Rajendra Prasad 's case.
[1074 E] (i) In the minority opinion the need for judicial restraint was emphasised and the duty to avoid encroachment on the powers conferred upon Parliament.
The assessment of public opinion on this difficult and complex question was essentially a legislatives not a judicial, function.
[1074El (ii) Buttressed by the belief that Capital punishment served no useful purpose, the majority, asserted that it was morally unacceptable to the contemporary society and found it shocking to their conscience and sense of justice.
The deliberate extinguishment of human life by the State for an offence of murder, was a denial of human dignity and the death penalty was usually inflicted only on a few, i.e. the poor and downtrodden who are outcasts of a society, which led to the irresistible inference that the punishment was not fairly applied.
[1074F] (iii) This may be 'progressive ' stance which is out of place in a judicial pronouncement, which ought to be based on the facts and circumstances of the case and the law applicable.
But the professed view does not stem from a firm belief in dignity of human life for the death penalty is advocated for certain classes of offenders namely (l) white collar offenders, (2) anti social Offenders and (3 ) hardened murderers.
This shows that the majority was not against the capital punishment in principle.
[1074G 1075A] (iv) on the facts, the majority commuted the sentence of death to a sentence of imprisonment for life, and the decision cannot, therefore, be construed as laying down a ratio decidendi.
[1075B 10.
The majority decision tested in the light of the theory of precedents clearly does not lay down any legal principle applied to any legal problem disclosed by the facts and, therefore, the majority decision cannot be, said to have 'declared any law ' within the meaning of article 141 so as to bind all courts in the country.
General observations made in the context of sentencing jurisprudence will have to be regarded as the view of the Judge/ Judges concerned and not 'law declared by this court ' under article 141 of the Constitution.
Any attempt to limit or circumscribe the connotation of 'special reasons ' mentioned in section 354(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure by indulging in classification of murders such as white collar offences and nonwhite collar offences or laying down so called guidelines for imposition of the extreme penalty, would amount to unwarranted abridgement of the discretion legally vested in the trial court and constitutionally upheld by this Court.[1075C D] 11.
If the general observations on sentencing jurisprudence made in Rajendra Prasad 's ease are to be regarded as 'law declared by this Court ' within the meaning of article 141 so, as to bind all courts in the country, then the observation or the so called guidelines to the effect " 'special reasons ' necessary for imposing death penalty must relate, not to the crime as such but to the criminal" occurring in the majority judgment, it must be stated, would be unwarranted and contrary to s 302 of the Indian Penal Code read with section 354(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
[1075E F] 1064 12.
section 302 of the I.P.C. gives a choice while section 354(3) of the Code merely requires 'special reasons ' to be indicated for imposing the death penalty.
Nothing is stated whether the 'special reasons ' should relate to the criminal or the crime.
In the absence of any specific indication in that behalf 'special reasons ' would relate both to the crime and the criminal.
Previously, perhaps, more attention was being paid to the nature, gravity and the manner of committing the crime, though extenuating factors concerning the criminal, his age, criminal tendencies etc.
were not ignored.
[1075G] 13.
In the majority judgment in Rajendra Prasad 's case nothing new has been said except that more emphasis on factors concerning the criminal is indicated.
But in the great enthusiasm for doing so, the pendulum has swung to the other extreme and the guideline given is that the 'special reasons ' must relate "not to the Crime as such but to the criminal," for which there is no warrant in section 354(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
[1075H 1076A] 14.
The obsession to get the death penalty abolished from the Statute Book i.e. Indian Penal Code 1860 is so great great an interdict against it is surprisingly spelt out from the Constitution itself because right to life has been regarded as 'very valuable, sacrosanct and fundamental ' therein, though in Jagmohan Singh 's case 1(1973) 1 S.C.C. 20] a constitution bench of this Court unanimously held that the death penalty and the judicial discretion vested in the Court regarding its imposition on an accused are constitutionally valid.
[1076B C] 15.
So long as the extreme penalty is retained on the Statute Book, it would be impermissible for any Judge to advocate its abolition in judicial pronouncements.
The forum for that is elsewhere.
[1076D] (a) In the instant case it cannot be said that the award of death sentence to any of the two appellants, was not proper or uncalled for.
Though the dispute was over the 'turns of water, ' that would hardly furnish any justification for the commission of the pre planned triple murder.
The dastardly act of the appellants resulted in the loss of three precious lives.
These were nothing but intentional, cold blooded and brutal murders.
[1077A, E] (b) The High Court was justified in confirming the death sentence passed under section 368(a) of the Code, being satisfied that there were 'special reasons" within the meaning of section 354, sub section
(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973.
[1077A] (c) On the facts and circumstances of the case the award of death sentence to the two appellants who were trigger happy gentlemen was neither 'erroneous in principle ' nor was 'arbitrary or excessive ', or 'indicative of an improper exercise of discretion ', and is well merited.
[1077G]
