The earliest provision granting exemption of super tax in respect of intercorporate dividends was made as far back as 9th December, 1933 in a Notification issued by the Governor General in Council and it provided as follows: "The Governor General in Council is pleased to exempt from super tax.
(i) so much of the income of any investment trust company as is derived from dividend paid by any other company which has paid or will pay super tax in respect of the profits, out of which such dividends are paid.
" This Notification was followed by a provision of a similar kind granting exemption from super tax in respect of certain specified categories of inter corporate dividends introduced as section 56A in the Indian Income Tax Act, 1922.
When this Act was repealed and the present Act enacted with effect from 1st April, 1962 section 99, sub section (1) was introduced in the present Act exempting certain categories of income from super tax and one of such categories was that set out in cl.
Section 99, sub section (i) cl.
(iv) read as follows: "99(1) Super Tax shall not be payable by any assessee in respect of the following amounts which are included in his total income (iv) if the assessee is a company, any dividend received by it from an Indian Company, subject to the provisions contained in the Fifth Schedule.
" This provision continued to be in force upto 31st March, 1965 subject to a minor inconsequential amendment made by Finance Act, 1964, but by an amendment made by Finance Act 10 of 1965, the provision was omitted and Chapter VI A and section 85A were introduced in the present Act with effect from 1st April, 1965.
Chapter VIA comprised sections 80A to 80D providing for certain specified deductions to be made in computing total income while section 85A provided for deduction of tax on inter corporate dividends.
The original Chapter VIA and certain other sections including section 85A were deleted from the present Act by Finance (No.2) Act, 1967 with effect from 1st April, 1968 and replaced by a new Chapter VIA which contains a fasciculus of sections from section 80A to section 80VV.
Section 80A, sub section (1) provides that 985 in computing the total income of an assessee there shall be allowed from his gross total income, in accordance with and subject to the provisions of Chapter VIA, the deductions specified in section 80C to section 80VV and sub section (2) of that section imposes a ceiling on such deductions by enacting that the aggregate amount of such deductions shall not, in any case, exceed the gross total income of the assessee.
The expression "gross total income" is defined in cl.
(5) of section 80B to mean the total income computed in accordance with the provisions of the Act before making any deduction under Chapter VIA or under section 280.
O Section 80M is the new section which corresponds to the repealed section 85A and it provides for deduction in respect of certain categories of inter corporate dividends.
There were several amendments made subsequently in this section but they relate primarily to the percentage of the income to be allowed as a deduction.
One amendment that was made by Finance Act, 1968, was that the words "received by it" occurring in sub section (1) of section 80M were omitted with effect from 1st April, 1968.
The Finance Act of 1968 also provided in sub section (2) and (3) of section 31 that notwithstanding the omission of section 99, sub section (1), cl.
(iv) and section 85A, the provisions of these sections shall have and be deemed always to have effect, subject to the modification that the words "received by it" in the opening part of these sections were deleted.
The net effect of these amendments was that the words "received by it" following upon the words "dividend" were omitted with retrospective effect from section 99 sub section (1), cl.
(iv) and section 85A and section 80M was to be read as if the words "received by it" were not in the opening part of that section.
The Gujarat High Court having taken a view against the assessees (appellants), appeals were preferred against the judgment relating to the assessment years 1965 66 and 1966 67 when section 85A was in force.
In view of the conflict of opinion between the view of the Gujarat High Court, and the view taken by the Bombay, Madras and Calcutta High Courts, the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, referred similar matters under section 257 of the Act to this Court.
In the appeals and references before this Court, the question was whether on a true interpretation of Sections 85A and 80M of the Income Tax Act, 1961, rebate of income tax is admissible on the actual amount of dividend received by an assessee, being a company, from an Indian company, or it is confined only to the dividend income as computed in accordance with the provisions of the Act, that is after making the deductions specified in section 57 including deductions of the interest paid on borrowings for making the investments.
Allowing the appeals and answering the questions referred by the Tribunal in favour of the assessees: ^ HELD: 1.
The assessees are entitled to relief under section 85A for the assessment years 1965 66, 1966 67 and 1967 68 and under section 80M for the assessment years 1968 69 and 1969 70 in respect of the entire amount of dividend income without deductions of interest paid on borrowings for acquiring the shares.
[1006 B] 2.
Sections 85A and 80M were not written by the Legislature on a clean slate, nor were they the outcome of any new or innovative exercise of legislative judgment, but they were preceded by similar provisions granting rebate of super tax or income tax on inter corporate dividends and these provisions as 986 interpreted by the Courts throw light on the true meaning and content on sections 85A and 80M. [99 F].
It is clear from the Notes on cl. 31 which subsequently became section 31 of the Finance Act, 1968, that the amendments retrospectively deleting the words "received by it" from the opening part of section 99, sub section (1), cl.
(iv) and section 85A were made with a view to widening the scope of the relief granted under these sections, as it was felt that the presence of these words might render these sections inapplicable in cases where the shares to which the dividend relates are registered in the name of a person other than the assessee and the dividend is, therefore, received strictly speaking, by such other person and not by the assessee.
The object of introducing these amendments was to widen the scope of the tax relief provided under section 99, sub section (1), cl.
(iv) and section 85A by making it available to the assessee even though the shares to which the dividend related were registered in the name of a person other than the assessee and not to narrow it down by restricting it to net dividend computed after making deductions allowable under the provisions of the Act.
[998 E G].
Even after the deletion of the words "received by it", the expressions "any dividend from an Indian company" and "any income by way of dividends from an Indian company" occurring in the opening part of these sections continue to mean the same thing, namely, the full amount of dividend derived or obtained from an Indian company.
The decisions of the Bombay, Calcutta and Madras High Courts interpreting these sections cannot, therefore, be said to be displaced by the retrospective omission of the words "received by it." [998 H 999 B].
It is clear on a plain natural construction of the language of section 99 sub section (1), cl.
(iv), that it grants exemption from super tax in respect of "any dividend from an Indian company" and these last mentioned words cannot mean anything else than the full amount of dividend derived from an Indian company.
They cannot obviously mean dividend from an Indian company minus any expenses incurred in earning it, or less any other deduction allowable under the Act.
[999 C D].
The words, "the following amounts which are included in his total income", in the opening part of section 99, sub section (1) do not have any limitative effect so as to restrict "dividend from an Indian company" in respect of which exemption from super tax is granted to dividend computed in accordance with the provisions of the Act and forming part of the total income.
The exemption from super tax granted under section 99 sub section (1) is not only in respect of "dividend from an Indian company" referred to in cl.
(iv), but also in respect of other items of income mentioned in clauses (i) to (iii) and (v).
[999 E].
The legislature clearly wanted to provide that the different categories of income mentioned in clauses (i) to (v) should be eligible for exemption from super tax, only if they are included in the total income and the Legislature could have made such a provision separately in respect of each category of income in the opening part of s.99 sub section (1), but instead of adopting such legislative device, which would have been both inapt and inelegant, the Legislature chose to use an omnibus expression, "the following amounts which are included in his total income", which would cover all the different items of income dealt with in clauses (i) to (v).
[999 F G].
987 8.
It would, therefore, seem that though the exemption from super tax granted under clause (iv) of sub section (i) of section 99 would be applicable only if the particular item of income namely, "dividend from an Indian company ' is included in total income, what is exempted is "dividend from an Indian company" which can only mean the full amount of dividend received from an Indian company.
[1000 B].
Commissioner of Income Tax, Kerala vs South India Bank Ltd., ; referred to.
Section 85A in its opening part by using the words "where the total income of an asessee. . includes any income by way of dividends, from an Indian Company", lays down a condition for its applicability, which is that the total income must include income by way of divdend from an Indian company.
It is only if this category of income forms a component part of total income that the provisions enacted in the section is attracted and the assessee becomes entitled to rebate on income calculated with reference to the "income so incduded".
[1001 F].
The meaning of the section would become clear if the words "income by way of dividends from an Indian company", are substituted for the words "income so included.
" Then it would be obvious that the rebate on income tax is to be calculated by applying the average rate of tax to the "income by way of dividends from an Indian company" which can only mean the full amount of dividend received from an Indian company.
[1002 B C].
Commissioner of Income Tax vs Indian Guarantee & General Insurance Co Ltd., approved.
There is a close similarity between section 85A and section 80M so far as the opening part of the two sections is concerned, but in the latter part, there is a difference inasmuch as section 85A provides for calculation of rebate of income tax on "income so included", while section 80M provides for deduction of the whole or part of "such income by way of dividends".
The language employed by the legislature in section 80M leaves no doubt that the deduction, whether whole or 60 per cent, is to be calculated with reference to the entire amount of income by way of dividends.
[1002 D E].
Section 80M occurs in Chapter VIA which is headed "Deduction to be made in computing total income".
The marginal note to the section, indicates, that it provides for deduction in respect of certain inter corporate dividends.
Section 80A sub section (1) provides that in computing the total income of an assessee, the deductions specified in section 80C to 80VV shall be made from his gross total income, and gross total income, according to the definition in section 80B, cl.
(5) means the total income computed in accordance with the provisions of the Act before making any deduction under Chapter VIA or under section 280.O.
What section 80A, sub section (1) requires is that first the total income of the assessee must be computed in accordance with the provisions of the Act without taking into account the deductions required to be made under Chapter VIA or under section 280.O. and then from the gross total income thus computed, the deductions specified in section 80C to 80VV must be made in order to arrive at the total income.
But sub section (2) of section 80A provides that the aggregate 988 amount of the deductions required to be made under Chapter VIA shall not exceed the gross total income of the assessee so that the total income arrived at after making the deductions specified in section 80C to 80VV from the gross total income can never be a minus or negative figure.
This provision imposing a ceiling on the deductions which may be made under sections 80C to 80VV clearly postulates that in a given case the aggregate amount of these deductions may exceed the gross total income.
[1002 G 1003 B].
The words "where the gross total income of an assessee. includes any income by way of dividends from a domestic company" are intended only to provide that a particular category of income, namely, income by way of dividends from a domestic company should form a component part of the gross total income.
These words merely prescribe a condition for the applicability of the section namely, that the gross total income must include the category of income described by the words "Income by way of dividends from a domestic company".
If the gross total income includes this particular category of income, whatever be the quantum of such income included, the condition would be satisfied and the assessee would be eligible for deduction of the whole or 60 per cent of "such income".
[1003 F G].
The words "such income" as a matter of plain grammar must be substituted by the words "income by way of dividends from a domestic company", in order to arrive at a proper construction of the section and if that is done, it would be obvious that the deduction is to be in respect of the whole or 60 per cent of the "income by way of dividends from a domestic company" which can only mean the full amount of dividends received from a domestic company.
The deduction permissible under the section is, therefore, to be calculated with reference to the full amount of dividends received from a domestic company and not with reference to the dividend income as computed in accordance with the provisions of the Act, that is, after making deductions provided under the Act.
[1004 B C].
If the Legislature was of the view that the deduction should not be in respect of the full amount of dividends received from a domestic company, but it should only be in respect of the amount of dividend computed after deducting allowable expenditure, the legislature would have undoubtedly amended section 80M, sub section (1) and made its intention quite clear.
[1005 C].
The legislature in fact amended section 80M several times in respect of other matters subsequent to the decision of the Bombay High Court in the New Great Insurance Cols case and the decision of the Madras High Court in the Madras Auto Service 's case, but it did not choose to amend the lannguage employed in section 80M, sub section (1) for the purpose of overriding the interpretation placed by the courts.
This indicates legislative recognition of the interpretation placed by the Courts on section 85A and section 80M. [1005 D E].
Section 80K read with rule 20, section 80MM, section 80N and section 80.O which occur in the same group of sections as section 80M, use the same legislative formula as section 80M and open with the identical words "where the gross total income of an assessee includes any income.
" It appears on a plain reading of these sections that the deduction admissible is in respect of the whole of the income 989 received by the assessee and not in respect of the income computed after making the deductions provided under the Act.
[1005 F G] Madras Auto Service vs Income Tax Officer, ; approved.
