Section 5(1) of the Punjab Sales Tax Act, 1948 authorises the State Government to determine the rates of tax payable on the taxable turnover of a dealer not exceeding the limit prescribed therein.
Sub section (2) lays down the principles governing the determination of the taxable turnover.
Schedule 'C ' of the Act refers to goods, the turnover of which is subject to purchase tax.
Section 31 of the Act which gives specific power to the State Government to amend Schedule 'C ' provides that after giving by notification, not less than three months ' notice of its intention so to do the State Government may add to or delete from Schedule 'C ' any goods and thereupon Schedule 'C ' shall be deemed to be amended accordingly.
By a notification dated January 15, 1968 the State Government added in Schedule 'C ', "paddy" and "rice" as items on which purchase tax could be levied.
As a result of this notification turnover relating to the purchase of paddy and rice became exigible to purchase tax in the hands of the purchasers with effect from that date.
The appellants who are dealers in paddy, buy paddy in the first instance and sell rice after converting paddy into rice.
They filed writ petitions in the High Court questioning the validity of s.31 of the Act and the notification issued thereunder and their liability to payment of purchase tax.
The High Court dismissed the writ petitions.
In appeal to this Court it was contended that section 31 of the Act which authorised the State Government to vary Schedule 'C ' by adding certain goods whose turnover was not liable to payment of sales tax earlier, suffered from the vice of excessive delegation of legislative power.
Dismissing the appeals, ^ HELD: 1(a) The delegation of power to the State Government to determine whether any class of goods should be included or excluded from Schedule 'C ' to the Act cannot be considered as unconstitutional.
[967G] (b) The case in so far as section 31 of the Act which is an integral part of a single enactment and which authorises the State Government to amend Schedule 'C ' to the Act cannot be different from the case which was dealt 953 with by the Constitution Bench, in Pt.
Banarsi Das Bhanot vs State of M.P.; , If it is permissible for the Legislature to authorise the State Government to convert tax free goods into taxable ones, there is hardly any justification for holding that the State Government cannot be entrusted with the power to include goods in Schedule 'C ' making their purchase turnover taxable.
[968 D F] (c) It is well established that the delegation of power by the legislature to a local authority or to the executive Government to vary or modify an existing law would not be unconstitutional so long as such delegation does not involve the abdication of essential legislative power by the legislature.
Such delegations of legislative powers have been upheld by this Court on several varied and diverse grounds such as the scheme and policy of the statute under which the power is delegated, the presence of guidelines in the statute regarding the exercise of delegated power, the lack of time for the legislature to make provision with regard to all the details involved in the administration of law, the incapacity of the legislature to foresee future events, the nature of the subject matter of the legislation and the nature of the donee of power etc.
Even in matters relating to taxation laws, it has been consistently held that the legislature can delegate the power to fix rates of tax provided there are necessary guidelines regarding such fixation on the ground that in a modern society, taxation is one of the methods by which economic and social goals of State can be achieved and the power to tax should be flexible and capable of being easily altered to meet the exigencies of circumstances.
Such delegation has been held to be not amounting to delegation of essential legislative function.
[959A D] Pt.
Banarsi Das Bhanot vs State of M.P. & Ors., ; ; Municipal Corp. of Delhi vs Birla Cotton, Spinning and Weaving Mills, Delhi & Anr., ; ; Corporation of Calcutta & Anr.
vs The Liberty Cinema, ; ; Sita Ram Bishambar Dayal & Ors.
vs State of U.P. State of U.P & Anr. etc., etc.
; ; referred to. 2(a) The argument that even though section 31 was not unconstitutional the notification was not enforceable against the appellants has no force.
In Pt.
Banarsi Das Bhanot vs State of M.P. it has been held that it is open to the Legislature to delegate the power to withdraw the exemption which has been given by the Legislature in respect of certain transactions specified in the Act under consideration in that case.
It cannot be said that the principal object of the Act is to encourage manufacturing industry.
The Act is a fiscal legislation and its object is to collect revenue for the purpose of meeting the expenditure of the Government.
It is true that while levying tax under the Act, the Legislature may grant exemptions in certain cases and may decline to grant exemption in other.
The question whether such exemption should be given or not is only incidental or ancillary to the principal object viz., the object of levying tax for the purpose of collecting revenue.
It cannot be said that when certain goods are sold in favour of a manufacturer, the seller is always entitled to deduct such sales turnover from the gross turnover.
He can do so only when such goods are specified in the certificate of registration obtained by the purchaser and they are used by him in the 954 manufacture in the State of any goods other than goods declared tax free under section 6 of the Act for sale in the State.
Transactions in paddy cannot be considered as having been generally exempted from payment of tax under the Act.
Section 5(2)(a)(ii) of the Act grants exemption from payment of sales tax on the turnover of goods sold in favour of a manufacturer under the circumstances mentioned therein only to the seller and not to the buyer even though indirectly the buyer may be benefited thereby.
[970A F] (b) The terms "taxable goods", "taxable event" and "taxable person" are three distinct concepts.
In the instant case the "taxable event" is the purchase of paddy and not its sale which alone attracts section 5(2)(ii) of the Act.
"Taxable person" i.e. the person liable to pay tax is the purchaser and not the seller.
The appellants cannot complain that any exemption granted to them by the Act has been taken away.
Even though the liability to pay purchase tax may be on the appellants, it is bound to have repercssions on the price at which they buy paddy and the price at which rice manufactured by them out of that paddy is sold by them.
The tax payable under the Act being an indirect tax, the tax burden would ordinarily fall on the consumer of rice and not on any of the intermediaries including the appellants.
The impugned notification cannot therefore, be treated as one issued against the policy of the statute.
[970G H, 971A B] State of Tamil Nadu vs M. K. Kandaswami, etc., etc.
; , ; referred to.
