The appellant who was appointed as a Train Lighting Inspector, Nagpur on July 11, 1974 by the Chief Electrical Engineer was removed from service by respondent No. 1; the Divisional Assistant Engineer, Central Railway Nagpur by his order August 31, 1976.
The Writ Petition filed by the appellant in the Bombay High Court challenging the order of removal was dismissed summarily by a Division Bench of that Court.
Allowing the appeal by special leave, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
The order of removal is in patent violation of the provisions of Article 311(1) of the Constitution.
[53C] 2. article 311(1) of the Constitution provides that no person who is a member of a civil service of the Union or an all India service or a civil service of a State or holds a civil post under the Union or a State shall be dismissed or removed by an authority subordinate to that by which he was appointed.
[52A] 3.
Whether or not an authority is subordinate in rank to another has to be determined with reference to the state of affairs existing on the date of appointment.
It is at that point of time that the constitutional guarantee under article 311(1) becomes available to the person holding, for example, a civil post under the Union Government that he shall not be removed or dismissed by an authority subordinate to that which appointed him.
[52 F G] 4.
Delegation of the power to make a particular appointment does not enhance or improve the hierarchical status of the delegate.
An officer subordinate to another will not become his equal in rank by reason of his coming to possess some of the powers of that another.
[53 A B] The Divisional Assistant Electrical Engineer in the instant case does not cease to be subordinate in rank to the Chief Electrical Engineer merely because the latter 's power to make appointments to certain posts has been delegated to him the subsequent authorisation made in favour of respondent, in regard to making appointments to the post held by the appellant cannot confer upon respondent 1 the power to remove him.
On the date of the 51 appellant 's appointment as a Train Lighting Inspector, respondent 1 had no power to make that appointment.
He cannot have, therefore, the power to remove him.
[52H, 53 A B]
