In Ashok Murlidhar vs State of Gujarat a Division Bench of the High Court thought that this Court in Hardhan Saha & Anr.
vs The State of West Bengal & Ors., ; laid down that where a person was sought to be detained preventively the possibility of a prosecution being launched was an irrelevant consideration which need never be present to the mind of the detaining authority.
Purporting to follow this decision another Division Bench of the High Court rejected the habeas corpus petition of the appellant who was in preventive detention under the provisions of .
The Division Bench certified that a substantial question whether it is necessary for the detaining authority to consider whether a person should be prosecuted before an order of detention is made against him needed to be decided by this Court.
In appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that it was axiomatic that the detaining authority must invariably consider the possibility of launching a prosecution before making an order of detention, in the absence of which the order of detention must be held to be bad.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
In Hardhan Saha 's case this Court did not say that the possibility of a prosecution being launched was an irrelevant consideration which need never be present to the mind of the detaining authority.
All that was laid down in that case was that the mere circumstance that a detenu was liable to be prosecuted was not by itself a bar to the making of an order of preventive detention.
It does not follow therefrom that failure to consider the possibility of a prosecution being launched cannot ever lead to the conclusion that the detaining authority never applied its mind and the order of detention was, therefore, bad.
[57 F G] 2.
The principles emerging from a review of the cases decided by this Court are that the ordinary criminal process is not to be circumvented or short circuited by ready resort to preventive detention, but that the possibility of launching a criminal prosecution is not an absolute bar to an order of preventive detention.
Nor is it correct to say that if such possibility is not present to the mind of the detaining authority the order of detention is necessarily bad.
However, the failure of the detaining authority to consider the possibility of launching a criminal prosecution may, in the circumstances of a case, lead to the conclusion that the detaining authority had not applied 55 its mind to the vital question whether it was necessary to make an order of preventive detention.
Where an express allegation is made that the order of detention was issued in a mechanical fashion without keeping present to its mind the question whether it was necessary to make such an order when an ordinary criminal prosecution could well serve the purpose, the detaining authority must satisfy the court that the question too was borne in mind before the order of detention was made.
If the detaining authority fails to satisfy the court that the detaining authority so borne the question in mind the court would be justified in drawing the inference that there was no application of the mind of the detaining authority to the vital question whether it was necessary to preventively detain the detenu.
[60 A D] In the instant case the grounds of detention served on the appellant contained a very elaborate statement of facts quite clearly pointing to an application of the mind by the detaining authority.
The appellant did not complain in his petition that the detaining authority had not applied its mind and in particular had not considered the question of the possibility of a prosecution nor were there any facts appearing from the record which could lead to the conclusion that the detaining authority did not apply its mind to relevant considerations.
The order of detention is not infirm in any manner.
[60 E F] Bhuthnath Mate vs The State of West Bengal, ; ; Srilal Shaw vs State of West Bengal & Ors., ; ; Abdul Gaffer vs State of West Bengal, AIR 1975 SC 1496; Dulal Roy vs The District Magistrate, Burdwan & Ors., ; ; Salim vs State of West Bengal; ; ; explained.
