The appellant filed a suit against his employer, the respondent, for a declaration that he had been removed from service illegally and without any reason and that he should be reinstated in his former job with due benefits and advantages.
He also claimed compensation.
The trial court held that the dispute raised by the appellant was in the nature of an industrial dispute and that the civil court had no jurisdiction to try the same.
The First Appellate Court allowed the appeal and held that the dispute raised was of a civil nature and the case was cognizable by a civil court.
In the respondent 's second appeal, the High Court agreed with the view of the trial court and held that the appellant had not claimed damages by pleading wrongful dismissal and breach of the contract of his service and that the facts pleaded in the plaint showed that the dispute was an industrial dispute cognizable only by an industrial court and not by a civil court.
In the further appeal to this Court the point for consideration was whether on the facts pleaded by the appellant the dispute was an industrial dispute cognizable only by an industrial court and not by a civil court.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD:(1) It is not quite correct to say that the suit as filed by the appellant is not maintainable at all in a civil court.
The main reliefs asked for by the appellant which when granted will amount to specific performance of the contract of service and, therefore, they cannot be granted.
But the appellant in the alternative has also claimed for awarding compensation to him.
[127A C] (2) Reading the plaint as a whole, it can legitimately be culled out that the appellant had made out a case that he was wrongfully dismissed from service.
This relief could be granted by the civil court if it found that the plaintiff 's case was true.
The High Court was not right in saying that no such case had at all been made in the plaint.
To this limited extent the matter could be examined by the civil court.
[127D E] Dr. section B. Dutt vs University of Delhi, ; ; section R. Tewari vs Distt.
Board Agra & Anr., ; ; Indian Airlines Corp. vs Sukhdeo Rai, , Premier Automobiles Ltd. vs Kamlekar Shantaram Wadke of Bombay & Ors., ; ; referred to.
