The act complained of is dishonest misappropriation or conversion of goods by the appellants which they had seized and as such were holding in trust to be dealt with in accordance with law.
This gave a bona fide apprehension to the respondent that the goods have been criminally mis appropriated by the appellants.
The S.D.M. conducted a preliminary enquiry and found a prima facie case under section 120B/409 IPC against the appellants.
The S.D.M. summoned the appellants who appeared before him and prayed for their immediate discharge, which was accepted on the ground that he had no jurisdiction and he discharged the appellants.
A revision petition before the Addl.
Sessions Judge was dismissed on the ground that since the shortage of the goods was discovered at the time when they were produced before the Customs House, there was absolutely nothing to show that the shortage, if any, was due to the act of the appellants.
The respondent went in further revision to the High Court which was allowed on the ground that no sanction was required for the prosecution of the accused appellants because they were certainly not acting in the discharge of their official duties, when they misappropriated these goods.
It was argued on behalf of the appellants that (i) It had been falsely alleged in the complaint that when the S.D.M. inspected the goods and noticed the condition thereof, it was found that the seals of the four boxes were broken while the remaining three packages were completely empty but sealed; that the inventory itself, prepared by the S.D.M. falsified the prosecution allegation; (ii) That it was not alleged in the complaint with particularly as to what goods had disappeared or were removed, nor that the disappearance of some of the goods, if any, occurred after their seizure and before their deposit in the Customs House by the appellant; (iii) That even if for the sake of argument it is assumed that some of the goods were removed and set apart by the appellants after seizure, then also sanction for prosecution u/s 197 Cr.
P.C. was absolutely necessary because, the seizure and removal being integrally connected with each other, the alleged act constituting the offence of criminal mis appropriation/criminal breach of trust could but reasonably be viewed as an act which includes dereliction of duty done or purporting to be done in the discharge of their official duty by the appellants; (iv) That section 197 Cr.
P.C. cannot be construed too narrowly, in the sense that since the commission of offence is never a part of the official duty of a public servant, an act constituting an offence can 112 never be said to have been done or purportedly done in the discharge of official duty, as such a narrow construction, will render the section entirely otiose.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: The question of sanction u/s 197 Criminal Procedure Code can be raised and considered at any stage of the proceedings.
[116H, 117A] The words "Any offence alleged to have been committed by him while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty" in section 197(1) of the Code, are capable of a narrow as well as wide interpretation.
If these words are construed too narrowly, the section will be rendered altogether sterile, for it is no part of an official duty to commit an offence, and never can be.
In the wider sense, these words will take under their umbrella every act constituting an offence, committed in the course of the same transaction in which the official duty is performed or purports to be performed.
The right approach to the import of these words lies between these two extremes.
While it is not every offence committed by a public servant while engaged in the performance of his official duty, which is entitled to the protection of sec.
197(1), an act constituting an offence directly and reasonably connected with an official duty will require sanction for prosecution under the said provision.
The sine qua non for the applicability of this section is that the offence charged, be it one of commission or omission, must be one which has been committed by the public servant either in his official capacity or under colour of the office held my him.
[118D H, 119A] In the instant case, there was some foundation for the allegation that the goods in question had been misappropriated by the appellants sometime after their seizure and before their deposit in the Customs House.
There can be no dispute that the seizure of the goods by the appellants and their being thus entrusted with the goods or having dominion over them, was an committed by them while acting in the discharge of their official duty.
But the act complained of is subsequent dishonest, misappropriation or conversion of those goods by the appellants, which is the second necessary element of the offence of criminal breach of trust under section 409, Indian Penal Code.
It could not be said that the act of dishonest, misappropriation or conversion complained of bore such an integral relation to the duty of the appellants that they could genuinely claim that they committed it in the course of the performance of their official duty.[119E H 120A] There is nothing in the nature or quality of the act complained of which attaches to or partakes of the official character of the appellants who allegedly did it.
Nor could the alleged act of misappropriation or conversion be reasonably said to be imbued with the colour of the office held by the appellants.
Therefore, on the facts of the present case, the alleged act of criminal misappropriation complained of was not committed by them while they were acting or purporting to act in the discharge of their official duty, the commission of the offence having no direct connection or inseparable link with their duties as public servant.
At the most, the official status of the appellants furnished them with an opportunity or occasion to commit the alleged criminal act.
Sanction of the appropriate Government was therefore not necessary for the protection of the appellants for an offence under section 409/120B Indian Penal Code.
[120A B, 121D F] 113 Om Parkash vs State of Uttar Pradesh, ; , Amrik Singh vs The State of pepsu; , , Shreekantiah Rammayya Munipalli and Ors.
vs State of Bombay, A.I.R. ; distinguished.
Baijnath vs State of Madhya Pradesh, A.I.R. 1966, S.C. 220 at page 222 and Harihar vs State of Bihar, ; referred to.
