The Maharaja of Cochin, reigned and ruled over a pretty State, Cochin, which is now an integral part of the Kerala State.
The Travancore Cochin State came into being on July 1, 1949.
Two days before this constitutional merger, the Maharaja of Cochin issued a Proclamation to provide for the impartibility, administration and preservation of the Royal Estate and the Palace Fund through a Five man Board of Trustees.
A small Process of family legislation on the Cochin Palace followed the political transformation of the State.
The first was the Valiamma Thampuram Kovilakam Estate and the Palace Fund (Partition) Act, 1961 (Act 16 of 1961), the primary purpose of which was to undo the impartibility of the Royal Estate, as declared by the Proclamation of 1949.
Sections 4 and 5 of the Act prescribed the shares of the members, the mode of division and the machinery for partition under these provisions, on a majority of the major members of the royal family expressing their wish to be divided, the Maharaja would consider whether it was in the interest of the family to partition the estate among the members and, if he did, direct the Board of Trustees to proceed with the partition under his supervision and control.
Each member including en ventra sa mere, was eligible for a single share on an equal basis.
The Board nominated under the earlier Proclamation was continued but its responsibilities were broadened.
The privileges of the Maharaja were preserved as his personal rights but vis a vis family assets feudal "primogeniture" fell to modern egalite, within limits.
As a result of the 26th Constitution Amendment Act of 1971 which extinguished all royal privileges, privy purses and other dignities of the erstwhile rulers of the Indian States, the Cochin Maharaja stepped down to the level of the Karta of a Joint Hindu Family.
The Marummakkattayam system which ensured impartibility and management by the senior most member had lost its functional value and virtually vanished from the Kerala coast with the passing of the Kerala Joint Hindu Family System (Abolition) Act, 1975 (Act 30 of 1976).
Despite this revolutionary change, the Cochin royal family maintained its former status as Marummakkattayam undivided coparcenary since it was governed by special legislation which remained unrepealed.
Therefore, the Kerala Legislation enacted the Valiamma Thampuram Kovilakam Estate and the Palace Fund (Partition) and the Kerala Joint Hindu Family System (Abolition) Amendment Act, 1978 (Act 15 of 1978).
Before the High Court and in the special leave petition, the vires of the Amending Act omitting sections 4 and 5 from the Principal Act 16/1961 was challenged as offending Articles 14 and 19 of the Constitution.
Dismissing the special leave petition, the Court, 137 ^ HELD: The public policy behind Section 7 of the Valiamma Thampuram Kovilakam Estate and the Palace Fund (Partition) Act, 1961, excluding civil court jurisdiction is not merely the special situation of the former royal family but the virtual impossibility within a life time of division by metes and bounds and allotment of shares to the 800 odd members, most of whom are real royalties in rags, homeless and hungry, seeking to survive by the small pieces from the large cake if ever it will be sliced and distributed.
[141A B] Civil litigation for partition is the surest punishment to the tattered 'princelings ' by pauperizing them through the justice process and giving them stones instead of bread in the end, if the end would arrive at all.
The compulsive pragmatics of distributive justice elicited legislative compassion for this uniquely numerous crowd of pauperised patricians by exclusion of civil courts jurisdiction.
The pathology of protracted, exotic processual legalistic needs comprehensive renovation if the Justice System is to survive but the legislature salvaged the largest royal family with the littlest individual resources without waiting for the remote undertaking to overhaul Processual Justice to the People.
Sociology is the mother of law, lest law in the books should be bastardized by the law of life.
[141D F] 2.
Our constitutional order is sensibly and sensitively allergic to arbitrary power and the Supreme Court will unhesitatingly strike down any provision which can be anathematised as creating uncanalised and Neronised power.
Section 4 of the Principal Act of 1961 provided for an equal opportunity for every member including those en ventre sa mere.
This provision was deleted because its purpose was otherwise served by the substituted Section 3 of Act 16 of 1961 by including a direction to the Board "to effect partition of the Estate and the Palace Fund among all the members entitled to a share". . . under Section 4 of the Kerala Joint Hindu Family System (Abolition) Act, 1975 (Act 30 of 1976).
" The effect of the importation of Section 4 of the Abolition Act is to ensure partition per capita among all the members as in the case of a Joint Hindu Family other than an undivided mitakshara Hindu family.
What was otiose, namely, Section 4 of Act 16 of 1961, was cut out.
This was merely a drafting operation not making any change in the substantive law bearing upon the shares of the members.
The contention that by this deletion the members of the Kovilagam had been made over as hostages to the caprice of the Board of Trustees is a frightful error or disingenuous scare.
[142 F G, 143H, 144A B] 3.
Section 5 of the 1961 Act arrogated to the Maharaja of Cochin the power to exclude any properties from the category of partible estate.
If most members were to be indigent, the infliction upon such members by the Maharaja 's act of exclusion of as many properties as he thought should not be divided would be unjust.
Since every member was entitled to an equal share with the Maharaja himself all the properties should be available for partition and this result, which is eminently just, is achieved by the omission of Section 5 from Act 16 of 1961.
Therefore, the provision in Act 15 of 1978 omitting Section 5 from the principal Act is a virtue to be commended, not a vice to be condemned.
It is eminently reasonable and to contend against it is obviously unreasonable.
[143D F] 4.
To blaspheme the Board as an imperium in imperio, a law unto itself and therefore, arbitrary is an egregious error.
The Board was not a new creation 138 but an old concoction brought into being by the Ruler thirty years ago, continued by the Kerala Legislature in Act 16 of 1961 and recognised by the latest amendment Act.
The Board is a time honoured entity wherein the heads of the four branches are members and is entrusted with the work of division of assets.
The Board, being an old institution in plenary management since 1949 and wisely composed of senior most members of the four branches, is sentimentally and functionally the best instrument to divide and distribute.
Indeed Act 16 of 1961 had also entrusted the task of partition to the same Board and no member had during nearly two decades challenged the wisdom of the provision.
[144B D] Section 3 of the Act 15 of 1978 does not dispense with canons of fair play of natural justice and of quasi judicial values.
A non curial instrumentality and procedure for partitioning cannot be condemned as discriminatory.
The alternative created by the statute is quite reasonable and is a better instrument having regard to the totality of factors.
Law is not a cocoon and keeps its eyes wide awake to the realities of life.
The legislation in question has taken note of all facts namely; (a) absence of any complaint against their management ever since the Board 's creation; (b) sanctification of the Board by the principal Act 16 of 1961 by conferring powers of partitioning the "Kovilagam" properties on this very Board; and does nothing more What was good and valid in 1961 could not become vicious and invalid in 1978.
[145 B D, E] Quasi judicial responsibilities are implied by the statute in the Board 's function and if the Board breaches these norms and canons, the constitutional remedy under Article 226 comes into play.
After all, the Board is a statutory body and not an executive creature.
It has been saddled with effecting the rights of parties and is bound to act quasi judicially.
Its deviances are not unreviewable in writ jurisdiction.
Sufficient guidelines are built in Section 3 and therefore Section 3 (2) is not unbridled and unconstitutional.
[145F G. 146E] Maneka Gandhi vs Union of India, [1976] Suppl.
S.C.R. 489; M. section Gill and Anr.
vs Union of India, [1978] 2 S.C.R. 621, Organo Chemical Industries and Anr.
vs Union of India & Anr., [1980] 1 S.C.R. p. 61 referred to.
Absence of appeals does not jettison justice, though often times, appeals are the bane of the justice system, especially because the rich can defeat the poor and the weak can be baulked of their rights indefinitely that way.
The Board is a statutory body and when it violates the prescriptions of the law or otherwise acts arbitrarily or malafide, article 226 of the Constitution is a corrective.
[146 F G] of 1978 has none of the characteristics of class legislation and is on the other hand, an equalising measure with a pragmatic touch.
The Cochin Kovilagam vis a vis the Kerala State is sui generis.
It has been legislatively dealt with as a special class throughout the history of Kerala and before.
Partitioning of the royal family estates on principles similar those applicable to all other Kerala Hindu Families with the only difference that a Board instead of a Civil Court allots shares by metes and bounds, is fully justifiable by the special circumstances.
[147 A B]
