In a suit for recovery of money on the basis of a mortgage, a consent decree was passed.
When the judgment debtors failed to pay the amount the mortgaged properties were ordered to be sold.
The decree holder assigned his interest under the decree in favour of the respondent and this was approved by the Court.
A part payment was made to the decree holder.
On the death of one of the judgment debtors, his heirs and legal representatives (appellants in this appeal) were substituted.
On June 17, 1953 a consent order was passed by the Court on the basis of the terms of settlement arrived at between the parties.
According to the will left by one of the judgment debtors his daughter was the universal legatee and his son in law was the sole executor.
When the decree holder sought execution of the decree a Single Judge of the High Court dismissed the application on the grounds (1) that the terms of settlement between the parties recorded on 17th June, 1953 were entirely different from the original decree and had the effect of superseding it; (2) that the fact of the death of one of the judgment debtors was not recorded and his heirs were not substituted and (3) execution was barred under section 48 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
On appal, a Division Bench of the High Court reversed the order of the Single Judge.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
There was no bar of limitation in the execution instituted in 1965.
At no point of time the mortgage decree had been fully satisfied.
It is not a case in which the execution was barred either under section 48 CPC or article 183 of the Limitation Act, 1908.
Execution was not barred under article 136 of the .
[159D] 2.
There is no force in the contention that it was already barred when the 1963 Act came into force.
All through steps had been taken by the decree holder to enforce the decree.
When the order of sale of the mortgaged properties was passed in 1929 some payments were made and finally accounts were settled in 1934.
Thereafter the mode of execution proceeded by appointment of a receiver.
Some money was paid in 1939.
In 1945 the heirs and legal representatives of one of the deceased judgment debtors were substituted.
Appellant no 1 was allowed to take steps for the satisfaction of the decree; but nothing was done.
A settlement was again arrived at in 1953 for satisfaction of the decree but on the judgment debtor 's failure to comply with the terms of the settlement the present proceedings were started well within 12 years.
[159E H] 157 3.
The daughter of the second judgment debtor was competent to represent the estate of her father.
Even if her husband who was the sole executor of the will was not substituted, execution was not defective.
[160B] The Andhra Bank Ltd. vs R. Srinivasan and Others [1962] 3 S.C.R. referred to. 4.
The settlement of 17th June, 1953 was not an altogether renovation of the old decree.
All that was done was that the amount due was quantified and the mode of satisfaction was prescribed giving opportunity to the judgement debtors to satisfy the decree by conveying one of the two mortgaged houses.
The judgment debtors did nothing.
Though the terms of settlement were silent with regard to what was to happen on failure to satisfy the decree, it is legitimate to assume that the parties intended that the decree holders would be entitled to realise the dues by execution of the original mortgage decree.
The order of 17th June, 1953 passed by the Court had not the effect of passing a new decree in substitution of the old one.
It had merely the effect of giving facility to the judgment debtors for the satisfaction of the decretal dues.
On their failure to do so they were liable to be proceeded with in execution of the original mortgage decree.
[160C F]
