Rule 10, Chapter II, Part 6 of the Rules framed by the Bar Council of India for professional mis conduct provides that an advocate shall not stand a surety, or certify the soundness of a surety, for his client required for the purposes of any legal proceedings.
The appellant, a practising advocate, was suspended for one month by the Disciplinary Tribunal of the Bar Council of India on the ground that in violation of the rules, he had certified the solvency of a surety in a bailable offence in which the accused was his client.
The appellate body dismissed his appeal.
On the question whether a reprimand would meet the ends of justice, Allowing the appeal in part, ^ HELD: (1) Section 35 of the Advocates Act permits reprimand provided the ends of public justice are met by this leniency.
Ordinarily this Court does not interfere with a punishment imposed by the Disciplinary Tribunal except where strong circumstances involving principle are present.
Censure has a better deterrent value on the errant brethren in the profession in some situations than suspension for a month from professional practice.
In the present case the lawyer was young, the offence was not tainted with turpitude and the surety whose solvency he certified was found to be good.
These circumstances are amelioratory and hardly warrant codign punishment.
Public admonition is an appropriate sentence in the present case.
p, Public professions which enjoy a monopoly of public audience have statutorily enforced social accountability for purity, probity and people conscious service.
In our country bail has become a logy and an instrument of unjust incarceration.
This harasses the poor and leads to corruption.
A smart lawyer who appears for an indigent accused may commiserate and enquire whether the surety is solvent.
If he is satisfied that the surety is sufficiently solvent, he may certify the solvency of the surety.
In some cases the detainee may be a close relation or close friend or a poor servant of his.
In that capacity, not as a lawyer, he may know the surety and his solvency or may offer himself as a surety.
In such cases he violates the rule all the same.
The degree of culpability in such cases depends on the total circumstances and the social milieu.
The rule under consideration is a wholesome one in the sense that lawyers should not misuse their role for making extra perquisites by standing surety for their clients or certifying the solvency of such sureties.
The Court may not 206 frown upon a lawyer who helps out the person, not by false pretences, but on the strength of factual certitude and proven inability to substantiate solvency.
The Court reprimanded the appellant and directed that he shall not violate the norm of professional conduct and shall uphold the purity and probity of the profession generally.
