The appellant and the sixth respondent, who were brothers, constituted a joint Hindu family.
Though younger in age than the sixth respondent, the appellant by virtue of a settlement, became Karta.
Of the joint family.
The family owned vast Zamindari properties.
One of which was a Farm known as Mukundpur Farm.
For the improvement of the Farm the appellant took taccavi loan by offering his half share in the joint family property as security.
On his failure to repay the loan the Collector of the District ordered attachment of the hypothecated property under section 150 of the U.P. Land Revenue Act, 1901.
The appellant alleged that as a result of the partition of properties between him and his brother the hypothecated property fell to the share of his brother, that under the compromise decree his brother undertook to discharge the loan and that therefore it was he who was responsible for repayment of the loan.
(The Government, however was not impleaded as a party to the suit in which compromise was arrived at between the brothers.) Sometime later the sixth respondent resiled from the compromise decree and stated that he was not liable to repay the loan because it was not taken by the appellant in his capacity as Karta of the joint family but that it was taken only in his (appellant 's) personal capacity and that, therefore, he alone was liable to repay it.
The Collector made enquiries and held that the loan was taken by the appellant in his individual capacity and not as Karta of the joint family and held that he was personally liable to repay the loan.
Eventually it was decided that the realisation of the dues should be made from the hypothecated property as well as from his person and accordingly proceedings for realisation of the principal and interest on the loan were started.
The High Court rejected the appellant 's writ petition.
In appeal the following three questions were raised.
( I ) whether the taccavi loan was taken by the appellant as Karta of the joint family, and, therefore, had to be recovered from the sixth respondent to whose share the hypothecated property had fallen in the partition of the property; (2) Whether the Collector was precluded from taking resort to any one of other modes prescribed by section 7(1) of the land Improvement Loans Act, 1883 for recovery of the sum remaining unrealised towards the taccavi loan; (3) Whether the Government had no right to recover the outstanding amount due except from the compensation amount in terms of section 6 (e ) thereof ? ^ HELD: 1.
The loan in question was taken by the appellant in his individual capacity and not as Karta of the joint family.
By the terms of the taccavi bond the appellant had bound himself to discharge the liability from his property.
Even 180 assuming that he took the loan as Karta, he was personally and severally liable to pay.
In the compromise suit the Government was not made a part and therefore, was not bound by the terms of the compromise decree; nor was the Government bound by the alleged partition effected between the.
appellant and the sixth respondent.
[185 D E; 186C] 2.(a) Section 7(1) of the Land Improvement Loans Act empowers the Collector to recover taccavi dues from the defaulter as arrears of land revenue and the Collector could have taken resort to s.289(1) of the U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950, for the recovery of the unrealised amount of taccavi loan by attachment and sales of properties belonging to the appellant.
Section 289 applies only to those cases in which the provision of section 243(1) have been made applicable and it is nobody 's case that a notification contemplated by section 243(2) was ever issued.
The question of section 289(2) operating as a bar to the recovery proceedings upon expiry of period of three years, therefore, does not arise.
If section 289(2) is read in the context of sub section
(1) it will be clear that upon the expiry of the period of three years the village has to be restored free of claim on the part of the Government for any arrear of land revenue due in respect thereof.
The consequence that ensures is that liability for payment of land revenue in respect of the village or any area therein in respect of which arrears are due stands discharged.
But in regard to other Sums of money recoverable as arrears of land revenue the liability continues.
[186D; G, 187E F] (b) As section 291(3) contemplates that upon expiry of the period of lease, the holding shall be restored to the tenure holder concerned free of any claim on the part of the State Government for any arrears in respect of such holding.
In this case the period of the lease had not expired when the recovery proceedings were initiated.
[188A B] 3.
Section 6(c) provides that all amounts due under the Land Improvement Loans Act shall become due forthwith upon the vesting of the Zamindari right.
It also provides that such dues may, without prejudice to any other mode of recovery provided therefor, be realised by deducting the amount from the compensation money payable to such intermediary.
What it provides is an additional mode of recovery for realisation of the dues.
Under the scheme the Government has the option and the mode indicated in the section is not the one and the only mode available.
The recovery proceedings pending before the Collector were for the remainder of the loan after such adjustment together with interest.
[188F G]
