The grandfather and great grand father of the respondents and the father of the appellant were brothers.
By a registered deed (Ext. 39) the elder brother purportedly gave the younger brother (appellant 's father) some lands for separate living and maintenance of himself, and his male lineal descendants for ever.
The lands in dispute were a part of the lands covered by the deed.
In their suit, the plaintiffs alleged that the suit lands were part of Desgat Watan estate which, by virtue of an immemorial family and territorial custom, was impartible and the junior members were given lands only for their maintenance, and that till his death, the appellant 's father continued, to be an undivided member of the joint family consisting of himself and the plaintiffs, and that on the death of the appellant 's father the lands should go to them.
The trial court held: (1) that the impartibility of the estate and the rule of primogeniture had not been proved; (2) that there was severance of the joint family in 1902 since when the brothers were living separately; (3) that on the abolition of Watans by Bombay Act 60 of 1950, the suit lands which originally were Watan lands, were re granted in favour of the appellant 's father and that the plaintiffs tacitly assented to the regrant of the lands exclusively in his favour.
On appeal, the High Court affirmed the view of the trial court that the estate was not impartible and that the onus of proving partition was on the defendant (appellant herein).
It was held that Ext.
39 did not establish that the brothers were divided in 1902 and that the suit lands were allotted to the appellant 's father; that on the erroneous but honest belief that Desgat lands were impartible, the elder brother granted the lands to his brother and his descendants in the male line in lieu of their maintenance and that the younger brother having died without male issue, the tenure came to an end whereupon the plaintiffs who were the surviving male members of the family, were entitled to resume the lands.
The High Court remitted the matter to the trial court with certain directions.
In appeal to this Court, the appellant contended: (i) that her father prior to the execution of Ext.
39, had clearly intimated to his brother his intention to divide the estate and to live separately after division, resulted in a severance of the joint family status, and that such severance was evident from the recitals in Ext.
39 and the subsequent conduct of the members of the erstwhile family.
162 Since the appellant 's father after such division was holding, the suit lands as his separate property, the same were inherited by the appellant to the exclusion of the plaintiffs.
(ii) Since the regrant of the suit lands to the appellant 's father created new rights exclusively in his favour, the regrant did not enure for the benefit of the plaintiffs.
Allowing the appeal and dismissing the plaintiff 's suit ^ HELD: 1.
Unity of ownership and commonsality of enjoyment are the essential attributes of an undivided Hindu family of Mitakshra concept.
So long as the family remains undivided no member can predicate a definite share to himself.
Cesser of this unity and commonsality means cesser or severance of the joint family status, which in Hindu Law amounts to partition, irrespective of whether it is accompanied or followed by a division of the properties by metes and bounds.
Disruption of joint status covers both division of right and division of property.
Division of joint status may be brought about by any adult member of the joint family by intimating the others his intention to separate and enjoy his share in the family property in severalty.
Such intimation may be an explicit declaration (written or oral) or manifested by conduct of the members of the family.
[170A B] (i) In the instant case, Ext.
39 speaks of a division of the joint family status and separation of interests.
The trial judge translated the term "Vibhaktarahave" in Marathi, as connoting division of status.
But the High Court did not agree with the translation made by the trial judge, and preferred to rely on the translation by the High Court translator.
Except for the English translation of the word "Vibhaktarahave" there is no substantial difference between the two translations.
[171 A B] The word "Vibhaktarahave" is a compound of two words viz., "Vibhakta" and "Rahave".
"Vibhakta" appears to have its roots in the Sanskrit word "Vibhaga".
"In the Mitakshra, Vijnanesvara, defines the word 'Vibhaga ', which is usually rendered into English by the word 'partition ' as the adjustment of diverse rights regarding the whole by distributing them in particular portions of the aggregate".
"Rahave" means "living".
Understood in its etymological sense the word "Vibhaktarahave" means living separately after division.[172H] (ii) None of the four features which, according to the High Court, militate against the literal interpretation of the word "Vibhaktarahave", viz., that the deed was one for maintenance, that it was executed by the elder brother, that the lands were given to the appellant 's father and his descendants in the male line and that the appellant 's father would not have remained contended with only a small portion instead of claiming entire half share detracts from the conclusion that in substance and reality the document evidence a division of joint family status as a result of an intimation by the appellant 's father to his brother of his intention to live separately after division.
[173D] 2.
Section 92 of the Evidence Act prohibits only the varying of terms of a document, not the memorandum or recitals of facts, bereft of dispositive terms, particularly when the correctness of the whole or any part of the recital is in question.
[174E] 163 In the instant case the preliminary recital does not fall under the dispositive or operative portion of the document.
The bar under section 92 against the admissibility of extrinsic evidence for the purposes of showing that the insertion of the words 'for your maintenance ' in the recital is wrong, is not attracted.
[174G] 3.
(a) When there is a dispute in regard to the true character of a writing evidence de hors the document can be led to show that the writing was not the real nature of the transaction but was only illusory which cloaked something else and that the apparent state of affairs was not the real state of affairs.
[174H] Chandi Prasad Singh vs Piari Bidi, CA No. 75 of 1964, decided on 16 3 1966, Bhagwan Dayal vs Reoti Devi, ; ; referred to.
(b) The preliminary recital in Ext.
39 raises an inference that sometime prior to the date of the deed the younger brother had clearly intimated to his coparcener of his intention to sever the joint family status and to enjoy the joint family property in severalty.
Disruption of the joint family status ensued.
From that date onwards the brothers ceased to be coparceners.
That is, at the time of the execution of the deed, joint family status did not exist.
There is no evidence that after the severance of the joint family status there was a re union.
[175 E F] (c) It cannot be said that the preliminary recital furnished little or no evidence that the younger brother intimated in clear terms his intention to sever the joint family status.
The document had been let in evidence more than 70 years after its execution.
All those who might have given evidence were dead.
In such a situation it is permissible to draw reasonable inferences to fill the gap of details obliterated by time.
[175H; 176A] Chintamanibhatla Vankat Reddy vs Rani of Wadhawan; 47 I.A. 6 at p. 10; Sree Sree Iswar Gopal Jien Thakur vs Pratapmal Begaria, ; referred to.
(d) Once it is found that the division of joint status preceded the execution of the deed, the elder brother had no power to impose a condition that the land was being given to his younger brother and male lineal descendants for their maintenance.
[176 E F] (e) The expression 'Potgi ' (maintenance) or 'Nirwahkrit ' used in the deed could not be construed as conferring an estate with restricted rights of ownership to the younger brother and his descendants.
The deed evidences a permanent transfer of land to be enjoyed from generation to generation.
Moreover the younger brother remained in full ownership of the land till his death.
After the abolition of Watans he alone applied for re grant of this land in his favour.
The plaintiffs were aware of this position.
[177A B]
