The Central Engineering Service (Roads) of the Ministry of Transport and Communications, Department of Transport (Roads Wing) Class I Recruitment Rules 1959 provided that recruitment to the service shall be made by competitive examination, by promotion and by transfer as provided for in Parts III, IV, V of the Rules.
The Rules provided that no appointment shall be made to the service or to any post borne on the cadre of the service by any method, not specified in Rule 3.
The Rules empowered the Government to determine the methods of recruitment for filling any particular vacancy in the service.
An amendment introduced on August 2, 1966 to Rule 3 of the 1959 Rules provided an additional method of recruitment viz. direct recruitment through the UPSC in accordance with Part VI of the Rules.
This Part provided that in special circumstances recruitment by selection of candidates to the posts mentioned in Appendix IV shall be made by the Commission by open advertisement, notwithstanding anything contained in the Rules.
Right from the inception selection of officers for Class I posts was made by an examination conducted by the UPSC.
After the introduction of r. 3(d) in the 1959 Rules in August 1966, 951 persons were recruited by the UPSC by way of interviews without written examination.
Some of the respondents who were officers selected by written examination impugned the appointment of the 51 officers including the petitioners who were working as Assistant Executive Engineers or Executive Engineers in the same wing on the ground that the appointment of these 51 officers was contrary to the Recruitment Rules in that they were appointed in contravention of the 1959 Rules or in the alternative they contended that they should be treated to have been appointed to ex cadre posts and for this reason they were not eligible for promotion to the posts of Executive Engineers, until the respondents were first appointed to those posts.
Lastly the respondents contended that they were entitled to be confirmed in preference to the petitioners.
A similar writ petition was filed by three Executive Engineers (among the present respondents) alleging that their recruitment by the method of examination was in accordance with the Recruitment Rules but that the petitioners were appointed by 210 mere interviews, a method not permissible under the Rules and therefore those who were appointed by interview method could neither be confirmed nor promoted unless they were brought into the cadre and appointed to the regular cadre posts.
The High Court held that the Rules of 1966 had no retrospective operation and that therefore an appointment made in contravention of the rules could not he regularised by making a rule under the proviso to article 309.
It also held that the petitioners were appointed to temporary posts without any right to become permanent but since the temporary appointments were outside the service and against ex cadre posts, Rule 3 of he 1959 Rules had no application and for that reason their appointments could not be said to be illegal.
While the writ petitions were being argued orders were issued on August 28, 1973 by which persons who were appointed as Assistant Executive Engineers by way of interview were deemed to have been inducted into the Engineering Service as Assistant Executive Engineers with retrospective effect from August 2, 1966 i.e. the date of induction of r. 3(d) into the 1959 Rules.
Provisional seniority list was separately made for the different categories of officers.
This order of August 28, 1973 was not however questioned before the High Court.
In view of the decision of the High Court the Government withdrew and cancelled the provisional inter se seniority list dated August 28, 1973 and at the same time it issued a Notification to the effect that the officers appointed by the interview method would be deemed to have been inducted into the Central Engineering Service (Roads) Class T Service as temporary officers in the grade with effect from August 2, 1966.
On March 1, 1976 the Government issued a notification stating that it had decided to set up two services called the Central Engineering Service (Roads) Group 'A ' comprising of officers appointed by the method of examination/ promotion and the other Central Engineering Pool, Group 'A ' comprising of officers appointed by the method of interview.
Rules in respect of both the services were published and the inter se seniority list of officers of the two services were circulated to the concerned officers.
The Central Engineering Service Rules constituted a new service called the Central Engineering Service (Roads) Group 'A ' consisting of (a) persons who were holding posts in the various grades included in the Central Engineering Service (Roads) Class I immediately before the commencement of the 1959 Rules; (b) persons who were appointed to the old service on or after the date of commencement of the 1959 Rules, except those who have been appointed to the Pool Service; and (c) persons who may be appointed to the new service after the commencement of the new Rules The Central Engineering Pool Group 'A ' consisted of persons appointed to the Roads Wing by competitive examination by the method of interview through the UPSC before the commencement of the Pool Rules.
A note appended to r. 3 contained a clarification that the regular tenure service cf the officers in the respective grade prior to their appointment to the Pool would count for the purposes of qualifying service for promotion and confirmation in the Pool in the different grades.
Rule 5 authorised Government to 211 keep in abeyance certain posts and operate them as Isolated Posts outside the Pool.
Promotions to higher posts in Pool were to be made on the recommendations of the Departmental Promotion Committee.
In their writ petitions the petitioners contended that though they were appointed to the posts long before the respondents they were ranked much below the latter in the list of seniority and that consequently they would be denied promotional opportunities to the higher posts, that their segregation into a separate class called the Pool is totally unscientific and was in violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution; and that the classification made between the Pool officers and Service officers is discriminatory and bore no nexus with the object sought to be achieved by it. ^ HELD: 1.
Out of 40 posts of Superintending Engineers the Pool officers were occupying 27 posts whereas Service officers held only 13 posts.
There is a historical reason for this state of affairs.
Recruitment on a very large scale was made by the interview method in 1962, 1964 and 1965 fol.
execution of certain urgent works.
Most of the petitioners had a longer standing though not in a regular cadre, and naturally they were occupying even the two posts in the isolated category which were meant for officers belonging to the regular cadre.
[224D E] 2.
The so called Pool created by the 1976 Rules consisted of stagnant water.
There is to be no fresh recruitment to the Pool pos(s and.
therefore, allocations to the Pool would always be shared by I definite and predictable number of officers.
On the other hand, the other wing was a living and growing service to which recruitment continued to be made in subsequent years.
Allocations to that wing would have to be in proportion to the total number of officers working therein but in the very nature of things there were budgetary constraints on the creation of additional posts.
1224 F G] 3.
It cannot be said that persons holding similar posts and having similar responsibilities to discharge could be classified into different categories for the mere reason that some of them were recruited directly by the interview method and some were recruited directly on the result of a competitive examination.
Were it permissible to make such classification, ingenuity may suggest the nature of curriculum in different years as the basis of classification.
If subjection tc different kinds of tests as a condition of eligibility produces qualitative difference in the ability of persons recruited to similar posts, it may perhaps become necessary to limit the promotional opportunities, in regard to the relatively higher posts to those whose abilities are remarkably higher.
The Government had made no grievance that the petitioners who were appointed by the interview method were in any way inferior in ability, efficiency or educational qualifications to those who were appointed after a written competitive examination.
In the matter of experience too, the petitioners were in no way inferior to the respondents.
[224H 225C] 4.
Though classification which proceeds merely on the basis that certain persons were recruited after going through one test and certain others after going through another test would be unscientific, it cannot be said on the facts of the case that there could be no valid basis or justification for classifying the various officers of the Roads Wing into separate categories.
The appointments 212 of some of the petitioners and some of the respondents were made in violation of the Rules which were in force at the relevant time.
It is in respect of that class of persons that the High Court held that they must be deemed to have been appointed to ex cadre posts.
Persons for whose appointments the necessary legal sanction was wanting, were liable to be put out of employment but in order to prevent any such harsh consequence, the High Court came to record the finding that the must be held to have been appointed to ex cadre post.
That finding must be taken to have been affirmed in these proceedings, with the result that no action would lie hereafter for a declaration or any similar relief asking that their appointments were illegal.
[225G 226B] 5.
The fact remains that persons who were appointed contrary to the Rules, but to ex cadre posts, were taken initially for purposes of certain projects.
Their precarious tenure was continued from time to time but that would not furnish justification for treating them on the same footing as others whose appointments were made strictly in accordance with Rules and who were appointed to posts borne on the cadre of the Central Engineering Service.
A division of these two classes of officers into separate categories would remove possible injustice to those who were appointed to cadre posts in that, their promotional opportunities would not be blocked or hindered by ex cadre officers who were recruited on a large scale to meet an urgent necessity.
Such a classification would also minimise the injustice which would otherwise have been caused to those who were appointed to ex cadre posts.
[226 C E]
