A large number of suits filed by a religious community in the State were pending over the years in several courts.
Considering the prolongation and plurality of cases and the deleterious social consequences resulting from such litigation the High Court and the State Government selected eight of the most significant suits and constituted an Additional District Court to try them.
After the court had recorded evidence of numerous witnesses and before the commencement of arguments a petition under section 24(1)(b) of the Code of Civil Procedure was presented to the High Court for withdrawal of the suits to the file of the High Court.
This was dismissed by the High Court.
On the question whether at this stage and in these circumstances the suits should be called up to the High Court and disposed of Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: Advancement of public justice will be promoted by the High Court itself at this stage, proceeding to hear the suits.
All the suits should be transferred to the High Court and, tried from the present stage, since expeditious termination is the driving force behind this order for transfer.
[243H] What is more important in a case of this kind is shortening the longevity of these quasi public litigations, reducing the enormous expenditure involve for both sides and entrusting the first determination to the highest deck of justice in the State.
The case involves questions of public moment which are likely to spiral up to the Supreme Court on appeal.
In this jurisdiction, the approach has to be pragmatic, not theoretic, without whittling down the basics of law bearing on transfer of cases.
Where a large number of people are affected and the fate of a few hundred suits and a thousand churches are involved, the elimination of some years and duplication of hearings and full arguments at the commanding height of the High Court is a wise measure, alt things considered.
The social savings of abbreviation of law 's delays re important to social justice.
[253B, D, G]
