The appellants in their claim petition, before the Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal, claimed Rs. 50,000/ as compensation alleging that the husband of the first appellant was run over by a truck which was driven in a rash and negligent manner.
Appellants 2 to 5 were the minor children of the first appellant.
The claim was contested by the owner of the truck, Respondent No. 1 and the insurer, Respondent No. 2.
A written plea was filed by the second respondent contending that the truck had been stolen by somebody while it was standing, that a report to the police had been made to this effect and that the truck was driven without the consent of the owner and consequently the respondents were not liable.
It was further pleaded that the replying respondent was absolved from any possible liability in connection with the alleged accident under the provisions of Ss. 95 and 96 (2) of the .
The first respondent in his written statement filed about a month after that of the second respondent, contended that the truck did not meet with any accident nor was any intimation sent to the replying respondent.
The Motor Accident Claims Tribunal, came to the conclusion from the pleadings and evidence that the claimants had failed to establish the identity of the driver and the claimants not even being aware of the name of the driver who had driven the offending truck, had failed to prove their case and rejected the claim.
The appeal of the claimants to the High Court was rejected, the High Court agreeing with the finding of the Claims Tribunal and further holding that the truck was stolen by some irresponsible person who did not know driving and by reckless driving caused the accident and therefore the owner of the truck cannot be held responsible.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
According to the insurer by his written statement which was filed a month before the written statement of the owner it was pleaded that somebody stole the truck without the knowledge of the owner or the driver.
The plea of the owner in his written statement filed more than a month there after, was that the truck did not meet with any accident.
While the owner did not complain about any theft of the vehicle, the insurer professed further knowledge that the vehicle was driven by somebody who had no driving licence 301 and without the authorisation of the owner.
Apart from not examining himself the insurer did not make any attempt to substantiate his plea that the driver who was driving the vehicle did not have the driving licence.
The plea taken by both the owner and insurer is palpably false and made without any sense of responsibility with a view to somehow escape liability.
It is most unbecoming of an insurance company to have acted in this callous and irresponsible manner.
[305 F H, 306B, 307G] 2.
There is no finding by the Claims Tribunal that the truck was driven by an unauthorised person.
The High Court found that the truck ought to have been stolen and driven by some irresponsible person who did not know driving.
According to AW 4 the truck was driven by RW 2.
In fact in the F.I.R., AW 4 stated that it was RW 2 who was diving the truck.
In cross examination he stated that the case against RW 2 is still pending in the court and as far as he could remember he had no driving licence.
The evidence of the owner of the truck is totally unreliable.
The evidence of RW 2 is self serving and is made with a view to escape the prosecution that was launched against him.
It is therefore surprising that the High Court observed that it is evident from the material on record that RW 2 did not possess the driving licence.
[307H 308D] 3.
Under section 96(2)(b)(ii) the insurer can defend a claim for compensation on the ground that the vehicle was driven by a person who was not duly licensed.
Apart from making the averment in his written statement the insurer did not take any steps to establish that the vehicle was driven by a person who was not properly licensed.
The evidence of AWs.
4 and 5 clearly establishes that R.W. 2 was driving the vehicle.
[308E F] 4.
The Motor Accident Claims Tribunal rejected the evidence of AWs.
4 and 5 on the ground that as the time of accident is said to be 1 a.m. it is not possible for the witnesses to have recognised R.W. 2 (driver).
The evidence of AW 4 was rejected as he failed to identify RW 2.
AW 5 stated that he knew RW 2 and that it was he who was driving the truck and that he ran away after causing the accident.
The basis on which the Claims Tribunal came to the conclusion that the identity of the driver was not established is not acceptable.
Equally unacceptable is the conclusion of the High Court that as suggested by the counsel for the respondents the truck was stolen by some irresponsible person who did not know driving and by his reckless act caused the accident.
There has been no discussion of the evidence of AWs 4 and 5.
[306F G, H 307A] 5.
The deceased at the time of his death was working as a Patwari and was drawing Rs. 109/ per month as his salary, out of which he used to handover Rs. 100/ to Appellant No. 1 for household expenses.
The deceased had many more years to go and his contribution to the household which consisted of his wife and four children would have increased.
Rs. 20,000/ as compensation and Rs. 2,500/ as costs awarded.
[308H 309A] 6.
The instant case brings into focus the difficulties experienced by dependants in obtaining relief before the Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal.
The law as it exists, requires that the claimant should prove that the driver of the vehicle was guilty of rash and negligent driving.
The burden thus placed is very heavy and difficult to discharge by the claimant.
The records of police investigation are not made available to the Tribunal.
The officers who investigated the accident are seldom available to give evidence before the Claims Tribunal and assist it in coming to a proper conclusion.
The insurance company in quite a 302 few cases, takes an unreasonable stand raises all sorts of untenable pleas just to thwart relief to thee dependants.
In many of the claims it turns out to be beyond the capacity of the claimant to maintain his claim in a court of law.
It is for the legislature to make provisions for immediate and adequate relief to the dependants in motor accident cases.
[309B, E F, 310E] 7.
The legislature may consider making the liability to pay minimum compensation absolute as is provided for to the dependants of victims in rail and air accidents.
When a person dies in a motor accident, the number of his dependants and the period of their dependency may be ascertained.
The minimum compensation may be paid every month to the dependants according to their share for the period to which they are entitled.
The insurance companies being nationalised the necessity for awarding lump sum payment to secure the interest of the dependants is no longer there.
Regular monthly payments could be made through one of the nationalised banks nearest to the place of residence of the dependants.
Payment of monthly instalments and avoidance of lump sum payment would reduce substantially the burden on the insurer and consequently of the insured.
[310E G] Minu B. Mehta & Anr.
vs Balkrishna Ramchandra Nayan & Anr., 1977.
Accidents Claims Journal 118; State of Haryana vs Darshan Devi & Ors., 1979 Accidents Claims Tribunal 205; referred to.
