The appellant was detained under the in September, 1974 but was released in December, 1974.
In February, 1977 he was detained under section 3(1) of the , on the ground that he was "likely to engage in transporting smuggled goods".
One of the grounds of .detention stated: "you were an associate of a notorious smuggler, that you were engaged in piloting smuggled goods loaded in trucks from the place of landing . " In support of the above, two instances were mentioned: one relating to an incident on 6th August, 1974 and another on 25th August, 1974.
In the appellant 's writ petition the High Court observed (1) that although some of the activities attributed to the detenu related to August 1974, the fact that the detenu was in illegal employment of a notorious smuggler under detention clearly indicated that there was connection between him and the smuggler and (2) that a reasonable nexus between the prejudicial activities and the purpose of detention could not be said to have been snapped by the time lag rendering the impugned order of detention as one without genuine satisfaction of the detaining authoritY.
In appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that the order of detention was bad, in that it disclosed that the satisfaction arrived at by the detaining authority was mechanical and without application of his mind.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: (1) It is clear from the record that the instances alleged do not relate to any incident after 1974 but only relate to the activities of the detenu in 1973 and 1974.
Even though information about the activities of the detenu during the year 1974 came to light in october and November, 1976, a fresh order of detention under the Act was not passed till February, 1977.
If the authorities were in possession of any activities of the detenu after his release in December, 1974 action would have been taken.
it is only the statements that .were recorded in october and November 1976 which led the authorities to pass a fresh order of detention in February, 1977.
From the statements recorded in october and November, 1976 no incidents are shown to have taken place after 1974.
[262B; 263C D] 258 (2) Whether the time lag between August 1974 and February 1977 is enough to snap the reasonable nexus between the prejudicial activities and the purpose of detention would depend upon the facts of the case.
If the detaining authority had come to the conclusion, taking into account the past activities of the detenu, that he was likely to continue to indulge in his unlawful activities in future there would be no justification for this Court to interfere.
It is quite likely that persons who are totally involved in such activities as smuggling can cause a reasonable apprehension in the mind of the detaining authority that they are likely to continue in their unlawful activities.
But in the instant case the detaining authority passing the order has not stated that he was satisfied that the detenu was likely to engage in transporting smuggled goods.
What he has stated was that the detenu "engages" or is "likely to engage" in transporting smuggled goods.
There was no material before the detaining authority for coming to the conclusion that the detenu was "engaging" himself in unlawful activities.
[263F; 264A C]
