The Tamilnadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961 by section 3 (42) defined "stridhana land" as any land held on the date of the commencement of the Act (April 6, 1960) by any female member of a family in her own name, and section 5 (4)(a) of the Act enabled such a female member to hold, in addition to the extent of land which the family is entitled to hold, stridhana land not exceeding 10 standard acres.
The mother of the appellant had bequeathed to the appellant and his wife certain agricultural lands by a will.
The appellant being married on June 29, 1960 and his mother having died on April 20, 1962 i.e. after the Act came into force, the Authorised Officer passed orders treating the lands bequeathed in favour of the appellant 's wife as part of the holdings of the family consisting of the appellant and his wife, and determined the extent of the surplus land to be surrendered.
The appellant 's contention in his appeal under section 78 of the Act before the Land Tribunal, that the land which was bequeathed in favour of his wife by his mother under the will was stridhana land, was accepted by it and the Land Tribunal allowed the wife of the appellant to retain the land as stridhana land under section 5 (4)(a) of the Act and remitted back the case to the Authorised Officer for making a fresh determination of the surplus extent of the land.
The respondent 's revision petition under section 83 of the Act was allowed, the High Court holding that the land held by the wife was not 'stridhana land ' as defined under section 3 (42) of the Act, and could not be treated as such while determining the surplus land.
On the question whether the land in question was 'stridhana land ' and could be treated as such under section 5 (4) of the Act while determining the surplus land.
^ HELD: (1) The High Court was right in holding that section 5 (4) of the Act was not applicable to the land in question.
[403 F] (2) The expression "stridhana land" used in section 5 (4) (a) has been given a restricted meaning by section 3 (42) of the Act which defines it as any land held on the date of the commencement of the Act by any female member of a family in her own name.
[401C] 397 In the instant case on the date of the commencement of the Act i.e. April 6, 1960 the wife was not the owner of the land in question.
She acquired title to it on April 20, 1962 on the death of the testatrix her mother.
The appellant cannot therefore claim any benefit under section 5 (4) (a) of the Act.
[401C] (3) section 21 of the Act under which the land in question becomes liable to be included in the holding of the appellant for purposes of determination of the surplus land does not make any difference between stridhana property of a female acquired after the commencement of the Act by inheritance or bequest from any person and any other property held by her family.
[401D] (4) A reading of the definition of the expression "stridhana land" in section 3 (42) of the Act and the provisions of section 5(4) of the Act, indicate that the State Legislature intended to extend the concession available under section 5 (4) of the Act only to the land held by a female on the date of the commencement of the Act and not to land acquired by her thereafter.
[401E] (5) The object of the legislation is the acquisition of agricultural land in excess of the ceiling area and distribution of the same amongst the landless among the rural population.
If the construction urged by the appellant is placed on section 21 of the Act, the very object of the statute would be defeated.
There is also no room for construing section 5 (4) (a) of the Act as being applicable to agricultural land acquired by a female even after the commencement of this Act.
[401G, F] (6) If the Legislature intended that lands acquired by way of inheritance or bequest by a female on or after the commencement of the Act should also be dealt with in accordance with section 5(4), it would have defined the expression "stridhana land" without the words "on the date of the commencement of this Act." [401H] (7) The Act is applicable to Hindus as well as others governed by other personal laws.
This indicates that the expression 'stridhana ' is not used in the Act in the sense in which it is used in Hindu law.
[402A] Valliammal vs The Authorised Officer, Land Reforms, Coimbatore , over ruled.
