The parties to the litigation leading to this appeal are governed by the Aliyasantana law prevalent in the district of South Kanara.
They were members of a Kutumba descended from a common ancestress by name Manjekke.
One Parameshwari and her son and daughter instituted original suit No. 91 of 1950 before the Court of the Subordinate Judge South Kanara for partition of properties in accordance with the provisions of Madras Aliyasantana Act, 1949.
The suit was dismissed, but on appeal the High Court reversed it.
The High Court passed a preliminary decree on 28 6 1961 and remanded the suit for further proceedings.
In the trial a joint memo was filed by the parties on 25th September 1963 accepting the shares as per the memo.
Defendants 22 to 24 in the suit were allotted 85176 shares out of a total of 6,15,264 shares.
Defendants 22,23,24 were all male members of the 'Kutumba ' and were 'Nissanthathi kavaru '.
On the death of the 23rd and 24th defendants their legal Representatives who were brought on record filed R.I.A. No. 2266/66 and R.I.A. 2259/66 respectively claiming that out of the share allotted to the Kavarus of defendants 22 to 24, one third representing the share or interest of the 23rd and 24th defendants be allotted to them.
The petition was opposed on the ground that each one of the defendants 22, 23, and 24 was a separate 'Nissanthathi Kavaru ' and on the death of each of the defendants 24 and 23, his share or interest devolved upon the 'Santhathi Kavaru ' nearest to him to which defendants 11, 12 and 16 belonged.
The plea of the 22nd defendant was that all the three defendants 22, 23 and 24 constituted one single Nissanthathi Kavaru to which, under the preliminary decree one single or joint share was allotted and, therefore, the said share survived to the last surviving member thereof (22nd defendant) and that no devolution on a 'Santhathi Kavaru ' under sub section (5) of Section 36 is possible until the last member of 'Nissanthathi Kavaru ' viz. the 22nd defendant dies.
The trial court found that in the High Court decree dated 20 6 1961 defendants 22 to 24 were allotted shares jointly.
It further held that defendants 22, 23 and 24 formed three 'Nissanthathi Kavarus ' as their mother was dead at the time of the filling of the suit and partition was effected and there was no undivided interest in the property when they died so as to attract the provisions of section 7(2) of the .
The High Court on appeal held that when the 24th defendant died he had an undivided interest in the properties of the Kavaru of himself and defendants 405 22 and 23 and that the said undivided interest quantified as provided by the explanation to sub section (2) of section 7 of the and would devolve by intestate succession under the Succession Act.
Similarly when the 23rd defendant died he had an undivided interest in the property jointly belonging to himself and the 22nd defendant.
That undivided interest also get quantified under Section 7(2) of the .
The High Court allowed the appeals holding that the property descended according to the rule of intestate succession contained in .
Dismissing the appeal by special leave the Court, ^ HELD: 1.
The three defendants were allotted jointly a share in the partition.
In the suit filed by one Parameshwari defendants 22, 23 and 24 were made parties as they belonged to the Kavaru of their mother.
They pleaded in the written statement for the allotment of their share in the event of partition.
Moreover in the joint memo their joint share was shown as 85, 176 out of the total share of 615,264.
[409E, 410C D] 2.
The three defendants have enjoyed the interest as Nissanthathi Kavaru, and on partition are entitled only to life interest in the properties allotted to them under section 36(3) of the Madras Aliyasantana Act, 1949.
[411 C D] 3.
In view of the over riding provision in Section 4 of the , it is clear that the provisions of Aliyasantana Act, whether customary or statutory will cease to apply, in so far as they are inconsistent with the provisions of the , which came into force on 17th June 1956.
Therefore, the devolution by testamentary or intestate succession is under the .
[411G H] The explanation to Section 7(2) of the Act provides that the interest in the property of the Kutumba or Kavaru of a Hindu shall be deemed to be the share in the property of the Kutumba or Kavaru, as the case may be, that would have fallen to him or her if a partition of that property per capita had been made immediately before his or her death among all the members of the Kutumba or Kavaru, as the case may be, then living whether he or she was entitled to claim such partition or not under the Aliyasantana law and such share shall be deemed to have been allotted to him or her absolutely.
The result of the Explanation is that the undivided interest in the property of the Hindu in the Aliyasantana Kutumba or Kavaru shall devolve as provided for under the and that the share of the Hindu shall be deemed to have been allotted to him absolutely.
[412G H, 413A] The Explanation to section 30 of the provides that a member of an Aliyasantana Kutumba or Kavaru can dispose of his interest in Kutumba properties by a will, while under the Aliyasantana law the individual cannot do so.
Explanation to section 30(1) enables the male Hindu in a Kutumba or Kavaru which is deemed to be property capable of being disposed of by him Sections 7(2) and 30(1) would relate to undivided interest in the property of the Kutumba or Kavaru.
[413B D] Section 17 of the deals with the intestate succession to the separate property of a Hindu male under the Aliyasantana law.
It provides that section 8, 10, 15 and 23 shall have effect with certain modifica 406 tions in relation to persons who would have been governed by the Aliyasantana law.
Section 8 provides that the property of a male Hindu dying intestate shall devolve as specified in the section.
The succession to the property of a male Hindu belonging to a Kutumba or Kavaru of Aliyasantana law dying intestate would be governed by the provisions of section 8 as modified by section 17, the effect being that the succession as provided for under the Aliyasantana law would not be applicable to Hindu females under section 10 which provides for the distribution of property among heirs in class 1 of the Schedule.
Section 15 provides the general rule of succession in the case of Hindu females.
The rule as to the succession is also made applicable to Hindu female under the Aliyasantana law which provides for succession of the separate property of a Hindu male and a female.
Section 14 of the Act enlarges the property possessed by a female Hindu (and not a Hindu male) whether acquired before or after the commencement of the by providing that she will hold the property as a full owner and not as a limited owner.
The Hindu male will be entitled only to the limited rights as provided for under the law applicable to him.
According to the provisions of section 36(5) of the Aliyasantana law, the property allotted to Nissanthathi Kavaru at a partition is enjoyed by it only as a life interest and at the time of the death of the last of its members shall devolve upon the Kutumba.
But when a Hindu governed by the Aliyasantana law dies possessed of a life interest, after his death the property devolves under the to the heirs as provided for under the said Act and not under the Aliyasantana Act and therefore would not revert back to the Kutumba.
[413H, 414A C, 418D E] 4.
The effect of the Provisions of the is that after the coming into force of the an undivided interest of a Hindu would devolve as provided by section 7(2), while in the case of separate property it would devolve on his heirs as provided for in the .
Even though a Nissanthathi Kavaru might have a limited interest which would in turn devolve upon a Kutumba or the nearest Santhathi Kavaru under Section 36(5) of the Aliyasantana Act, the devolution will be under the , as the mode of devolution prescribed under section 36(5) of the Aliyasantana Act, has to give way to the provisions of section 8 of the , which prescribed a different mode of succession.
[414G H, 415 A] In this case, the property has been found to be undivided as between defendants 22, 23 and 24 and therefore, the position is that on the death of each one of the defendants his undivided interest would devolve on his heirs.
[415B] The contention that there was a division in status on the filing of suit for partition or that as the mother was dead there were separate Kavarus is not correct.
In the case of defendants 22, 23 and 24 who are male the Kavaru would mean the Kavaru of the mother of that male under section 3(b) (ii) of the Aliyasantana Act.
The male by himself cannot be a Kavaru under the definition.
By virtue of the Explanation to Section 35(2) a male member of a Kutumba is deemed to be a Kavaru for the purpose of Chapter VI, which deals with partition of Kutumba.
In this case, the suit was filed by Parameshwari and her two children for the partition and separate possession of their share of the Kutumba property.
When the suit is not filed by a male member the provisions of Chapter VI will not be applicable.
The deemed provision is only applicable in considering the right to claim partition.
Further 407 when the plaintiff filed the suit, there is no presumption that there was a division in status of all the Kavarus that constituted the Kutumba.
The filing of the suit will no doubt result in the disruption of the joint status of the plaintiff/Kavaru, but the other Kavarus may continue to be joint in the Kutumba.
Whether the other Kavarus continued to be joint in the Kavaru or not is a question of fact.
[415E H, 416A] Jalaja Shedthi and Ors.
vs Lakshmi Shedthi and Ors., ; , and Sundara Adappa and Ors.
vs Girija and Ors.
A.I.R. 1962 Mys. 72, explained and distinguished.
