The religious Mutts, of which the appellants were Mathadhipatis, were situated in the District of South Kanara which formerly was in the State of Madras.
Section 76(1) of the Madras Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Act, 1951, the law applicable to the Mutts, provides that in respect of services rendered by the Government and their officers and for defraying the expenses incurred on account of such services, every religious institution shall, from the income derived by it, pay to the Commissioner annually such contribution not exceeding 5% of its income as may be prescribed.
Consequent upon the reorganisation of States in 1956 the District of South Kanara was transferred to the State of Mysore.
By reason of the provisions of the States Reorganisation Act the Madras Act of 1951 continued to apply to the Mutts in the district even after their transfer to the State of Mysore.
The Government of Mysore issued a notification authorising the Commissioner for Settlement and Charitable Endowments for Mysore to exercise the functions of the Commissioner under the Madras Act.
In April, 1964 when the Commissioner of Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments, Mysore issued a notice to the appellants demanding payment of certain contributions for the years 1957 to 1960 the appellants denied their liability to pay the amounts on the ground that (1) the Commissioner had no power to demand payment of contributions for the period subsequent to November, 1956 (when the District was transferred from the former State of Madras to the State of Mysore); (2) that the demands were excessive and bore no relationship with the services rendered by the department and (3) that the expenditure incurred on the maintenance of staff and officers of the Commissioner 's office could not wholly or in part be recovered from the appellants by way of contributions under s.76(1) of the Madras Act of 1951.
All the contentions were rejected by the Commissioner.
The appellants thereupon filed writ petitions in the High Court impugning the Commissioner 's orders.
The High Court dismissed the writ petitions.
369 On appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellants that (1) the notification issued by the Mysore Government authorising the Commissioner to exercise the functions of the Commissioner under the Madras Act was invalid because the Commissioner being a Corporation Sole the only authority competent to issue a notification in this behalf under section 109(1) of the was the Central Government; (2) that the demands made by the Commissioner for payment of fees were illegal because considering the services rendered to them they were excessive; (3) that the application of the Madras Act to one district only offends against the guarantee of equality contained in article 14 because the Mutts were required to pay fees which similar institutions situated in other areas of the State were not required to pay and (4) that though the initial application of the Madras Act of 1951 to the District was not violative, its continued application offends against the guarantee of equality.
Dismissing the appeals, ^ HELD : 1.
The provisions of s.109(1) of the do not support the argument that the Commissioner being a Corporation Sole the only authority competent to issue the notification under section 122 was the Central Government.
Though the body corporate has to function within the scope of and in accordance with the directions issued by the Central Government from time to time, its power to function under the parent Act is not conditional on the issuance of directions by the Central Government.
If directions are issued by the Central Government they have to be complied with by it.
If on the other hand no directions are issued the powers and functions of the authority remain unimpaired and can nevertheless be exercised as contemplated by the Act which creates the body corporate.
[375C D] 2.(a) Information on matters like the date of constitution of the Religious Endowment Fund, annual salary budget of the Commissioner 's establishment at different places and the total number of institutions to which services were rendered sought by the appellants would be within the knowledge of the respondents and could have been supplied.
For the purposes of finding whether there was a correlationship between the services rendered to the fee payers and the fees charged it is necessary to know the cost incurred for organising and rendering the services.
But matters involving consideration of such correlationship are not required to be proved by mathematical formula.
What has to be seen is whether there is a fair correspondence between the fee charged and the cost of services rendered to the fee payers as a class.
A vivisection of the amounts spent by the Commissioner 's establishment would have been speculative.
It cannot be said that substantial prejudice had been caused to the appellants by reason of the non supply of the information sought by them.
[376 F H] (b) It is well established that a tax is levied as a part of a common burden while a fee is for a special benefit or privilege.
Public interest is at the basis of all impositions; but in a fee it is some special benefit which the individual receives which is the basis of imposition.
A fee being a levy in consideration of rendering service to a particular type, correlation between the expenditure and the levy must exist but a levy will not be regarded as a tax merely because of the absence of uniformity in its incidence or because of compulsion 370 in the collection thereof or because some of the contributories did not obtain the same degree of service as others may.
[377F H] In the instant case there were some institutions whose annual income was over Rs. 200 and a large number whose annual income was less than Rs. 200.
The smaller institutions require and receive services from the department as much as the bigger class and the amounts collected by way of fees were just enough to balance the bulk of the expenditure incurred for financing the conduct of affairs of the department which is charged with the duty and obligation of rendering services to the institutions directly and to the public which patronises or visits them indirectly.
[378G H] The Commissioner, Hindu Religious Endowment, Madras vs Sri Lakshmindra Thirtha Swamiar of Sri Shirur Mutt.
; , H. H. Sudhundra Thirtha Swamiar vs Commissioner for Hindu Religious & Charitable Endowments, Mysore.
[1963] Suppl.
2 SCR. 302, Kewal Krishan Puri and Anr. etc.
vs State of Punjab and ors.
; , Hingir Rampur Coal Co. Ltd. & Ors.
vs State of Orissa and Ors.
; , Indian Mica and Micanite Industries Ltd. vs State of Bihar & ors. , Secretary, Government of Madras, Home Department and Anr.
vs Zenith Lamp & Electrical Ltd. ; referred to.
(c) In the absence of any acceptable evidence showing that the department had built up large accumulations or reserves out of the fees collected from the various institutions and considering that services were required to be rendered to a large class of institutions consisting of major and minor institutions it cannot be said that there was no approximation or correspondence between the fees levied on the appellants and the services rendered to the class to which they belonged.
[379C D] 3.
The Madras Act of 1951 in its application to the district of South Kanara (now in the State of Karnataka) does not infringe article 14 of the Constitution.
By a long line of decisions this Court has laid down that dissimilar treatment does not necessarily offend against the guarantee of equality contained in article 14 so long as there is a valid basis for classification and the classification bears a nexus with the object of the impugned provisions.
In matters arising out of reorganisation of States, continued application of laws of a State to territories which were within that State but which became a part of another State, is not discriminatory since classification rests on geographical considerations founded on historical reasons.
Bhaiyalal Shukla vs State of Madhya Pradesh [1962] Supp.
2 SCR 257, Pandit Banarsi Das Bhanot vs State of M.P. ; , Anant Prasad Lakshminivas Ganeriwal vs State of Andhra Pradesh and other [1963] Suppl.
1 SCR 844, The State of Madhya Pradesh vs Bhopal Sugar Industries Ltd. ; , Vishwesha Thirtha Swamiar & Ors.
vs State of Mysore & Anr.
; referred to.
State of Rajasthan vs Rao Manohar Singhji ; and Jia Lal vs The Delhi Administration distinguished.
Section 119 of the was intended to serve a temporary purpose.
But Acts, Rules and Regulations whose constitutional validity is upheld and can be upheld only on the ground that no violation per se of article 14 is involved in the application of different laws 371 to different components of a State, if the area to which unequal laws are applied has become a part of the State as a result of the States Reorganisation, cannot continue to apply to such area indefinitely.
An indefinite extension and application of unequal laws for all time to come would militate against their true character as temporary measures taken in order to serve a temporary purpose.
The decision to withdraw application of unequal laws to equals cannot be delayed unreasonably because the relevance of historical reasons which justify the application of unequal laws is bound to wear out with the passage of time.
But it cannot, however, be said that the continued application of the Act to the District became violative of article 14 as immediately as during the period under consideration, which was just five or six years after the passing of the .
Nor has the continued application of that Act until now is shown to be violative of article 14.
[387E G] Narottam Kishore Dev Varma and Ors.
vs Union of India and Anr.
; referred to.
Shinghal J. (concurring in the final decision).
In the absence of necessary pleadings by the appellants it was not necessary to consider whether the continued application of the Madras Act to the district was violative of article 14 of the Constitution.
It cannot also be said that inequality is writ large on the face of the impugned statute in its application to the district and that it is perilously near the periphery of unconstitutionality merely because of the lapse of 23 years.
[395A] 2.
Pleadings or a statement of material facts are of vital importance because absence of all the necessary facts in a petition for the redress of a grievance denies an opportunity for the opposite party to formulate its case.
The parties would not know the points at issue and therefore the controversy would be confined to any point or points.
If a petition filed under article 226 or article 32 alleging infringement of article 14 is singularly deficient in furnishing particulars justifying the allegation, but makes out only a mere plea of differential treatment, that, by itself, would not be sufficient to enable the Court to examine the validity of the petitioner 's claim.
[389G H; 392H] In the instant case the sole ground on which the appellants rested their plea of discrimination was the continued application of the provisions of the Act to the district eight or nine years after the reorganisation of States and that failure to "unify" the legislation on the subject of Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments was wholly discriminatory.
That is quite untenable in view of the decision in Bhopal Sugar Industries case.
The other plea of mixing of Mutts with temples is not quite intelligible.
It had not even been referred by the counsel during the arguments.
The grounds which had been taken were, therefore, untenable.
[394A C] 3.
It is impossible to lay down any definite time limit within which the State has to make the necessary adjustment for the purpose of effectuating the equality clause of the Constitution.
While differential treatment could not be permitted to assume permanency without a rational basis to support it as years go by a mere plea of differential treatment is by itself not sufficient to attract the application of article 14.
State of Madhya Pradesh vs Bhopal Sugar Industries Ltd. ; followed.
