The services of the appellant, who was appointed as an Assistant Sub Inspector of Police on July 2, 1973 were terminated in September 1977.
The High Court rejected his petition impugning the order of termination of his services.
In appeal to this Court it was contended that on completion of the three year period of probation in accordance with r. 12.8(1) of the Punjab Police Rules the appellant should be deemed to have been confirmed in the post and that the order terminating his services was illegal.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD.
: There is no legal error in the order passed by the Senior Superintendent of Police terminating the appellant 's services.
[490C] 1.
It is well settled that a person is appointed on probation only when he is appointed against a substantive post.
The appellant, having been appointed against a temporary vacancy, was not on probation.
Rule 12.8, which deals with officials appointed on probation, does not apply to this case.
[489 F G] 2.
Assuming that r. 12.8 was applicable, the officer could not be deemed to be confirmed unless there is any rule providing that, in the absence of an order of confirmation at the end of the probation, the employee must be presumed to be confirmed.
There is no such provision in the present rules and hence the period of probation must be presumed to have been extended.
in the State of Punjab vs Dharam Singh, ; this Court held that when a first appointment is made on probation for a specific period a and the employee is allowed to continue in the post after the expiry of the period without any specific order of confirmation he should be deemed to continue in his post as a probationer only in the absence of any indication to the contrary in the original order of appointment or the Service Rules.
In such a case, an express order of confirmation is necessary to give the employee a substantive right to the post.
[489B C] In the instant case since no order of confirmation had been passed after the appellant completed three years, it must be presumed that his probation had been extended 488 State of Punjab vs Dharam Singh [1968] 3 SCR applied.
Supdt.
of Police Ludhiana and Anr.
vs Dwarka Das etc.
; over ruled.
