The assessee a private limited company carried on the busi ness of distribution of films.
In some instances the assessee used to produce or purchase films and then distribute the same for exhibition in different cinema halls and in other cases the assessee used to advance monies to producers of films and secure the right of distribution of the films produced with the help of the monies so advanced by the assessee.
In the course of such business it advanced monies to Jupiter Pictures for the production of three films and acquired the right of distribution of these three films under three agreements in writing dated the September 1941, July 1942 and May 1945.
The said agreements expressed in similar language contained similar provisions.
In the accounting year ending 31st March 1946 and in the previous years the assessee bad exploited its rights of distribution of the three pictures.
On 31st October 1945 the assessee and Jupiter Pictures entered into an agreement cancelling the three agreements relating to the distribution rights in respect of the three :films and in consideration of such cancellation the assessee was paid Rs. 26,000, in all by the Jupiter Pictures during the accounting period as compensation.
The question for determination was whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case the sum of Rs. 26,000, received by the assessee from the Jupiter Pictures was a revenue receipt assessable under the Indian Income Tax Act.
Held, per section R. DAS C. J. and VENKATARAMA AYYAR J., (BHAGWATI J. dissenting) that the sum received by the assessee was a revenue receipt (and not a capital receipt) assessable under the Indian Income Tax Act inasmuch as: (i) the sum paid to the assessee was not truly compensation for not carrying on its business but was a sum paid in ordinary course of business to adjust the relation between the assessee and the producers of the films; 30 224 (ii) the agreements which were cancelled were by no means agreements on which the whole trade of the assessee had for all practical purposes been built and the payment received by the assessee was not for the loss of such a fundamental asset as was the ship managership of the assessee in Barr Crombie & Co. Ltd. vs Commissioners of Inland Revenue ([1945] ; and (iii) one cannot say that the cancelled agreements constituted the framework or whole structure of the assessee 's profit making apparatus in the sense the agreement between the two margarine dealers concerned in Van Den Berghs Ltd. vs Clark ; was.
It is not always easy to decide whether a particular payment received by a person is his income or whether it is to be regarded as his capital receipt.
Income is a word of the broadest connotation and difficult and perhaps impossible to define in any precise general formula.
Though in general the distinction between an income and a capital receipt was well recognised and easily applied, cases did arise where the item lay on the border line and the problem had to be solved on the particular facts of each case.
No infallible criterion or test can be or has been laid down and the decided cases are only helpful in that they indicate the kind of consideration which may relevantly be borne in mind in approaching the problem.
The character of the payment received may vary according to the circumstances.
BHAGWATI J. (dissenting): that in the instant case, the pictures, if produced by the assessee itself would have been capital assets of the assessee.
What the assessee did was that instead of producing the pictures itself it advanced monies to the producers for the purpose of producing the pictures which it acquired for the purpose.
of distribution and exploitation.
Nonetheless, the pictures thus acquired were capital assets of the assessee which it worked upon in carrying on its business of distribution and exploitation, the monies it spent on the acquisition of the pictures were thus capital expenditure and whatever monies were realised by it by working these capital assets were its capital receipts except of course the commission which it earned by distribution and exploitation of the pictures which cer tainly would be its trading receipts.
Having regard to the terms of these agreements it could certainly not be predicated of these pictures that they were its stock in trade so as to constitute the payment in question a trading receipt of the assessee.
Commissioner of Income tax vs Shaw, Wallace & Co. ([1932] L.R. 59 I.A. 206; A.I.R. 1932 P.C. 138; , Baja Bahadur Kamakshya Narain Singh of Ramgarh vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bihar and Orissa ([1943) , 521; L.R. 70 I.A. 180), Short Brothers, Ltd. vs The Commissioners of Inland Revenue ([1927] , Kelsall Parsons & Co. vs Commissioners of Inland Revenue ([1938] 21 T. C. 608), Glenboig Union Fireclay Co. Ltd. vs The Commissioners of Inland Revenue ([1922] , Shadbolt 225 (H. M. Inspector of Taxes) vs Salmon Estate ([1943] 25 T.C. 52), Johnson (H.M. Inspector of Taxes) vs W.S. Try, Ltd. ([1945] , Commissioner of Income Tax, Bengal vs Shaw Wallace and Company (A.I.R. , Van Den Berghs, Ltd. vs Clark (Inspector of Taxes) (L.R. [1935] A.C. 431; ; ; 3 I.T.R. (Suppl.) 17) and Barr Crombie & Co. Ltd. vs Commissioners of Inland Revenue ([1945] 26 T.C. 406), referred to.
The facts of the case as taken from the judgment of the Hon 'ble The Chief Justice are shortly as follows: The assessee is a private limited company.
It carried on the business of distribution of films.
In some instances the assessee used to produce or purchase films and then distribute the same for exhibition in different cinema halls and in other cases the assessee used to advance monies to producers of films and secure the right of distribution of the films produced with the help of the monies so advanced by the assessee.
In the course of such business it advanced monies to Jupiter Pictures for the production of three films and acquired the right of distribution of these three films under three agreements in writing dated the 17th September 1941, 16th July 1942 and 5th May 1945.
The said several agreements were expressed in similar language and contained similar provisions.
The assessee bound itself to advance a certain sum in instalments specified therein and retain the balance to be utilised for the purpose of press publicity in such way as it thought fit and proper and at its sole discretion.
Jupiter Pictures in its turn bound itself to arrange for the delivery to the assessee of twelve copies of the film to be produced after it would be passed by the Board of Censors (clause 1).
The territories within which the assessee was to have the right of distribution and exploitation of the film was specified in clause 2 and such right was to enure for a period of five years from the date of the release of the film.
The assessee was given the right, at its sole discretion, to distribute the films at such rates and on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it might deem fit (clause 2).
The amounts realised by the distribution of the films was to be utilised by the assessee in the following way: namely, in paying itself its distribution commission and in retaining the available balance until the entire amount of advance would be discharged (clause 3) and after the entire amount of the advance would be discharged, in paying to Jupiter Pictures the net realisations from the film after deducting its commission (clause 4).
In case the full amount of advance could not be recouped from the realisations of the film on or before the expiry of one and half years from the date of the first release of the film Jupiter Pictures would be liable to pay to the assessee whatever balance would remain due with compound interest at twelve per cent.
per annum calculated in the manner men tioned in clause 6.
The assessee 's commission for distribution and 226 exploitation of the film through its Organisation was, by clause 8, fixed at 15 per cent.
of the net realisations.
In case of sale of district or territorial rights of the film made by consent of both parties the assessee alone would be entitled to put through such sales and receive the proceeds and would be entitled to a commission of ten per cent.
thereon and to appropriate the balance towards the payment and discharge of the advance made by it (clause 9).
The assessee was to submit to Jupiter Pictures a monthly statement of account and show all books of account to Jupiter Pictures (clauses 11 and 12).
The assessee was given liberty to appoint sub agents and sub distributors at its sole discretion (clause 13).
The amount advanced by the assessee was made immediately repayable in the event of the film being banned or not passed by the Board of Censors (clause 14).
Clause 15 gave the assessee a charge by way of security on the negative and positive copies of the film for whatever amount might be due to the assessee on account of the advance made and in case the negative and positive copies were in possession of Jupiter Pictures the same were to be held by the latter as trustee of the assessee.
The burden of insuring the negative copies of the film was placed on Jupiter Pictures at its own cost (clause 16).
Jupiter Pictures agreed to indemnify the assessee against all claims or demands of any nature whatsoever by any person or agency in or upon the film and against all claims of any person or agency on account of any infringement of copyright (clause 17).
If Jupiter Pictures failed to deliver the film within the time specified therein, the assesses was given the right, at its option, to complete the picture at its own cost and in such event, Jupiter Pictures was to be liable to the assessee for all such expenses with compound interest thereon at 12 per cent.
per annum and the assessee would have all the rights of distribution, sale, etc.
as aforesaid (clause 19).
The last clause provided that on the expiry of the period of 5 years the assessee would return to Jupiter Pictures all copies of the film and balance stock of loan and saleable publicity materials subject to wear and tear.
In the accounting year ending 31st March 1946 and in the previous years the assessee had exploited its right of distribution of the three pictures.
On 31st October 1945 the assessee and Jupiter Pictures entered into an agreement cancelling the three several agreements relating to the distribution rights in respect of the three films and in consideration of such cancellation Jupiter Pictures agreed to pay to the assessee towards commission the sum of Rs. 8,666 10 8 (rupees eight thousand six hundred and sixty six annas ten and pies eight) for each of the three pictures aggregating in all to Rs. 26,000 (rupees twenty six thousand).
It is this sum of Rs. 26,000 (rupees twenty six thousand) which was paid during the accounting year which forms the subject matter of the question that has arisen between the assessee and the department.
