Respondent 1 joined the judicial service Class II in the State of Maharashtra on the 7th December, 1960 as per his order of appointment which clearly states (i) that he would be on probation for a period of two years from the date of his joining, (ii) that during that period, his appointment would be liable to be terminated without notice, (iii) that after the period of probation his services would be liable to be terminated on one month 's notice as long as his appointment was temporary.
The two years ' probationary period originally fixed expired on 6th December of 1962 even so he was allowed to continue in the post only in an officiating capacity and was not confirmed.
His services were terminated with effect from 1 2 1972 by a simple order of termination dated 15th December 1971.
Respondent 1 challenged the order of his termination by filing a writ petition.
The High Court of Bombay allowed the petition holding (1) that Respondent 1 would be deemed to have been confirmed in his post because his work was satisfactory and a vacancy in the permanent cadre was available.
The Government had no discretion in the matter and it was bound to confirm him under Rule 4(2)(iv) of the Rules (2) that the appointment of respondent 1, therefore, could not be terminated by a simple notice of termination and it was passed by way of punishment in violation of Article 311(2) of the Constitution.
Allowing the appeal by special leave, the Court ^ HELD: Per Untwalia J. 1.
Sub rule (2) of Rule 4 of the Bombay Judicial Service Rules, 1956 deals with the method of recruitment to the Junior Branch Class II.
Clause (iv) of Sub rule (2) of Rule 4 deals with probation and confirmation.
There are two parts of clause (iv) (a) that it is imperative to put every person appointed under sub rule (2) on probation for a minimum period of two years "unless 552 otherwise expressly directed" and (b) on the expiry of the said period of two years the eprson appointed may be confirmed, if there is a vacancy and if his work is found to be satisfactory.
[557H, 558 B C] The plain meaning of the rule is that there is no automatic confirmation on the expiry of the probationary period of two years in the first instance.
On the expiry of the said period and on the fulfillment of the requirement of sub clauses (a) and (b) a Government servant becomes eligible for being confirmed and normally he is likely to be confirmed.
But, in many branches of Government service including the judiciary that for administrative reasons or otherwise the confirmation is delayed and is made at a subsequent time.
It may also be delayed for watching the work of the Government servant for a further period.
The expression "unless otherwise expressly directed" governs only the first part of clause (iv) and not the second part.
Therefore the rule in question comes under the ordinary and normal rule that without an express order of confirmation the Government servant will not be taken to have been confirmed in the post to which he was appointed temporarily and/or on probation.
It is not covered by the exceptional rule like the one in State of Punjab vs Dharam Singh, ; [558C F] State of Punjab vs Dharam Singh, ; , Kedar Nath Bahl vs State of Punjab and Ors., A.I.R. 1972 SC 873; referred to.
Rule 4(2) (iv) of the Bombay Judicial Service Recruitment Rules, 1956 does not violate Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution; there being several other reasons administrative or otherwise, which may delay the confirmation of an officer.
The confirmation can surely be delayed if the suitability of the Government servant has got to be watched further to decide whether he should be confirmed in the post or not.
[560 B, G H] section B. Patwardhan and Ors.
etc., etc v State of Maharashtra; , ; distinguished.
The Government Resolution dated 19 4 1963 and the Gazette Notification dated 11 5 1963 do not give a deemed confirmation status.
Two inferences are possible to be drawn from them. (1) that the period of probation stood extended beyond two years until and unless he was confirmed and (2) that in any event be continued in the post in his temporary or officiating capacity.
[561A, D E] 4.
Termination of services by a notice of termination simpliciter will be violative of the requirement of Article 311(2) of the Constitution, if the Government servant be held either as confirmed or deemed to have been conformed in the post to which he has been initially appointed.
In the instant case Respondent 1 was continuing in the post in an officiating capacity.
His services could be terminated by one month 's notice simpliciter.
[561E G] 5.
If the termination was by way of punishment, then also Article 311(2) would be attracted.
Even in the case of a temporary or officiating Government servant his services cannot be terminated by way of punishment casting a stigma on him in violation of the requirement of Article 311(2).
[561 G H] 6.
Ordinarily and generally, any of the three courses, namely, compulsory retirement, reversion to parent cadre from a higher officiating post; dispensing 553 with the services of an officiating or temporary Government servant with an order of termination simpliciter, is taken recourse to only, if there are some valid reasons for taking the action against the Government servant.
If a probe in the matter is allowed to be made in all such cases, then curious results are likely to follow.
In a given case there may be valid reasons, may be of a very serious kind, which led the authorities concerned to adopt one course or the other as the facts of the particular case demanded.
If reasons are disclosed in the order, then it could be said that the order of the Government was passed by way of punishment.
If not disclosed then it would be said as arbitrary and violative of Article 16 of the Constitution.
Only a practical and reasonable approach to the problem would solve it.
Ordinarily and generally the rule laid down in most of the cases by this Court, is that the Court should look to the order on the face of it and find whether it casts any stigma on the Government servant.
In such a case, there is no presumption that the order is arbitrary or malafide unless a very strong case is made out and proved by the Government servant, who challenges such an order.
[562B E] section P. Vasudeva vs State of Haryana & Ors., ; ; State of U.P. vs Ram Chandra Trivedi, ; ; Parshotam Lal Dhingra vs Union of India ; ; Shamsher Singh vs State of Punjab, ; and Manager Govt.
Branch Press & Anr.
vs D. P. Belliappa, ; ; referred to.
Malafide should be pleaded by specific allegations.
Merely to say that the action was not justified and it was out of bias that the impugned action was taken, was not, in the least, any allegation of malafide.
[565 E] In the instant case, in the absence of any specific allegation against any of the respondents in the Writ Petition, the conclusion would be that when the orders were passed against Respondent 1 the High Court must have examined the matter carefully and found that it was not desirable to allow him to continue in the service and must have further found that the facts did not warrant or make it expedient to hold any regular enquiry against him and to remove him from service by way of punishment.
The order of termination against Respondent 1 was not passed by way of punishment contravening the requirement of Article 311 (2) of the Constitution.
[565H, 566A B, G] 8.
The State counsel rightly refused to show the records of the case to Respondent 1.
Obviously it could not be shown to him.
Otherwise he would have come out with a plea, right or wrong, that the order was made against him by way of punishment.
[566B C] Per Pathak J. 1.
Where the services of a temporary Government servant or a probationer Government servant are terminated by an order which does not ex facie disclose any stigma or penal consequences against the Government servant and is merely a termination order simpliciter, there is no case ordinarily for assuming that it is anything but what it purports to be.
Where however, the order discloses on the face of it that a stigma is cast on the Government servant or that it visits him with penal consequences, then plainly the case is one of punishment.
There may still be another kind of case, where although the termination of services is intended 554 by way of punishment, the order is framed as a termination simpliciter.
In such a case, if the Government servant is able to establish by material on the record that the order is in fact passed by way of punishment, the innocence of the language in which the order is framed will not protect it if the procedural safeguards contemplated by Article 311(2) of the Constitution have not been satisfied.
[567 B D] 2.
The jurisdiction of the Court extends to examining and scrutinising the official records in the following circumstances: (a) The official records may be called for by the Court generally in a given case, for the purpose of determination the truth; where the Government servant succeeds in making out a prima facie case that the order was by way of punishment, but an attempt to rebut the case is made by the authorities.
[567D E] (b) It is not open to the Court to send for the official records on a mere allegation by the Government servant that the order is by way of punishment.
For unless there is material on the record before the Court in support of that allegation, an attempt by the Court to find out from the record whether the termination of service is based on the unsuitability of the Government servant in relation to the post held by him or is in reality an order by way of punishment will in effect be an unwarranted attempt to delve into the official records for the purpose of determining the nature of the order on the basis of a mere allegation of the Government servant.
On a sufficient case being made out on the merits before the Court by the Government servant it is open to the Court to resort to scrutiny of the official records for the purpose of verifying the truth.
[567E G] (c) Courts should not decline to peruse the official records in an appropriate case.
Where considerations of privilege and confidentiality do not suffer, the information set forth in the records should be made available to the Government servant.
The mere possibility that the official records could confirm what the Government servant had set out to prove, and prima facie had indeed proved, should not shut out disclosure of the information.
[567G H, 568A] (d) There is no absolute rule that where the order terminating the services of a temporary or a probationer Government servant is ex facie an order of termination simpliciter, the Government servant is barred from establishing that it is in fact an order by way of punishment and on the Government servant succeeding in establishing it to be so the Court is prohibited from examining the official records for the purpose of verifying the true position.
[568D E] (e) The question of scrutinising the official records arises where a Government servant is entitled to show that although the order impugned by him purports to be an order of termination simpliciter it is in fact an order made by way of punishment.
[568E F] (f) If a Government servant is able to establish that, although the impugned order is innocent ex facie it was made on the ground that he was guilty of misconduct and, therefore, the order was intended by way of punishment, the law still is that an order, although framed in terms which do not cast an aspersion against the character and integrity of the Government servant or visit him with evil consequences, may still be proved to be in fact one by way of punishment.
[569E F] 555 (g) In the present case, the reason for the High Court refusing to examine the official records was that the respondent Government servant had failed to make out any case whatever that the order was by way of punishment.
There being no doubt in the mind of the High Court on the point, it was justified in declining to look into the official records.
[570C D] State of U.P. vs Ram Chandra Trivedi, ; , Union of India vs R. section Dhaba, , R. section Sial vs The State of U.P. & Ors., , Shamsher Singh & Anr.
vs State of Punjab, ; ; applied.
section P. Vasudeva vs State of Haryana and Ors., ; ; explained and relied on
