The Karnataka Contract Carriage (Acquisition) ordinance, 1976 was promulgated on January 30, 1976 with the object of acquiring the contract carriages operating in the State.
Sub clause (3 ) to cl. 20 of the ordinance provided for absorption of certain categories of employees of contract carriage operators in the service of the Corporation, and the ratio for absorption for the different categories of employees that were entitled to be absorbed.
On the same day, the State Government made an order under sub cl.
(I) to cl. 20 of the ordinance transferring the contract carriages that vested in the State Government to the Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation.
This ordinance was subsequently replaced by the Karnataka Contract Carriages (Acquisition) Act, 1976 which was published in the Gazette dated March 12, 1976.
The ordinance was repealed by the Act, which re enacted the provisions of the repealed ordinance, with a saving clause in sub section
(2) of section 31 for presentation of any thing done or any action taken.
The Act was substantially in similar terms, except for the difference that the ratio prescribed by proviso to sub cl.
(3) to cl. 20 of the ordinance which laid down the categories of persons who could be absorbed in the service of the Corporation, was substantially altered and a new ratio was inserted in the proviso to sub section
(3) of section 19 of the Act.
Otherwise, sub section
(3) of section 19 of the Act and sub cl.
(3) to cl. 20 of the ordinance were identical in every respect.
Under the Proviso to sub cl.
(3) to cl. 20, the total strength of the employees of the erstwhile Carriage operators allowable for absorption was 7.9 per vehicle while under the proviso to sub section
(3) of section 19 of the Act, the ratio worked out to 4.45 per vehicle.
Further, while under the ordinance, conductors were entitled to be absorbed, the ratio provided under the Act showed that conductors were not included in the categories of persons who could be absorbed in the service of Corporation.
The change in the ratio of absorption from 7.9 per vehicle under. sub cl.
(3) to cl. 20 of the ordinance to 4.45 per vehicle under sub section
(3) of section 19 of the Act adversely affected a large number of employees of the erstwhile contract carriage operators who filed writ petitions in the High Court, 685 challenging the vires of the proviso to sub section
(3) of section 19 of the Act, which dismissed the writ petitions.
In the appeal and the writ petitions to this Court the question for consideration was, whether the employees of the erstwhile contract carriage operators in the State of Karnataka acquired a vested right of absorption in the service with the Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation under sub cl.
(3) to cl. 20 of the Karnataka Contract Carriage (Acquisition) ordinance 1976.
Dismissing the appeal and writ petitions; ^ HELD: 1.
The High Court rightly observed that there was neither anything done nor action taken and, therefore, the petitioners did not acquire any right to absorption under sub cl.
(3) to cl. 20.
[692 C] 2.
The ordinance promulgated by the Governor in the instant case was a 'legislative act ' of the Governor under article 213(1) and, therefore, undoubtedly a temporary statute, and while it was still in force the repealing Act was passed containing the saving clause in section 31(2)(i) providing that, notwithstanding such repeal, 'anything done ' or any 'action taken ' under the repealed ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of the Act.
[691 C D] 3.
In considering the effect of an expiration of a temporary Act, it would be unsafe to lay down any inflexible rule.
It requires very clear and unmistakable language in a subsequent Act of the legislature to revive or re create an expired right.
If, however, the right created by the statute is of an enduring character and has vested in the person, that right cannot be taken away because the statute by which it was created has expired.
In order to see whether the rights and liabilities under the repealed ordinance have been put an end to by the Act, 'the line of enquiry would be not whether the new Act expressly keeps alive old rights and liabilities under the repealed ordinance but whether it manifests an intention to destroy them.
Another line of approach may be to see as to how far the new Act is retrospective in operation.
[691 F G] State of Punjab vs Mohar Singh, ; , referred to 4.
(i) Sub section
(2) of section 31 of the Act was not intended to preserve abstract rights conferred by the repealed ordinance.
The legislature had the competence to so re structure the ordinance as to meet the exigencies of the situation obtaining after the taking over of the contract carriage services.
It could re enact the ordinance according to its original terms, or amend or alter its provisions.
[692 A] (ii) When the ordinance came to be replaced by the Act, the Corporation felt that the number of employees of the erstwhile contract carriage operators was too large for its requirements.
The legislature, therefore stepped in and reduced the scale of absorption in the proviso to sub section
(3) of section 19 from 7.9 per vehicle to 4.45 per vehicle.
[694G] 5.
The object of section 31(2)(i) is to preserve only the things done and action taken under the repeated ordinance and not the rights and privileges acquired and accrued on the one side, and the corresponding obligation or liability 686 incurred on the other side, so that if no right acquired under the repealed ordinance was preserved, there is no question of any liability being enforced.
It is unlike the usual saving clauses which presented unaffected by the repeal, not only things done under the repealed enactment but also the rights acquired thereunder.
[693 C, D] 6.
(i) Every person eligible for absorption had to fulfil three conditions, viz., (1) he had to be a workman within the meaning of the ; (2) he should have been, immediately before the commencement of the ordinance, exclusively employed in connection with the acquired property, and (3) he had to come within the ratio provided in the proviso to sub cl.
(3) to cl. 20.
The whole object of inserting sub cl.
(3) to cl. 20 of the ordinance was to obviate the unemployment of persons suitable for employment, for which purpose, the Corporation had necessarily to screen the applicants.
[693 G] (ii) It was only if the employee was willing to be absorbed in the service of the Corporation that the Corporation could absorb him in service, provided the other conditions specified in sub cl.
(3 ) to cl. 20 were satisfied.
[694 E] (iii) Thus it is clear that several steps had to be taken by the authorities before identifying and determining the persons who could be absorbed in the service of the Corporation, in accordance with sub cl.
(3) to cl. 20 of the ordinance, which indicates that automatic absorption of the employees of the erstwhile contract carriage operators was not legally permissible.
[694 F] 7.
The distinction between what is and what is not a right presented by the provisions of section 6 of the General Clauses Act.
is often one of great fineness.
What is unaffected by the repeal of a statute is a right acquired or accrued under it and not a mere 'hope or expectation of ', or liberty to apply for acquiring a right.
[692 G] Director of Public Works vs Ho Po Sang, [1962] 2 All.
ER 721 PC, referred to.
The Act substitutes a 'new ' proviso in sub section
(3) of section 19 in place cf the old proviso to sub cl.
(3) to cl. 20 of the ordinance, altering the whole basis of absorption.
The new proviso is given a retrospective effect, and it holds the field from the notified date i.e., January 30, 1976.
The proviso in subcl.
(3) to cl. 20 laying down a particular ratio of absorption, is pro tanto avoided by an express enactment of a 'new ' proviso to sub section
(3) of section 19 which is entirely inconsistent with it.
When an ordinance is replaced by an Act which is made retrospective in operation, anything done or any action taken under the ordinance stand wholly effected.
[695 C] 9.
(i) The employees of the former contract carriage operators in normal course filled in the pro forma giving their service particulars and reported to duty.
This was in the mere 'hope or expectation ' of acquiring a right.
The submission of these 'call reports ' by the employees did not subject the Corporation to a corresponding statutory obligation to absorb them in service.
[692 C] (ii) The meeting of the Committee set up by the Government for laying down the principles for equation of posts and for determination of inter sc seniority, met on June 2, 1976.
The Committee decided that even in the 687 case of helpers cleaners, there should be a 'trade test ' and the staff cleared by the Committee for the posts of helper 'B ', helper 'A ' and assistant artisans should be on the basis of their technical competence, experience, ability etc.
The Committee also decided that all other employees of contract carriage operators, who were eligible for absorption, should be interviewed by that Committee for the purpose of absorption on the basis of experience, ability duties and responsibilities.
These norms were not laid down till June 2, 1976 Till their actual absorption, the employees of the erstwhile contract carriage operators had only an inchohate right.
[692 E F]
