Section 91 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 confers power on the court or an officer in charge of a police station to issue a summons or written order to any person in whose possession or power a document the production of which the court or the officer considers necessary or desirable for the purposes of any investigation, inquiry, trial or other proceeding under D. the Code calling upon him to produce the document.
Section 93 of the Code contemplates three situations in which the court may issue a search warrant: (a) where the Court has reason to believe that a person to whom the summons or order under section 91 has been or might be addressed will not or would not produce the document or thing as required by such summons or requisition or (b) where such document or thing is not known to the court to be in the possession of any person or (c) where the court considers that the purposes of any enquiry, trial or other proceeding under this code will not be served by a general search or inspection, then it may issue a search warrant; and the person to whom such warrant is directed may search or inspect in accordance therewith and the provisions contained in the code.
The complainant (respondent No. 1 ) made an application before a magistrate for the issue of a warrant for the search and seizure of certain books and documents of a Sabha of which the accused were office bearers.
After the seizure of the books and documents, on the application of one of the accused persons, the magistrate directed their return to the persons from whom they were recovered.
In the respondent revision petition the High Court held that the provisions contained in section 93(1) of the Cr.
P.C. were not hit by article 20(3) of the Constitution.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: The High Court was right in sustaining the general search warrant under section 93(1)(c) of the Code.
[682 H] 1.
The immunity against self incrimination extends to any incriminating evidence which the accused may be compelled to give but does not extend to cover a situation where evidence which may have tendency to incrinate 674 the accused is being collected without compelling him to be a party to the collection of the evidence.
The search of the premises occupied by the accused, without compelling the accused to be party to such search, would not be violative of article 20(3) of the Constitution.
[682C] 2.
A search and seizure pursuant to a search warrant under section 93 ( 1 ) (c) 8 of the Code would not have the remotest tendency to compel an accused to incriminate himself.
He is not required to participate in the search.
He may remain a passive spectator or may even be absent.
Merely because the accused is occupying the premises to be searched it cannot be said that by such search and consequent seizure of documents, including the document which may contain statements attributable to the personal Knowledge of the accused and which may have a tendency to incriminate him, would violate the constitutional guarantee against self incrimination because he is not compelled to do anything.
A passive submission to search cannot be styled as compulsion on the accused to submit to search.
If anything is recovered during the search which may provide incriminating evidence against the accused it cannot be called a compelled testimony.
[681 G H] 3.
Section 93(1)(c) comprehends a situation where a search warrant can be issued as the court is unaware of not only the person but even the place where the documents may be found and that a general search is necessary.
Therefore, power of the court under this clause cannot be cut down by importing some of the requirements of cl.
(b) of the section 93(1).
[682 F G] In the instant case although the order of the magistrate was laconic certain important aspects could not be over looked.
The objects of the Sabha were of a general charitable nature.
An earlier search warrant was quashed by the High Court.
When the complainant made more serious allegation a search warrant was issued to conduct a search of the institution.
The office premises, the books and other documents of the Sabha could not be said to be in possession of any individual accused.
They were in the possession of the institution.
A search of such a public place under the authority of a general search warrant can easily be sustained under section 93(1)(c).
Viewed this way there was no illegality in the Magistrate 's order.
Shyamlal Mohanlal vs State of Gujarat, , M. P. Sharma & others vs Satish Chandra District Magistrate, Delhi & ors., [19541 SCR 1077, The State of Bombay vs Kathi Kalu Gohad & Ors. ; explained.
