These appeals arise from a common demand for tax by the State from a number of Sugar Mills on the purchase of Sugarcane at a rate regulated by weight and not on value.
The Cess under the U.P. Sugarcane Cess Act, 1956 was declared ultra vires which resulted in the enactment of Sugarcane Purchase Tax Act, 1961.
In a fiscal sense, the Purchase Tax Act, is a reincarnation of the Cess Act, but in a legislative sense, it is an independent statute with a different source of power, impact and structure.
The tax in question is a successor to the Cess which was struck down but jurisprudentially, the levies are different in character and attributes and constitutionally the imposts derive from different legislative entities and have to be tested by different standards.
The Act by Section 3 imposes a rate of tax at the rate of Rs. 1.25 paise per quintal of sugarcane purchased by a factory owner, the corresponding rate for a "unit" being paise 50.
Under Section 3(2) of the Act, the charge is on the purchase transaction payable by the owner of the factory or unit "on such date" at such place and in such instalment as may be prescribed.
The appellant had challenged the charge of tax.
The High Court dismissed the Writ Petition on the ground that the petitioners have not supplied for any period figures of actual prices paid by them, actual quantity of cane crushed, actual quantity of juice derived, actual quantity of sugar produced and their earnings and, therefore, it was not possible to take the view that tax by weight was unfair and inequitable.
The High Court further held that tax by weight had fairer relation to the production of sugar by earnings of a factory than tax by price and consequently no one could complain that the impugned provisions treated unequals as equals, Equal crushing attracts equal tax.
On appeal to this Court, it was argued on behalf of the appellants that (i) the scheme and sections of the Act are ultra vires (ii) the charge of tax is bad because in its true character it is a legislation in respect of "Controlled Industry" and this power belongs exclusively to Parliament under Entry 52 of List I (Seventh Schedule) of the Constitution, (iii) there is discrimination between sugar factories and khandsari units by the impost of differential rates of tax and liability is computed by the weight of the cane as distinguished from its monetary value, there is an inevitable arbitrariness built into the texture of the scheme and (iv) the Act, masked as Purchase Tax, in essence asks for an Excise Duty on sugar manufacture and is, therefore, invalid as colourable legislation.
770 ^ HELD: (i) This Court cannot lose sight of the all India impact when the law is laid down under Article 141 of the Constitution and judgments of this Court are decisional between litigants but declaratory for the nation.
The scheme of the Act is simple and workable.
It is undisputed that sugar industry is a controlled industry within the meaning of Entry 52, List I of Schedule and therefore, the legislative power of Parliament covers enactments with regard to industries having regard to Article 246(1) of the Constitution.
Entry 54 in List II of the Seventh Schedule, empowers the State legislature to legislate for taxes on purchase of goods and so if the Act under consideration is attracted, in pith and substance by this entry, legislative incompetence cannot void the Act.
[774 E F, 781 G H, 782 A] (ii) The contention that the charge of tax is bad because in its true character it is a legislation in respect of controlled industry and which power belongs exclusively to Parliament under Entry 52 of List I has no force.
Tika Ram 's case deals with the identical question of "controlled industry ' vis a vis U.P. Legislation regulating Sugarcane supply and purchase under the U.P. Sugarcane (Regulation of Supply and Purchase) Act, 1953.
That statute reserved or assigned to sugar factories specified cane purchasing centres for the purpose.
This regimentation of sugarcane growers and regulation of cane supplies to specified millers by a State enactment was attached on the precise ground that sugar being a "controlled industry" any enactment affecting such industry including the regulation of supplies of raw materials thereto was taboo.
The plea was dismissed as specious, and the appeals under this Court 's consideration are a fortiori cases where the rejection of the contention can be more confidently made.
[782 C, F H, 783 A] "Industry" as a legislative topic has a large and liberal import, true.
But what peripherally affects cannot be confused with what goes to the heart.
An acquisition of land for sugar mills or of sugar mills may affect the industry but is not an action in the legislative field forbidden for the States.
Sales tax on raw materials going to a factory may affect the costing process of the manufacture but is not legislation on industrial process or allied matters.
Indeed, if the State Legislature cannot go anywhere near measures which may affect topics reserved for Parliament a situation of reductio ad absurdum may be reached.
[780 B C] Ch.
Tikka Ram 's case ; Shyamkant Lal , Kanan Devan Hills Produce Company Ltd. followed.
(iii) The contention that there is discrimination between sugar factories and khandsari units by the impost of differential rates of tax and that when a purchase tax liability is computed by the weight of the cane as distinguished from its monetary value, there is an inevitable arbitrariness built into the texture of the scheme, has no force.
Neither in intent nor in effect is there any discriminatory treatment discernible to the constitutional eye.
Price is surely a safe guide but other methods are not necessarily vocational.
It depends Practical considerations of the Administration.
traditional.
practices in the Trade.
Other economic pros and cons enter the verdict but, after a judicial generosity is extended to the legislative wisdom, if there is writ on the statute perversity. 'madness ' in the method or gross disparity, judicial credulity may snap and the measure may meet with its funeral.
This Court has uniformly held that classi 771 fication for taxation and the application of Article 14, in that context, must be viewed liberally, not meticulously.
[786 F H, 787 B D] Murthy Match Works case; , , applied.
It is well established that classification is primarily for the legislature and becomes a judicial issue only when the legislation bears on its bosom obvious condemnation by way of caprice or irrationality.
[789 A] (iv) The contention that the Act masked as Purchase tax, in essence asks for an Excise Duty on sugar manufacture and is therefore invalid as colourable legislation has no force.
Tax on sale of purchase must be on the occurrence of a taxing event of sale transaction.
Beyond that is left to the free play of the legislature, subject, of course, to the contra indication about capricious, arbitrary or irrational features.
It is a superstition, cultivated by familiarity, to consider that all sales tax must necessarily have nexus with the price of the commodity.
Price as basis is not only usual but also safe to avoid uneven, unequal burdens, although it is conceivable that a legislature can regard prices which fluctuate frequently, as too impractical to tailor the purchase tax.
It may even be, in rare cases, iniquitous to link purchase tax with price, if more sensible bases can be found.
Supposing a legislature classifies sales tax on the basis of human categories and reduces the rate or exempts the tax in respect of abject desuetudes, or starving flood victims or notoriously hazardous habitations, with respect lo necessity of life.
Such differentiation cannot be castigated as discrimination out of hand.
It is common and commonsense that reliable stand is the price, although in regard to customs duties there are still items levied on the nature of the goods rather than its value in money.
For the present, it is sufficient to state that the practice has been to impose purchase tax by weight of cane.
Also, in weight of cane, its sucrose content and its price have a close nexus, although, theoretically, they may appear unconnected.
Unequals cannot be treated equally since mechanical uniformity may become unmitigated injustice.
Khandsari units are cottage industries unlike sugar factories and need legislative succor for survival.
Their economy justifies State action, classifying them as apart from factories and we fail to appreciate the flaw in the scheme on this score.
[789 F H. 790 A B. F G] Nothing more than prevention of escapement of purchase tax on cane is done and what is done is legitimately incidental to the taxing power.
Peripheral similarity between purchase tax and excise levy does not spell essential sameness.
Sugarcane tax operates in the neighborhood of sugar excise but proximity is not identity.
The tax is only on purchase of cane, not its conversion into sugar.
If the miller has his own cane farm and crushes it, he has no purchase tax to pay but cannot escape excise duty if any.
Again if cane is purchased by a miller and it is later robbed or destroyed before sugar is manufactured, the State tax is exigible although excise on production is not.
A perspicacious appreciation of the implications of purchase and production dispels confusion on this issue.
To buy new produce is a step preliminary to manufacture but is not part of manufacture.
[791 D F]
