The appellant Bank was a society registered under the Bombay Co operative Societies Act, 1925 and with the coming into force from May 1, 1962 of the Gujarat Co operative Societies Act, 1961, it came to be governed by the said Act.
By Notification No. BIR 1362 5 H dated March 2, 1963, the Government of Gujarat directed under section 2(4) of the Bombay Industrial Relations Act, 1946 (Bombay Act 11 of 1947) that all the provisions of the said Act shall apply with effect from March 15, 1963 to the business of banking by Co operative Banks in the Saurashtra and Kutch areas of the State, registered and deemed to be registered under the Gujarat Co operative Societies Act, 1961.
The second respondent, Babu Bhai Negracha who was working as an additional supervisor in the Dasada Branch of the appellant Bank and whose services were terminated by an order dated February 21, 1962, by giving him one month 's pay in lieu of notice under Staff Regulation No. 15, filed an application in the Labour Court Rajkot, alleging that his services had been illegally and maliciously terminated as an act of victimisation on account of his trade union activities and praying for setting aside the order of his termination of service and for reinstatement with full back wages.
The Labour Court by its order dated June 11, 1963, over ruled the preliminary objection raised by the appellant Bank, namely, that "the Bombay Industrial Relations Act, 1946 under which the application was made by the respondent was not applicable to its case, as it was a co operative society governed by the Gujarat Co operative Societies Act, under which only the Registrar or his nominee had jurisdiction to decide the dispute, and the Labour Court had no jurisdiction to entertain and decide the application".
The appellant Bank 's writ petition challenging the said order of the Labour Court was dismissed by the Gujarat High Court by its judgment dated August 25, 1967.
Dismissing the appeal by certificate, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
No new plea can be raised for the first time in the Supreme Court, as a matter of right.
In the instant case, the new plea that "the appellant is not doing banking business" was not entertained for the reasons 1024 namely (i) it was much too belated; (ii) it stood in direct contradiction to the position taken by the appellant in its writ petition and the affidavit in support thereof in the High Court wherein it had been clearly admitted that "the society is engaged in the business of banking" and (iii) it was not a purely legal plea but a mixed plea of law and fact and could not be determined on the basis of material already on the record.
[1027 F G] 2.
The expression "any dispute" referred to in Section 54 of the Bombay Cooperative Societies Act, 1925 and in Section 96 of the Gujarat Cooperative Societies Act, does not cover a dispute of the kind raised by respondent 2 against the appellant bank.
[1034 C] (a) It is clear from the object and the scheme of the Acts of 1925 and 1961 that the legislature never intended to give such a wide scope to the expression "any dispute" so as to cover all classes of disputes whatever be their nature as the prefix "any" to "dispute" appears to give.
The term "dispute" means a controversy having both positive and negative aspects.
It postulates the assertion of a claim by one party and its denial by the other.
[1031 C D] (b) The expression "any dispute" has not been defined in the Acts of 1925 and 1961.
This expression has been used in a narrower sense limited to contested claims of a civil nature, which could have been decided by civil or revenue courts, but for the provisions with regard to compulsory arbitration by the Registrar or his nominee found in Section 54 of the Bombay Act of 1925 and in Section 96 of the Gujarat Act, 1961.
The words "as if the dispute were a suit and the Registrar as Civil Court" occurring in sub section (k) of Section 97 of the Gujarat Act, also make this position clear.
[1031 C, D, E, G] (c) The compulsory arbitration by the Registrar on reference under section 96 is only a substitute for adjudication of disputes of a civil nature normally tried by the Civil Court.
It is incumbent, under sub section (2) of section 96 of the 1961 Act, on the Registrar to decide as a preliminary issue, whether the dispute is of a kind under sub section (1) of section 96 falling within his jurisdiction.
If this preliminary issue is found in the negative he will have no further jurisdiction to deal with the matter.
[1031 F, G 1032 F] (d) Thus considered, a dispute raised against the Society by its discharged servant claiming reliefs, such as, reinstatement in service with back wages, which are not enforceable in a civil court, is outside the scope of the expression "touching the management of the Society" used in section 96(1) of the Act of 1961, and the Registrar has not jurisdiction to deal with and determine it.
What has been directly bidden "out of bounds" for the Registrar by the very scheme and object of the Act, cannot be directly inducted by widening the connotation of 'management '.
Such a dispute squarely falls within the jurisdiction of the Labour Court under the Bombay Industrial Relations Act.
[1036 E G] 3.
The law of Industrial disputes or Industrial Relations is a special law dealing with rights and obligations specially created by it.
The provisions in section 54 of the Bombay Act and in section 96 of the Gujarat Act being general provisions in accordance with the maxim generalia specialibus non derogant, nothing in these general provisions can derogate from Bombay Industrial Relations Act, and the Cooperative Societies Act must yield to the special provi 1025 sions in the Bombay Industrial Relations Act, whenever a dispute clearly comes within the language of the latter Act.
Section 166(1) of the Gujarat Act, in terms, bars the jurisdiction only of Civil or Revenue Court, and not of the Labour Court or any Industrial Tribunal constituted under the Bombay Industrial Relations Act or Industrial Disputes Act.
The legislature never intended to oust the jurisdiction of the Labour Court or the Industrial Tribunal to determine claims and industrial disputes which cannot be adjudicated by the ordinary Civil Court.
[1032 H, 1033 A, 1034 A B] In the instant case : (a) The Labour Court is competent to grant the relief of reinstatement while in view of section 21(b) of the Specific Relief Act, then in force, the Civil Court was not competent to grant that relief.
If a Court is incapable of granting the relief claimed, normally the proper construction would be that it is incompetent to deal with the matter.
[1033 F, H] (b) The dispute was raised by the second respondent by writing an approach letter to his employee, the appellant, as required by the Bombay Industrial Relations Act.
In substance, it was an industrial dispute.
It was not restricted to a claim under the contract or agreement of employment.
[1033 F G] (c) The rights and reliefs claimed by the second respondent could not be determined and granted by a Civil Court in a suit.
His allegation was that his services were terminated unfairly and vindictively because of his legitimate trade union activities, as an act of victimisation.
The relief claimed is reinstatement in services with back wages.
The rights claimed are those which are conferred on workmen and employees under the Bombay Industrial Relations Act to ensure social justice.
Such rights which do not stem from the contract of employment can be enforced only in the Labour Court constituted under B.I.R. Act.
[1033 B F] Jullundur Transport Cooperative Societies Ltd. vs Punjab State, AIR 1959 Pun. 34; approved.
Rohtas Industries Ltd. vs Brijnandan Pandey, ; ; referred to.
(d) Neither the Registrar nor his nominee will be competent to grant the relief of requiring change in the service conditions of the employee.
Such a relief could be granted by the Industrial Tribunal which under the Industrial Disputes Act, has the jurisdiction even to vary contracts of service between an employer and employees.
[1037 C D] Co operative Central Bank Ltd. vs Additional Industrial Tribunal, Hyderabad ; applied.
Farkhundali Naunhay vs V. B. Potdar, AIR 1962 Bom.
362 over ruled.
