The services of the appellant who was appointed in November 1954 were terminated in December 1962, but the termination order was withdrawn on January 16, 1963 and he rejoined service and resumed his duties.
Again his services were terminated by an order dated May 18, 1966.
This order having been quashed by the High Court in August 8, 1969, the appellant was reinstated with the benefit of Continuity of service.
In June 1973 he was allowed to cross the second Efficiency Bar, but on August 2, 1974 the State Government made an order compulsorily retiring him from service.
In the appellant 's writ petition, quashing the order of compulsory retirement, a single Judge of the High Court declared that the appellant continued to remain in service.
In allowing the appeal of the State, the Division Bench of the High Court rejected the appellant 's contention that the order of compulsory retirement was arbitrary because nothing to justify the order had taken place after he was allowed to cross the second Efficiency Bar in June 1973.
11 Allowing the appeal this Court, ^ HELD: 1.
The compulsory retirement of the appellant was not called for on the facts of this case.
The appellant will be deemed to have I continued in service on the date of the impugned order [925 H 926A] 2.
The appellant was found worthy of being permitted to cross the second Efficiency Bar only a few months before.
Although this Court does not ordinarily interfere with the decision of the relevant authority in a case of this kind particularly when the order was made on the recommendation of the High Court, it is difficult to reconcile the apparent contradiction that for the purpose of crossing the second Efficiency Bar the appellant was considered to have worked with distinct ability and with integrity beyond question, yet with in a few months thereafter he was found so unfit as to deserve compulsory retirement.
There is no evidence to show that suddenly there was such deterioration in the quality of the appellant 's work or integrity that he deserved to be compulsorily retired.
[925 F H]
