The petitioners Ex patwaris under the State of Uttar Pradesh brought the present petition under Article 32 of the Constitution in the Supreme Court alleging that the provisions of articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution had been violated because they bad been denied equality before the law and equal opportunity for employment under the State.
Patwaris numbering about 28,000 in the whole State of Uttar Pradesh had organized themselves into "The U.P. Patwaris Associations" with a view to improving their prospects and emoluments.
The association passed resolutions demanding increase in pay and allowances etc.
The Government was considering these matters when a large number of patwaris went on a "pen down strike" with the result that the Government withdrew the recognition of the Association.
The Government further published the new "Land Records Manual" embodying new amended rules regarding recruitment, conditions of service and duties of patwaris.
The Association protested against the revised Land Records Manual and passed a resolution that all patwaris should submit their resignations on the 2nd February, 1953 requesting that they should be relieved of their duties by the 4th March, 1953 after which date they will consider themselves as free from all obligations to work under the Government.
About 26,000 patwaris actually resigned with a view to paralyse the whole revenue administration in the State and to coerce 47 358 the Government into accepting their demands.
The Government however, accepted their resignations and relieved them of their duties before the 4th March, 1953.
On the very next date, the 5th March, 1953, the Government announced the creation of a new service of "Lekhpals" and proceeded to organize that service by recruiting the new personnel which included most of the old patwaris.
It also included all those patwaris whose record of service was free from blemishes and who had withdrawn their resignations.
Some of the petitioners were absorbed in the new cadre of Lekbpals.
The Government was thus giving a locus poenitentiae to those of the ex patwaris who had joined the agitation.
The question for consideration before the Supreme Court was whether the petitioners who came within the category excluded from re appointment had been denied equal opportunity of appointment as Lekhpals and thus article 16 of the Constitution had been infringed.
Held, that the contention of the petitioners that they bad been prevented from re entering Government service upon the re organisation of the cadre under the new name and had been denied equality of opportunity as contemplated by article 16 of the Constitution was without substance as the Government were within their rights to lay down certain qualifications for the new recruits.
They were entitled to exclude those persons who had betrayed a lack of proper sense of discipline.
Article 16 of the Constitution is an instance of the application of the general rule of equality laid down in article 14 with special reference to the opportunity for appointment and employment under the Government.
Like all other employers, Government are also entitled to pick and choose from amongst a large number of candidates offering themselves for employment under the Government.
