The assessee was the Managing Director of a Company originally assessed on a total income of Rs. 43407/ for the assessment year 1959 60.
Thereafter the Income Tax Officer came to know that the assessee had been withdrawing moneys from the Company and that those amounts were liable to be treated as dividend under section 2(6A)(e) of the Act, he re opened the assessment.
In the assessment proceedings that followed, the assessee claimed that the accumulated profits of the Company amounted to Rs. 1050 only and that amount alone could be considered as dividend under section 2(6A)(e) of the Act.
The figure was worked out on the basis that Rs. 11,000 as a provision for tax and Rs. 6,900 as a provision for dividend had to be adjusted against the balance of Rs. 18,950 in the Profit and Loss Account.
The Income Tax Officer rejected the contention of the assessee.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner dismissed the appeal filed by the assessee.
The Income Tax Appellate Tribunal in second appeal, upheld the claim of the assessee that the words "accumulated profits" in section 2(6A) (e) of the Act could not be construed as including current profit but it rejected the contention that the two sums of Rs. 11,000 and Rs. 6,900 had to be taken into account in determining the figure of the "accumulated profits".
It determined the "accumulated profits" at Rs. 18,950.
The Revenue obtained a reference to the High Court on the question: "Whether the Appellate Tribunal was legally correct in holding that the accumulated profit will not include "current profits" for the purpose of section 2(6A) of the Act.
" A second question was referred to the High Court at the instance of the assessee : "Whether the Tribunal was right in holding that Rs. 18,950 constituted accumulated profits for the purpose of section 2(6A) of the Act.
" The High Court answered both the questions in favour of the assessee, the first question in the affirmative and the second question in the negative.
On appeal to this Court, ^ HELD: 1.
"Current profits" that is to say, profits earned by the Company during the year in which the loans were advanced to the assessee cannot be regarded as included within the "accumulated profits" of a Company within the meaning of section 2(6A) (e) of the Act.
[947G 948E] Commissioner of Income Tax, Madras vs M. V. Murugappan
