On the questions (1) Whether the ornaments and other articles of gold purchased by the assessee fell within the description of "Bullion and specie" given in Entry 56 in the First Schedule of the Kerala General Sales Tax Act 1956 and (2) the taxability of the turn over of sales of G.I. Pipes made by the assessee.
^ HELD: 1.
One cardinal rule of interpretation while interpreting entries in Sales Tax legislation is that the words used in the entries must be construed not in any technical sense nor from the scientific point of view but as under stood in common parlance.
The words used by the legislature must be given their popular sense meaning, "that sense which people conversant with the subject matter with which the statute is dealing would attribute to it." [940 H, 941A] 2.
"Bullion" in its popular sense cannot include ornaments or other articles of gold.
"Bullion" according to its plain ordinary meaning means gold or silver in the mass.
It connotes gold or silver regarded as raw material and it may be either in the form of raw gold or silver or ingots or bars of gold or silver.
[941 B] 3.
Ornaments and other articles of gold cannot be regarded as "bullion" because, even if old and antiquated, they are not raw or unwrought gold or gold in the mass, but they represent manufactured or finished products of gold.
Nor do they come within the meaning of the expression "specie".
The word "specie" means coin, as distinguished from paper money".
[941 D] 4.
The ornaments and other articles of gold purchased by the assessee do not fall within Entry 56 and they are, liable to be taxed not at the lesser rate of 1 per cent applicable to "bullion and specie" but at the general rate of 3 per cent under section 5A read with section 5(i) (ii) of the Act.
[941 G, 943 E] 5.
In State of Uttar Pradesh vs Indian Hume Pipe Ltd., 39 STC 355 it has been held by this Court that 'sanitary fittings ' according to the popular sense of the term means such pipes or materials as are used in lavatories urinals or bath rooms of private houses or public buildings.
[942 C] 939 6.
The G.I. Pipes sold by the assessee would fall within the description of 'sanitary fittings ' only if it can be shown and the burden of so doing would be on the Revenue, that they were meant for use in lavatories, urinals or bath rooms.
The attention of the assessee and the tax authorities was not drawn to this aspect of the question and no material was brought on record which would throw light on the question as to what was the use for which the G.I. Pipes were meant.
If the G.I. Pipes were heavy and intended to be laid underground for carrying supply of water from one place to another they would obviously not be 'sanitary fittings '.
[942 C E] 7.
The category of goods in Entry 26A is not described as 'water supply pipes ' but as 'water supply and sanitary fittings '.
The words 'water supply. fittings ' do not occur in isolation but they are in juxtaposition of the words 'sanitary fittings '.
The entire expression 'water supply and sanitary fittings ' is one single expression and the words 'water supply. fittings ' must receive colour from the immediately following words 'sanitary fittings '.
The expression 'water supply. .fittings ' in the context in which it occurs means such pipes or materials as are meant for use for supply of water to or in lavatories, urinals or bath rooms of private houses of public buildings and they do not include heavy pipes which are laid underground as mains for carrying water supply from one area or place to another.
[942 G, 943 A B] 8.
As far as G.I. Pipes sold by the assessee are concerned the case remanded to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner for the purpose of deciding on the basis of the existing material as also such further material as may be adduced, whether G.I. Pipes sold by the assessee fall within the description "water supply and sanitary fittings" so as to be exigible to sales tax at the higher rate of 7 per cent under Entry 26A. [943 F]
