In the case of a trial before a court of session, under section 235(2) Criminal Procedure Code "if the accused is convicted, the Judge shall, unless he proceeds in accordance with the provisions of section 360, hear the accused on the question of sentence, and then pass sentence on him according to law." Similarly, in the case of trial of warrant cases by Magistrates, under section 248 (2) of the Code, "where the Magistrate finds the accused guilty, but does not proceed in accordance with the provisions of section 325 or section 360, he shall after hearing the accused on the question of sentence, pass sentence upon him according to law.
" Section 361 of the Code mandates that "where in any case, the court could have dealt with: (a) an accused person under section 360 or under the provisions of the (Act XX of 1958) or; (b) a youthful offender under the (Act LX of 1960) or any other law for the time being in force for the treatment, training or rehabilitation of youthful offenders, but has not done so, it shall record in its judgment, the special reasons for not having done so." Thus, under the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973, recourse to the provisions of section 360 is a must.
In a trial against four persons charged by the Police with offences under sections 302, 324, 323 IPC, including constructive liability under section 34, two were, acquitted by the trial court and two were convicted.
The appellant was sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for one year and a fine of Rs. 200/ for causing simple injury to one Arjan Singh.
He was held vicariously guilty under sections 324/34 IPC and awarded two years rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 1000/ .
In addition he was convicted under section 323 IPC, for causing hurt to the daughter of the deceased and on this count punished with R.I. for one year together with a fine of Rs. 200/ .
Releasing the appellant on probation, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
Enacted law is guilty of inaction; because its obscure presence on the statute book escapes the vigilance of the Bar.
Where even the Court ignores what is vital to the little man the guarantee of sentencing legality becomes a casualty.
[1135H, 1136A] 1135 2.
To jail an accused is mechanical farewell to the finer sentencing sensitivity of the Judge of salvaging a redeemable man by non institutionalised treatment.
If the judge has before him a complete and accurate pre sentence investigation report which sets forth the conditions, circumstances, background, and surrounding of the accused and the circumstances underlying the offence which has been committed, the judge could then impose sentence with greater assurance that he has adopted the proper course.
The purpose of section 360 of the Code is precisely this and the goal of section 235(2) is just this.
[1138H, 1140B C] 3.
Sentencing legality is violated when the judge shirks.
And the Bar is often alien to correctional alternatives and concentrates its ammunition on culpability and extenuatory scaling down of imprisonment.
[1189F] 4.
Calling pre sentence investigation reports, bestowal of intelligent care on the choice between institutional and non institutional disposition like probation, conditional release and such community methods must form part of innovative sentences.
But this should be based on careful study of the convict and his potentiality for reform; not guess work, nor insensitive assessments.
[1137B E] Williams vs New York, ; , 249; quoted with approval.
