The appellants and others were the Zamindars of a village in which certain lands were given on Theka to the Respondent and others on 6th March, 1948, the Zamindari having vested on 30th June, 1952.
Disputes arose between the appellants and the respondents during the pendency of proceedings under the U.P. Consolidation of Holdings Act.
The appellants and others claimed the plots in dispute being in their exclusive Sir and Khudkast would be deemed to have been settled with them by the State on the Abolition of Zamindari and their name should be recorded as Bhoomidars thereof.
Respondent and others on the other hand claimed they had become the Sirdars of the plots in dispute and resisted the claims of the Zamindars.
The dispute gave rise to the question of title.
The Civil Judge sent the matter for decision to an Arbitrator appointed under the Act.
The Arbitrator held the respondents to be the Sirdars of the plots in question.
The appellants filed objections against the award before the Civil Judge who allowed the objections, set aside the award and remitted back the award for reconsideration.
Appeals were taken to the Additional District Judge who disagreed with the Civil Judge but affirmed the order of remand.
Both sides filed separate revisions before the High Court, the revision of Respondents was allowed and dismissed those of the appellants.
The only point argued was whether Respondent and others have been rightly held to be the Sirdars of the plots in question or whether the ex landlords had become the Bhoomidars.
Dismissing the appeal.
^ HELD: That a Thekedar of an Estate ceases to have any right to hold or possess any land in such Estate with effect from the date of its vesting.
This is what has been provided in sub section (1) of section 13.
But it is subject to the exceptions viz.
, one the provisions contained in section 12 and the other engrafted in sub section (2) of section 13.
There is no dispute between the parties that the land in possession of the Thekedars on the date of vesting was either covered by section 12(1) or section 13(2)(a).
The land admittedly was the Sir or Khudkasht of the lessor namely the Zamindars.
If such a land was in the personal cultivation of a person on the Ist May, 1950 as a Thekedar thereof and if the Theka was made with a view to the cultivation of the land by such Thekedars personally then because of the non obstante clause occurring in sub section (1) of section 12 of the Act the Thekedar would be deemed to be a hereditary tenants of the land entitled to hold as such and liable to pay rent at hereditary rates.
If, however, the land was in personal cultivation of the Thekedar merely as a Thekedar appointed to collect rent from other tenants and incidentally allowed to cultivate the Sir or Khudkasht land of the lessor then he will be a mere asami in accordance with section 13(2)(a) of the Act.
The Arbitrator on a consideration of the theka document found that the theka 978 was made with a view to cultivation of the land by the Thekedar personally.
The interpretation of the Arbitrator was not such that it could enable the Civil Judge to take the view that there was an error of law apparent on the face by the record.
On the other hand it appears to us that the interpretation put by the Arbitrator was correct.
There is a subtle but clear dividing line between the two types of cases one falling under section 12(1) of the Act and the other coming within the ambit of section 13(2) (a).
The High Court was right in its that the Award of the Arbitrator was not fit to be interfered with.
[980 G H. 981 A D]
