The appellant purchased a house in July, 1948.
Although neither the vendor nor the appellant was an evacuee within the meaning of the , the appellant was treated as an evacuee and the house was declared evacuee property in 1951.
In response to the appellant 's petition filed in 1953, a certificate was granted by the Government under the unamended provisions of section 16 of the Act.
When the appellant asked for restoration of the house the Assistant Custodian passed an order in 1957 granting restoration.
In the meantime since respondent No. 2 had been inducted as a tenant in the house by the Custodian after it was declared evacuee property the appellant was asked to take symbolic possession of the house allowing the tenant to continue in possession.
Section 20A(1) of the provided that where an evacuee had made an application under section 16 of the Evacuee Property Act, 1950 and the Central Government is of opinion that it is not expedient or practicable to restore the whole or any part of the property to the applicant, it shall be lawful for the Central Government to pay to the applicant the value of the property in cash from the compensation pool in lieu of the evacuee property.
The Explanation to this section provided that the provisions of this sub section shall apply, whether or not a certificate for the restoration of the evacuee property had been issued to the applicant under section 16(1) of the 1950 Act.
The Central Government revised its earlier order dated November 11, 1960 and gave compensation to the appellant under section 20A of the 1954 Act.
The appellant 's writ petition challenging the order of the Assistant Custodian was dismissed by the High Court.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
According to section 16 of the 1950 Act, as it stood before October 22, 1956, an application for certificate was to be made to the Central Government.
On the issuance of the certificate, restoration order was made by the Custodian of Evacuee Property.
In the instant case the certificate was issued on October 27, 1956.
The High Court was therefore right in holding that the certificate issued in accordance with the old law was not valid.
[995 D F] 2.
The provisions of section 20A(1) have got the over riding effect by virtue of the Explanation appended to it even after a certificate for the restora 994 tion of the evacuee property had been issued to the applicant on October 27, 1956.
In spite of the certificate it was open to the Central Government not to allow restoration of the house to the appellant and to pay him compensation only.
The Central Government has adopted the latter course.
Respondent No. 2, a displaced person, was inducted as a tenant in the property a long time back.
The property was sold to him by the Custodian.
In such a situation it was just and proper to refuse restoration of the property to the appellant and to pay him only compensation.
[996 F H]
