G and J were the sons of S son of M.
The plaintiff was the grandson of another son of M.
In a document purporting to have been executed by G it was stated that defendant No. 1 was his (G 's) adopted son and heir and that C (his younger brother J 's widow) and defendant No. 1 had rendered services to him, in recognition of which he bequeathed properties detailed in the will to C to be enjoyed by her during her life time and that on her death defendant No. 1 shall be their owner.
The plaintiff in his suit for partition claimed that the properties detailed in Schedule A to the plaint had been acquired by his great grandfather M, those in Schedule B were jointly acquired by G and J, both of whom constituted a joint Hindu family, and those in Schedule C which once belonged exclusively to J descended on his death to his widow C.
The plaintiff also challenged the adoption of defendant No. 1.
Defendant No. 1 on the other hand claimed that since he was the adopted son of G the properties bequeathed to him by G 's will were his exclusive properties.
He also claimed that the properties in Schedule C were purchased by J 's widow C with her stridhana, that by reason of her will he was entitled exclusively to those properties and that they never belonged to her late husband.
The trial court held that adoption had not been proved and that the motive for the execution of the will was not merely the recognition by the testator of his relationship through adoption with the devisee but mainly the existence of feelings of love and affection for him.
The first appellate court held that the recital in G 's will that defendant No. 1 was his adopted son was sufficient to prove the fact of adoption.
The High Court on the other hand was of the opinion that the recital in G 's will that defendant No. 1 was his adopted son was not sufficient to prove the adopted and that the reference to adoption had been made merely as a description of the devisee and not as a motivation for the execution of the will. ^ HELD: Defendant No. 1 had not been successful in establishing the alleged adoption.
(a) It is well established that evidence in support of an adoption must be sufficient to satisfy the very grave and serious onus that rests upon any person who seeks to displace the natural succession by alleging an adoption.
[1005 D E] (b) The burden of proof of adoption in this case lay heavily on defendant No. 1 which he has not discharged satisfactorily.
This is not a case in which the adoption had taken place a very long time the suit was filed.
It had in fact taken place within about a decade immediately preceding the suit when witnesses who were present at the ceremony and who had seen the giving and taking would normally have been available.
He did not explain why no such witness was forthcoming.
[1005 A B] (c) The relationship mentioned in the will that defendant No. 1 was his adopted son and heir was merely a description of the devisee as understood by the testator.
The will was executed not because that relationship was brought about by adoption but by reason of feelings of affection which the devisee had earned by his association with and the assistance rendered to the testator.
[1003 H 1004 A] 2.
There is no force in the contention of the plaintiff that the will executed by C must be held to be wholly inoperative in so far as properties detailed in Schedules A and B were concerned because one half of the properties mentioned in these schedules had vested in C under the will of G which itself declared that she would hold them merely as a life tenant and that thereafter they would devolve on defendant No. 1.
In devising the properties to defendant No. 1, C did no more than carry out the behest of her own testator, which behest was good in law.
[1004 A C]
