In their petition for the issue of a writ of habeas corpus the petitioners stated that a large number of men and women including children were in jails for years awaiting trial in courts of law and that the offences, even if proved, would not warrant punishment for more than a few months.
Although sufficient opportunity was given, the State did not appear before the Court.
Directing the release of the undertrials on their executing a personal bond.
^ HELD : (Per Bhagwati & Koshal, JJ.) 1.
A procedure which keeps large number of people behind bars without trial for long, cannot possibly be regarded as "reasonable, just or fair" so as to be in conformity with the requirement of article 21.
It is necessary, therefore, that the law as enacted by the Legislature and as administered by the courts must radically change its approach to pre trial detention and ensure `reasonable, just and fair ' procedure which has a creative connotation after the decision of the Supreme Court in Maneka Gandhi 's case.
[174 C D] 2.
Speedy trial is of the essence of criminal justice and, therefore, delay in trial by itself constitutes denial of justice.
Though speedy trial is not specifically enumerated as a fundamental right, it is implicit in the broad sweep and content of article 21.
Speedy trial which means reasonably expeditious trial, is an integral part of the fundamental right to life and liberty enshrined in article 21, [179 H, 180 C, F] article 21 confers fundamental right on every person not to be deprived of his life or liberty except in accordance with the procedure prescribed by law and it is not enough to constitute compliance with the requirement of that Article that some semblance of a procedure should be prescribed by law, but that the procedure should be "reasonable, fair and just".
If a person is deprived of his liberty under a procedure which is not "reasonable, fair or just", such deprivation would be violative of his fundamental right under article 21 and he would be entitled to enforce such fundamental right and secure his release.
Any procedure prescribed by law for depriving a person of his liberty cannot be "reasonable, fair or just" unless that procedure ensures a speedy trial for determination of the guilt of such person.
[180 D E] 170 Maneka Gandhi vs Union of India, [1978] 2 SCR 621; referred to.
Expeditious trial and freedom from detention are part of human rights and basic freedoms.
The judicial system which permits incarceration of men and women for long periods of time without trial is denying human rights to such undertrials and withholding basic freedoms from them.
Law has become for them an instrument of injustice and they are helpless and despairing victims of the callousness of the legal and judicial system.
[173 C E, F] 4.
One reason why our legal and judicial system continually denies justice to the poor by keeping them for long years in pretrial detention is the highly unsatisfactory bail system, which suffers from a property oriented approach.
It proceeds on the erroneous assumption that risk of monetary loss is the only deterrent against fleeing from justice.
Even after its re enactment, the Code of Criminal Procedure continues to adopt the same antiquated approach.
Where an accused is to be released on his personal bond, it insists that the bond should contain a monetary obligation requiring the accused to pay a sum of money in case he fails to appear at the trial.
Moreover, as if this were not sufficient deterrent to the poor, the courts mechanically and as a matter of course insist that the accused should produce sureties who will stand bail for him and these sureties must again establish their solvency to be able to pay the amount of bail in case the accused fails to appear to answer the charge.
[174 E G] This system of bails operates very harshly against the poor and it is only the non poor who are able to take advantage of it by getting themselves released on bail.
The poor find it difficult to furnish bail even without sureties because very often the amount of the bail fixed by the Court is so unrealistically excessive that in a majority of cases the poor are unable to satisfy the police or the Magistrate about their solvency for the amount of the bail and where the bail is with sureties, as is usually the case, it becomes an almost impossible task for the poor to find persons sufficiently solvent to stand as sureties.
The result is that either they are fleeced by the police and revenue officials or by touts and professional sureties and sometimes they have even to incur debts for securing their release or, being unable to obtain release, they have to remain in jail until such time as the court is able to take up their cases for trial, leading to grave consequences, namely, (1) though presumed innocent, they are subjected to psychological and physical deprivations of jail life, (2) they are prevented from contributing to the preparation of their defence and (3) they lose their job, if they have one, and are deprived of an opportunity to work to support themselves and their family members with the result that the burden of their detention almost invariably falls heavily on the innocent members of the family.
[174 G 175 D] The bail system, as it operates today, is thus a source of great hardship to the poor and if the civil effects of poverty are to be eliminated and a fair and just treatment assured to the poor in the administration of justice, it is imperative that the bail system should be thoroughly reformed so that it should be possible for the poor, as easily as the rich, to obtain pre trial release without jeopardizing the interest of justice.
[177 C D] Risk of monetary loss is not the only deterrent against fleeing from justice.
There are also other factors which act as equal deterrents against fleeing.
Therefore, the courts, even under the law as it stands today, must abandon the antiquated concept under which pre trial release is ordered only against bail with sureties.
If the court is satisfied, after taking into account, on the basis of 171 information placed before it, that the accused has his roots in the community and is not likely to abscond, it can safely release the accused on his personal bond.
[177 E, G, H] 5.
To determine whether the accused has his roots in the community which would deter him from fleeing, the court should take into account the following factors concerning the accused: (1) The length of his residence in the community, (2) his employment status, history and his financial condition, (3) his family ties and relationships, (4) his reputation, character and monetary conditions, (5) his prior criminal record including any record of prior release on recognizance or on bail, (6) the identity of responsible members of the community who would vouch for his reliability, (7) the nature of the offence charged and the apparent probability of conviction and the likely sentence in so far as these factors are relevant to the risk of non appearance, and (8) any other factors indicating the ties of the accused to the community or bearing on the risk of wilful failure to appear.
[178 A E] If the court is satisfied on a consideration of the relevant factors that the accused has his ties in the community and there is no substantial risk of non appearance, the accused may, as far as possible, be released on his personal bond.
If facts are brought to the notice of the court showing that, having regard to the condition and back ground of the accused, his previous record and the nature and circumstances of the offence, there may be a substantial risk of his non appearance at the trial, as for example, where the accused is a notorious bad character or a confirmed criminal or the offence is serious, the court may not release the accused on his personal bond and may insist on bail with sureties.
But in the majority of cases, considerations like family ties and relationship, roots in the community, employment status etc. may prevail with the court in releasing the accused on his personal bond and particularly in cases where the offence is not grave and the accused is poor or belongs to a weaker section of the community, release on personal bond could, as far as possible, be preferred.
But even while releasing the accused on personal bond it is necessary to caution the court that the amount of the bond which it fixes should not be based merely on the nature of the charge.
The decision as regards the amount of the bond should be an individualised decision depending on the individual financial circumstances of the accused and the probability of his absconding.
The amount of the bond should be determined having regard to these relevant factors and should not be fixed mechanically according to a schedule keyed to the nature of the charge.
Otherwise, it would be difficult for the accused to secure his release even by executing a personal bond, it would be very harsh and oppressive if he is required to satisfy the court and what is said in regard to the court must apply equally in relation to the police while granting bail that he is solvent enough to pay the amount of the bond if he fails to appear at the trial and in consequence the bond is forfeited.
The inquiry into the solvency of the accused can become a source of great harassment to him and often result in denial of bail and deprivation of liberty and should not, therefore, be insisted upon as a condition of acceptance of the personal bond.
[178 F 179 D] 6.
Necessary to provide by an amendment of the penal law that if an accused wilfully fails to appear in compliance with the promise contained in his personal bond, he shall be liable to penal action.
[177 F] 7.
High time that the State Government realised its responsibility to the people in the matter of administration of justice and set up more courts for the trial of cases.
[180 H] 172 Pathak J. (concurring) (1) The primary principle of criminal law is that imprisonment may follow a judgment of guilt, but should not precede it.
There is also another principle which makes it desirable to ensure that the accused is present to receive his sentence in the event of being found guilty.
[181 E] (2) It is indisputable that an unnecessarily prolonged detention in prison of undertrials before being brought to trial is an affront to all civilized norms of human liberty and any meaningful concept of individual liberty which forms the bedrock of a civilized legal system must view with distress patently long periods of imprisonment before persons awaiting trial can receive the attention of the administration of justice.
[181 D] (3) The Code of Criminal Procedure both the old Code and the new include provisions for the release of a person on bail or on the execution of a bond without sureties for his appearance.
There is an amplitude of judicial power to release a prisoner awaiting trial on bail or on the execution of a personal bond without sureties for his appearance within the existing provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure and it is for the Courts to fully acquaint themselves with the nature and extent of their discretion in exercising it.
It is no longer possible to countenance a mechanical exercise of the power.
What should be the amount of security required or the monetary obligation demanded in a bond is a matter calling for the careful consideration of several factors.
The entire object being only to ensure that the undertrial does not flee or hide himself from trial, all the relevant considerations which enter into the determination of that question must be taken into account.
[181 E, 182 B C] (4) The abuses attendant on the prevailing system of pre trial release in India could be avoided or, in any event greatly reduced, if considerations like "nature and circumstances of the offence charged, the weight of the evidence against the accused, the accused 's family ties, employment, financial resources, character and mental condition, the length of his residence in the community, his record of convictions, and his record or appearance at court proceedings or of flight to avoid prosecution or failure to appear at court proceedings", are taken into consideration when determining pre trial release and the amount of security or monetary obligation to be imposed.
[182 G, E F] United States Bail Reforms Act, 1966: 18 USS 3146 (b), Moti Ram & Ors.
vs State of M.P. ; ; referred to.
(5) Urgent need for a clear and explicit provision in the Code of Criminal Procedure enabling the release, in appropriate cases, of an under trial prisoner on his bond without sureties and without any monetary obligation.[183 B]
