In 1962, a site was chosen for a grain market and the foundation stone for it was laid.
This spot belonged to a cousin of Respondent No. 22, an ex Minister and an influential politician.
This spot was eventually abandoned in favour of the lands of Respondents Nos. 1 to 21, which were notified in 1971.
The landowners resisted and successfully impeached the acquisition on the ground of mala fides before the High Court.
After a long interval, the State initiated acquisition proceedings in respect of the same land a second time, invoking the emergency powers under Section 17 of the Land Acquisition Act.
The Respondents Nos. 1 to 21 assailed the acquisition before the High Court on the ground that the statutory power to acquire land had been misused to satisfy the personal ends of Respondent No. 22 and that the acquisition was not for a legitimate statutory purpose.
The High Court struck down the 'declaration ', and invalidated the acquisition.
Dismissing the Special Leave Petition of the State, ^ HELD: Krishna Iyer, J.) 1.
It is fundamental that compulsory taking of a man 's property is a serious matter and the smaller the man the more serious the matter.
Hearing him before depriving him is both reasonable and preemptive of arbitrariness, and denial of this administrative fairness is constitutional anathema except for good reasons.
Save in real urgency where public interest does not brook even the minimum time needed to give a hearing, land acquisition authorities should not, having regard to Articles 14 (and 19), burke an enquiry under section 17 of the Land Acquisition Act.
[1078H 1079B] In the instant case a slumbering process, pending for years and suddenly exciting itself into immediate forcible taking, makes a travesty of emergency power.
[1079B] 1072 2.
The power to select land for acquisition proceedings is left to the responsible discretion of Government under the Act, subject to Articles 14, 19 and 31 (then).
The Court is handcuffed in this jurisdiction and cannot raise its hand against what it thinks is a foolish choice.
Wisdom in administrative action is the property of the Executive and judicial circumspection keeps the court lock jawed save where power has been polluted by oblique ends or is otherwise void on well established grounds.
[1075 F G] 3.
Legal malice is gibberish unless juristic clarity keeps it separate from the popular concept of personal vice.
Bad faith which invalidates the exercise of power sometimes called colourable exercise or fraud on power and often times overlaps motives, passions, and satisfactions is the attainment of ends beyond the sanctioned purposes of power by simulation or pretension of gaining a legitimate goal.
If the use of the power is for the fulfillment of a legal object the actuation or catalysation by malice is not legicidal.
The action is bad where the true object is to reach an end different from the one for which the power is entrusted, goaded by extraneous considerations, good or bad, but irrelevant to the entrustment.
When the custodian of power is influenced in its exercise by considerations outside those for promotion of which the power is vested, the court calls it a colourable exercise and is undeceived by illusion.
[1075H 1076C] 4.
Fraud on power voids the order if it is not exercised bona fide for the end designed.
Fraud in this context is not equal to moral turpitude and embraces all cases in which the action impugned is to effect some object which is beyond the purpose and intent of the power, whether this be malice laden or even benign.
If the purpose is corrupt the resultant act is bad.
If considerations, foreign to the scope of the power or extraneous to the statute, enter the verdict or impel the action, mala fides or fraud on power vitiates the acquisition or other official act.
[1076 D E] In the instant case the moving consideration was not that this land was needed for the mandi, in the judgment of Government, but that the mandi need was hijacked to reach the private destination of depriving an enemy of his land through back seat driving of the statutory engine.
Respondent No. 22 when he became State Minister of Panchayat and Development constituted a Selection Board and appointed himself as President thereof.
The choice was made of the site belonging to Respondents 1 to 21 and lest the take over delayed, even the S5A enquiry was scuttled by invoking the emergency power S17.
At times, natural justice is the natural enemy of intolerant authority.
The judicial process under Article 226 therefore, rightly invalidated the acquisition on the ground of mala fide.
[1076F, 1078 C E] 5.
This court does not upset a factual finding unless it is upset by perverse assessment, absence of evidence and the like.
[1077A] 6.
Counsel in court are 'robed ' representatives, within the parameters of the adversary system, geared to the higher cause of justice, not amoral attorneys paid to ventriloquize the case of the principal.
Every 'lawless ' cause brought recklessly before the Court, is a dubious gamble which blocks the better ones from getting speedy remedy.
[1074E, 1073F] 1073 (Per Pathak J. concurring) 1.
On a conspectus of the material on the record it does seem that the impugned acquisition proceeding cannot be sustained.
There is reason to believe that the statutory power to acquire land has been misued to satisfy the personal ends of the Respondent No. 22, an individual who appears to be not without considerable political influence.
Despite an opportunity afforded to controvert the allegations made by the Respondents Nos. 1 to 21, no attempt has been made by him to contradict the allegations.
[1079 E F] 2.
Whether or not the deliberations which were said to have led to the selection of the land belonging to Respondent Nos.
1 21, were affected by the influence or pressure of the Respondent No. 22 is a matter to which the officials or members selecting the land could alone be privy.
In the absence of any denial of the allegations made by the Respondents Nos. 1 to 21 in the writ petition by a person having personal and direct knowledge in the matter, and having regard to the entire history of the case, it is difficult to resist the conclusion that the averments in the writ petition alleging mala fides must be accepted.
[1079H 1080B]
