The assessee (appellant) effected certain transactions of sale of cement in accordance with the provisions of the Cement Control order.
The amount of freight which was included in the 'free on rail destination railway station ' price and which was paid by the purchaser was deducted from the price shown in the invoices sent to the purchasers.
The assessee proceeding on the basis that the amount of freight did not form part of the sale price and was not includible in the taxable turnover did not show it in the returns submitted by it.
The Assistant Commissioner of Sales Tax took the view that having regard to the provisions of the Cement Control Order, the amount of freight formed part of the sale price and was includible in the taxable turnover of the assessee, and passed two orders of assessment, one under the and the other under the Madhya Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, 1958, including the amount of freight in the taxable turnover of the assessee and levying tax upon it and also imposing heavy penalty on the assessee on the ground that the assessee had failed to disclose in its returns the amount of freight as forming part of the taxable turnover.
In appeals to this Court on the questions of: (1) inclusion of the amount of freight in the taxable turnover of the assessee and (2) imposition of penalty for not showing the amount of freight as forming part of the taxable turnover in the returns.
^ HELD: 1.
(i) The amount of freight formed part of the sale price within the meaning of the first part of the definition of that term in Section 2(o) of the Madhya Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, 1958 and Section 2(h) of the ' and was rightly included in the taxable turnover of the assessee.
[1101E] (ii) In Hindustan Sugar Mills vs State of Rajasthan this Court held that by reason of the provisions of the Cement Control Order, 1967, which governed the transactions of sale of cement entered into by the assessee the amount of freight formed part of the sale price within the meaning 1099 of the first part of the definition of that term contained in Section 2(p) of the Rajasthan Sales Tax Act, 1954 and Section 2(h) of the and was includible in the taxable turnover of the assessee.
The said decision must equally apply under the Madhya Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, 1958, as the definition of 'sale price ' in Section 2(o) of the Madhya Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, 1958 is materially in the same terms as Section 2(p) of the Rajasthan Sales Tax Act, 1954.
[1101C E] 2(i) The Assistant Commissioner of Sales Tax was not justified in imposing penalty on the assessee under Section 43 of the Madhya Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, 1958 and section 9 sub section (2) of the of 1956 as the assessee could not be said to have filed 'false ' returns when it did not include the amount of freight in the taxable turnover shown in the returns.
[1103C, B] (ii) Section 43 of the Madhya Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, 1958 providing for imposition of penalty requires that the assessee should have filed a 'false ' return and a return cannot be said to be 'false ' unless there is an element of deliberateness in it.
The Section being penal in character, unless the filing of an inaccurate return is accompanied by a guilty mind, the section cannot be invoked for imposing penalty.
[1102D, 1102H] (iii) Where the assessee does not include a particular item in the taxable turnover under a bonafide belief that he is not liable so to include it, it would not be right to condemn the return as a 'false ' return inviting imposition of penalty.
[1102F] Hindustan Steel Ltd. vs State of Orissa, 25 S.T.C. 211, referred to.
In the instant case, the assessee did not include the amount of freight in the taxable turnover under a bonafide belief that the amount of freight did not form part of the sale price and was not includible in the taxable turnover.
The contention of the assessee through out was that on a proper construction of the definition of 'sale price ' in Section 2(o) of the Madhya Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, 1958 and Section 2(h) of the , the amount of freight did not fall within the definition and was not liable to be included in the taxable turnover.
It cannot be said that this was a frivolous contention taken up merely for the purpose of avoiding liability to tax.
This was a highly arguable contention.
The belief entertained by the assessee that it was not liable to include the amount of freight in the taxable turnover could not be said to be malafide or unreasonable.
It cannot, therefore, be said that the assessee filed 'false ' returns necessitating imposition of penalty.
[1102A D,E]
