Out of 46 odd acres of land held by the original owner (husband of respondent No. 1 and son of respondent No. 2), the Collector declared six odd acres as surplus area under section 2(3) of the Punjab Security of Land Tenures Act, 1953 and allotted them to two other tenants.
On the death of the original owner the two heirs (respondents 1 and 2) made an application stating that since the land inherited by each of them in equal shares was below the permissible area of 30 standard acres, there was no surplus area with them and that, therefore, no part of the land could be utilized for allotment to other tenants.
The Collector rejected their application on the ground that the surplus area having been declared during the life time of the original owner, it could not be excluded from the holding in the hands of the two respondents.
The respondents failed in appeal and revision before the Commissioner and the Financial Commissioner.
A single Judge of the High Court allowed their petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution in so far as it related to the application of the land of which possession had not been given to the other tenants.
A Division Bench rejected the appellants appeal.
On the question whether mere allotment of land to other tenants amounted to utilization of the surplus area when the re settled tenant had not taken possession.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
While section 10A(a) of the Act empowers the State Government to utilize any surplus area for re settlement of tenants, the Act does not define what is meant by order of utilization under the section.
Clause (b) of the section, however, has the effect of saving the land comprised in the surplus area if it has been acquired by an heir by inheritance.
Therefore, when an heir succeeds by inheritance that basic fact would affect the utilization of the surplus area, even if an order had been made under section 10A(a) for its utilization for the resettlement of other tenants but that order had not been implemented.
[1122H, 1123A B] 2.
A conspectus of the rules made under the Act also shows that while allotment of land is an initial stage in the process of utilization of the surplus area, it does not complete that process as it is necessary for the allottee to obtain a certificate of allotment, take possession of the land within the specified period and execute necessary documents thereafter.
A mere order of allotment does not have effect of completing that process.
Rule 20D also points to the con 1121 clusion that a completed title does not pass to the allottee on a mere order of allotment and that order is defeasible if the other conditions prescribed by law are not fulfilled.
[1123 F G] In the instant case since the process of utilization of surplus area had not been completed by the time the heirs made the application it was permissible for the authorities to re examine the question whether there was any surplus area at all after the heirs had inherited the land in equal shares so as to reduce the area of the holding of each one of them below the permissible area.
[1124 B G]
