The ancestors of a former Zamindar dedicated their maufi interest in a village in favour of a deity.
Acting on behalf of the deity the ex zamindar created a lease of thikadari rights in the village in favour of the appellant for ten years.
The lease deed termed the appellant as "legal guardian of gaontia thikadari patta".
While the lease was in force the Orissa Estates Abolition Act, 1951 which sought to abolish all intermediaries in land and vest their interest in the State came into force.
The Act however protected certain intermediaries thereby carving out an exception to the scheme of the Act.
Meanwhile the Managing Trustee of the Board of Trustees appointed under the Orissa Hindu Religious Endowments Act, 1951 to look after the affairs of the deity filed a petition under section 7 of the Abolition Act claiming that the deity was in Khas possession of certain lands including the land lease to the appellant and prayed that the same be settled on the Board of Trustees as an occupancy tenant.
The question was eventually settled in favour of the Trustees and against the appellant.
In the Managing Trustee 's application under section 145 Cr.
P.C. asserting that the appellant was disturbing peaceful possession of the deity over the land, the Magistrate held that it was the appellant who was in possession of the land and directed that the land should be restored to him.
The High Court in revision set aside the order of the Magistrate.
In appeals to this Court the appellant contended that it was he and not the deity, who was the thikadar and therefore an intermediary within the meaning of the definition of that term in the Abolition Act and was in Khas possession of the land in dispute and so the land should be restored to him.
Allowing the appeals, ^ HELD: 1.
It was the appellant who had the Khas possession of the land, and therefore, the land must be deemed to have been vested in him, and not in the deity, as an occupancy tenant under the provisions of section 7 of the Abolition Act.
[328 F] 2.
Apart from the description of the appellant as gaontia thikadari patta, condition 8 contains a sure indication of the nature of the tenancy agreement.
It states "that the cultivable lands cannot be utilised for any other purpose nor can they be transferred or sold or otherwise dealt with to the hardship of the villagers or the tenants." [328 B C] 321 3.
The reference to tenants in this condition points to the land being under the cultivation of persons other than the appellant at the moment the lease was granted.
This position was incompatible with the grant of an ordinary lease to him.
The tenure granted in his favour was on the other hand one conferring on hint a right to collect the rents from the tenants of the deity and in lieu thereof pay a fixed sum to it.
He was, therefore, correctly described as gaontia or thinkdar, both of which expressions describe an intermediary as distinguished from a raiyat or an actual tiller of the soil.
[328 D E]
