The appellant (plaintiff) the present Mahant, filed a suit for a declaration that the plaint schedule properties were his personal properties and that there was no trust of a religious or public nature so as to attract the provisions of the Bihar Hindu Religious Trust Act 1951.
It was contended in the suit that one G constructed a temple on his own land in the village, installed deities, performed puja and raj bhog till his death, that the public had no concern with the idols and that after his death he was succeeded by his son who became a bairagi.
Apart from the properties left by him, his son also acquired other properties.
On the son 's death he was succeeded by his Chela who became a Mahant.
Each succeeding Mahant was succeeded by his Chela.
Properties were acquired by the respective Mahants in their own name and treated as their personal properties.
One of the Mahants constructed a temple in a nearby village where he installed deities and performed puja and raj bhog.
It was claimed that the temple and the properties were the private properties of the Mahant and the public did not have any interest or right in them.
The suit was contested by respondent No. 1, contending that the temples and the properties were not the private properties of the Mahant and that they belonged to a Hindu Religious Trust to which the provisions of the Bihar Hindu Religious Trusts Act, 1951 were applicable.
The Trial Court dismissed the suit and its decree was confirmed by the High Court.
In the appeal to this Court, the question was whether the plaint schedule properties were properties in respect of which there was a trust of a public or religious nature so as to attract the provisions of the Bihar Hindu Religious Trusts Act, 1951.
^ HELD: 1.
The High Court was right in holding that there was a trust of a public nature.
[1130B] 2.
The fact that members of the public were permitted to go to the temple without any hinderance might not be a circumstance which by itself would conclusively establish that the temple was a public temple in the absence of an element of right in the user of the temple by the public.
Conversely the free use of the properties of the temple by the Mahant at a time when he was the sole manager of the temple and its properties would not necessarily lead to the inference that the temple was not a public temple.
[1129E] 3.
There can be no simple or conclusive factual test to determine the character of a trust.
The totality of the circumstances and their effect must be considered.
[1129F] In the instant case not only were the members of the public allowed free access to the temple, but they were evincing much greater interest in the insti 1126 tution as several villagers had made gifts of land to it, a circumstance which would ordinarily be consistent with the nature of the institution being public and not private.
[1129F] 4.
The situation of the temple would be an important circumstance in determining whether it was private or public.
[1129G] Deoki Nandan vs Murlidhar ; referred to.
In the instant case the High Court had pointed out that the temple was constructed outside the village on open land between two villages so as to be convenient to the villagers of both the villages.
It was constructed on a high platform and was open on all sides with plenty of space around it, so as to attract and accommodate large number of villagers from two villages.
This indicated that the trust was of a public nature.
[1129H 1130A] 5.
The donation of land by members of the public to the institution and location of the temple at a place freely accessible and convenient to the public were circumstances which indicated that the trust was of a public nature.
[1130B] Bihar State Board Religious Trust, Patna vs Mahant Sri Biseshwar Das,[1971] 3 S.C.R. 680, distinguished.
