The respondent Company, a subscriber, had to pay money in monthly instalments to a Chitty run by the Orient Bank.
The last instalment was paid on December 10, 1960.
The respondent was the successful bidder.
The prize amount was to be paid to the respondent on January 10, 1961.
But before that date the Central Government imposed a Moratorium, originally for the period ending with the March 18, 1961 which later on was extended upto June 16, 1961 on the Orient Bank with the result that the Orient Bank had to suspend all its business activity.
This resulted in the conduct of the Chitty being discontinued, so that the Chitty stood terminated and the Orient Bank in its capacity as the Foreman of the Chitty incurred the obligation to pay back all the contributions made by non prized subscribers.
The Central Government sanctioned a scheme under the Banking Regulation Act for the amalgamation of the Orient Bank with the appellant (Travancore Bank).
Realising that the Travancore Bank would not be able to continue the Chitties for which the Orient Bank had acted as Foreman because those Chitties had terminated owing to the failure of the Orient Bank to continue to conduct them by reason of the Moratorium, the Central Government passed an order on December 4, 1961 under section 45(10) of the Banking Act.
This order was further amended substituting the words "the 31st March 1962" for the words "31st December 1961", the effect of which was to obliterate the termination of the Chitties as resulting from the suspension thereof by reason of the moratorium during the period from December 18, 1960 to 31st March, 1962, and to enable the appellant Bank to continue those Chitties as if there had been no suspension at any point of time, so that they could be continued as if the relevant provisions of the Chitties Act and the relevant variolas had throughout been complied with.
The respondent filed a suit claiming refund of the four instalments paid by it along with interest.
There was no reference to the impugned order presumably because the respondent had no knowledge thereof.
The suit was resisted on the strength of the impugned order dated 15 1 1962, but the vires of that order was challenged by the respondent and it was urged that the impugned order did not fall within the ambit of sub section (10) of section 45 of the Banking Act and that in any case that sub section itself was constitutionally invalid.
The suit was transferred by the High Court to its own file, from the Court of Munsif as the constitutional validity of section 45(10) of the Banking Act was questioned.
The suit was dismissed.
The respondent instituted an appeal which was accepted by the Division Bench.
Disagreeing with the trial judge as to the object of the scheme of 1158 amalgamation the Division Bench held that sub section (10) did not suffer from excessive delegation of legislative power.
It was urged on behalf of the respondent in this Court that one of the objects of the scheme was to continue the Chitties to a successful conclusion as held by the trial Judge and that the finding to the contrary recorded in the impugned judgment was erroneous.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: The pervasive provisions embraced in the later part of paragraph 2 of the scheme embraced within their ambit a complete transfer of all rights and liabilities, of whatsoever nature, of the Orient Bank to the appellant Bank and no special provision was therefore needed to be included in the scheme in regard to Chitties, if they were not to be continued to a successful conclusion.
As it is, the portion of paragraph 2 provides for Chitties on a special footing which could not have been the case if the right and liabilities of the Orient Bank in regard to Chitties were sought to be transferred to the appellant Bank on the basis of the termination of the Chitties which had already become operative because of the Moratorium and as a consequence of suspension of the Chitty business by the Orient Bank.
Nor was it necessary to provide in clause (1) of paragraph 2 of the scheme that "the transferee Bank shall become the forman. and shall continue to exercise all powers and to do all such acts and things as would have been exercised or done by the transferor Bank. " if the Chitties were to be dealt with as having come to termination.
The special provision for the Chitty business cannot be regarded as redundant and it was obviously made with a purpose which, in the circumstances of the case, could be nothing more or less than to provide for the continuation of the Chitties in supersession of their termination.
No other reasonable explanation of that special provision appears possible.
And if that be so, the entire reasoning adopted in the judgment of the Division Bench for arriving at the conclusion that the impugned order was beyond the scope of sub section (10) of section 45 of the Banking Act would become unacceptable; for, in that case, the difficulty which the impugned order sought to overcome would become very real so that the Central Government would be fully competent under the provisions of that sub section to pass an order removing that difficulty and the order actually passed could not be considered to be inconsistent with the provisions of the scheme to any extent or in any manner.
The impugned order therefore did not fall outside the scope of the power conferred on the Central Government under sub section (10) of section 45 of the Banking Act.
[1168 E H, 1169 A C]
