Entry 12 of Part IX of the Schedule to the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order 1950 prior to its amendment in 1956 read as "Gond including Media (Maria) and Mudia, (Muria)".
By the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Amendment) Act 63 of 1956 the said Entry was substituted by Entry 12 in Paragraph 5 of Part VII A of the Schedule to the Order.
It read as "12 Gond, including: Arakh or Arrah. Mana. " "Mana" was the 30th community amongst the communities included in that Entry.
In 1976 the entire Schedule to the order as it stood prior to the amendment was substituted by a new Schedule.
Entry 18 of Part IX of the new Schedule corresponding to Entry 12, prior to the amendment, showed 'Mana ' community as one of the communities included in the group of communities headed by "Gond" community.
In the election to the State Assembly held in February, 1978 the appellant was declared successful from a constituency reserved for Scheduled Tribes.
In his election petition impugning the appellant 's election respondent No. 1 who was the unsuccessful candidate challenged the election on the ground that the appellant did not belong to any of the Scheduled Tribes specified in Part IX of the Schedule to the 1950 Order as it stood at the time of the election and was therefore not qualified to be chosen to fill the seat reserved for the Scheduled Tribes.
The High Court set aside the appellant 's election.
In appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that while the word "including" in Entry 12 of the 1950 Order as it stood after its amendment in 1956 showed that the communities referred to therein were those having affinity with the Gond Tribe and its omission in Entry 18 as amended in 1976 showed that the group of communities mentioned in this Entry, need not necessarily be those having mutual affinity amongst them so that a person belonging to any "Mana" community should be treated as a person belonging to a Scheduled Tribe even though it had no affinity with the "Gond" tribe.
Dismissing the appeal ^ HELD: 1.
The High Court was right in setting aside the appellant 's election on the ground that he did not belong to a Schedule Tribe.
[1147 B] 1136 2.
(a) Even when the Order, before its amendment in 1976 used the term "including", this Court giving a restricted meaning to "Mana", held that only 'Mana ' community which had affinity with the 'Gond ' community could be considered as a Scheduled Tribe and that 'Kshatriya Bidwaik Mana ' community to which the appellant belonged could not be treated as a Scheduled Tribe.
[1143F G] (b) A reading of Part IX of the Schedule to the Order shows that certain communities had been grouped together under a single Entry in the light of Article 342 of the Constitution which requires part of or groups within a tribal community also to be specified in the Order.
Therefore the communities mentioned against any specific Entry are those which have mutual affinity amongst them.
[1144C E] (c) Merely because a new Schedule had been substituted for the old one it cannot be said that Parliament had intended to treat persons belonging to "Kshatriya Bidwaik Mana" community also as a Scheduled Tribe.
Where there are two communities with the same name one having affinity with a tribe and the other not having anything to do with it and both are treated as Scheduled Tribes, the community which has affinity with another tribe is shown along with it in the same group against a single Entry and the other is shown against a different Entry.
Therefore the Mana community included in Entry 18 can only be that which has affinity with 'Gonds ' and any other community which also bears the name 'Mana ' but does not have any such affinity cannot be deemed to fall within the scope of 'Mana ' in Entry 18.
[1144H, 1145C D] 3.
The term "including" is sometimes used in a definition to give an extended meaning to the word defined.
Sometimes it is used as a synonym for "means" and not as a word of extension but limitation.
[1143C D] Dilworth vs Commissioner of Stamps, [1899] A.C. 99 at pp.
105 106, South Gujarat Roofing Tiles Manufacturers Association & Anr.
vs State of Gujarat & Anr.
, ; , referred to.
