Section 89(3) of the Jammu & Kashmir Representation of the People Act, 1957 reads: "Every election petition should be accompanied by as many copies thereof as there are respondents mentioned in the petition and every such copy shall be attested by the petitioner under his own signature to be true copy of the petition".
Under Section 94(1) of the Act, "The High Court shall dismiss an election petition which does not comply with the provisions of Section 89 or Section 90 or Section 125".
Sections 89(3) and 94(1) of the Act are in pari materia with sections 81(3) and 86(1) of the Central Act 43 of 1951.
In the election petition filed by the appellant in the J & K High Court challenging the verdict of the Returning Officer declaring the respondent as a successful candidate from the Handwara Constituency to the State Legislature, both the copies of the election petition contained the endorsement "Attested true copy.
Piare Lal Handoo, Advocate".
The question arose whether it was a sufficient compliance within the provisions of Section 89(3) of the Act.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
The requirement in Section 89(3) of J & K Representation of People Act, 1957 that every copy of the election petition which is intended for service on the respondent should be attested by the petitioner under his own signature is a mandatory requirement and the non compliance with that requirement should result in the dismissal of the petition as provided in Section 94(1) of the Act.
[1189 F G] 2.
The object of requiring a copy of an election petition to be attested by the petitioner under his own signature to be a true copy of the petition is that the petitioner should take full responsibility for its contents and that the respondent or respondents should have in their possession a copy of the petition duly attested under the signature of the petitioner to be the true copy of the petition at the earliest possible opportunity to prevent any unauthorised alteration or tampering of contents of the original petition after it is filed into Court.
No doubt, the records and documents in the custody of Courts are taken due care of by the Courts and the Courts would not by themselves give 1178 any scope for tampering with them.
Still allegations not always without basis are sometimes made that records in the Court have been tampered with, notwithstanding the care and caution taken by Courts.
To obviate any scope for such an allegation being made or to protect the interest of the respondent, the Legislature thought of enacting sub section (3) of Section 89 of the Act so that the respondent may rely on the copy served on him when he finds that the original document in the Court contains allegations different from those in the copy in his custody.
A respondent would not have the same degree of assurance if a copy served on him is one attested by any person other than the petitioner himself.
The attestation by the advocate for the petitioner cannot be treated as the equivalent of attestation by the petitioner under his own signature.
If the requirement of the second part of section 89(3) that copy of the petition should contain the signature of the petitioner himself is not one of substance, there was no need to enact it as the first part of sub section (3) of section 89 of the Act would have been sufficient for it provides that every election petition shall be accompanied by as many copies thereof as there are respondents mentioned in the petition and the word "copies" mentioned therein can only mean "true copies".
The importance of the provision contained in section 94 of the Act which makes it obligatory on the part of the High Court to dismiss a petition when it is established that section 89 of the Act had not been complied with also cannot be overlooked in this context.
[1188 G H, 1189 A E] 3.
It is true that section 89(3) of the Act is purely procedural in character and that ordinarily procedural law should not be given that primacy by courts as would defeat the ends of justice.
But if a law even though it may be procedural in character insists that an act must be done in a particular manner and further provides that certain consequences should follow if the act is not done in that manner, courts have no option but to enforce the law as it is.
A rule of limitation, for example, which is generally considered as procedural in character is strictly enforced by courts since the rule lays down that no court shall entertain a suit, an appeal or an application which is barred by time.
[1187 F H] An election to a Legislative Assembly can be called in question only by filing an election petition and not otherwise.
The right to challenge the election by filing an election petition is a statutory right and not a common law right.
A successful candidate is entitled to enjoy the privileges attached to the membership of the Legislative Assembly unless his right to do so is successfully challenged in an election petition filed within the prescribed period and in accordance with law.
Section 89(3) of the Act consists of two parts.
The first part requires that every election petition shall be accompanied by as many copies thereof as there are respondents mentioned in the petition and the second part requires that every such copy shall be attested by the petitioner under his own signature to be a true copy of the petition.
The copies of the election petition should be filed alongwith it in order to prevent the delay in the disposal of the election petitions.
Sub section (3) of section 89 of the Act provides that a copy of the petition shall be attested by the petitioner "under his own signature".
But the same expression is not to be found in Section 91(1)(c) of the Act which provides that an election petition shall be signed by the petitioner and verified in the manner laid down in the Jammu and Kashmir Code of Civil Procedure (Act X of 1977), for the verification of 1179 pleadings.
Sub section (3) of section 89 of the Act was inserted by Jammu and Kashmir Act I of 1962.
Section 94 of the Act which requires the High Court to dismiss an election petition when the petitioner has not complied with the provisions of section 89 was enacted in the place of former section 94 of the Act by Jammu and Kashmir Act XI of 1957 by the Legislature with the full knowledge of the requirements of section 89(3) of the Act.
[1188 A G] Satya Narain vs Dhuja Ram and Ors., ; ; applied. 4.
The question whether a provision of law is mandatory or not, depends upon its language, the context in which it is enacted and its object.
The difference between a mandatory rule and a directory rule is that while the former must be strictly observed, in the case of the latter substantial compliance may be sufficient to achieve the object regarding which the rule is enacted.
Certain broad propositions which can be deduced from several decisions of courts regarding the rules of construction that should be followed in determining whether a provision of law is directory or mandatory are as follows: The fact that the statute uses the word 'shall ' while laying down a duty is not conclusive on the question whether it is a mandatory or directory provision.
In order to find out the true character of the legislation, the Court has to ascertain the object which the provision of law in question is to subserve and its design and the context in which it is enacted.
If the object of a law is to be defeated by non compliance with it, it has to be regarded as mandatory.
But when a provision of law relates to the performance of any public duty and the invalidation of any act done in disregard of that provision causes serious prejudice to those for whose benefit it is enacted and at the same time who have no control over the performance of the duty, such provision should be treated as a directory one.
Where however, a provision of law prescribes that a certain act has to be done in a particular manner by a person in order to acquire a right and it is coupled with another provision which confers an immunity on another when such act is not done in that manner, the former has to be regarded as a mandatory one.
A procedural rule ordinarily should not be construed as mandatory if the defect in the act done in pursuance of it can be cured by permitting appropriate rectification to be carried out at a subsequent stage unless by according such permission to rectify the error later on, another rule would be contravened.
Whenever a statute prescribes that a particular act is to be done in a particular manner and also lays down that failure to comply with the said requirement leads to a specific consequence, it would be difficult to hold that the requirement is not mandatory and the specified consequence should not follow.
[1182 E H, 1183 A C, 1188 D] K. Kamaraja Nadar vs Kunju Thevar and Ors.
, Subbarao vs Member, Election Tribunal Hyderabad, ; , Kamalam (M.) vs Dr. V. A. Syed Mohd., ; at p. 452; referred to.
Satya Narain vs Dhuja Ram and Ors., ; ; applied.
Jagat Kishore Prasad Narain Singh vs Rajendra Kumar Poddar and Ors., [1971] 1 SCR 821; held inapplicable.
