The respondent bought new cars and chassis manufactured in Bombay and brought them by road.
In the course of their journey from Bombay to Madras the vehicles passed through the territory of the State of Mysore for over 400 miles.
The Road Transport Authorities of the State of Mysore demanded payment of road tax on the vehicles under section 3(2) of the Mysore Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1957 which provides that taxes are leviable on motor vehicles belonging to or in the possession or control of persons not ordinarily resident in the State of Mysore and kept in the State for periods shorter than a quarter but not exceeding thirty days.
Allowing the respondent 's writ petition the High Court held that vehicles which passed through the State were not "kept" in the State within the meaning of section 3(2) of the Act and so were not taxable under it.
In appeal to this court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that the vehicles passing through the territory of the State over a distance of 400 miles with halts on the way could be said to have been "kept" for use on loads in the State within the meaning of the section and were therefore taxable.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD : A vehicle in transit through the State of Mysore or even making necessary halt for short intervals during transit cannot be said to be a vehicle kept for use on roads in the State of Mysore.
[6 B C] The word "kept", which has not been defined in the Act, has to be interpreted in its ordinary popular sense consistent with the context.
In association with the use of the vehicle the word "kept" has an element of stationeries which is something different from a state of transit or a course of journey through the State.
A mere state of running through or even halting of the vehicle in the course of the journey through the State for its outside destination, will not be sufficient to constitute "keeping" of that vehicle in the State within the meaning of section 3(2).
[4 C E & 5 E] Dudley vs Holland , Biggs vs Mitchell ; referred to.
