The first respondent owned certain Land forming part of a town planning scheme, situated within the city limits.
At the request of the second respondent, a Corporative Housing Society, the State Government issued a Notification under section 4 of the Act on August 3, 1960 stating that the land was likely to be needed for a public purpose and it was followed by a further notification of the State Government under Section 6 of the Act dated August 21, 1961 that the land was to be acquired at the expense of the Cooperative Housing Society for the public purpose specified in column 4 of the Schedule to the notification.
The entire expense of the acquisition was to be borne by the second respondent.
The first respondent moved the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution challenging the validity of the notification under section 6 of the Act.
During the pendency of the Writ Petition, the appellant by a notification dated May 27, 1963 cancelled the earlier notification under section 6 and issued a fresh notification.
The High Court struck down the second notification dated September 10, 1964 issued under section 6 of the Act.
In the appeal to this Court, on the question of the validity of the 2nd notification dated September 10, 1964. ^ HELD: (i) The High Court was in error in striking down the second notification under section 6 of the Act issued on September 10, 1964.
(ii) This Court in Valjibhai Muljibhai Soneji vs State of Bombay has held that the Government has no power to issue a notification for acquisition of land for a public purpose, where the compensation is to be entirely paid by a company.
[287 C D] In the instant case the first notification issued by the Government for acquisition of land for a public purpose at the expense of the second respondent, the cooperative society was therefore, invalid and the Govt.
was justified in issuing the second notification under section 6 after removing the lacuna by providing for acquisition of the land for public purpose, at public expense.
[287 D E] (iii) The acquisition of land for cooperative housing society is a public purpose.
The Govt.
is the best judge to determine whether the purpose in question is a public purpose or not.
It cannot be said that a Housing Scheme for a limited number of persons cannot be construed to be a public purpose.
When a notification under section 6 of the Act is invalid, the Govt.
may treat it as ineffective and issue a fresh notification under section 6 of the Act 2nd nothing in section 48 of the Act precludes the Government from doing so.
[291 C E] 285 Girdharilal Amratlal Shodan & Ors.
vs State of Gujarat Madhya Pradesh & Ors.
; , Pandit Jhandu Lal & Ors.
vs The State of Punjab & Ors. ; Ratilal Shankarbhai & Ors.
vs State of Gujarat & Ors.
A.I.R. , Ram Swarup vs The District Land Acquisition Officer, Aligarh & Ors. , referred to.
(iv) In the instant case, tho Respondent had not taken any ground in the Writ Petition with regard to the delay in the issuance of the second notification.
The High Court was therefore, not justified in observing that "the appellant had not explained the delay by filing any affidavit.
" If there was no ground taken, there could be no occasion for filing of any such affidavit.
[292 B C] (v) There is nothing in the Act which precludes the Govt.
from issuing a fresh notification under section 6 of the Act if the earlier notification is found to be ineffective.
The delay of one year and four months between the date of cancellation and the issue of the second notification cannot be regarded to be unreasonable.
[292 E F] Gujarat State Transport Corpn.
vs Valji Mulji Soneji
