The appellant, an Advocate, tenanted a ' building belonging to tho respondent.
The respondent sued the appellant for possession of the premises and by a compromise, the Appellant agreed to vacate the premises by a certain date.
A decree in terms thereof was passed.
Then the Act came into being which by extension of its operation applied to Chandigrah with effect from 4 11 1972.
It was contended that (i) had the decree been passed but a few days later, the Act would have admittedly interdicted the eviction because of Section 13 thereof; and had the decree been made and executed a day before the extension of the Act, the years of litigative procrastination of eviction might have been impossible.
The salvation of the appellant is certain if he be a "tenant" within the meaning of the Act and his eviction is certain if the definition of tenant does not cover him in its amplitude and (ii) that the effect of compromise decree is that the tenancy of the appellant has been terminated.
Accepting the appeal, ^ HELD: An advocate, under this Act, enjoys special protection.
lt is too platitudinous to preach and too entrenched to shake the proposition that rent control legislation in a country of terrible accommodation shortage is a beneficial measure whoso construction must be liberal enough to fulfil the statutory purpose and met frustrate it.
So construed, the benefit of interpretative doubt belongs to the potential evictee unless the language is plain and provides for eviction.
That intendment must, by interpretation, be effectuated.
This is the essence of rent control jurisprudence.
[143 E G] The expression 'tenant includes a 'tenant ' continuing in possession after the termination of the tenancy in his favour '.
It thus includes, by express provision, a quondam tenant whose nexus with the property is continuance in possession.
The fact that a decree or any other process extinguishes the tenancy under the general law of real property does not terminate the status of a tenant under the Act having regard to the carefully drawn inclusive clause.
Subudhi 's case ; related to a statute where the definition in section 2(5) of that Act expressly included "any person against whom a suit for ejectment is pending in a court of competent jurisdiction" and more pertinent to the point specially excluded "a person against whom a decree or order for eviction has been made by such a court." [144 E G] (ii) The text, reinforced by the context, especially of section 13, convincingly includes ex tenants against whom decrees for eviction might have been passed, 142 whether on compromise or otherwise.
Nobody has a case that the appellant is not continuously in possession.
The conclusion is inevitable that he remains tenant and enjoys immunity under section 13 (1) of the Act.
The execution proceedings, must therefore fall, because the statutory road block cannot be removed.
[A conflict is best resolved by the parties as both sides in the present case have produced an enlightened settlement by an agreement to sell the property in dispute by the respondent to the appellant.
[144 G H]
