The appellant manufactures steel tubes in the outskirts of Ahmedabad city.
It started its business in 1960, went into production since 1964 and waggled from infancy to adulthood with smiling profits and growling workers, punctuated by smouldering demands, strikes and settlement until there brewed a confrontation culminating in a head on collision following upon certain unhappy happenings.
A total strike ensued whose chain reaction was a whole sale termination of all employees followed by fresh recruitment of workmen defacto breakdown of the strike and dispute over restoration of the removed workmen.
As per the last settlement between the management and the workmen of 4th August, 1972, it was not open to the workmen to resort to a strike till the expiry of a period of five years; nor could the management declare a lock out till then.
Any dispute arising between the parties, according to the terms arrived at were to be sorted out through negotiation or, failing that by recourse to arbitration.
The matter was therefore, referred to an arbitrator and the arbitrator by his award held the action cf the management warranted.
The respondent challenged the decision of the arbitrator under Article 226/227 of the Constitution and the High Court of Gujarat reversed the award and substantially directed reinstatement.
Hence the appeals both by the Management and the workmen.
Dismissing the appeals and modifying the awards substantially, the Court ^ HELD: (By Majority) Per Iyer J.
On behalf of D. A. Desai J. and himself.
(i) The basic assumption is that the strike was not only illegal but also unjustified.
[210 H] 147 (ii) The management did punish its 853 workmen when it discharged them for reasons of misconduct set out in separate but integrated proceedings; even though with legal finesse, the formal order was phrased in harmless verbalism.
[211 A] (iii) The action taken under the general law or the standing orders, was illegal in the absence of individualised charge sheets, proper hearing and personalise punishment if found guilty.
None of these steps having been taken, the discharge orders were still born.
But, the management could, as in this case it did, offer to make out the delinquency of the employees and the arbitrator had, in such cases, the full jurisdiction to adjudge de novo both guilt and punishment.
[211 B C] (iv) Section 11A of the does take in an arbitrator too, and in this case, the arbitral reference, apart from section 11A is plenary in scope.
[211 C D] (v) Article 226 of the Constitution, however restrictive in practice Is a power wide enough in all conscience, to be a friend in need when the summons comes in a crisis from a victim of injustice; and more importantly this extra ordinary reserve power is unsheathed to grant final relief without necessary recourse to a remand.
What the Tribunal may in its discretion do the High Court too under Article 226, can, if facts compel so.
[211 D E] (vi) The Award, in the instant case, suffers from a fundamental flaw that it equates an illegal and unjustified strike with brozen misconduct by every workman without so much as identification of the charge against each, after adverting to the gravamen of his misconduct meriting dismissal.
Passive participation in a strike which is both illegal and unjustified does not ipso facto invite dismissal or punitive discharge.
There must be active individual excess such as master minding the unjustified aspects of the strike, e.g., violence, sabotage or other reprehensible role.
Absent such gravamen in the accusation, the extreme economic penalty of discharge is wrong.
An indicator of the absence of such grievous guilt is that the management, after stating in strong terms all the sins of workmen, took back over 400 of them as they trickled back slowly and beyond the time set, with continuity of service, suggestive of the dubiety of the inflated accusations and awareness of the minor role of the mass of workmen in the lingering strike.
Furthermore, even though all sanctions short of punitive discharge may be employed by a Management, low wages and high cost of living, dismissal of several hundreds with disastrous impact on numerous families is of such sensitive social concern that, save in exceptional situations, the law will inhibit such a lethal step for the peace of the industry, the welfare of the workmen and the broader justice that transcends transcient disputes.
The human dimensions have decisional relevance.
The discharge orders though approved by the Arbitrator are invalid.
[211 E H, 212 A B] HELD FURTHER: 1.
In a society, capital shall be the brother and keeper of labour and cannot disown this obligation of a partner in management, especially because social justice and Articles 43 and 43A are constitutional mandates.
The policy directions in Articles 39, 41, 42, 43 and 43A speak af the right to an adequate means of livelihood, the right to work, humane conditions of work, living wages ensuring a decent standard of life and enjoyment of leisure and participation of workers in management of industries.
De hors these 148 mandates, law will fail functionally.
Suck is the value vision of Indian Industrial Jurisprudence.
[155 B, G H, 156 A] 2.
Jural resolution of labour disputes must be sought in the law life complex beyond the factual blinkers of decided cases, beneath the lexical littleness of statutory tests, in the economic basics of industrial justice which must enliven the consciousness of the Court and the corpus juris.
[154 F G] The golden rule for the judicial resolution of an industrial dispute is first to persuade fighting parties, by judicious suggestions, into the peace making zone, disentangle the differences, narrow the mistrust gap and convert them through consensual steps, into negotiated justice.
Law is not the last word in justice, especially social justice.
Moreover in an hierarchical system, the little man lives in the short run but most litigation lives in the long run.
So it is that negotiation first and adjudication next, is a welcome formula for the Bench and the Bar, the Management and Union.
[157 C E] The anatomy of a dismissal order is not a mystery, once it is agreed that substance, not semblance, governs the decision.
Legal criteria are not so slippery that verbal manipulations may outwit the Court.
The fact is the index of the mind and an order fair on its face may be taken at its face value.
But there is more to it than that, because sometimes words are designed to conceal deeds by linguistic engineering.
The form of the order of the language in which it is couched is not conclusive.
The Court will lift the veil to see the the nature of the order.
[171 G H. 172 A] If two factors motive and foundation of the order co exist, an interference of punishment is reasonable though not inevitable.
If the severance of service is effected the first condition is fulfilled and if the foundation or causa causans of such severance is the servant 's misconduct, the second is fulfilled.
If the basis or foundation for the order of termination is clearly not turpitudes or stigmatic or rooted in misconduct or visited with evil pecuniary effects, then the inference of dismissal stands negated and vice versa.
These canons run right through the disciplinary branch of master and servant jurisprudence, both under Article 311 and in other cases including workmen under managements.
The law cannot be stultified by verbal haberdashery because the Court will lift the mask and discover the true face.
[172 C E] Masters and servants cannot be permitted to play hide and seek with the law of dismissals and the plain and proper criteria are not to be misdirected by terminological cover ups or by appeal to psychic processes but must be grounded on the substantive reason for the order, whether disclosed or undisclosed.
The Court will find out from other proceedings or documents connected with the formal order of termination what the true ground for the termination is.
If thus scrutinised the; order has a punitive flavour in cause or consequence, it is dismissal.
If it falls short of this test, it cannot be called a punishment.
A termination effected because the master is satisfied of the misconduct and of the consequent desirability of terminating the service of the delinquent servant, it is a dismissal even if he had the right in law to terminate with an innocent order under the standing order or otherwise.
Whether, in such a case the grounds are recorded in a different proceeding from the formal order does not detract from its nature.
Nor the fact that, after being satisfied of the guilt, the master abandons the enquiry and proceeds to terminate.
Given 149 an alleged misconduct and a live nexus between it and the termination of service the conclusion is dismissal, even if full benefits as on simple termination are given and non injurious terminology is used.
[173 E H, 174 A] On the contrary, even if there is suspicion of misconduct, the master may say that he does not wish to bother about it and may not go into his guilt but may feel like not keeping a man he is not happy with.
He may not like to investigate nor take the risk of continuing a dubious servant.
There it is not n dismissal, but termination simpliciter, if no injurious record of reasons or punitive pecuniary cut back on his full terminal benefits is found.
For, in fact, misconduct is not then the moving factor in the discharge, What is decisive is the plain reason for the discharge, not the strategy of a non enquiry or clever avoidance of stigmatising epithets.
If the basis is not misconduct, the order is saved.
[174 B D] Management of Murugan Mills vs Industrial Tribunal ; ; Chartered Bank vs Employees ' Union ; ; Western India Automobile Association vs Industrial Tribunal, Bombay ; Assam Oil Co. vs Workmen; , ; Tata Oil Mills Co. vs Workmen, ; @ 130; Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co. Ltd. vs S.C. Prasad & Anr. ; L. Michael and Anr.
vs M/s. Johnson Pumps India Ltd., ; Workmen of Sudder Office, Cinnamore vs Management, , Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay vs P.S. Malvankar; , ; referred to.
Every wrong order cannot be righted merely because it was wrong.
It can be quashed only if it is vitiated by the fundamental flaws of gross miscarriage of justice, absence of legal evidence, perverse misreading of facts, serious errors of law on the face of the order, jurisdictional failure and the like.
[182 P G] While the remedy under article 226 is extraordinary and is of Anglosaxon vintage, it is not a carbon copy of English processes.
Article 226 is a sparing surgery but the lancet operates where injustice suppurates.
While traditional restraints like availability of alternative remedy hold back the Court, and judicial power should not ordinarily rush in where the other two branches fear to tread.
judicial daring is not daunted where glaring injustice demands even affirmative action.
The wide words of Article 226 are designed for service of the lowly numbers in their grievances if the subject belongs to the Court 's province and the remedy is appropriate to the judicial process.
There is a native hue about article 226, without being anglophilic or anglophobic in attitude.
Viewed from this jurisprudential perspective the Court should be cautious both in not over stepping as if Article 226 were as large as an appeal and not failing to intervene where a grave error has crept in.
And an appellate power interferes not when the order appealed is not right but only when it is dearly wrong.
The difference is real, though fine.
[182 G H, 183 A B] The principle of law is that the jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution is limited to holding the judicial or quasi judicial powers within the leading sings of legality and to see that they do not exceed their statutory jurisdiction and correctly administer the law laid down by the statute under the Act.
So long as the hierarchy of officers and appellate authorities created by the statute function within their ambit the manner in which they do so can be no ground for interference.
The power of judicial supervision of the High Court under Article 227 of tho Constitution (as it then stood) is not 150 greater than those under Article 226 and it must be limited to seeing that a tribunal functions within the limits of its authority.
The writ power is large, given illegality and injustice even if its use is severely disciplinary.
The amended Article 226 would enable the High Court to interfere with an Award of the industrial adjudicator if that is based on a complete misconception of law or it is based on no evidence, or that no reasonable man would come to the conclusion to which the Arbitrator has arrived.
[15 E G 1 86 D E] Navinchandra Shanker Chand Shah vs Manager, Ahmedabad Cooperative Department Stores Ltd., @ 140; approved.
Rohtas Industries & Anr.
vs Rohtas Industries Staff Union and Ors. ; followed.
Nagendranath Bata and Anr.
vs The Commissioner of Hills Divisions and Appeals, Assam & Ors.
, ; ; Engineering Mazdoor Sabha vs Hind Cycle Lrd.
[1963] Suppl.
1 SCR 625; State of A.P. vs Sreeeama Rao, ; @ 33; P. H. Kalyani vs M/s Air France, Calcutta, ; ; referred to. "Tribunal" simpliciter has a sweeping signification and does not exclude Arbitrator.
A tribunal literally means a seat of justice, may be, a commission, a Court or other adjudicatory organ created by the State.
All these are tribunal and naturally the import of the word, in Section 2(r) of the , embraces an arbitration tribunal.
[188 E F H 189 A] Dawking vs Rokely, L.R. 8 Q.B. 255; quoted with approval.
An Arbitrator has all the powers under the terms of reference, to which both sides are party, confer.
In the instant case, the Arbitrator had the authority to investigate into the propriety of the discharge and the veracity of the mis conduct.
Even if section 11A of the is not applicable, an Arbitrator under Section 10A is bound to act in the spirit of the legislation under which he is to function.
A commercial Arbitrator who derives his jurisdiction from the terms of reference will by necessary implication be bound to decide according to law and when one says "according to law", it only means existing law and the law laid down by the Supreme Court being the law of land, an Arbitrator under section 10A will have to decide keeping in view the spirit of section 11A. [196 B D] Union of India vs Bungo Steel Furniture (P) Ltd. ; ; referred to.
Per Koshal J. (Contra) 1.
The orders of discharge could not be regarded as orders of their dismissal and were on the other hand, orders of discharge simpliciter properly passed under Model Standing order 23.
[235 C D] (a) Clauses (3) and (4) of M.S.O. 25 speak of an inquiry only in the case of an order falling under sub clause (g) of clause (1) of that M.S.O. The only sub clause of clause (1) of M.S.O. 25 to which the provisions of clauses (3) and (4) of that M.S.O. would be attracted is sub clause (g) and if an order of discharge falls under M.S.O. 23, an inquiry under clauses (3) and 151 (4) of M.S.O. 25 would not be a pre requisite thereto even though such an a older is mentioned in sub clause (f) clause (1) of that M.S.O. [222 H, 223 A] (b) Under M.S.O.s.
23 and 25, the Management has the powers to effect termination of the services of an employee by having recourse to either or them.
In action taken under M.S.O. 23, no element of punishment is involved and the discharge is a discharge simpliciter; and that is why no opportunity to the concerned employee to show cause against the termination is provided for.
Dismissal, however, which an employer may order is in its very nature, a punishment, the infliction of which therefore has been made subject to the result of an inquiry (having the semblance of a trial in a criminal proceeding).
Exercise of each of the two powers has the effect of the termination of the services of the concerned employee but must be regarded, because of the manner in which each has been dealt with by the M.S.O. as separate and distinct from the other.
[223 C E] (c) To contend that once it was proved that the order of discharge of a workman was passed by reason of a misconduct attributed to him by the management, the order cannot but amount to an order of dismissal is wrong for two reasons.
For one thing, clause (1) of M.S.O. 25 specifically states in sub clauses (f) that a workman guilty of misconduct may be discharged under M.S.O. 23.
This clearly means that when the employer is satisfied that a workman has been guilty of misconduct he may [apart from visiting the workman with any of the punishments specified in sub clauses (a), (b), (c), (d) and (e) of clause (1) of M.S.O. 25] either pass against him an order of discharge for which no inquiry precedent as, provided for in clauses (3) and (4) of M.S.O. 25 would be necessary, or may dismiss him after holding such an inquiry which of the two kinds of order, the employer shall pass is left entirely to his discretion.
[223 E H] It is true that the employer cannot pass a real order of dismissal in the garb of one of discharge.
But that only means that if the order of termination of services of an employee is in reality intended to push an employee and not merely to get rid of him because he is considered useless, inconvenient or troublesome, the order even though specified to be an order of dismissal covered by sub clause (g) of clause (1) of M.S.O. 25.
On the other hand if no such intention is made out the order would remain one of discharge simpliciter even though it has been passed for the sole reason that a misconduct is imputed to the employee.
That is how M.S.Os. 23 and 25 have to be interpreted.
M.S.O. 25 specifically gives to the employer the power to get rid of "a workman guilty of misconduct ' by passing an order of his discharge under M.S.O. 23.
[224 A D] Secondly, the reasons for the termination of service of a permanent workman under M.S.O. 23 have to be recorded in writing and communicated to him if he so desires, under clause (4 A) thereof.
Such reasons must obviously consist of an opinion derogatory to the workman in relation to the performance of his duties, and whether such reasons consist of negligence, work shirking or of serious overt acts like theft or embezzlement, they would in and case amount to misconduct for which he may be punished under M.S.O. 25.
There being no case in which such reasons would not amount to misconduct, the result is that M.S.O. 23 would be render otiose if termination of service thereunder for misconduct could be regarded as a dismissal and such a result strikes at the very root of accepted canons of interpretation.
If it was open to the Court to.
"lift 152 the veil" and to hold an order of discharge to amount to dismissal merely because the motive behind it was a misconduct attributed to the employee, the services of an employee could be terminated without holding against him an inquiry such as is contemplated by clauses (3) and (4) of M.S.O. 25.
[224 D G] Bombay Corporation vs Malvankar ; ; applied.
Merely because it is the reason which weighed with the employer in effective the termination of services would not male the order of such termination as one founded on misconduct, for such a proposition would run counter to the plain meaning of clause (1) of M.S.O. 25.
For an order to be "founded" an misconduct, it must be intended to have been passed by way of punishment, that is, it must be intended to chastise, or cause pain in body or mind or harm or loss in reputation or money to the concerned worker.
If such an intention cannot be spelled out of the prevailing circumstances, the order of discharge or the reasons for which it was ostensibly passed, it cannot be regarded as an order of dismissal.
Such would be the case when the employer orders discharge or the interests of the factory or of the general body of workers.
[226 A C] Chartered Bank, Bombay vs The Chartered Bank Employees Union, ; ; The Tata Oil Mills Co. Ltd. [1964] 2 SCR p. 123; The Tara Engineering and Locomotives Co. Ltd. vs S.C. Prasad, ; Workmen of Sudder Office, Cinnamore vs Management, followed.
The real criterion which formed the touchstone of a test to determine whether an order of termination of services is an order of discharge simpliciter or amounts to dismissal is the real nature of the order, that is, the intention with which it was passed.
If the intention was to punish, that is to chastise, the order may be regarded as an order of dismissal; and for judging the intention, the question of mala fides (which is the same thing as colourable exercise of power) becomes all important.
If no mala fides can be attributed to the management, the order of discharge must be regarded as one having been passed under M.S.O. 23 even though the reason for its passage is serious misconduct.
(2) The arbitrator could not exercise tho power conferred on a Tribunal under section 11A of the 1947 Act and could not therefore interfere with the punishment awarded by the Management to the workmen (even if the discharge could be regarded a punishment).
[235 D E] Throughout the I.D. Act, while 'arbitrator ' would include an umpire, a Tribunal would not include an arbitrator but would mean only an Industrial Tribunal constituted under the Act unless the context makes it necessary to give the word a different connotation.
In sub section (1) of section 11, the word 'Tribunal ' has been used in accordance with the definition appearing in clause (r) section 2 because an arbitrator is separately mentioned in that sub section.
In sub sections (2) and (3) of that section a Board, a Labour Court, a Tribunal and a National Tribunal have been invested with certain powers.
A Tribunal as contemplated by sub sections (2) and (3) then, would not include an arbitrator.
[233 A B] It is a well settled canon of interpretation of statutes that the language used by the Legislature must be regarded as the only source of its intention unless such language is ambiguous, in which situation the Preamble to the Act, the statement of objects of and Reasons for bringing it on the statute book and 153 the purpose underlying the legislation may be taken into consideration for ascertaining such intention.
That the purpose of the legislation is to fulfil a socio economic need, or the express object underlying it does not come into the picture till an ambiguity is detected in the language and the Court must steer clear of the temptation to mould the written word according to its own concept of what should have been enacted.
It is thus not permissible for the Supreme Court to take the statements of objects and Reasons or the purpose underlying the enactment into consideration, while interpreting section 11A of the I.D. Act.
[231 F G, 234 Cl 3.
The High Court exceeded the limits of its jurisdiction in interfering with the said punishment, in the instant case, purporting to act in the exercise of its powers under Article 227 of the Constitution of India.
[235 E F] The High Court, while discharging its functions as envisaged by that Article, does not sit as a Court of Appeal over the Award of the Arbitrator but exercises limited jurisdiction which extends only to seeing that the arbitrator has functioned within the scope of his legal authority.
In this view of the matter it was not open to the High Court to revise the punishment (if the discharge is regarded as such) meted out by the Management to the delinquent workmen and left intact by the arbitrator whose authority in doing so has not been shown to have been exercised beyond the limits of his jurisdiction.
[234 G E, 235 A C] Nagendra Nath Bora and Anr.
vs The Commissioner of Hills Division and Appeals, Assam and Ors.
, ; ; P. H. Kalyani vs M/s Air France, Calcutta, ; , of A.P. vs Sree Rama Rao, ; ; Navinchandra Shakerchand Shakerchand Shah vs Manager Ahmedabad Cooperative Stores Ltd, ; referred to.
