The Chartered Accountants of the assessee company, which was an investment company.
VL ed its shares by applying the profit earning method of valuation of shares without making any adjustment in the profits of the company.
The Gift Tax and Wealth Tax officers did not accept this method and valued The shares by applying the break up method.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner applied a different method called "the rule of three" and reduced the valuation of the shares; but the figures determined by him were still higher than those claimed by the assessee.
The Revenue preferred an appeal against the order of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner because the valuation of the shares made by the Gift Tax and Wealth Tax officers was reduced by him: the assessee preferred an appeal against the order of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner because he did not accept the valuation put forward d by the assessee.
The Tribunal accepted the valuation made by the Chartered Accountants and rejected the Revenue s appeal.
The Department 's request for making reference to the High Court was rejected on the ground that no referable question of law arose out of the order of the Tribunal.
The High Court refused to call for a reference.
It was contended on behalf of the assessee before this Court that the determination of this question was completely covered by the decision of this Court in Commissioner of Wealth Tax vs Mahadeo Jalan and no useful purpose would be served by calling for reference.
On the other hand the Revenue contended that (1) the decision in Mahadeo Jalan 's case laid down no more than broad guidelines which did rot eliminate the necessity of finding out the appropriate method of valuation in each case and therefore it was necessary to make a reference so that the proper method of valuation of shares could be determined by the High Court.
(2) The break up method according to rule 10(2) of the Gift Tax Rules is the primary method to be applied for arriving at the valuation of the shares and since in this case the articles of association contained a restrictive provision as to the alienation of the shares, the Tribunal was wrong in determining the value of I i the shares by applying the profit earning method so far as the valuation under the Gift Tax Act was concerned.
358 Dismissing the appeals, ^ HELD: 1.
It is not every question of law that is require to referred by the Tribunal to he High Court.
Where the answer to the question of law is self evident or is concluded by a decision of this Court no reference would be justified [361 C D] The answer to the question of law relating to the method adopted for valuation of shares in the company was clearly concluded by the decision in Mahadeo Jalan 's case and the High Court was justified in refusing to call for a reference on this question.
[367A B] In the instant case the assessee was a private limited company which was a going concern.
lt was neither ripe for liquidation nor were there any exceptional circumstances which should attract the applicability or the break J up method.
The profit earning method was, therefore, the only method which could properly be applied for arriving at the valuation of the shares in the company and the Tribunal was right in accepting the figures of valuation in the report of the Chartered Accountants based on the application of the profit earning method.
[366G H, 367A] 2.
It is well settled that no question can be referred to the High Court unless it arises out of the order of the Tribunal.
A question of law can be said to arise out of the order of the Tribunal only if it is dealt with by the Tribunal or is raised before it, though not decided by the Tribunal.
A question of law not raise before the Tribunal and not dealt with by it in is order cannot be said to arise out of its order, even if on the facts of the case stated in the order, the question fairly arises.
[368C D] In the instant case the question sought to be raised by the Revenue was l ' neither raised before the Tribunal nor decided by it and the only argument t advanced before the Tribunal was that the mean of the values arrived at on an application of the profit earning method and the break up method should be taken to be the value of the shares.
No argument was addressed to the Tribunal that the break up method should be adopted because that was the primary method prescribed by rule 10(2) and the Tribunal had no occasion to deal with such argument.
The question did not arise out of the order of the Tribunal and it could not be required to be referred to the High Court.
3(i F]
