The Andhra Pradesh Government acquired the lands belonging to one Rashid Shapoor Chenai and situate at Moosapet Village Hyderabad and Qutbillapur in Medchal district.
The special Deputy Collector of Land Acquisition awarded a total compensation of Rs. 20,000 and Rs. 4,29,360 respectively.
The compensation of Rs. 20,000 was paid during the life time of Rashid and the compensation of Rs. 4,29,360 was paid after Rashid 's death to his widow Mrs. Freny Chenai and son Shapoor Rashid Chenai on whom the estate of Rashid devolved in equal shares.
On the death of Rashid on November 4, 1963, Mrs. Freny Chenai (appellant in CA 2206/72) as his widow and 'accountable person ' filed before the Respondent on December 26, 1963 an account of the properties passing on the death of her husband under section 53(3) of the Act.
The estate duty assessment was completed by the respondent on March 29, 1966.
With regard to the lands acquired both during the lifetime of Rashid as well as after, their values were taken at the respective figures of compensation (Rs. 20,000 and Rs. 4,29,360) awarded for them by the special Deputy Collector.
Shapoor Rashid Chenai, who had one half share in the undivided estate of his late father Rashid died on May, 7, 1965.
As required by section 53 of the Act Mrs. Khorshed Chenai (appellant in CA 2205/72) as his widow and the 'accountable person 's filed before the respondent on November 6, 1965 an account of the properties passing on the death of her husband and the respondent completed the estate duty assessment on December 30, 1966.
Even here.
the respondent adopted the values of the lands acquired by the Government at figures awarded by the special Deputy Collector.
The legal heirs of late Rashid did not accept the awards by the special Deputy Collector in respect of the lands acquired by Government and a reference was made to Civil Court under section 18 of the Land Acquisition Act.
The Civil Court, by its orders dated March 6, 1967/Oct. 30, 1967 enhanced the compensation awarded by the special Deputy Collector by Rs. 1,90,000 in respect of Moosapet lands and by Rs. 20,45,000 in respect of Qutbillapur Lands.
The Government did not accept the decisions of the Civil Court and filed appeals to the High Court challenging the enhancement, which appeals are still pending in the High Court.
316 On receipt of information that enhanced compensation was awarded by the Civil Court in respect of the above lands the respondent issued two notices both dated November 14, 1969, one addressed to Mrs. Khorshed Shapoor Chenai and the other to Mrs. Freny Rashid Chenai.
The former notice was issued under section 59(a) of the Act calling upon Mrs. Khorshed to show cause why the Estate Duty assessment made on December 30, 1966 should not be reopened and revised in view of the extra compensations awarded by the Civil Court in respect of the lands acquired by the Government, while the latter notice was issued under section 61 of the Act requiring Mrs. Freny Chenai to show cause why the mistake apparent from the record should not be rectified and the enhanced compensation included in the principal value of the estate.
These notices were challenged by the recipients by filing writ petitions in the High Court.
The High Court negatived the contentions raised in both the writ petitions upheld the impugned notices and dismissed the writ petitions.
Hence the two appeals by certificates.
Allowing the appeals, the Court, ^ HELD: 1.
So far as the estate duty assessment in respect of the properties passing on the death of Shapoor was concerned, the lands which were the subject matter of acquisition proceedings could not be regarded as forming part of the estate of the deceased on the relevant date and could not pass on his death in as much as these lands had vested in the Government long prior to his death but the right to receive compensation at market value on the dates of the relevant notifications unquestionably accrued to the deceased which was property and it would be such property that would pass on the death of the deceased.
In other words, since the lands were lost to the estate of the deceased before the relevant date, namely, the date of death, it would be the right to receive compensation under the Land Acquisition Act that will have to be evaluated under the Estates Duty Act.
[324 G H, 325 A, C] Pandit Lakshmi Kant Jha vs Commissioner of Wealth Tax, Bihar and Orissa, , applied.
There are no two separate rights one a right to receive compensation and other a right to receive extra or further compensation.
Upon acquisition of his lands under the Land Acquisition Act the claimant has only one right which is to receive compensation for the lands at their market value on the date of the relevant notifications and it is this right which is quantified by the Collector under section 11 and by the Civil Court under section 26 of the Land Acquisition Act.
It is true that under section 11 the Collector after holding the necessary inquiry determines the quantum of compensation by fixing the market value of the land and in doing so is guided by the provisions contained in sections 23 and 24 of the Act the very provisions by references to which the Civil Court fixes the valuation.
It is also true that the Collector 's award is, under section 12, declared to be, except as otherwise provided, final and conclusive evidence as between him and the persons interested.
Even so, it is well settled that in law the Collector 's award under section 11 is nothing more than an offer of compensation made by the Government to the claimant whose property is acquired.
If that be the true nature of the award made by the Collector then the question whether the right to receive compensation survives the award must depend upon whether 317 the claimant acquiesces therein fully or not.
If the offer is acquiesced in by total acceptance the right to compensation will not survive but if the offer is not accepted or is accepted under protest and a land reference is sought by the claimant under section 18, the right to receive compensation must be regarded as having survived and kept alive which the claimant prosecutes in Civil Court.
[326 B G] Ezra vs Secretary of State for India ILR ; Raja Harish Chandra vs Dy.
Land Requisition Officer, and Dr. G. H. Grant vs State of Bihar ; , followed.
It is not correct that no sooner the Collector has made his award under section 11 the right to compensation is destroyed or ceases to exist or is merged in the award, or what is left with the claimant is a mere right to litigate the correctness of the award.
The claimant can litigate the correctness of the award because his right to compensation is not fully redeemed but remains alive which he prosecutes in Civil Court.
That is why when a claimant dies in a pending reference his heirs are brought on record and are permitted to prosecute the reference.
This, however, does not mean that the Civil Court 's evaluation of this right done subsequently would be its valuation as at the relevant date either under the Estate Duty Act or the Wealth Tax Act.
It will be the duty cf the assessing authority under either of the enactments to evaluate this property (right to receive compensation at market value on the date of relevant notification) as on the relevant date (being the date of death under the Estate Duty and Valuation date under the Wealth Tax Act).
Under section 36 of the Estate Duty Act the assessing authority has to estimate the value of this property at the price which it would fetch if sold in the open market at the time of the deceased 's death.
In the case of the right to receive compensation, which is property, where the Collector 's award has been made but has not been accepted or has been accepted under protest and a reference is sought or is pending in Civil Court at the date of the deceased 's death the estimated value can never be below the figure quantified by the Collector because under section 25(11 of the Land Acquisition Act.
Civil Court cannot award any amount below that awarded by the Collector; the estimated value may be equal to the Collector 's award of more but can never be equal to the tall claim made by the claimant in the Reference nor equal to the claim actually awarded by the Civil Court inasmuch as the risk or hazard of litigation would be detracting factor while arriving at a reasonable and proper value of this property as on the date the deceased 's death.
The assessing authority will have to estimate the value having regard to the peculiar nature of the property, its marketability and the surrounding circumstances including the risk or hazard of litigation looming large at the relevant date.
[326 H, 327 A F] 4.
The very issuance of the notice under section 59(a) was on a wrong basis; It was issued with the object to include the enhanced amounts received by the appellant in the principal value of the property passing on the death of Shapoor and bringing the same to duty; such notice and the subsequent reassessment made in pursuance thereof would be clearly illegal and unsustainable inasmuch as the extra compensation awarded by the Civil Court taken with the original compensation as on the date of the death of the deceased.
Proposed as well as actual inclusion of such extra compensation awarded by the Civil Court in the principal value of the estate passing on the death of the deceased would be manifestly wrong for more than one reason.
In the first place the said property.
namely, the enhanced compensation was not in existence at the 318 date of the death of the deceased.
Secondly, such extra compensation awarded by the City Civil Court was liable to variation in the appeals that were pending in the High Court.
Thirdly, such extra compensation together with the compensation awarded by the Special Deputy Collector could not be regarded is the proper valuation of the right to compensation as on the relevant date (the date of the deceased 's death).
[330 A D] 5.
The notice under section 61 of the Act and the rectification order passed in pursuance thereof if illegal and unsustainable.
[333 E] (i) The rectification is being undertaken on the ground that the initial valuation adopted in respect of the acquired lands was based at rates fixed by the Land Acquisition officer, that such valuation was obviously wrong in view of the enhanced compensation awarded by the Civil Court and, therefore, the enhanced compensation was sought to be included in the principal value of the estate by undertaking the rectification proceedings.
In substance it cannot be said to be a case of rectification of any mistake apparent from the record but the respondent is really seeking to change his opinion about the valuation of the acquired lands because some other authority, namely, the Civil Court has valued the same differently.
[331 C E] (ii) For the purpose of enhancing the value of the acquired lands on the basis of their value as determined by the Civil Court the respondent must resort to provisions of section 59 and proceed to make reassessment but such reassessment has to be done within the period of three year from the date of the original assessment under section 73A of the Act.
In the instant case the respondent resorted to section 61 because the rectification of any mistake apparent from the record could be done at any time within five years from the date of the original assessment.
[331 E.F] (iii) When the original assessment was made it was the duty of the respondent, after scrutinising the account filed and examining the materials produced before him, to value the estate of the deceased properly under section 36 of the Act and when he accepted the! compensation fixed by the special Deputy Collector as the proper valuation he must be deemed to have adopted that valuation as his own estimated value of the lands which he wanted to enhance by relying upon the valuation made by the another authority, namely, the City Civil Court.
To such a case section 59 is clearly attracted but obviously with a view to avoid the bar of section 73A he purported to issue the impugned notice under section 61.
[332 F H] Ethel Rodriques vs Assistant Controller of Estate Duly, Estate Duty cum Income Tax Circle, Mangalore, [1963] 49 I.T.R. (E.D.) 128, applied.
