The appellants and the third accused were brothers of the deceased Rasayal.
They were charged for the offence of committing the offence of murder and were found guilty and sentenced under section 302 read with section 149 I.P.C. to imprisonment for life by the Sessions Court.
In appeal the High Court, acquitted the third accused but confirmed the conviction and sentence of the appellants.
In appeal by special leave, three contentions were raised namely (i) the conviction of the two appellants based entirely on the retracted evidence of PWs.
1,2, 3 and 5 marked in the Sessions Court was wrong (ii) the evidence marked under section 288 was inadmissible as it was only read in full to the witnesses and had not been put to them passage by passage as required in section 145 of the Evidence Act and (iii) the case of the second appellant was similar to that of the third accused and ought to have been acquitted giving him the benefit of doubt.
Accepting the appeal of the 2nd appellant and dismissing the appeal of the first, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
Talking into account the facts and the probabilities of the case it is clear that it was the first appellant who caused the fatal injury and needed no instigation from the second appellant.
There was no evidence as to any overt act, except the presence of the second appellant along with the third accused.
It was most unlikely that the second appellant instigated the first accused as a result of which the first accused caused the fatal injury.
The second appellant is entitled to the benefit of doubt.
[495E G] 2.
The requirements of section 288 of the Criminal Procedure Code would be fully complied with if statements of the witnesses are read in extenso to them 492 and they admit that they have made those statements in the Committal Court.
The required procedure has been followed in this Case.
[497F G] Tara Singh vs State of Punjab, ; , Bhagwan Singh vs State of Punjab, ; State of Rajasthan vs Kartar Singh, ; referred to.
During the investigation the police officer, sometimes feels it expedient to have the statement of a witness recorded under section 164 Code of Criminal Procedure.
This happens when the witnesses to the crime are closely connected with the accused or where the accused are very influential which may result in the witnesses being gained over.
The 164 statement that is recorded has the endorsement of the Magistrate that the statement had been made by the witness.
[499 A C] 4.
The mere fact that the police had reasons to suspect that the witness might be gained over and that it was expedient to have their statements recorded by the Magistrate, would not make the statements of the witnesses thus recorded tainted.
If the witness sticks to the statement given by him to the Magistrate under section 164 Code of Criminal Procedure, no problem arises.
If the witness resiles from the statement given by him under section 164 in the committal court, the witness can be cross examined on his earlier statement.
But if he sticks to the statement given by him under section 164 before committal enquiry and resiles from it in the Sessions Court, the procedure prescribed under section 288, Code of Criminal Procedure will have to be observed.
It is for the Court to consider taking into account all the circumstances including the fact that the witness had resiled, in coming to the conclusion as to whether the witness should be believed or not.
The fact that the Police had section 164 statement recorded by the Magistrate would not by itself make his evidence tainted.
[499 C F] Ram Chandra & Ors.
vs State of U.P. ; explained and relied on.
Section 157 of the Evidence Act makes it clear that the statement recorded under section 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure can be relied on for corroborating the statements made by the witnesses in the committal court.
Though the statements made under section 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, is not evidenced, it is corroborative of what has been stated earlier in the committal court.
[499 F G] State of Rajasthan vs Kartar Singh, ; followed.
A statement recorded under section 288 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of one witness can corroborate the statement of another witness under section 288.
The statements are treated as substantive evidence in law and there is no flaw in treating the statement of one witness as corroborative of the other.
[500 A B]
