The appellants by two suits, which were heard by a Full Bench of the Assam High Court, challenged the Constitutional validity of the Assam State Acquisition of Zamindaries Act of 1951 as amended by the Assam Act VI of 1954.
The Assam Legislative Assembly had passed the Bill on March 28, 1949.
It was presented to the Governor and reserved by him for the consideration of the Governor General who, in view of the impending constitutional changes, on January 25, 1950, returned the Bill to the Governor suggesting that it might be reserved for the consideration of the President.
While the Bill was in transit and before it actually reached the Governor, the Constitution came into force.
The Governor reserved the Bill for the consideration of the President and sent it to him.
The President returned the Bill suggesting certain alterations.
The State Legislative Assembly considered them and passed the Bill suitably amended.
It received the President 's assent on July 27, 1951, and became an Act.
On September 11, 1951, the State Legislative Assembly passed an amending Bill which was assented to by the President.
The Act as amended was brought into force on April 15, 1954, and a Notification was issued by the State Government under the impugned Act declaring that the properties of the appellants, along with those of others, would vest in the State.
It was contended on behalf of the appellants that the impugned Act was not within the competence of the State Legislature, it was not enacted according to law and infringed the fundamental rights of the appellants under articles 31(2) and 14 of the Constitution.
The High Court repelled these contentions and they were reiterated in appeal.
Held, that the impugned Act was passed according to law, its 40 304 provisions were constitutionally valid and the decision of the High court must be affirmed.
That the repeal of the Government of India Act, 1935, by article 395 of the Constitution could not wipe out the Bill as it was, immediately before the commencement of the Constitution, pending before the Governor General and/or the Governor who represented His Majesty the King who was a part of the Provincial Legislature and was, therefore, pending before the Provincial Legislature and, consequently, the State Legislature of Assam was competent under article 389 to continue the same.
That although the Governor General might not have acted constitutionally under section 76 of the Government of India Act, 1935, in suggesting that the Bill might be reserved for the President 's consideration, his action, in the absence of a positive declaration to that effect, could not amount to a withholding of assent under that section and effect a termination of the bill, contrary to his express intention indicated by the suggestion itself that it should remain pending.
That under the Government of India Act, 1935, His Majesty the King was an integral part of the Legislature and when the Bill was presented to the Governor or the Governor General under section 75 or section 76 of the Act, in due course of legislation, and neither of them gave or withheld assent in the name of His Majesty, it remained pending, both in law and reality, before his Majesty and, therefore, before the Legislature and could properly be continued by the State Legislature after the commencement of the Constitution.
The Governor was, therefore, within his powers in reserving it for the President and the subsequent enactment of the Bill was in accordance with the Constitution.
That the word 'Legislature ' is not used in the same sense in different articles of the Constitution, or even in different parts of the same article, and its exact meaning has to be ascertained with reference to the subject matter on the context and in article 389 it is used in the larger sense so as to comprise the entire legislative machinery including His Majesty represented by the Governor General or the Governor and does not mean merely the Legislative Chamber or Chambers.
The Constitution intended to keep alive not merely Bills which were actually pending before the Legislative Chamber but also Bills, such as the present, that had reached the final stages of the legislative process and were awaiting assent of the Governor General or the Governor representing His Majesty.
Visweshwar Rao vs The State of Madhya Pradesh, [1952] S.C.R. 1020, referred to.
That the impugned Act was a law providing for the acquisition of estates by the State within the meaning of article 31 A of the Constitution and was, as such, fully protected by it, and its validity could not be questioned on the ground of any contravention of any 305 of the provisions of Part III of the Constitution dealing with fundamental rights.
That the Act could not, in the absence of any question as to legislative incompetency, be impugned as a colourable exercise of legislative power on account of the provisions it made for payment of compensation and any question relating to the quantum of compensation would be barred under article 31 A of the Constitution.
C.Gajapati Narain Deb vs State of Orissa, ([1954] S.C.R. 1), referred to.
That article 14 of the Constitution could not really help the appellants, it being no longer open to them to contend, in view of the decisions of this Court, that the State could pick and choose and thus discriminate between one estate and another.
Biswambhar Singh vs The State of Orissa, ([1954] S.C.R. 842) and Thakur Amar Singh vs The State of Rajasthan, ([1955] 2 S.C.R. 303), referred to.
That, in view of the decisions of this Court, the Act could not be said to discriminate by reason of its application being limited to such Lakheraj estates alone as fell within the boundaries of permanently settled estates and not extending to other Lakheraj estates as the former constituted a distinct class by themselves and acquisition of them facilitated the object of the Act.
Nor could the provision for different scales of compensation prescribed for different estates amount to discrimination as there is a rational basis for such classification of proprietors of different income groups.
