Section 22 A of the was inserted in the Act by the Electricity (Amendment) Act, 1959 (32 of 1959).
Sub section 1 of section 22 A authorised the State Government to issue direction to a licensee to supply energy to an establishment in preference to any other consumer, if in its opinion it is necessary in the public interest to give such direction and (ii) if the establishment in question is in the opinion of the State Government as establishment used or intended to be used for maintaining supplies and services essential to the community and the decision of the State Government that in its opinion the establishment is used or intended to be used for maintaining supplies and services essential to the community is notified by that Government in the Official Gazette.
Sub section (3) of Section 22 A provides that where in any agreement by a licensee, whether made before or after the commencement of the Electricity (Amendment) Act, 1959 for the supply of energy with any establishment referred to in sub section (1) expires, the licensee shall continue to supply energy to such establishment on the same terms and conditions as are specified in the agreement until receipt of a notice in writing from the establishment requiring discontinuance of the supply.
The Respondent Municipality which was under an obligation to make reasonable and adequate provision for lighting of public streets, places and buildings situated within its limit, entered into an agreement on August 14, 1940 with the Appellant Company which was licensee under the Electricity Act, 1910.
The period during which the supply of electrical energy was to be made under the said agreement was 20 years from the date on which it was executed.
On May 10, 1960 the Company wrote a letter to the municipality that the said agreement was to come to an end and on its expiry, the Company was not under any obligation to continue to supply energy to the Municipality as per the rates, terms and conditions stated in the agreement.
The company also informed that if the municipality was not willing to purchase energy at the revised rates the supply would be discontinued on the expiry of the period of the agreement.
The municipality thereafter wrote a letter on August 6, 1960 requesting the Company to renew the agreement on the same terms and conditions.
The Company by its reply informed the municipality that it would not supply electrical energy on the same terms and conditions and insisted on payment being made at the revised rates as stated in its letter dated May 10, 1960.
The municipality thereafter filed a suit relying upon the provisions of sub section (3) of section 22 A 477 of the Act, for a declaration that it was entitled to the supply of electrical energy from the Company on the same terms and conditions as were specified in the agreement, until the Company received a notice in writing from the municipality requiring it to discontinue the supply.
The company contested the suit on the ground that the municipality was not entitled to the benefit of sub section (3) of section 22 A of the Act as it was not an establishment to which the said provision was applicable.
The Trial Court held that in the absence of a notification as required by sub section (1) of Section 22 A of the Act the municipality was not entitled to claim the benefit of the provision and therefore no relief could be granted in the suit and accordingly dismissed the suit.
The municipality 's appeal to the District Court was dismissed, but the second appeal was partly allowed by a Single Judge of the High Court, and a decree was passed granting relief in favour of the municipality declaring that the company was bound under sub section (3) of section 22 A of the Act to continue to supply electrical energy to the municipality at the same rates and on the same terms and conditions as were specified in the agreement, dated August 14, 1960.
The Letters Patent Appeal filed by the company was dismissed by the Division Bench of the High Court, which however certified the case as a fit one for appeal under Article 133(1)(c) of the Constitution.
In the appeal to this Court, on the question whether the municipality was an establishment which can claim the benefit of sub section (3) of section 22 A of the Act.
^ HELD: 1.
The High Court was in error in ignoring the requirements which an establishment had to satisfy before claiming the benefit of sub section (3) and in holding that if in the opinion of the Court, the establishment satisfied that it was being used or intended to be used for maintaining supplies and services essential to the community, it could claim the benefit of sub section (3) even though no notification had been issued by the State Government under sub section (1) of Section 22 A of the Act.
[489H 490B] 2.
If the agreement referred to in sub section (3) of section 22 A of the Act is an agreement entered into by a licensee with an establishment which is at the time of the agreement, an establishment referred to in sub section (1) of section 22 A of the Act, then the provision in sub section (3) making it applicable to agreements made before the commencement of the Electricity (Amendment) Act, 1959 by which section 22 A was introduced becomes meaningless because the formation of the two opinions of the State Government that an establishment is being used or intended to be used for maintaining supplies and services essential to the community and that it is necessary to issue a direction in respect of it under sub section (1) can only be done after section 22 A of the Act was introduced in the Act and there would be no establishment satisfying the requirements of section 22 A(1) before section 22 A(1) was introduced.
[486 G 487 A] 3.
Sub section (1) of section 22 A of the Act was enacted by the Parliament for the purpose of enabling the State Government to issue a direction and subsection (3) was enacted for the purpose of providing for the continuance of an agreement entered into by a licensee with an establishment referred to in sub section (1) of section 22 A. What, is however, common to the two sub sections is that the establishment referred to in sub section (1) and an establishment 478 referred to in sub section (3) of section 22 A should be of the same kind that is it should be an establishment which is in the opinion of the State Government used or intended to be used for maintaining supplies and services essential to the community and the fact of formation of such opinion is notified in the Official Gazette.
It should satisfy the test laid down in sub section 22 A(1) of the Act.
[487 C E] 4.
There is no impediment for the State Government issuing a notification under sub section (1) of section 22 A in order that an establishment notified therein gets the benefit of sub section (3) of section 22 A of the Act.
[487 H 488 A] 5.
The words 'referred to in sub section (1) appearing in sub section (1) of section 22 A of the Act are descriptive of and define the establishment to which sub section (3) of section 22 A applies and in order to identify such establishment, recourse should be had to the latter part of sub section (1) which lays down the criteria which such establishment should satisfy.
[488 B] 6.
A statutory definition or abbreviation should be read subject to all the qualifications expressed in the Statute and unless the context in which the word defined appears otherwise requires, it should be given the same meaning given by the words defining it.
[488 C] 7.
The power to issue a notification under section 22 A(1) of the Act involves an element of selection and the said process of selection cannot be construed as an empty formality which can be dispensed with.
Nor can that power of selection which is entrusted to the State Government by the Parliament be claimed by the Courts.
It is for the State Government to notify the establishment which should be the beneficiary of a direction to be issued under section 22 A(1) or which is entitled under section 22 A(3) of the Act to the supply of electrical energy on the same terms and conditions as are specified in the agreement entered into by it with the licensee even after the expiry of the agreement until such establishment serves a notice in writing on the licensee asking the licensee to discontinue the supply.
[488 H 489 B] 8.
Section 22 A of the Act, suggests that the intention of Parliament appears to be that the State Government can issue a direction only in the case of an establishment which in its opinion satisfies the qualifications mentioned therein and that sub section (3) should be applicable only to an establishment which in the opinion of the State Government satisfies the said qualifications.
[488 E] 9.
Sub section (3) of section 22 A of the Act makes a serious inroad into the rights of the licensee flowing from a contract stipulating a specific period during which it should subsist and compels the licensee to supply energy to the establishment even after the expiry of the agreement until a notice is issued in writing by the establishment requiring the licensee to discontinue the supply.
[489 D]
