Section 3(1)(b) of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 defines "annual value" to mean, in the case of any house or building "the gross annual rent at which such house or building. may reasonably be expected to let from year to year" subject to certain specified deductions.
The same definition of "annual value" is to be found in section 116 of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 but with only difference that there is a, second proviso to section 116 which is absent in section 3(1)(b).
One appeal related to a case where the building is situated within the jurisdiction of the New Delhi Municipal Committee and is liable to be assessed to house tax under the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 while the other two related to cases where the building is situated within the limits of the Corporation of Delhi and is assessable to house tax under the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957.
The house tax under both statutes was levied with reference to the "annual value" of the building.
The common question of law arising in the appeals related to the assessment of annual value for levy of house tax where the building is governed by the provisions of Rent Control Legislation but where the standard rent has not yet been fixed.
The argument of the Revenue was (i) that if it was not penal for the landlord to receive the contractual rent from the tenant, even if it be higher than the standard rent determinable under the provisions of the Act, it would not be incorrect to say that the landlord could reasonably expect to let the building at the contractual rent and the contractual rent therefore provided n correct measure for determination of the annual value of the building, and (ii) the period of limitation for making an application for fixation of tho standard rent had expired long prior to the commencement of the assessment years and in each of the cases, the tenant was precluded by section 12 of the Rent Control Act from making an application for fixation of the standard rent with the result that the landlord was lawfully entitled to continue to receive the contractual rent from the tenant without any let or hindrance.
Allowing the appeals, ^ HELD: 1.
Tho Court would have examined the validity of this argument first on principle and then turned to the authorities, hut it proposed to reverse this order because the decisions in the Life Insurance Corporation 's 608 case and the Guntur Municipal Council 's case (supra) completely covered the.
present controversy and did not leave any scope for further argument.
The decision in Padma Devi 's case may be said to be distinguishable on the ground that in the present cases, unlike Padma Devi 's case, the standard rent of the building was not fixed by the Controller and hence it could not be said that it was unlawful or penal for the landlord to receive anything more than the standard rent.
But so far as the decision in Life Insurance Corporations case is concerned, it is difficult to sec how its applicability could be disputed, because there also, as in the present case, the standard rent of the building was not fixed by the Controller and in the absence of the standard rent, it was open to the landlord to receive rent in excess of the standard rent determinable under the Act.
The only distinction was that under the West Bengal Premises Rent Control (Temporary Provisions) Act, 1950, which came up for consideration in the Life Insurance Corporation s case, the standard rent was statutorily determinable on the application of a mathematical formula without any discretion being left in the Controller, while under the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 the standard rent was not a certain and definite figure to be arrived at mathematically by application of the formula laid down in section 6 but it was left to the Controller under section 9 sub section (2) to fix the standard rent at such amount as appeared to him to be reasonable having regard to the provisions of section 6 and the circumstances of the case.
Hence, until the standard rent was fixed by the Controller, it could not be said what would be the standard rent of the building.
[622D H, 623A] 2.
Undoubtedly there is some difference in the provisions of the two statutes but this difference is not of such a character as to affect the applicapability of the decision in the Life Insurance Corporation 's case.
In that case too, the prohibition against the landlord to receive any rent in excess of the standard rent was operative only after the fixation of the standard rent by the Controller and so long as the standard rent was not fixed, it was not unlawful or penal for the landlord to receive any rent in excess of the standard rent.
If the standard rent though not fixed and hence not legally enforceable, could provide the measure for the reasonable expectation of the landlord to receive rent from a hypothetical tenant in the Life Insurance Corporation 's case, there is no reason why it should not equally be held to provide such measure in the present cases.
As in the one case so also in the other? the upper limit of the standard rent. though yet to be fixed by the Controller, would enter into the determination of the reasonable rent.
[623A D] 3.
It is not correct to say that under section 9 sub section (2) of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958, it is left to the unfettered and unguided discretion of the Controller to fix any standard rent which he considers reasonable.
He is required to fix the standard rent in accordance with the relevant formula laid down in section 6 and he cannot ignore that formula by saying that in the circumstances of the case, he considers it reasonable to do so.
The only discretion given to him is to make adjustments in the result arrived at on the application of the relevant formula, where it is necessary to do so by reason of the fact that the landlord might have made some addition, alteration or improvement in the building or circumstances might have transpired affecting the condition or utility of the building or some such circumstances of similar character.
The compulsive force of the formula laid down in section 6 for the determination of the standard rent 609 is not in any way whittled down by section 9 sub section (2) but a marginal discretion is given to the Controller to mitigate the rigour of the formula where the circumstances of the case so require.
The amount calculated in accordance with the relevant formula set out in section 6 would, therefore, ordinarily represent the standard rent of the building, unless the landlord of the tenant.
, as the case may be, can persuade the Controller that there are circumstances requiring adjustment in the amount so arrived at.
There is therefore no material distinction between the West Bengal Premises Rent Control (Temporary Provisions) Act, 1950 and the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1050 so far as the provisions regarding determination of standard rent are concerned and the decision in the Life insurance Corporations case must be held to be applicable in determination of the annual value in the present cases.
[623D H, 624A] 4.
In the Guntur Municipal Council 's case also, as in the present cases.
the standard rent of the building was not fixed by the Controller and under the Andhra Pradesh Rent Act which applied to the town of Guntur, in the Absence of fixation of the fair rent, it was lawfully competent to the landlord to recover rent hl excess of the fair rent.
determinable under that Act.
[624B C] 5.
The annual value of the building governed by the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 must be limited by the measure of standard rent determinable under that Act.
The landlord cannot reasonably expect to get more rent than the standard rent payable in accordance with the principles laid down in the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958.
It is true that the standard rent of the building not having been fixed by the Controller, the assessing authority would have to arrive at its own figure of standard rent by applying the, principles laid down in the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 for determination of standard rent, but that is a task which the assessing authority would have to perform as a part OF the process of assessment and in the Guntur Municipal Council 's case, this Court has said that it is not a. task foreign to the function of assessment and has to be carried out by the assessing authority.
When the assessing authority arrives at its own figures of standard rent by applying the principles laid down in the Act, it does not, in any way, usurp the function of the Controller, because it does not fix the standard rent which would he binding on the landlord and the tenant, which can be done only by the Con F troller under the Act but it merely arrives at its own estimate of standard rent for the purpose of determining the annual value of the building.
That is a perfectly legitimate function within the scope of the jurisdiction of the assessing authority.
[624G H. 625A C] 6.
The existing tenant may be barred from making an application for fixation of the standard rent and may, therefore, be liable to pay contractual rent to the landlord but the hypothetical tenant to whom the building is hypothetically to be let, would not suffer from this disability created by the bar of limitation and he would be entitled to make an application for fixation of the standard rent at any time within two years of the hypothetical letting and the limit of the standard rent determinable under the Act.
would therefore, inevitably enter into the bargain and circumscribe the rate of rent at which the building could reasonably be expected to he let.
[625E G] 7.
It is difficult to sec how the annual value of the building could vary accordingly as it is tenanted or self occupied.
The circumstance that in each.
610 of the present cases, the tenant was debarred by the period of limitation from making an application for fixation of the standard rent and the landlord was consequently entitled to continue to receive the contractual rent.
cannot therefore, affect the applicability of the decision in the Life Insurance Corporation 's case and the Guntur Municipal Council 's case, and it must.
be held that the annual value of the building in each of these cases was limited by the measure of the standard rent determinable under the Act.
[626B C] 8.
Even if the standard rent has not been fixed by the Controller, the landlord cannot reasonably expect to receive from a hypothetical tenant anything more than the standard rent determinable under the Act and this would be so equally whether the building has been let out to a tenant who has lost his light to apply for fixation of ' the standard rent or the building is self occupied by the owner.
The assessing authority would.
in either case, have to arrive at its own figure of the standard rent by applying principles laid down in the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 for determination of standard rent and determine the annual value of the building on the basis of such figure of standard rent.
[626G H, 627A] 9.
It is clear therefore that in each of the present cases the annual value of the building must be held to be limited by the measure of the standard rent determinable on the principles laid down in the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 and it cannot exceed such measure of standard rent.
[627A B] Corporation of Calcutta vs Life Insurance Corporation ; ; Corporation of Calcutta vs Padma Devi ; ; Guntur Municipal Council vs Guntur Town Rate payers ' Association ; M. M. Chawla vs J. section Sethi referred to.
Municipal Corporation, Indore & Ors.
v, Smt.
Ratnaprabha & Ors. ; distinguished.
