The respondent a member of the Indian Air Force, retired from service on June 15, 1965 but was reemployed for a period of two years with effect from June 16, 1965.
On September 7, 1966 the respondent was transferred to the Regular Air Force Reserve with effect from June 16, 1965 to June 15, 1970 i.e. for a period of five years.
On March 13 1968 the reemployment given to the respondent ceased and his services were terminated with effect from April 1, 1968.
A charge sheet was submitted against the respondent for having committed offences under section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947, during the period March 29, 1965 to March 16, 1967.
The respondent filed a petition before the Special Judge for dropping the proceedings against him on the ground that the Judge could not take any cognizance of the offences in the absence of any valid sanction of the appointing authority OF the respondent.
The application was rejected on the ground that as the respondent was not a Commissioned Officer in the Air Force at the time when the cognizance was taken, no sanction of the President was necessary.
The respondent moved the High Court in revision, which quashed the proceedings, holding that as the respondent continued to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code inasmuch as he remained a member of Air Force Reserve, sanction was necessary before prosecuting the respondent.
In the appeal to this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellant: (1) that as the respondent had retired from the Indian Air Force and his employment was terminated with effect from April 1, 1968 he ceased to be a public servant and therefore no sanction was necessary, and (2) that reemployment under the provisions of the Regular Air Force Reserve Act would not amount to an employment in the Regular Force of the Service and therefore even though the respondent may have been reemployed he could not be said to hold the status of a public servant.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
The prosecution must prove that at the time when cognizance of the offence was taken the respondent ceased to be a public servant.
[700 C] In the instant case, the Special Judge took cognizance on June 19.
1969 at a time when the respondent continued to be a public servant having been reemployed and though his services were terminated only on April 1, 1968 he 698 continued to be a member of the Auxiliary Air Force upto July 15, 1970, that is a long time after cognizance of the offence was taken.
[700 D] section A. Venkataraman vs The State ; State of West Bengal etc.
vs Manmal Bhutoria & Ors.
; referred to.
2(i) The Provisions of the Auxiliary Air Force Act do not expressly contain the nature of the emoluments that the respondent may receive but the general tenor and setting of the Act clearly show that a member of the Auxiliary Force is as much a public servant as an acting member of the Indian Air Force.
[703 G] (ii) Even after the respondent was transferred to the Auxiliary Air Force he retained his character as a public servant because he was required to undergo training and to be called up for service as and when required.
[703 F]
