The respondent who was a bidder at the annual excise auction offered the highest bid for two groups of country liquor shops, and which were knocked down in his favour.
He affixed his signature to the respective bid sheets in token of his acceptance and also in the register of Settlement Record.
He, however, did not deposit l/6th of the bid amounts on conclusion of the sales as required under the Excise Rules but took time for deposit.
In spite of repeated reminders he did not pay the advance deposits.
The Excise Authorities resold the excise privileges in respect of the two groups of shops and in the re auction the shops fetched a lesser amount than what the respondent had offered.
The State Government, appellant directed the respondent to make good the loss.
Since he failed, a suit for recovery was instituted by the appellant.
The suit was contested, the respondent pleading (1) that there were no completed contracts between the State Government and himself and consequently there could be no breach of contracts; (2) that the entire auction proceedings, having been against the rules and instructions of the Government were illegal and void; (3) the contracts, if any, were unenforceable as they did not satisfy the conditions mentioned in Article 299 of the Constitution; and (4) that the State Government having accepted his prayer to be relieved from the bids made by him and subsequently re auctioning the groups of shops to others was estopped from fixing any civil liability on him.
The trial court decreed the suit.
On appeal, the High Court dismissed the suit on the view that there was no valid contract which could be enforced by the appellant as the requirements of Article 299(1) of the Constitution had not been complied with.
It, however, held that the failure to deposit 1/6 of the bid amount did not make the proposal incomplete and that the absence of the approval of the Excise Commissioner which was in the nature of a power vested in him to reverse the acceptance of a bid made by the officer holding the auction did not in any way exonerate the respondent from the liability if he was otherwise liable.
In the appeal to this Court on the question whether the respondent would not be liable to make good the loss even though no contract in writing had been executed in accordance with Article 299 of the Constitution.
725 ^ HELD :[Per Gupta and Tulzapurkar, JJ.] 1.
The suit must be dismissed as there was no concluded contract between the parties, nor was there any statutory rule permitting recovery of the deficiency on re sale from the respondent.
[728 B] 2.
The last part of 5th clause to Rule 357 providing that in case of default, if the price fetched at the re sale was less tan the bid at the first sale the defaulter had not been published.
[729 C] 3.
Assuming that different clauses of Rule 357 barring the last part of the 5th clause embody the condition of sale, it is clear from the 2nd clause that in the absence of the final sanction of the Excise Commissioner the bid cannot be said to have been finally accepted.
In the instant case it is not claimed that the bid offered by the respondent was sanctioned by the Excise Commissioner.
[729 E] There was thus no concluded contract between the parties to make the respondent liable for the alleged loss.
[729 E] Union of India and others vs M/s. Bhimsen Walaiti Ram ; referred to.
(Per Venkataramiah J. dissenting) 1.
The respondent should be made liable for the sum claimed in the suit and the decree made by the trial court should be restored.
[745 G] 2.
The respondent was liable for the sum claimed made by the State Government even though no contracts were formally entered into between the respondent and the State Government,[745 B] In the instant case on the pleading and evidence it has to be assumed that the respondent knew that he was under an obligation to deposit with the officer holding the auction 1/6th of the bid amount and that if he committed any default in doing so, the excise licences in question were to be resold and that he would be liable to pay any loss suffered by the Sate Government on such re sale.
[733 E] 3.
Condition No. 5 in the sale proclamation which provides that if the price at the re sale be less than that at the first sale, the difference will be recovered from the defaulter negatives the contention of the respondent that in the absence of the approval of the Excise Commissioner, he would bot be liable to make good the loss.
[73 H, F] 4.
There was no disapproval of the Excise Commissioner of the bids offered by the respondent.
On the other hand, the excise authorities requested the respondent to perform his part of the obligation under the sale proclamation.
[734 E] 5.
In Union of India & Ors.
vs M/s. Bhimsen Walaiti Ram, ; , this Court proceeded on the basis that the liability of the bidder could arise only as a consequence of the breach of a completed contract.
No attention appears to have been given in the case to the question whether the act of the offering of the highest bid which was accepted by the officer holding the auction and which resulted in the closure of the auction could by itself become a source of liability when the highest bidder failed to comply with the conditions stipulated in the sale proclamation.
In section 39, the words "all excise revenue, including all amounts due to the Government by any person on account of any contract relating to the excise revenue, may be recovered from the persons primarily liable to pay the same" by him on account of any contract relating to the excise revenue.
The words "on account relating to the excise revenue" include within their scope not merely any compensation which a person may be liable to pay on account of the breach of contract committed by him after the contract is completed but also any other amount that may become due on account of a contract which would come into existence if all the formalities are completed, having regard to the scheme and manner in which the excise privilege is disposed of by the excise authorities.
[735 E F] 7.
A reading of clauses 1 and 2 of Rule 357 of the Excise Manula show that the officer holding the sale was empowered to accept the bid and that his acceptance was only subject to the sanction of the Excise Commissioner.
They mean that the power which had been reserved to the Excise Commissioner, only enabled him to set aside the acceptance already made by the officer conducting the sale.
If it was not set aside by him, the acceptance of the officer conducting the sale would be effective.
[737 B] In the instant case the Excise Commissioner had not refused to sanction the acceptance of the highest bids offered by the respondent.
The liability of the highest bidder to deposit a sum equivalent to 1/6th of the bid offered by him arises as a consequence of his offering the highest bed with the knowledge of the conditions of the auction, immediately on the conclusion of the sale for the day in his favour and if he does not make such deposit, the officer holding the same is entitled to put the excise privilege for re sale either immediately of on a subsequent day with liberty to recover from the defaulter any loss that may be occasioned to the Government by such re sale.
[737 C D] 8.
The completion of the contract or the execution of a contract in accordance with Article 299 of the Constitution arises only after the highest bidder has deposited 1/6th of the bid offered by him on the conclusion of the sale which is a condition precedent for the completion of the contract or for execution of a formal document in accordance with Article 299 of the Constitution.
It is not, therefore, correct to determine the liability of a defaulting bidder on the basis of a completed contract or a formal document to be executed under Article 299.
[737 E F] 9.
In the interest of public revenuer, excise privileges, privileges of cutting and removing timber from Government forests, occupancy right over Government lands and building sites etc.
are disposed of in public auction by the Central Government, State Governments, statutory boards and local authorities and in almost every such auction, there is invariably boards a condition that the acceptance of the highest bid at the auction is subject to the sanction of some superior officer or statutory or the appropriate Government.
If the liability of such a bidder is to be funded only on the basis of a completed contract them in then in the case of auctions held by or on behalf of the Central or State Governments, no liability can arise even it such sanction is accorded, unless it is followed up by a formal document executed under Article 299 of the Constitution which alone amounts to a completed contract where Government is a party.
[737 H 738 A, 738 D] 727 In the instant case the respondent by his own conduct in not depositing 1/6th A of the bids offered by him made it impossible for the excise authorities to conclude the contract. 'the question may have been different if the respondent had done all that he had to do under the condition of the auction but the excise authorities had not intimated him that he could exploit the excise privileges in accordance with law.
[744 E] 10.
The liability of the respondent arises under the statute and it also arises as the result of a civil wrong or a tort committed by him, in offering the highest bid with open eyes and in not fulfilling the obligations arising therefrom.
The latter source of liability may appear to be novel but if justice requires, the Court should not hesitate to impose it on the person who has committed the wrong to secure justice for the innocent injured party.
[745 Cl A. Damodaran & Anr.
vs State of Kerala & ors.
; ; Candlar vs Crane Christmas & Co. [1951] 2 K.B. 164 at p. 178 referred to.
K. P. Chowdhary vs Stare of Madhya Pradesh & Ors. ; distinguished.
