The respondent landlord sought eviction of the appellant tenant from the suit premises for failure to pay arrears of rent, despite service of notice of demand.
The trial court found that the tenant was in arrears o. payment of rent, but the tenant having deposited the arrears of rent within the time allowed by the court on his application the tenant was entitled to avail the protection of section 12(3) of the Madhya Pradesh Accommodation Control Act.
and dismissed the suit for eviction.
The landlord preferred an appeal and while the same was pending? the tenant filed an application under section 13(1) of the Act for condonation of delay in depositing,, the rent, month by month.
which had become payable after the filing of the suit.
On several occasions, when the suit and the appeal were pending before the trial court and the appellate court respectively, the tenant had deposited the monthly rent a day or two or three beyond the prescribed date, and the same had been received by the court and drawn out by the landlord, without any protest.
The landlord, taking advantage of the filing of the tenant s application for condonation of delay, contended that the court had no power to extend the time for deposit of the monthly rent and that he was entitled to a decree for eviction consequent on the non compliance with the provisions of section 13(1) of the Act.
The appellate court negatived this contention and dismissed the appeal.
In the second appeal preferred by the landlord, the High Court held that the Court had no power to extend time and decreed the Suit for eviction.
In the tenant 's appeal to this Court on the question whether the Court ha(l.
the power to condone the delay in depositing the monthly rent falling due after the filling of the suit for eviction.
^ HELD :1.
The court had the jurisdiction to extend time for deposit or payment of monthly rent falling due after the filing of the suit.
[338 G] 2.
In order to entitle a tenant to claim the protection of section 12(3).
the tenant had to make payment or deposit as required by section 13.
The arrears of rent should be paid or deposited within one month of the service of the writ of summons on the tenant or within such further time as may he allowed by the court, and should further deposit or pay every month by the 15th.
a sum equivalent to the rent.
[338 A B].
335 3.
Failure to pay or deposit a sum equivalent to the rent by the 15th of every month, subsequent to the filing of the suit for eviction will not entitle the landlord, straightaway, to a decree for eviction.
The consequences of the deposit or payment and non payment or non deposit are prescribed by subsection and (6) of section 13.
[338 B] 4.
A discretion is vested in the court under section 13(6) to order the striking out of the, defence against eviction.
[338 D] 5.
If the court has the discretion not to strike out the defence or a tenant committing default in payment or deposit of rent as required by section 13(1), the court surely has the further discretion to condone the default and extend the time for payment or deposit.
Such a discretion is a necessary implication of the discretion not to strike out the defence.
Any other construction may lead, to a perversion of the object of the Act.
namely, 'the adequate protection of the tenant. ' [338 F G] 6.
Section 12(3) entitles a tenant to claim protection against eviction on the ground specified in section 12(1)(a) if he makes payment or deposit as required by section 13.
As the court has under section 13, the power to extent: the time for payment or deposit, payment or deposit, within the extended time will entitle the tenant to claim the protection of section 12(3).
[338 H] 1 7.
Express provision for extension of time for deposit or payment or rent falling due after the filing of the suit was not made in section 13(1! as the consequence of non payment was dealt with by a separate sub section, section 13(6).
The discretion given to the court under section 13(6) must imply a discretion to condone the delay and extend the time in making deposit or payment under section 13(1).
[339A, E] Jagdish Kapoor vs New Education Society disapproved.
B. C. Kame vs Nem Chand Jain, A.I.R. 1970 S.C. 981.
referred to.
