By virtue of section 3(1) of the Madhya Bharat Zamindari Abolition Act, 1951, rights of proprietors in villages, Muhalas and Chaks or blocks settled on the zamindari system vested in the State free from all encumbrances.
In so far as the mortgages were concerned a mortgage with possession which existed on the date immediately preceding the date of vesting of the property was deemed to have been substituted by a simple mortgage.
The mortgagee who was in possession of lands under a deed of mortgage, for example a usufructuary mortgage, lost possession of the lands by operation of law and his mortgage became a simple mortgage from the date of vesting of the lands in the State.
On the other hand a mortgagor who was once the proprietor of the lands, though lost his proprietary right in the lands because of their vesting in the State, had to fulfil his obligation as a mortgagor to the extent of the amount secured under the mortgage.
To alleviate the lot of such proprietors section 4(2) of the Act provided that notwithstanding anything contained in sub section (1) a proprietor shall continue to remain in possession of his khud kasht land so recorded in the annual village papers before the date of vesting.
The expression khud kasht is defined to mean "land cultivated by the Zamindar himself or through employees or hired labourers".
If a person was a zamindar and cultivated the land himself or through employees or hired labourers that would be his khud kasht cultivation within the meaning of section 2(c) of the Act, that is, in a given case if it was shown that a proprietor had khud kasht land which was so recorded in the annual village papers before the date of vesting of the lands in the State, he was entitled to continue to remain in possession of those lands.
Section 37(1) provides that every proprietor who is divested of his proprietary rights shall be a pacca tenant of the khud kasht land in his possession and the land revenue payable by him shall be determined at the rates fixed by the current settlement for the same kind of land.
In the present case, the plaintiff 's suit for redemption of the mortgage which was an usufructuary mortgage, was decreed by the trial court in respect of the relief of redemption but the claim in regard to the mesne profits was disallowed.
Against that decree three appeals were filed before the District Court, one of them being the appeal by the plaintiffs challenging the refusal by the trial court to grant mesne profits.
The plaintiff 's appeal was partly allowed granting mesne profits from the date of deposit of the mortgage money in court.
The other two appeals were dismissed.
The matter was taken in appeal to the High Court by the defendants in second appeal.
The plaintiffs also preferred a second appeal claiming full relief in so far as mesne profits were concerned.
The High Court partly allowed the defendants ' appeal holding that the plaintiffs were entitled to redeem the mortgage by paying the 791 mortgage money but were not entitled to get possession of the mortgaged land, since according to the High Court, the proprietary rights including the right to get possession had become vested in the State under the aforesaid Act.
It further held that the plaintiffs were only entitled to claim compensation from the Government in lieu of their proprietary rights after redeeming the mortgage by making payment of the mortgage money.
Against the decree of the High Court, the plaintiffs filed an appeal before this Court in Meharban Singh & Ors.
vs Naresh Singh & Ors.
[1970] 3 SCR 18.
This Court set aside the decree of the High Court and remitted the case back to the High Court for a fresh decision on the question whether the lands in dispute were khud kasht lands and to pass a decree for possession if they were found to be so in view of sections 4(1)(f) and 4(2) of the Act.
After the case went back to the High Court, the State Government was impleaded as a party to the suit and was permitted to file a written statement.
Certain additional issues were raised by the High Court on the basis of the new pleadings.
The High Court sent the case to the trial court for recording its finding on the issue 'whether the land in dispute was recorded as khud kasht land immediately before the date of vesting? ' after giving the parties an opportunity to adduce further evidence on the said additional issue and to resubmit the record to it.
The trial court held that the suit land was khud kasht land in possession of the plaintiffs before the date of vesting of the estate and submitted the said finding to the High Court.
The said finding was not in fact disputed before the High Court.
All that the High Court was to decide was whether the plaintiffs were entitled to the benefit of sub section (2) of section 4 of the Act but the High Court once again took the view that the plaintiffs were not entitled to get possession of the suit lands although they were entitled to a decree for redemption.
It is against the judgment of the High Court, the above appeal has been filed.
Allowing the appeal and restoring the decree of the Court of first appeal, ^ HELD: When the case went back to the High Court all that the High Court was to decide was whether the appellant was entitled to the benefit of section 4(2) of the Act in terms of the directions given by this Court.
Since the plaintiffs were the proprietors of the suit lands there can be no dispute that till the time of mortgage the suit lands were in their possession.
Secondly since the lands were recorded as khud kasht lands of the mortgagors in the annual village papers before the date of vesting, they were clearly entitled to a decree for possession in terms of section 4(2) and there was no occasion for the High Court to examine the consequences of their losing the possession of the lands after the mortgage.
When section 4(1) (f) read with section 4(2) gave the mortgagor the benefit of the right to remain in possession of his khud kasht, which was in his possession upto the date of mortgage, there could be no reason why it should be denied to the plaintiffs.
It was found on evidence by the first court of appeal that the mortgagors were themselves cultivating the lands and thereafter the mortgagee got them cultivated through his relatives.
Assuming that the mortgagee really inducted tenants in the lands during the period of mortgage their tenure was bound to end on the redemption of the mortgage according to the ordinary law of redemption unless they could lay claim to protection under any other law.
[797 E H] It is well settled that the normal law of mortgage would apply and tenants inducted by the mortgagee would go out of the lands on redemption of the 792 mortgage if in the meanwhile the law has not been shown to intervene for their protection.
In the instant case the law expressly gave the benefit of section 4(2) to a proprietor like the plaintiffs.
The tenants inducted by the mortgagee would have no statutory right to possession.[800 A B] Mahabir Gope and others vs Harbans Narain Singh and others ; ; Narihar Prasad Singh and Another vs Mst. of Munshi Nath Prasad and others ; ; Asa Ram and another vs Mst.
Ram Kali and another ; Prabhu vs Ramdev and others ; , referred to.
Section 41 which deals with protection of tenancy rights of the mortgagees cannot be invoked by the mortgagees in the case of section 4(2).
[800 B C]
