The respondents lost their limbs in a road accident while travelling in a bus belonging to the petitioner, a nationalised transport system.
The plea by the operator to escape the liability for compensation was that the lights of the bus accidentally failed, which resulted in the accident.
The Accidents Claims Tribunal negatived the plea and awarded compensation in sums far lower than were claimed by the respondents.
In the special leave petitions to this Court, the petitioner contested the application of the principle of res ipsa loquitur and the quantum of the claim.
Dismissing the petitions, ^ HELD: 1.
(i) It was improper of the Corporation to have tenaciously resisted the claim.
[868 A] (ii) It was right on the part of the Tribunal to have raised a rebuttable presumption on the strength of the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur.
[868 B] 2.
The heads of claim have been correctly appreciated by the Tribunal and the awards have been moderate.
[868 C] 3.
Instead of indulging in wasteful litigation, it would have been more humane and just, if the Corporation had hastened compassionately to settle the claims so that goodwill and public credibility could be improved.
[867 H] 4.
The State has a paramount duty, apart from liability for tort, to make effective provision for disablement in cases of undeserved want Article 41 of the Constitution states so.
[868 A] 5.
Nationalisation of road transport should have produced a better sense of social responsibility on the part of the management and drivers.
One of the major purposes of socialisation of transport is to inject a sense of safety, accountability and operational responsibility which may be absent in the case of private undertakings whose motivation is profit making regardless of risk to life.
[867 E F] 6.
Common experience on Indian high ways disclose callousness and blunted consciousness on the part of public corporations which acquire a monopoly under the in plying buses.
It is a pity that State Road Transport vehicles should become mobile menaces.
[867 G]
