The University of Delhi has many post graduate and diploma courses in the faculty of medicine but all of them put together provide 250 seats.
The three medical colleges in Delhi turn out annually 400 medical graduates who get 'house ' jobs in the local hospitals and qualify themselves for post graduate courses.
As the graduates from the Delhi University could not be accommodated fully or even in part for the post graduate courses in medicine and as these graduates were not considered for admission into other universities on account of various regional hurdles such as prescription of domicile, graduation in that very university, registration with the State Medical Council, service in the State Medical service etc., the Delhi University had earmarked some seats at the post graduate level in medicine for the medical graduates of Delhi University.
Until April 1978, the rule for selection of candidates for admission into the post graduate classes in medicine provided that selection for 52% of the total number of seats was to be made on the basis of combined merit of Delhi University and other university medical graduates, and 48 per cent from the Delhi University graduates only.
The rule was amended, reserving 70% of the seats at the post graduate level to Delhi graduates and 30% being open to all, including graduates of Delhi.
The petitioner who was a medical graduate from the Madras University applied for the post graduate degree in Dermatology in the University of Delhi.
He passed the common entrance test for admission, but his admission was turned down because of the rule of the University reserving 70% of the seats at the post graduate level to Delhi University graduates.
The petitioner in his writ petition under Article 32 challenged the rule as violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution and sought the court 's writ to direct the University to admit him to the M.D. Course in Dermatology.
It was contended that the University was sustained by Central Government finances, collected from the whole country and the benefits must likewise belong to all qualified students from everywhere.
The University justified the reservation on the ground of exclusivism practised by every other University by forbidding Delhi University graduates from getting admission in their colleges and also on account of the reasonableness of institutional continuity in educational pursuits for students who enter a university for higher studies.
832 Dismissing the writ petition.
^ HELD: (per Krishna Iyer & Chinnappa Reddy, JJ.) 1.
Reservation of 70% is too high at the post graduate level.
But the rule is not invalidated because the facts are imperfect, the course has already started and the court must act only on sure ground, especially when matters of policy, socio educational, investigation and expert evaluation of variables are involved.
When fuller facts are placed, the court will go into this question more confidently.
[858 D E] 2.
If 70% reservation is on the high side and the petitioner is hopefully near 'admission ' going by marks it is but just that he is given a chance to do his post graduate course.
His coming to Delhi itself was a compulsion beyond his control.
[858 F] 3.
Petitioner directed to be admitted to the degree course this year, if the rules of attendance etc., do not stand in the way and the Medical Council makes an exception by agreeing to addition of one seat as a special case for this year.
[858 G] 4.
(i) The University forthwith not later than two months from today to appoint a time bound committee to investigate in depth the justification for and the quantum of reservation at the post graduate level from the angle of equality of opportunity for every Indian.
That committee will study facts and figures and the reservation realities of other universities and make recommendations on the question of university based reservations and allied aspects as well as modus operandi for implementation.
The Committee will benefit if it has a constitutional expert and a representative of the Indian Medical Council on it.
Its report shall be considered by the University as soon as may be, so that, if possible, the admissions for the next year may be governed by the revised decisions of the concerned organs informed by the report.
[858 H 859 C] (ii) The Union of India has a special responsibility to ensure that in higher education provincialism does not erode the integrity of India.
Anyone who lives in India can never be considered an 'outsider ' in Delhi.
Blind and bigoted local patriotism in xenophobic exclusivism is destructive of freedom and only if compelling considerations of gross injustice, desperate backwardness and glaring inequality desiderate such a course can protective discrimination gain entrance into the portals of college campuses.
[859 D, 860 A, B] 5.
The philosophy and pragmatism of universal excellence through universal equal opportunity is part of our culture and constitutional creed.
[843 A] 6.
The Indian Constitution is wedded to equal protection and non discrimination.
articles 14, 15 and 16 are inviolable and article 29(2) strikes a similar note though it does not refer to regional restrictions or reservations.
article 15 saves the State 's power to make special provisions for women and children or for advancement of socially and educationally backward classes.
[842 B] 7.
University wise preferential treatment may still be consistent with the rule of equality of opportunity where it is calculated to correct and imbalance or handicap and permit equality in the larger sense.
What is fundamental is equality, not classification.
What is basic is equal opportunity, for each according to his ability, not artificial compartmentalization and institutional apartheidisation, using the mask of handicaps.
A clanish exclusivism based upon a particular university cannot be contemplated as consistent with Article 14.
[852 A] 9.
A blanket ban which is the indirect result of a wholesale reservation is constitutional heresy.
There must be substantial social justice as raison d 'etre for a high percentage of alumni reservation.
[853 H] 10.
If equality of opportunity for every person in the country is the constitutional guarantee, a candidate who gets more marks than another is entitled to preference for admission.
Merit must be the test when choosing the best, according to this rule of equal chance for equal marks.
This proposition has greater importance when we reach the higher levels of education like postgraduate courses.
The role of high grade skill or special talent may be less at the lesser levels of education jobs and disciplines of social inconsequence, but more at the higher levels of sophisticated skills and strategic employment.
To devalue merit at the summit is to temporise with the country 's development in the vital areas of professional expertise.
[854 E G] 11.
The class which enjoys reservation must be educationally handicapped.
The reservation must be geared to getting over the handicap.
The rationale of reservation must be in the case of medical students, removal of regional or class inadequacy or like disadvantage.
The quantum of reservation should not be excessive or societally injurious, measured by the over all competency of the end product, viz. degree holders.
A host of variables influence the quantification of the reservation.
[855 B C] 12.
The higher the level of the speciality the lesser the role of reservation.
M.B.B.S. is a basic medical degree and insistance on the highest talent may be relaxed by promotion of backward groups, institution wise chosen, without injury to public welfare.
It produces equal opportunity on a broader basis and gives hope to neglected geographical or human areas of getting a chance to rise.
Moreover, the better chances of candidates from institutions in neglected regions getting down for practice in these very regions also warrants institutional preference because that policy helps the supply of medical services to these backward areas.
[855 D, F] 13.
It is difficult to denounce or renounce the merit criterion where the selection is for post graduate or post doctoral courses in specialised subjects.
There is no substitute for sheer flair, for creative talent, for fine tuned performance at the difficult heights of some disciplines where the best alone is likely to blossom as the best.
[856 F G] 14.
Neither Delhi nor the Delhi University medical colleges can be designated as categories which warrant reservation.
Reservation for Delhi graduates is not that invidious, because the students are from families drawn from all over India.
Not sons of the soil ' but sons and daughters of persons who are pulled into the capital city for reasons beyond their control.
This reservation, is, therefore, qualitatively different.
[857 D E] 15.
Institution wise reservation is constitutionally circumscribed and may become ultra vires if recklessly resorted to.
But even such rules, until revised 834 by competent authority or struck down judicially, will rule the roost.
Until the signpost of 'no admission for outsiders ' is removed from other universities and some fair percentage of seats in other universities is left for open competition, the Delhi students cannot be made martyrs of the Constitution.
Reservation must be administered in moderation, if it is to be constitutional.
[858 B C] 16.
Litigation, on a socio legal issue of critical constitutional moment, should not end with general assertions, affidavits of formal denials and minimal materials, but needs feeding the court with nutritive facts which build the flesh and blood of the administrative or legislative action under challenge and all other surrounding and comparative data which legitimate the 'reservation ' or other procedure under attack from the constitutional angle.
Ingenious or imaginative orality in court can never be a substitute for well researched down to earth factuality in the brief.
In the adversary system, advocacy in the superior courts which by their decisions, declare the law for all must broaden beyond the particular lis into a conspectus of sociological facts, economic factors and educational conditions so that other persons aggrieved who will potentially be bound by the decision, do not suffer by not being eo nomine parties.
[841 F G, H 837 E] (Per Pathak J.) 1.
Classification is a feature of the very core of equality.
It is a vital concept in ensuring equality, for those who are similarly situated form a class between themselves, and the classification is not vulnerable to challenge if its constituent basis is reasonably related to achieving the object of the concerned law.
An institutional preference as in the instant case does not offend the constitutional guarantee of equality.
[861 D E] 2.
The basis of the reservation is that the candidate for admission to the post graduate classes is a medical graduate of the same university.
The relation ship is institutional.
There is sufficient validity in that criterion as a basis of classification under Article 14.
[860 F, G] It is not beyond reason that a student who enters a medical college for his graduate studies and pursues them for the requisite period of years should prefer on graduation to continue in the same institution for his post graduate studies.
There is the strong argument of convenience, of stability and familiarity with an educational environment which in different parts of the country is subject to varying economic and psychological pressures.
But much more than convenience is involved.
There are all the advantages of a continuing frame of educational experience in the same educational institution.
In the post graduate class, it is not an entirely different course of studies which is contemplated; it is a specialised and deeper experience in what has gone before.
The student has become familiar with the teaching techniques and standards of scholarship, and has adjusted his responses and reactions accordingly.
The continuity of studies ensures a higher degree of competence in the assimilation of knowledge and experience.
Not infrequently some of the same staff of Professors and Readers may lecture to the post graduate classes also.
Over the under graduate years the teacher has come to understand the particular needs of the student, where he excels and where he needs an especial encouragement in the removal of deficiencies.
There is good reason in an educational institution extending a certain degree of preference to its graduates for admission to its post graduate classes.
[860 C] 835 3.
Medical courses are not all necessarily to be found only in New Delhi.
They are located in other parts of India and some are well known centres of medical education.
The proposition that because New Delhi is the political, legislative and judicial capital of India, an education of quality is not to be found in other cities is not acceptable.
Merely because New Delhi is the new Capital of Delhi does not justify a disproportionate treatment of the claim to equality on a national level made by its medical graduates.
[862 C D] 4.
But too excessive a reservation could result in preference to graduate candidates of severely limited aptitude and competence over meritorious candidates from other institutions whose exclusion could result in aborting a part of the national talent.
[861 F] 5.
Whether or not a reservation of 70% was called for has not been established conclusively.
There is hardly anything to show that the authorities applied their mind to a cool dispassionate judgment of the problem facing them.
The judgment and decision of the authority must be evolved from strictly concrete and unemotional material relevant to the issue before it.
[862 F]
