Punjab Agricultural Produce Markets Act, 1961 Ss. 23, 26 and 28 & Punjab Agricultural Produce (General) Rules, R 29 Marketing Development Fund & Marketing Committee Fund Utilisation of market fees Validity of purposes enumerated in clauses of Ss. 26 and 28 examined The Punjab Agricultural Produce Markets Act, 1961 which was passed by the composite State of Punjab is an Act for the better regulation of the purchase,sale, storage and processing of agricultural produce and the establishment of markets for agricultural produce in the State.
Section 3 envisages the establishment of the State Agricultural Marketing Board for the entire State and it is provided in sub sec (9) that "The Board shall exercise superintendence and control over.
the committees" Section 6(1 ) provides for "declaration of notified market area" and the State Government is empowered to declare the area notified under section S or any portion thereof to be a notified market area for the purpose of the Act in respect of the agricultural produce notified under section 5 or any part thereof.
The market areas and market yards were declared.
putting restriction on the traders to carry on their trade under a licence granted by the various Markets Committees established and constituted within the specified boundaries or areas.
After the declaration of the notified market area no person can establish or continue any place for the purchase, sale, storage and processing of the agricultural produce except under a licence granted in accordance with the provisions of the Act, the Rules and the Bye laws.
Section 23 empowers the committee to levy the fees subject to such rules as may be made by the State Government in this behalf on the agricultural produce bought or sold by licensees in the notified market area at a certain percentage.
Under section 27(1), all Moneys received by a Committee shall be paid into a fund to be called the Market Committee Fund and all expenditure incurred shall be defrayed out of such fund, while under section 25 all receipts of the Board are to be credited into a fund to be called the Marketing Development Fund and the purposes for which it may be expended are enumerated in section 26 viz. better marketing of agricultural produce on co operative lines, collection and dissemination of market rates and news.
grading and standardisation of agricultural produce etc.
Section 28 catalogues the purposes for which the Marketing Committee Fund may be utilised viz. acquisition of sites for the market.
maintenance and improvement of the market, construction and repair of buildings which are necessary for the purpose of the market etc.
In the composite State of Punjab and even after the bifurcation of the State for about a period of three years the maximum rate of market fee which could 1218 be levied by the various market communities under section 23 was 50 paise for every one hundred rupees.
the fee was thereafter raised from time to time.
A number of writ petitions were Filed in the High Court challenging the power of the Board to incease the levy of fee.
All the writ petitions were heard together and the increase Ind levy of fee upto Rs. 2/ by the various Market Committees in the State of Haryana was upheld and the writ petition of the Haryana dealers were dismissed while those of the Punjab dealers were allowed and the increase of u a e brought about by Act 13 of 1974 to the extent of Rs, 2.25 Was struck down.
[M/s. Hanuman Dall & General Mills, Hisar vs State of Haryana & others In Punjab, by amendment Act 14 of 1975, section 23 of the Act was again amended authorising the imposition of market fee at a rate not exceeding Rs. 2.20 per hundred rupee only, and this increase in the rates of fee was again challenged in the High Court and a Full Bench upheld the increase.
[Kewai Puri & Anr.
vs State of Punjab & Ors., AIR 1977 P & H 347].
This view was challenged in the appeal to this Court.
Both in the State of Punjab and the State of Haryana the rate of market fee was further raised from Rs. 2/ to Rs. 3/ .
It was unsuccessfully challenged in the High Court by the dealers of each of the States, who thereafter preferred appeals to this Court against the Judgment of the High Court and also challenged the increases in fee, in writ petitions in this Court.
In the appeals and writ petitions it was contended that the levy of the market fee realised from the buyers under section 23 of the Act could not be correlated I with the service to be rendered to the payers of the fees, and therefore cannot be justified and sustained on the well known concept of fee as pointed out by this Court in several decisions, and that the items of expenditure authorised and enumerated in sections 26 and 28 of the Act, go beyond the scope of the purpose of the utilisation of the market fees.
On the question of the validity of the fixation of market fee under section 23 of the Act from time to time and the scope and the purpose of the utilisation of such fees: ^ HELD: 1.
The impost of fee and the liability to pay it is on a particular individual or a class of individuals.
They are under the obligation to submit accounts, returns or the like to The authorities concerned in cases where quantification of the amount of fee depends upon the same.
I hey have to undergo the botherations and harassmentss, sometimes justifiably and sometimes even unjustifiably, in the process of discharging their liability to pay the fee.
The authorities levying the fee deal with them and realise the fee from them.
By operation of the economic laws in certain kinds of imposition of fee the burden may be passed on to different other persons one after the other.
[1229H 1230B] In the instant case, the Market Committees and the Market Board assumed to themselves the liberty of utilising and spending the realisations from market fees to a considerable extent.
as if it was a tax, although in reality it was not so.
[1240D] 2.
Rendering some service, however remote the service may be, cannot strictly speaking satisfy the element of quid pro required to be established in cases 1219 of the impost of fee.
Registration fee, however has to be taken to stand on a different footing altogether.
In the case of such a fee the test of quid pro quo is not to be satisfied with such direct close or proximate relationship as in the case of many other fees.
By and large registration fee is charged as a regulatory measure.
[1241B] 3.
This Court in a large number of cases had the occasion to examine the nature of fee and tax and from a conspectus of the various authorities the following, principles for satisfying the test for a valid levy of market fees on the agricultural produce bought or sold by licences in a notified market area are deducible : (i) That the amount of fee realised must be earmarked for rendering services to the licencees in the notified market area and a good and substantial portion of it must be shown to be expended for this purpose.
[1243H] (ii) That the services rendered to the licensees must be in relation to the transaction of purchase or sale of the agricultural produce.
[1244B] (iii) That while rendering services in the market area for the purpose of facilitating the transactions of purchase and sale with a view to achieve the objects of the marketing legislation it is not necessary to confer the whole of the benefit on The licensees but some special benefits must be conferred on them which `have a direct, close and reasonable correlation between the licensees and the transactions.
[1244C] (iv) That while conferring some special benefits on the licensees it is permissible to render such service in the market which may be in the general interest of all concerned with the transaction taking place in the market.
[1244D] (v) That spending the amount of market fees for the purpose of augmenting the agricultural produce.
its facility of transport in villages.
and to provide other facilities meant mainly or exclusively for the benefit of agriculturist is not permissible on the ground that such in services in the long run go to increase the volume of transaction, in the market ultimately benefiting the traders also.
Such an indirect and remote benefit to the traders is in no sense a special benefit to them.
[1244E F] (vi) That the element of quid pro quo may not be possible, or even necessary, to be established with arithmetical exactitude but even broadly and reasonably i; must be established by the authorities who charge the fees that the amount is being spent for rendering services to these on whom falls the burden of the fee.
[1244G] (vii) At least a good and substantial portion of the amount collected on account of fees, may be in the neighbourhood of two thirds or three fourths, must be shown with reasonable certainty as being spent for rendering services of the kind mentioned above.
[1244 H] The Commissioner Hindu Religious Endowments, Madras vs Sri Lakshmindra Thirtha Swamiar of Sri Shirur Mutt; , ; Matthews vs Chicorv Marketing Board, ; ; Attorney General for British Columbia & Esquimalt & Nanaimo Railway Co. & Ors., (1950) Appeal Cases.
87: H. H. 1220 Sudhundra Thirtha Swamiar vs Commissioner for Hindu Religious & Charitable Endowment, Mysore [1963 Suppl. 2 SCR 302; Mahant Sri Jagannath Ramanuj Das & Anr.
vs The State of Orissa & Anr., ; ; Ratilal Panachand Gandhi vs The State of Bombay and ors.
[1954] SCR 1055; The Hingir Rampur Coal Co. Ltd. & ors.
vs The State of Orissa & Ors., ; ; Parton vs Milk Board (Victoria) ; ; Corporation of Calcutta & Anr.
vs Liberty.
Cinema ; ; Har Shankar & ors.
vs The Dy.
Excise & Taxation Commr.
& ors.
; ; Nagar Mahapalika Varanasi vs Durga Das Bhattacharya & ors.; , ; The Delhi Cloth & General Mills Co. Ltd. vs Chief Commissioner Delhi & Ors.,1970] 2 SCR 348; Indian Mica & Micanite Industries Ltd. v State of Bihar & Ors. ; Secretary Government of Madras Home Department & Anr.
vs Zenith Lamp & Electrical Ltd. ; ; State of Maharashtra & Ors.
vs The Salvation Army, Western India Territory,[1975] 3 SCR 475; Govt.
of Andhra Pradesh & Anr.
vs Hindustan Machine Tools Ltd. [1975] Suppl.
SCR 394; The Municipal Council Madurai vs R. Narayanan etc.; , ; The Chief Commissioner Delhi and Anr.
vs The Delhi Cloth & General Mills Co. Ltd. & Anr.
; ; P P. Kutti Keya & Ors.
vs The State of Madras & Ors., AIR 1954 Madras, 621; MCVS Arunachala Nadar etc.
vs The State of Madras & Ors., [1959] Suppl.
1 SCR 92; Mohmmad Hussain Gulam & Anr.
vs State of Bombay & Ors.
, ; ;Lakhan Lal & Ors. etc.
vs The State of Bihar & Ors., ; ; referred to.
(i) A dispute arose between the parties as to whether the licence is granted for the whole of the area or for particular places therein.
On examining Form in the Rules meant for grant of licence under section 10, it is found that the licence is granted for one or more places of business specified in col. 6 situated in a particular notified market area named at the top of the licence.
There will be no sense in specifying the place of business in the licence if the licensee is to be permitted to establish his place of business any where in a notified market area which is too big and extensive for the control and supervision of a particular Market Committee.
Market yards are declared under section 7.
For each notified market area there can be one principal market yard and one or more sub market yards as may be necessary.
The marginal note of sec 8 is, "No private market to be opened in or near places declared to be markets." [1246D E] (ii) There is no special provision in this statute for an establishment of markets or markets proper as per the definition contained in cl.
(i) and (k) of section 2 of the Act, it is reasonable to assume that the intention of the legislature is to constitute the market yards as the market proper and ordinarily and generally the market would be the same but may include some other places where transactions of purchase of agricultural produce by the traders from the producers has been allowed in order to avoid rush in the precincts of the market proper.
But one thing is certain that the whole of the market area in no sense can be equated with market or market proper.
Nobody can be ' allowed to establish a purchasing centre of his own at any place he likes in the market area without there being such a permission or authority from The Market Committee.
After all the whole object of the Act is the supervision and control cf the transactions of purchase by the traders from the agriculturists in order to prevent exploitation of the latter by the former.
[1240H 1247A] 1221 5.
The whole object of the Act is the supervision and control of the transactions of purchase by the traders from the agriculturists in order to prevent exploitation of the latter by the former.
The supervision and control can be effective only in specified localities and places and not throughout the extensive market area.
[1247B] 6.
Rule 24(1) in both the States framed under the Act provides that "all agricultural produce brought into the market for sale shall be sold by open auction in the principal or sub market yard", which indicates that market is generally the principal and sub markets yards.
The benefit of market fee, therefore, has to be correlated with the transactions taking place at the specified place in the market area and not in the whole of the area.[1247D] 7.
The duties and powers of a market committee are enumerated in section 13 and this indicates that the Committee is primarily concerned with the establishing of a market in the notified area and with providing facilities in the market for persons visiting it and in connection with the transactions taking place there.
[1247F] 8.
Reading section 23 along with r. 29 it would be noticed that the power of the Committee to levy fees is subject to the Rules as may be made by the State Government.
The fee is levied on ad valorem basis at a rate which cannot exceed the maximum mentioned in section 23 by the legislature.
But the power to fix the rate from time to time within the maximum limit has been conferred on the Board and the Committee is merely bound to follow it.
[1248G H] 9.
Section 23 in express language controls the power of the Committee to levy fees subject to the rules.
The power given to the Board to fix the rate of market fees from time to time under rule 29 is not ultra vires the provisions of the Act, as sub sec.(a) of section 3 confers power on the Board to exercise superintendence and control over the committees, which power, in the context and the scheme of the marketing law, will take within its ambit the power conferred on the Board under rule 29(1).
[1249C] State of Punjab & Anr.
vs Hari Krishan Sharma, ; ; distinguished 10.
The fee levied is not on the agricultural produce in the sense of imposing any kind of tax or duty on the agricultural produce.
Nor is it a tax on the transaction of purchase or sale.
The levy is an impost on the buyer of the agricultural produce in the market in relation to transactions of his purchase.
The agriculturists are not required to share any portion of the burden of this fee.
In case the buyer is not a licensee then the responsibility of paying the fees is of the seller who may realise the same from the buyer.
But such a contingency cannot arise in respect of the transactions of sale by an agriculturist of his agricultural produce in the market to a dealer who must be a licensee.
Probably such an alternative provision was meant to be made for outside buyers who are not licensees when they buy the agricultural produce from or through the licensees.[1249D E] 11.
Every Market Committee is obliged under sub sec.
(2) (a) of section 27 to pay out of its funds to the Marketing Board as contribution such percentage of its income derived from licence fee, market fee and fines levied by the 1222 courts as specified in sub cl.
(i) and (ii).
The purpose of this contribution as mentioned in sub sec.(2) (a) is to enable the Board to defray expenses of the office, establishment of the Board and such other expenses incurred by it in the interest of the Committees in general.
The income of almost all the Market Committees were several lakhs of rupees per year and, therefore, each is required to pay 30 per centum of its income to the Board by virtue of the amendment brought about by Punjab Act 4 of 1978.
Under section 25 all receipts of the Board are to be credited into a fund to be called the Marketing Development Fund.
Purposes for which the Marketing Development Fund may be expended are enumerated in section 26 and the purposes for which the Market Committee Funds may be expended are catalogued in section 28[1250A C] 12.
No serious objection to the items of expenditure mentioned in clauses (xii), (xiv), (xv) and (xvi) can be taken.
Clause (x) and clause (xi) cannot form the items of expenditure of the market fees.
The whole of the State is divided into market areas.
The propaganda in favour of agricultural improvement and expenditure for production and betterment of agricultural produce will be in the general interest of agriculture in the market area.
So long as the concept of fee remains distinct and limited in contrast to tax such expenditure out of the market fee cannot be countenanced in law.
[1252F G] 13.
The first part of cl.
(xiii) may be justified in the sense of imparting education in marketing to the staff of the Market Committee.
But imparting education in agriculture in general cannot be correlated with the market fee.
[1252H] 14.
How ill conceived the second part of clause (xvii) is ? Is it permissible to spend the market fees realised from the traders for any purpose calculated to promote the national or public interest ? Obviously not.
No market Committee can be permitted to utilise the fund for an ulterior purpose howsoever benevolent, laudable and charitable the object may be.
The whole concept of fee will collapse if the amount realised by market fees could be permitted to be spent in this fashion.
[1253A B] Technically and legally, one may not have any objection to the expenditure of such money for the purposes mentioned in clauses (x), (xi), (xiii) and (xvii).
[1253D] 15.
It is not necessary to strike down any clauses of section 28 as being unconstitutional merely on the ground that the expenditure authorised therein goes beyond the scope of the purpose of the utilisation of the market fees.
The authorities have to bear this in mind and on a proper occasion the matter will have to be dealt with by courts in the light of this Judgment where a concrete case comes of raising of a loan, spending the money so raised which cannot be reasonably connected with the purposes for which the market fee can be spent, as to whether such a loan can be repaid or interest on it can be paid out of the realisations of the market fees.
[1253G] 16.
The Board in the State is the Central Controlling and superintending authority over all the Market Committees, the primary function of which is to render service in the market.
Parting with 30% income by a Market Committee in favour of the Board is not so excessive or unreasonable so as to warrant any interference with the law in this regard on the ground of violation of the principle of quid pro quo in the utilisation of the market fee realised 1223 from the traders in the market area.
Emphasised that the Marketing Development Fund can only be expended for the purposes of the Market Committees in a general way, or to be more accurate, as far as practicable, for the purposes of the particular Market Committee which makes the contribution.
[1254C D] 17.
Section 26 of the Act provides for purposes for which the Marketing Development Fund may be expended.
The Marketing Development Fund constituted primarily and mainly out of the contributions by the Market Committees from realisation of market fee can also be expended for the purposes of the market in the notified market area in relation to the transactions of purchase and sale of agricultural produce and for no other general purpose or in the general interest of the agriculture or the agriculturists.
The purposes mentioned in clauses (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), first part of clause (v), clauses (vi), (vii), (viii), (ix), (xii), first part of clause (xiii), clauses (xiv), (xv) and (xvi) held valid.
The Marketing Development Fund constituted out of the Market fees cannot be expended for the purposes mentioned in second part of clause (v), clauses (x), (xi), second part of clause (xiii) and clause (xvii).
As the purpose of the law will be served by restricting the operation of section 26, it is not necessary to strike down those provisions as being constitutionally invalid.
[1254E, 1255F 1256A] 18.
The High Court has extracted section 28 of the Act but has failed to scan the effect of the various purposes in some of the clauses.
[1256H 1257A] 19.
The High Court seems to be of the view that since transportation is very essential for the development of a market and to enable the growers of the agricultural produce to bring the same to the market, the construction of link roads becomes an essential purpose of the market committees.
It may be so but the purpose cannot be allowed to be achieved at the cost of the market fee realised from the dealers.
[1257G] 20.
The impost must be correlated with the service to be rendered to the payers of the fees in the sense and to the extent pointed out.
[1260A] 21.
Everybody seems to have allowed himself to be carried too far by the sentiment of the laudable object of the Act of doing whatever is possible to do under it for the amelioration of the conditions and the uplift of the villagers and the agriculturists.
Undoubtedly the Act is primarily meant for that purpose and to the extent it is permissible under the law to achieve that object of utilising the money collected by the market fee, it should be done.
But if the law does not permit carrying on the sentiment too far for achieving of all the laudable objects under the Act, then primarily it becomes the duty of the Court to allow the law to have an upper hand over the sentiment and not vice versa.
[1263G H] 22.
If insecticides and pesticides are for use at the place where actually the marketing operations are carried on it would be a justifiable expenditure.
But if they are meant to be supplied to the agriculturists for use at their village homes or in their fields surely they cannot be valid expenditure out of the collections of the market fee.
[1267G H] In the instant cases the authorities took full liberty to treat the realisation from market fee as a general realisation of tax which they were free to spend in any manner they liked for the purposes of the Act, the development of the area, for giving a fillip to agricultural production and so forth and so on.
The 1224 sooner the authorities are made to realise the correct position in law the better it will be for all concerned.
[1269F] 23.
Taking a reasonable and practical view of the matter and on appreciation of the true picture of justifiable and legal expenditure in relation to the market fee income, even though it had to be done on the basis of some reason able guess work, the court did not disturb the raising of an imposition of the rate of market fee upto Rs. 2/ per hundred by the various Market Committees and the Boards both in the State of Punjab and Haryana.
After all, considerable development work seems to have been done by many Market Committees in their respective markets.
The charging of fee @ Rs. 2/ therefore, is justified and fit to be sustained.
[1269G 1270A] 24.
The dealers of Haryana did not feel aggrieved when the High Court maintained the raising of the market fee to the extent of Rs. 2/ per hundred rupees.
The court did not uphold the raising of the fee from Rs.2/ to Rs. 3/ as on the materials placed before it, it is clear that this has been done chiefly because of the wrong impression of law that the amount of market fee can be spent for any development work in the notified market area and especially for the development of agriculture and the welfare of the agriculturists.
The High Court was wrong in maintaining this use on an erroneous view of the matter.[1270B C] 25.
In future if the market fee is sought to be raised beyond the rate of Rs.2/ per hundred rupees, proper budgets, estimates, balance sheets showing the balance of the money in hand and in deposit, the estimated income and expenditure, etc.
should carefully be prepared.
On drawing the correct balance sheets and framing of the correct estimates and budgets the authorities as also the State Government will be able to know the correct position and to decide reasonably as to what extent the raising of the market fee can be justified taking an over all picture of the matter and keeping in view the reason behind the restrictions of sales tax laws concerning the transactions of foodgrains and the other agricultural produce.
Then, and then only, there may be a legal justification for raising the rate of the market fee further to a reasonable extent.[1270E G]
