On the ground that the dealers have not charged and collected Central Sales Tax during the period 1st April, 1969 to 9th June, 1969 the Commercial Tax Officer, allowed exemption under section 10 of the Central Sales Tax Act in respect of certain turn over of the appellant which included the price realised on account of inter state sales.
In respect of a second set of transactions which involved the purchase value of cotton sold during the year through inter state sales the Commercial Tax Officer held that the appellant was entitled to exemption under the proviso to section 6 of the A.P. General Sales Tax Act.
In 1972 section 15(b) of the Central Act was amended with retrospective effect from 1st October, 1958 and in 1974 section 6 of the State Act was amended with retrospective effect from the same date.
The Deputy Commissioner of Commercial Taxes revised the assessment order of the Commercial Tax Officer passed under the State Act on the ground that in view of the provisions of section 6 as amended in 1974 the appellant was not entitled to any exemption during the above period.
The Sales Tax Appellate Tribunal dismissed the appellant 's appeal on the view that section 6 of the State Act did not talk of any exemption either before or after its amendment in 1974.
The High Court dismissed the appellant 's appeal holding that the exemption granted by the C.T.O. was patently wrong.
Dismissing the Appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
Section 10 of the Central Act which makes no reference to any tax leviable under a State Act can be of no assistance to the appellant.
Granting that the appellant did not collect any tax under the Central Act during the period in question on the ground that no such tax could have been levied or collected so that it becomes fully entitled to the benefit of the exemption enacted by the section, that would only mean that central sales tax cannot be charged from it in respect of sales covered by the section.
No demand had been made from it for any tax leviable under the Central Act in respect of such sales and the appellant could not derive any benefit from section 10 of the Central Act in the matter of its assessment under the State Act.
[1033G H] 2.
In so far as the assessment under the State Act is concerned all that the C.T.O. could have meant by granting exemption was that the appellant became liable to pay a tax under the opening para of the section; but that since the appellant was also entitled to a refund of such tax the same was taken to have been paid by and refunded to it.
The assessment order made 1029 under the proviso to section 6 of the State Act and section 15 (b) of the Central Act as they stood then was unexceptionable.
[1034E F] 3.
Under section 6 as amended the liability to tax remained unchanged but the entitlement to refund was abolished an was substituted by a right to reimbursement of the tax which arose only if the concerned goods were later on sold in the course of inter state trade under the Central Act and tax under that Act was paid in respect thereof.
Such reimbursement would not be available merely because the goods in question had been sold in the course of inter state trade or commerce when they were not subjected to tax under the Central Act.
No such tax was paid.
The proviso to section 6 as amended in 1974 can be of no assistance to the appellant.
[1035A B] 4.
The language of clause (b) of section 15 of the Central Act is the same as that of the amended proviso to section 6 of the State Act.
It clearly means that the tax under the State Act would be reimbursible only to a dealer who has paid tax under the State Act in respect of the sale of the goods in question in the course of inter state trade or commerce.
[1035C D] 5.
The argument that the Deputy Commissioner had no power to cancel the order of refund is fallacious.
He has done nothing more than to revise an order of the C.T.O. which has been varied only in so far as it was not in conformity with the law deemed to have been prevailing on the date of the assessment by virtue of the retrospective amendment of section 6 of the State Act.
The Deputy Commissioner had not only the power but was duty bound to strike down the order of refund as being illegal.
[1035F G] 6.
Rule 27A can be of little help to the appellant inasmuch as even if it can be construed as laying down something in its favour, the rule cannot override the provisions of the Act.
[1036A] Daita Suryanarayana and Company vs State of Andhra Pradesh 39 S.T.C. 500 approved.
