The purported object of the Andhra Pradesh Recognised Private Educational Institutions Control Act 1975 was to regulate the service conditions of teachers in private educational institutions and for ensuring the security of service of the teachers.
Section 3(1) of the Act provides "Subject to any rule that may be made in this behalf, no teacher employed in any private educational institution shall be dismissed, removed or reduced in rank nor shall his appointment be otherwise terminated except with the prior approval of the competent authority".
The proviso to this sub section states that if any educational management etc.
contravenes the provisions of this sub section, the teacher affected shall be deemed to be in service.
Where a proposal to dismiss etc.
any teacher is communicated to the competent authority, according to sub section (2) of this section, that authority shall, if satisfied that there are adequate and reasonable grounds for such proposal, approve such dismissal, removal or reduction in rank or termination of appointment.
Clause (a) of sub section (3) of this section states that no teacher employed in any private educational institution shall be placed under suspension, except when an enquiry into the gross misconduct of such teacher is contemplated.
Clause (b) provides that no such suspension shall remain in force for more than a period of two months from the date of suspension and if such inquiry is not completed with that period, such teacher shall, without prejudice to the inquiry, be deemed to have been r restored as teacher.
The proviso states that the competent authority may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the said period of two months for a further period not exceeding two months, if in his opinion, the inquiry could not be completed within the said period of two months for reasons directly attributable to each teacher.
Section 4 gives a right of appeal to teachers employed in private educational institutions against orders of punishment imposed on them.
Section 5 deals with special provisions regarding appeal in certain past disciplinary cases.
Section 6 which deals with retrenchment of teachers provides that where retrenchment of any teacher is rendered necessary consequent on any order of the Government relating to education or course of instructions or to any other matter, such retrenchment may be effected with the prior approval of the competent authority.
Section 7 provides for payment of pay and allowances to teachers in the prescribed manner.
925 The appellants who were minority educational institutions established by members of the Christian community filed writ petitions before the High Court impugning various provisions of the Act as being violative of the guarantee contained in Article 30(1) of the Constitution by permitting or compelling interference with the internal administration of their private educational institutions.
In particular they challenged the provisions of sections 3 to 7 of the Act on the ground that they deprive them of their right to administer the affairs of minority institutions by vesting the ultimate administrative control in an outside authority.
The contentions having been rejected by the High Court they filed appeals by special leave.
^ HELD s Permajority (Chandrachud, C.J., and Fazal Ali, J. Kailasam,J., dissenting.): Sub sections (1) and (2) of section 3 are invalid and cannot be applied to minority institutions.
Per majority (Chandrachud, C.J., and Kailasam J. Fazal Ali, J. dissenting).
Clauses (a) and (b) of section 3(3) do not offend against article 30(1) and are valid.
By the Court: Sections 4 & 5 are unconstitutional as being violative of article 30(1).
Per majority (Chandrachud, C.J., and Kailasam J Fazal Ali, J, dissenting).
Section 6 is valid.
By the Court: Section 7 is valid.
Per Chandrachud, C.J. Section 3(1) and 3(2) are unconstitutional in so far as they are made applicable to minority institutions since in practice these provisions are bound to interfere substantially with their right to administer institutions of their choice.
[937E] 1.
(a) Section 3(1) gives an unqualified mandate that no teacher shall be dismissed etc.
except with the prior approval of the competent authority.
Under the proviso, contravention of the section results in a total invalidation of the proposed action.
If the section is contravened the teacher shall be deemed to be in service.
Secondly, the sub section applies not only to cases in which the teacher is punished by an order of dismissal etc.
but to cases in which the appointment is otherwise terminated.
An order of termination simpliciter is also required to be submitted for the prior approval of the competent authority.
All this shows that the true object of the sub section is not that which one could liberally assume by reading down the section.
[935H; 936AB] (b) In the absence of any rules furnishing guidelines on the subject, it is difficult to predicate that in practice the operation of the section would be limited to a certain class of cases only.
The absence of rules on the subject makes the unguided discretion of the competent authority the sole arbiter of the question as to which cases would fall within the section and which would fall outside it.
[936 E F] (c) Section 3(2), under the guise on conferring the power of approval, confers upon the competent authority an appellate power of great magnitude.
That authority is made a judge both of facts and on law by the conferment upon 926 it of a power to test the validity of the proposal on the vastly subjective touchstone of adequacy and reasonableness.
The sub section leaves no scope for reading down the provision of section 3(1).
The two sub sections together confer upon the competent authority, in the absence of proper rules, a wide and untrammeled discretion to interfere with the proposed order whenever in its opinion the order is based on grounds which do not appear to it either adequate or reasonable.
[936G H; 937A] (d) Though the section provides that the competent authority "shall" approve the proposed order if it is satisfied that it is based on adequate and reasonable grounds, its plain and necessary implication is that it shall not approve the proposal unless it is satisfied.
The conferment of such a power on an outside authority, the exercise of which is made to depend purely on subjective consideration arising out of twin formula of adequacy and reasonableness, cannot but constitute an infringement of the right guaranteed by article 30(1).
[937C] State of Kerala vs Very.
Rev. Mother Provincial ; , D.A.V. College vs State of Punjab [1971] Suppl.
S.C.R. 688 and Ahmedabad st.
Xaviers College Society vs State of Gujarat ; ; referred to.
(a) Section 3(3)(a) and 3(3)(b) of the Act do not offend against the provisions of article 30(1) and are valid.
[939B C] (b) Clause (a) contains but an elementary guarantee of freedom from arbitrariness to the teachers.
The provision is regulatory in character since it neither denies to the management the right to proceed against an erring teacher nor does it place an unreasonable restraint on its power to do so.
It assumes the right of the management to suspend a teacher but regulates that right by directing that a teacher shall not be suspended unless an inquiry into his conduct is contemplated and unless the inquiry is in respect of a charge of gross misconduct.
These restraints which bear a reasonable nexus with attainment of educational excellence cannot be considered to be violative of the right given by article 30(1).
The limitation of the period of suspension initially to two months, which can in appropriate cases be extended by another two months, as provided in clause (b) and its proviso, partakes of the same character as the provisions contained in clause (a).
A provision founded so patently on plain reason is difficult to construe as an invasion of the right to administer an institution unless that right carried with it the right to maladminister.
[938 G H] 3.
Section 4 is unconstitutional as being violative of article 30(1) of the constitution.
The section confers upon the government the power to provide by rules that an appeal might lie to such authority or officer as it designates, regardless of the standing or status of that authority or officer.
Secondly an appeal is provided for on all questions of fact and law, thereby throwing open the order passed by the management to the unguided scrutiny and unlimited review of the appellate authority, which would mean that, in the exercise of the appellate power, the prescribed authority or officer can substitute his own view for that of the management even in cases in which two views are reasonably possible.
Lastly, while a right of appeal is given to the aggrieved teacher against the order passed by the management, no corresponding right is conferred on the management against the order passed by the competent authority under section 3(2) of the Act.
In the absence of a provision for appeal against the order of the competent autho 927 rity refusing to approve the action proposed by the management, the management is pleased in a gravely disadvantageous position vis a vis the teacher who is given the right of appeal by section 4.
[939D H] Section 5 must fall with section 4.
[940B] 4.
Section 6 is valid.
The section aims at affording a minimal guarantee of security of tenure to teachers by eschewing the passing of mala fide orders in the garb of retrenchment.
It is implicit in the provisions of this section that the limited jurisdiction which it confers upon the competent authority is to examine whether, in cases where the retrenchment is stated to have become necessary by reason of an order passed by the Government, it has in fact so become necessary.
The conferment of a guided and limited power on the competent authority for the purpose of finding out whether, in fact the retrenchment has become necessary by reason of a Governmental order cannot constitute an interference with the right of administration conferred by article 30(1).
[940D F] Section 7 is regulatory in its character and is valid.
[940H] Per Fazal Ali, J. On an exhaustive analysis of the authorities of this Court on the various aspects of the fundamental right enshrined in article 30(1) of the Constitution the following propositions of law emerge: (i) Article 30(1) enshrines the fundamental right of the minority institutions to manage and administer their educational institutions.
[967H] (ii) Although, the right conferred by this article is absolute, unfettered and unconditional, it does not mean that it gives a licence for maladministration so as to defeat the avowed object of the article, namely to advance excellence and perfection in the field of education.
[968B] (iii)While the State or any other statutory authority has no right to interfere with the internal administration of the minority institution, it could take regulatory measures to promote the efficiency and excellence of educational standards and issue guidelines for ensuring the security of the services of the teachers and other employees of the institution.
[968C] (iv) Under the garb of adopting regulatory measures, the State or any other authority cannot destroy the administrative autonomy of the institution or interfere with the management of the institution so as to render the right of administration of the management of the institution illusory.
[968E] (v) By its very nature article 30 implies that where an affiliation is asked for, the university cannot refuse the same without sufficient reason or try to impose such conditions as would completely destroy the autonomous administration of the educational institution.
[968G] (vi) Induction of an outside authority in the governing body of the minority institution to conduct the affairs of the institution would be completely destructive of the fundamental right under article 30(1), where a high authority like the Vice Chancellor or his 928 nominee is appointed in the administration, such authorities should not be thrust so as to have a controlling voice in the matter overshadowing the powers of the managing committee.
[968H] (vii)It is open to the Government or the University to frame rules and regulations governing the conditions of service of teachers in order to secure their tenure of service and to appoint a high authority to see that the rules are not violated or the members of the staff are not victimised.
In such cases the purpose is not to interfere with the autonomy of the institution but merely to improve the excellence and efficiency of education.
Even so, an authority should not be given a blanket uncanalised and arbitrary powers.
[969E F] (viii)Where a minority institution affiliated to a university is enjoined to adopt courses of study of the syllabi or the nature of books prescribed and the holding of examination to test the ability of the students of the institution, it does not follow that the freedom contained in article 30(1) of the Constitution is violated.
[970A] (ix) Where a high authority is appointed to exercise vigilance on the work of the teachers and to ensure security of tenure for them the authority must be given proper guidelines.
Before coming to any decision which may be binding on the managing committee the head of the institution or the senior member of the managing committee must be associated and they should be allowed to have a say in the matter.
[970C] Kerala Education Bill, 1957; , ; Sidhajbhai Sabhai and Ors.
vs State of Bombay and Anr.
; ; Rev. Father W. Proost & Ors.
vs State of Bihar ; ; State of Kerala etc.
vs Veru Rev. Mother Provincial etc.
; ; D.A.V. College etc.
vs State of Punjab & Ors.
and The Ahmedabad St. Xaviers College Society & Anr.
vs State of Gujarat ; ; referred to.
(a) Section 3 in its entirety is ultra vires as being violative of article 30(1) and is wholly inapplicable to the appellants who are minority institutions.
[975B] (b) The proviso enjoins that any contravention of the provisions would not affect the teachers who would be deemed to be in service.
It is manifest that in the absence of any rules the proviso would have no application and even if it applied it would amount to a serious inroad on the fundamental right of the minority institutions to administer or manage their own affairs.
[971H] (c) Sub section 2 of section 3 is unconstitutional as being violative of article 30(1).
It suffers from the vice of excessive delegation of powers and confers undefined, absolute and arbitrary powers to grant or to refuse sanction to any action taken by the managing committee and almost reduces the institution to a helpless position.
[973B C] (d) If the State wanted to regulate the conditions of service of the teachers, it should have taken care to make proper rules giving sufficient 929 powers to the management in the manner in which it was to act.
Induction of an outside authority into the institution and making his decision final was a blatant interference with the autonomy of the institution.
The words "adequate and reasonable" are too vague and do not lay down any objective standard to judge the discretion to be exercised by the competent authority whose order would be binding on the institution.
[972F G] (e) While section 4 gives a right of appeal to the aggrieved teacher no such right has been given to the management to file an appeal against the order of the competent authority if it refuses to grant sanction to the order of the Managing Committee of the institution.
The competent authority is only the District Educational Officer who is not a very high authority such as a Director of Public instruction or Vice Chancellor of a University.
No time limit has been fixed by the statute within which the competent authority is to give its approval.
The cumulative effect of clause (a) and (b) of section 3(3) and the proviso is to interfere with the internal administration of the minority institutions and curb the power of suspension.
It deprives the institution of the right of taking any disciplinary action against a teacher.
The adjective "gross" before the term "misconduct in clause (a) destroys the power of suspension which the minority institution possesses.
The provision contained in clause (b) of section 3(3) providing that no suspension shall remain in force for a period of more than two months from the date of suspension and if no inquiry is completed within this period the teacher would have to be reinstated, gives an unqualified right to a teacher in the matter of suspension which even a government servant does not enjoy.
[973A, 974D E] 2.
Section 4 is ultra vires and is violative of article 30 of the Constitution.
It does not contain any guidelines as to the manner in which the power could be exercised, nor does it contain any provision which may entitle the minority institution to be heard by the appellate authority.
The conferment of an absolute and unguided power on the appellate authority would amount to a direct interference with the right enshrined in article 30(1) and makes the minority institution a powerless body.
[976B; 975G] 3.
If section 4 is inapplicable to the minority institution Section 5 also follows the same fate.
[976C] 4.
Section 6 which contains an un canalised and unguided power suffers from the same vice as in the case of section 3.
The words "administer educational institutions of their choice" in article 30 clearly indicate that the institution has an absolute right to select teachers, retain them or retrench them at its sweet will according to the norms prescribed by the institution or by the religious order which has founded the institution.
[976H] 5.
Section 7 is an innocuous provision and is valid.
[977C] 6.
Sections 8, 9, 12 and 13 are inapplicable to the minority institutions.
[977D, 978B] 7.
Section 16 suffers from a serious defect namely that the provision regarding appeal to the appellate authority was valid then it completely bars the right of the management to file a suit to challenge the validity of the order of the appellant.
To this extent the section makes serious inroad on the fundamental right of the minority institutions and is inapplicable to the minority institutions.
[978G] Section 17 is inapplicable.
[978F] 930 Per Kailasam, J. 1.
A reading of the various decisions rendered by this Court on the interpretation of article 30(1) of the Constitution makes it clear that while the right to establish and administer a minority institution cannot be interfered with, restrictions by way of regulations for the purpose of maintaining the educational standards of the institution can be validly imposed.
For maintaining the educational standards of the institution as a whole, it is necessary to ensure that it is properly staffed.
Conditions imposing the minimum qualifications of the staff, their pay and other benefits, their service conditions, the imposition of punishment will all be covered and regulations of such a nature are valid.
In the case of institutions that receive aid it is the duty of the government who grants aid to see that the funds are properly utilised.
Regulations can be made by the government for ensuring the proper conditions of service of the teachers and for securing fair procedure in the matter of disciplinary action against them.
Prescribing uniformity in the conditions of service and conduct of teachers in all non governmental colleges would promote harmony, avoid frustration and, therefore, is permissible.
Rules prescribed by the university or other authority may require that no member of the teaching or non teaching staff of a recognised or approved institution shall be dismissed etc., except after a proper enquiry.
If the regulations require the approval of the competent authority for safeguarding the rights of the teachers and for securing the procedure there can be no objection.
Such authority can also interfere with the decision of the private institutions when the punishment awarded is malafide or by way of victimisation or for similar causes.
[989B; 993D G] Kerala Education Bill [1959] SCR, 995, Rev. Sidhajbhai Sabhai & Ors. ; , Rev. Father W. Proost and Ors.
vs State of Bihar & Ors.
; , State of Kerala vs Very.
Rev. Mother Provincial ; , D.A.V. College etc.
vs State of Punjab & Ors.
[1971] Suppl.
S.C.R. 688 and Ahmedabad St. Xaviers College Society and Anr.
vs State of Gujarat ; , referred to. 2.
It is not only reasonable but proper that a restricted meaning is given to the power of prior approval conferred on the competent authority under section 3 of the Act.
It is a well established principle of interpretation that the statement of objects and reasons could be referred to for the limited purpose of ascertaining the conditions prevalent at the time which actuated the sponsor of the Bill to introduce the same and the extent of urgency and the evil sought to be remedied.
Clearly the legislation was intended to regulate the service conditions of teachers employed in the private educational institutions and for the security of service of the teachers.
The power contained in section 3(1) and 3(2) is restricted to regulating the service conditions of teachers and for ensuring their security of service.
[1001C; 998A B] 3.
While interpreting a provision of law the Court will presume that the legislation was intended to be intra vires and also reasonable.
The section ought to be interpreted consistent with the presumption which imputes to the legislature an intention of limiting the direct operation of its enactment to the extent that is permissible.
A reading down of a provision of a statute puts into operation the principle that so far as it is reasonably possible to do so, the legislation should be construed as being within its power.
It has the principle effect 931 that where an Act is expressed in language of generality, which makes it capable, if read literally, of applying to matters beyond the relevant legislative powers, the Court will construe it in a more limited sense so as to keep it within power.
[998E F] The State of West Bengal vs Subhodh Gopal Bose and Ors. ; , Att.
vs HRH Prince Earnest Augstas of Hanover, , Keshavananda Bharti vs State of Kerala , 101, Towns vs Bigner 245 U.S. , 376 and Kedar Nath Singh vs State of Bihar ; ; referred to.
In the instant case it must be presumed that the legislature was conscious of the limitations of the power which the competent authority can have in granting or withholding approval in the case of disciplinary proceedings conducted by private institutions.
The object of the legislation in this case was very different from other cases in which the legislation was aimed at depriving the minority institutions of all their powers.
Its only aim is to provide security of service.
There are sufficient guidelines in the objects and reasons as well as in the preamble.
[1001 B C] 4.
(a) The contention that section 3(1) and (2) lack guidelines and have conferred a blanket power cannot be accepted.
Section 3(1) and (2) must be read together.
The words "adequate and reasonable" should be given a restricted meaning so as to validate the provisions of the section.
The approval of an order contemplated by sub section (2) will have to be read with sub section (1).
Sub section (2) required the competent authority to approve such a proposal if it is satisfied that there are adequate and reasonable grounds for such proposal.
The words "adequate and reasonable" furnish sufficient guidelines.
The competent authority can interfere if there are no materials at all for sustaining the order of punishment or when on the materials found the charge is completely baseless and preserve.
The word "adequate" will have to be understood as being confined to such examination of the proposal.
The word "reasonable" would indicate that the power of the competent authority is confined to the power of an authority to interfere with the enquiry and the conclusions arrived at by the domestic tribunal.
It cannot be understood as conferring absolute power to interfere with the enquiry by the tribunal as a Court of appeal on merits.
[1002E; 1001G H] (b) The plea that the "competent authority" may be any petty officer cannot be upheld because it is defined in section 2(1) to mean "any authority, officer or person authorised by notification performing the functions of competent authority".
The officers of the educational department who are incharge of the administration of educational institutions in the area cannot be called petty officers.
[1002H] (c) Clauses (a) and (b) of sub section (3) cannot be said to interfere with the right of administration of the private institutions.
The two clauses are regulatory in nature and are intended to safeguard the teachers from being suspended for unduly long periods without there being an enquiry into "gross mis conduct." [1003C] (d) Sub section (4) of section 3 which states that every teacher placed under suspension shall be paid subsistence allowance at such rates as may be 932 prescribed during the period of his suspension is purely regulatory in nature and, therefore, unobjectionable.
[1003D] 5.
Section 4 is invalid.
The vice contained in this section is that the right of appeal which is confined only to the teachers is not available to institutions.
[1003F] 6.
Section 5 which confers power on the competent authority to hear appeals in certain past disciplinary cases will have to fall along with section 4.
[1003G] 7.
Section 6 is also regulatory in nature and its validity cannot be questioned.
[1003H] 8.
Section 7 is regulatory in nature and is intended for securing regular payment to the teachers.
[1004A]
