The appellants in both the appeals were allotted a plot each "provisionally subject to the final approval of Government" and possession thereof was also given in 1956.
Six years later by letter dated 31 10 62 they were informed that "the State Government has not approved the allotment in your favour and the provisional allotment made in your favour stands cancelled".
Steps were to be taken for the eviction as per the said letter of cancellation, but before any action was taken, the District Magistrate requisitioned the said plots for defence purposes under section 29 of the Defence of India Act, 1922.
The letters of requisition were addressed to the appellants and possession taken.
No steps were taken by the Department for taking formal or symbolical possession of the plots in question after they were requisitioned by the Magistrate.
Later on, while derequisitioning the said plots under section 35(1) of the Defence of India Act 1962, the Magistrate "specified the Director of Industries, Kanpur as the person to whom the possession of the said plots shall be given".
Possession was given accordingly and the Director of Industries in CA 560/70 in turn allotted the plot covered in it to one Mrs. B. K. Anand respondent 5 therein.
The writ Petitions filed by the appellants in the High Court challenging the said orders failed and hence the appeal by special leave.
Allowing CA 559/70 and dismissing CA 560/70, the Court, ^ HELD: The inquiry envisaged under sub section (1) of section 35 of the Defence of India Act, 1962, is necessitated only if facts and events taking place after requisition necessitate it.
Otherwise not.
As for example, suppose, possession of a property is taken from X and after requisition he dies and dispute starts between his heirs as to who is entitled to get back the property.
A summary and prima facie inquiry may be made under sub section
(1) and property may be released in favour of the person who may be entitled to the possession of it in the opinion of the Government.
Of course such a decision would be subject to the adjudication of the rights of the parties in accordance with sub section
[814 C E] Facts anterior to the requisition are not necessary to be investigated for release of the property because the property has to be released in favour of the person from whom possession was taken.
If it were not so then it would be enlarging the scope of the inquiry envisaged under sub section
(1) of section 35 of 810 the Act and the power of the Government to adjudicate upon anterior title of the various claimants to the property.
This is not the scope of the inquiry.
[814 E F] Technically speaking on a correct interpretation of the law the property on de requisition ought to have been released in favour of the two appellants in the two appeals from whom possession was taken at the time of requisition.
The requisition was effected by an order in writing addressed to the person in possession of the property in accordance with sub section
(2) of section 29.
He may not be the owner of the property.
But on requisition possession was taken from him.
[814 C D, F G] [The Court, however, passed a qualified and conditional order in terms].
