The accused (appellant) who was charged with offences under section 5(1) (d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act and section 161 of the Penal Code was convicted and sentenced by the Special Judge.
The convictions and sentences were confirmed by the High Court.
The prosecution alleged that the scooter rickshaw of the complainant driven by his driver was one day involved in a traffic accident and the vehicle was taken to the police station by the accused who was a police constable.
The complainant obtained orders of the Magistrate for its release but the accused declined to release the vehicle unless he was paid a sum of Rs. 60.
The complainant was not prepared to pay the sum demanded.
He then went to an Inspector of the Anti Corruption Department and lodged a complaint that the accused was demanding illegal gratification from him for the release of his scooter rickshaw which was ordered by the Magistrate to be released.
The prosecution further alleged that the Inspector called two panch witnesses and after noting down the numbers of six ten rupee currency notes given by the complainant, treated them with phenol phthalene powder and gave them to the complainant.
It was arranged that the complainant should hand over the currency notes to the accused and should thereafter make a signal at which the Inspector and panch witnesses would enter the room.
The complainant carried out the plan as arranged and gave the call on which the Inspector and panch witnesses entered the room of the accused.
On seeing the Inspector, the accused removed the currency notes from his pocket and flung them across the wall into the adjoining room.
The notes were collected and when compared with the numbers noted earlier, they tallied.
The hands of the accused were then dipped in sodium bicarbonate solution which, colourless earlier, turned pink.
Similarly the handkerchief in the right side pocket of the trousers of the accused was removed and also dipped in sodium bicarbonate solution.
That too turned pink.
Before the trial court many of the witnesses turned hostile and one of the panch witnesses became mentally deranged.
In appeal it was contended before this Court that (1) the courts below had made free use of the statements made by the witnesses in the course of investigation as if they were substantive evidence and, if they were excluded, the rest of the evidence would not be sufficient to draw the presumption under 1054 section 4(1) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, (2) the fact that the Inspector was the very police officer who laid the trap, should be sufficient to insist on corroboration of his evidence.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1(a) The courts below were clearly wrong in using as substantive evidence statements made by witnesses in the course of investigation.
[1059E] (b) Section 162 of the Code of Criminal Procedure imposes a bar on the use of any statement made by any person to a police officer in the course of investigation at any enquiry or trial in respect of any offence under investigation at the time when such statement was made, except for the purpose of contradicting the witnesses in the manner provided by section 145 of the Evidence Act.
Where any part of such statement is so used any part thereof may also be used in the re examination of the witness for the limited purpose of explaining any matter referred to in his cross examination.
The only other exception to this embargo on the use of statements made in the course of an investigation relates to the statements falling within the provisions of section 32(1) of the Evidence Act or permitted to be proved under section 27 of the Evidence Act.
[1059A C] (c) The contention of the prosecution that the earlier statements with which witnesses were confronted for the purpose of contradiction could be taken into consideration by the Court in view of the definition of "proved" in section 3 of the Evidence Act has no substance.
The definition of the term "proved" does not enable a Court to take into consideration matters, including statements, whose use is statutorily barred.
[1059G] 2(a) The evidence of the Inspector is entirely trustworthy and there is no need to seek any corroboration.
[1059H] (b) There is no rule of prudence which has crystalized into a rule of law, nor any rule of prudence which requires that the evidence of such police officers should be treated on the same footing as evidence of accomplices and there should be insistence on corroboration.
In the facts and circumstances of a particular case a court may be disinclined to act upon the evidence of such an officer without corroboration, but, equally in the facts and circumstances of another case the court may unhesitatingly accept the evidence of such an officer.
It is all a matter of appreciation of evidence and on such matters there can be no hard and fast rule nor can there be any precedential guidance.
[1060A B].
In the instant case the proved facts were that the complainant made a report to the Inspector, and currency notes whose numbers were noted and which were treated with phenol phthalene powder were handed over to the complainant.
The complainant went into the accused 's room and came out after a short while giving the agreed signal.
When the Inspector rushed in, the accused threw the currency notes across the wall into the adjoining room.
His hands and the handkerchief when dipped in sodium bicarbonate solution turned pink and lastly instead of giving a plausible explanation as to how the phenol phthalene powder came to his hands and the handkerchief in his pocket all that he could say was that he "knew nothing about it".
From all these facts the only inference that follows is that currency notes were obtained by the accused from the complainant.
It is not necessary that the passing of 1055 money should be proved by direct evidence, it may also be proved by circumstantial evidence.
The events which followed in quick succession in the present case led to the only inference that the money was obtained by the accused from the complainant.
Under section 114 of the Evidence Act the Court may presume the existence of any fact which is likely to have happened regard being had to the common course of natural events, human conduct and public and private business, in their relation to facts of the particular case.
One of the illustrations to this section is that the Court may presume that a person who is in possession of stolen goods soon after the theft is either the thief or has received the goods knowing them to be stolen, unless he can account for his possession.
So too in the facts and circumstances of the present case the Court may presume that the accused who took out the currency notes from his pocket and flung them across the wall had obtained them from the complainant who, a few minutes earlier, was shown to have been in possession of the notes.
Once it is found that the accused had obtained the money from the complainant the presumption under section 4 (1) of the Prevention of Corruption Act is immediately attracted.
The presumption is rebuttable, but in the present case there is no material to rebut the presumption.
The accused was, therefore, rightly convicted by the courts below.
[1061D F] Sita Ram vs The State of Rajasthan AIR 1975 SC 1432; Suraj Mal vs The State (Delhi Administration) AIR 1979 SC 1408 held inapplicable.
There is no force in the contention that persons holding clerical posts could not be called independent witnesses on the ground that they would be under fear of disciplinary action if they did not support the prosecution case.
The respectability and verasity of a witness is not necessarily dependent upon his status in life and it cannot be said that clerks are less truthful and amenable than superior officers.
[1060E]
