The petitioner 's brother was detained by an order of detention dated 31st August, 1979 under section 3(1) of the and the grounds of detention were served on him on 5th September, 1979.
An application was made on 17th September, 1979 for supply of documents and statements recorded and relied on in the grounds of detention.
On 22nd September, 1979 he made an incomplete representation.
The documents were supplied on 25th September, 27th September and 3rd October, 1979.
The detenu made a second representation on 5th October, 1979 requesting that the order of detention be revoked by the Central Government but no action was taken on them till the date of hearing.
In the writ petition it was alleged that the first representation as well as the second representation requesting for the revocation of the order under section 11 of the Act were not considered by the Central Government and that non consideration of the representation vitiated the detention order.
The detaining authority on the other hand contended that the mere fact that the representation was not considered by the Central Government did not vitiate the order of detention.
Allowing the petition, ^ HELD: The continued detention of the detenu cannot be held to be according to procedure.
[1081F] If a properly addressed petition is left unattended for a long period of time the detention order cannot be justified as being according to procedure.
[1081 E] The power conferred on the Central Government by section 11 of the Act is wide enough to enable that Government to revoke the detention order at any stage for the words used are a detention order may at any time be revoked or modified.
Any petition for revocation of an order of detention should be dealt with with reasonable expedition.
It may be permissible for the Central Government to take reasonable time for disposing of a petition for revocation of an order of detention but it would not be justified in ignoring the representation because a statutory duty is cast upon the Central Government.
It is necessary that the Government should apply its mind and either revoke the order of detention or dismiss the petition.
[1080G H] In the instant case the representation which was properly addressed by the detenu to the Central Government was not forwarded to that Government and 1079 as such no action had been taken till the date of hearing.
There is no justification in sending the representation to the Central Government at this very late stage.
[1081C&E]
