Section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 prescribes a minimum sentence of one year, in all cases of conviction under the Act, with a proviso that the Court may for any special reasons recorded in writing impose a sentence of imprisonment of less than one year.
The petitioner was convicted for having committed offences under section 161 I.P.C. and Section 5(2) of POCA and was sentenced to suffer R.I. for one year on each count and on the second count, also to pay a fine of Rs. 400/ or in default to suffer further R.I. for three months by the learned Special Judge.
Both the substantive sentences of imprisonment were directed to run concurrently.
In appeal the High Court, while maintaining the conviction, reduced the substantive sentence of rigorous imprisonment for one year to the sentence undergone till the date of the Judgment of the High Court and increased the fine to Rs. 4,000/ (Rupees four thousand) or in default to suffer further R.I. for one year.
The High Court, while so altering the sentence, took into consideration two facts, namely, (i) that the petitioner was dismissed from service and (ii) that he is a family man.
Dismissing the special leave petition of the convict against his conviction, there being no appeal by State, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
The language of the proviso to Section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act makes it abundantly clear that court is under an obligation to impose a minimum punishment once the conviction is recorded under Section 5(2) and the minimum punishment of imprisonment is for a term not less than one year.
Undoubtedly the proviso confers power on the Court to award less than the minimum punishment if the Court convicting and sentencing the accused, is of the opinion that for any special reasons which the Court is under an obligation to record in writing, sentence of imprisonment for a term less than the minimum is called for.
Conceding that the quantum of sentence is in the discretion of the trial Court, where the Legislature stepped in and circumscribed and fettered the discretion by directing imposing of a minimum sentence, the court can exercise its discretion within the limited spheres left open by legislature.
The Legislature circumscribed the discretion by requiring the Court to impose minimum sentence but left it open to award less than the minimum statutorily prescribed for special reasons.
The reasons have to be special reasons.
The words 'special reasons ' in the context in which they are 1153 used could only mean special to the accused on whom sentence is being imposed.
The Court has to weigh reasons advanced in respect of each individual accused whose case is taken up for awarding sentence.
[1155C G] In the instant case, there was no justification much less special reasons statutorily required, for awarding less than the minimum sentence.
Stricto sensu court exceeded its jurisdiction while interfering with the quantum of sentence.
[1157E] Jagdish Prasad vs West Bengal, [1972] 2 S.C.R. p. 845 @ 851, relied on.
The word "special" has to be understood in contradistinction to word "general" or "ordinary".
"Special" means distinguished by some unusual quality, out of the ordinary.
Again "special" means 'particular '; peculiar; different from others; designed for a particular purpose, occasion, or person; limited in range; confined to a definite field of action.
Thus, anything which is common to a large class governed by the same statute cannot be said to be special to each of them.
And, "special reasons" in the context of sentencing process must be special to the accused in the case or special to the facts and circumstances of the case in which the sentence is being awarded.
[1155G H, 1156A] 3.
In the instant case, the only two reasons special according to the High Court for awarding less than the minimum sentence are (i) appellant before it has lost his job and (ii) and he is a married man with children.
These two reasons would be common to ninety nine percent of cases tried under Prevention of Corruption Act and if they can be styled as "special reasons" for awarding less than the minimum sentence the proviso would be rendered wholly nugatory.
[1156G H, 1157A] Observation: The Court should not be oblivious to the fact that while conferring discretion in the matter of awarding adequate sentence within limits prescribed by the statute, the Legislature finding cases of misplaced sympathy in sentencing process fettered the Court 's discretion by prescribing a minimum sentence and making it obligatory to record special reasons for awarding less than the minimum.
If still the notice of encroachments on court 's discretion is not taken, time may not be far when the Legislature out of exasperation may resort to what it has done in Section 16 of Prevention of Food Adulteration Act where minimum sentence is prescribed and Court 's discretion to award less in any case is wholly taken away.
[1157A C]
