The respondents were charged with the offence of attempting to smuggle out of India 43 silver ingots in violation of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947, Imports and Exports (Control) Act, 1947 and the .
The prosecution alleged that on the night of the occurrence the respondents carried in a truck and a jeep silver ingots some of which were concealed in a shawl, and some others hidden in saw dust bags from Bombay to a lonely creek nearby and that when the ingots were unloaded near the creek the sound of the engine of a mechanised sea craft from the side of the creek was heard by the Customs officials and that therefore they were guilty of attempting to smuggle silver out of India.
The respondents pleaded that they were not aware of the presence of silver ingots in the vehicles, that they were only employed for driving the jeep and the truck to another destination and that the police stopped them en route and had driven them to the creek.
The Trial Court convicted and sentenced them to various terms of imprisonment and fine.
On appeal, the Sessions Judge acquitted all the respondents taking the view that the facts proved showed no more than that the accused had only made "preparations" for bringing the silver to the creek and "had not committed any act amounting to a direct movement towards the commission of the offence" and that until the silver was put in the boat with intent to export, it would merely be in the stage of preparation falling short of an "attempt" to export in contravention of the law.
The High Court dismissed the State 's appeal.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, ^ HELD: Per Sarkaria, J.: (Chinnappa Reddy, J. concurring) 1.
The High Court was in error in holding that the circumstances established by the prosecution fell short of constituting the offence of an "attempt" to export unlawfully silver out of India.
[1165F] 2.
The expression "attempt" within the meaning of the penal provisions is wide enough to take in its fold any one or series of acts committed beyond the stage of preparation in moving contraband goods deliberately to the place of embarkation, such act or acts being reasonably proximate to the completion of the unlawful export.
[1165E].
1159 3.
The definition of 'proved ' contained in section 3 of the Evidence Act does not draw any distinction between circumstantial and other evidence.
If the circumstances establish such a high degree of probability that a prudent man ought to act on the supposition that the accused was attempting to export silver from India in contravention of the law, that would be sufficient proof of that fact in issue.
[116A B] 4(a) What constitutes an "attempt" is a mixed question of law and fact, depending largely on the circumstances of the particular case.
"Attempt" defies a precise and exact definition.
Brodly speaking, all crimes which consist of the commission of affirmative acts are preceded by some covert or overt conduct which may be divided into three stages: the first stage exists when the culprit first entertains the idea or intention to commit an offence; in the second stage he makes preparations to commit it; and the third stage is reached when the culprit takes deliberate overt steps to commit the offence.
Such overt act or step, in order to be criminal, need not be the penultimate act towards the commission of the offence.
It is sufficient if such act or acts were deliberately done and manifest a clear intention to commit the offence aimed, being reasonably proximate to the consummation of the offence.
[1164C E] Abhayanand Mishra vs State of Bihar, [1962] 2 S.C.R. 241, followed.
(b) There is a distinction between "preparation" and "attempt".
Attempt begins where preparation ends.
In sum, a person commits the offence of 'attempt to commit a particular offence ' when (i) he intends to commit that particular offence and (ii) he, having made preparations and with the intention to commit the offence, does an act towards its commission; such an act need not be the penultimate act towards the commission of that offence but must be an act during the course of committing that offence.
[1164E F] In the instant case the respondents carried silver ingots in the two vehicles to the sea shore and started unloading them near a creek from which the sound of the engine of a sea craft was heard.
In short they did all that was necessary to export the silver ingots by sea and the only step that remained was to load them on the sea craft for moving out of the territorial waters of the country.
But for the intervention of the Customs officials, the unlawful export would have been consummated.
The disappearance of the sea craft reinforces the inference that the accused had deliberately attempted to export silver by sea in contravention of law.
[1164G H] Chinnappa Reddy, J (concurring).
In order to constitute an "attempt" first there must be an intention to commit a particular offence, second, some act must have been done which would necessarily have to be done towards the commission of the offence and third such act must be 'proximate ' to the intended result.
The measure of proximity is not in relation to time and action but in relation to intention.
In other words, the act must reveal with reasonable certainty, in conjunction with other facts and circumstances and not necessarily in isolation, an intention as distinguished from a mere desire or object to commit the particular offence, though the act by itself may be merely suggestive or indicative of such intention.
[1170E F] In the instant case had the truck been stopped and searched at the very commencement of the journey or even on the way much before its destination the discovery of silver ingots in the truck might at the worst lead to the inference 1160 that the accused had prepared or were preparing for the commission of the offence.
It could be said that the accused were transporting or attempting to transport the silver somewhere but it would not necessarily suggest or indicate that the intention was to export silver.
The fact that the truck was driven up to a lonely creek from where the silver could be transferred into a sea faring vessel was suggestive or indicative, though not conclusive, that the accused wanted to export the silver.
It might have been open to the accused to plead that the silver was not to be exported but only to be transported in the course of inter coastal trade.
But the circumstance that all this was done in a clandestine fashion, at dead of night revealed, with reasonable certainty, the intention of the accused that the silver was to be exported.
[1170G H] Reg vs Eagleton ; Gardner vs Akeroyd ; Davey vs Lee ; Haughten vs Smith [1975] A.C. 476, 492; Director of Public Prosecutions vs Stonehouse , referred to.
Abhavanand Mishra vs The State of Bihar ; @ 253, applied.
Malkiat Singh & Anr.
vs State of Punjab @ 667, distinguished.
