The appellant was the Managing Director of a bank and held a power of attorney to act on behalf of its Directors and authorising him to borrow money on behalf of the bank.
Certain Government Promissory Notes were pledged with the bank by another bank to cover an overdraft account up to a specified amount.
There was, however, no overdraft by the pledgor.
The pledgee bank was in a precarious financial condition.
The appellant pledged the securities with a third party to get a loan for the bank 's use and on its failure 484 to repay the same on demand, the creditors sold the securities for realising their dues.
The pledgee bank was thus no longer in a position to return the securities on demand made by the pledgor.
Information.
was lodged with the police at the instance of the Official Liquidator appointed to wind up the bank and the appellant was put up for trial under section 409 of the Indian Penal Code.
Held, that the appellant was guilty of the offence charged and the appeal must be dismissed.
Held further, that in the absence of any overdraft by the pledgor, the pledgee bank acquired no interest in the securities which it could deal with and section 179 of the Contract Act had no application.
That the delivery of the securities by the pledgor made the pledgee a trustee for him and he remained the owner subject to any especial interest created in favour of the pledgee by the agreement and in a case, such as the present, where there was no question of redeeming the securities by the pledgor, there having been no overdraft, or sale by the pledgee in enforcement of any especial interest, as none had accrued to it, the pledgee bank had no right to deal with the securities.
That the question whether the remedy of the pledgor was by way of a suit for damages for breach of contract or by way of a criminal prosecution would depend on whether or not there was mens rea and.
other elements constituting the offence.
That although the offence of criminal breach of trust presupposes an entrustment, such entrustment need not conform to all the technicalities of the law of trust, and, consequently, in a case such as the present where the accused had the necessary power and exercised dominion over the securities and caused wrongful loss to the pledgor and wrongful gain to the pledgee by dealing with the securities, he was guilty of the offence.
That the provisions of section 79 of the Indian Penal Code were of no avail to him as it was never pleaded in his written statement nor found by the courts below that he Was unaware of the fact that there had been no overdraft at all.
That no sanction under section 179 of the Companies Act was re quired for the prosecution.
The provisions of that section were of a permissive character enabling the court Liquidator to do certain things with the permission of the court and did not in any way control the general law so as to restrict the power of the court to take cognisance of an offence or of the Police to initiate a prosecution or even of a private citizen to move the machinery of the criminal courts to bring an offender to justice.
Basdeo Agarwalla vs King Emperor, ([1946] F.C.R. 93), distinguished and held inapplicable.
That the charge framed against the accused fulfilled the requirements of sections 221 and 222(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure and 485 as the particulars mentioned in the charge were sufficient to give him notice of the matter he was being charged with it was not necessary to set out also the manner of the commission of the offence as required by section 223 of the Code.
