Several assignments such as the construction of major bridges, new lines, doubling of and electrification of existing lines etc.
were taken up the Engineering Department of the Indian Railways and to carry out these works, a number of temporary posts of Class I (Indian Railway Service of Engineers) and Class II engineers were created.
It was not thought possible to meet additional personnel requirements from existing sources, i.e. direct recruitment to Class I by competitive examination and promotion to class II from class III.
Instead, under a special scheme the various writ petitioners were appointed at various times between 1955 and 1964 as temporary Assistant Engineers by the Railway Board.
Everyone of them was told that the appointment, would be on a temporary basis, that the post to which they were appointed would be neither in Class I nor in Class II service though they were eligible, on completion of three year 's service, to be considered along with other temporary Assistant Engineers for absorption in Class I (Junior Scale) against vacancies ear marked from time to time for such absorption in the Indian Railway Service of Engineers cadre upto a maximum of six per year, and that in the event of their being selected in Class I Service their seniority would count from the date of the permanent appointment to Class I service.
They were required to execute service agreements "as applicable to temporary officers".
The petitioners accepted the terms offered to them and joined duty in the post to which they were appointed.
The petitioners also executed agreements in a standard form known as "Agreement for Temporary Assistant Officers of the Indian Railways".
140 Though in their orders of appointment as temporary Assistant Engineers the petitioners and others were told that six of them would be absorbed into the Indian Railway Service of Engineers Class I every year, the quota was increased to eight per year in 1957 and fifteen per year in 1961.
In 1960, the quota was fixed at 60 per cent of the actual intake of probationers from the CES etc.
examinations.
Again in 1975 the quota was increased to 25 per year.
The net result was that all but a 107 temporary Assistant Engineers were left unabsorbed by the time of the filing of the writ petitions and they too were finally absorbed in 1979 by a blanket order.
On September 17, 1965, the Railway Board decided that the temporary officers so absorbed into the Railway Service of Engineers should be given weightage in seniority "on the basis of half the total number of years of continuous service in working posts on Railways prior to their permanent absorption into Class I, subject to maximum weightage of five years.
" One of the writ petitioners, Katyani Dayal field a writ petition in the Allahabad High Court claiming promotion to the Senior scale post of District Officer.
He found his claim on Rule 133(3)(c) of the Railway Establishment Code on the basis that he was an Assistant Officer within the meaning of that expression as then defined by Rule 102(3).
The High Court allowed the writ petition and gave a direction to the Railway Administration to consider the claim of the petitioner for appointment in officiating vacancies to the post of District Officer as soon as vacancies arose, ignoring the circulars which gave preference to Class I junior scale officers of four years standing or more as against temporary Assistant Engineers.
An appeal filed by the Railway Administration under the Letters Patent was dismissed by a Division Bench of the High Court.
Though the Division Bench dismissed the appeal on August 1, 1974, the Railway Administration did not implement the judgment but instead on December 12, 1975 amended the Rule 102(3), 133(3)(c) and (f) and introduced new rule 102(17) so as to expressly exclude temporary Assistant Officers (newly defined by Rule 102 (7), from the category of Assistant Officers and thus make them ineligible for promotion to the senior scale under Rule 133(3)(c) and (f).
The petitioners, therefore, have filed these writ petitions in a representative capacity purporting to represent all temporary Assistant Engineers appointed on the recommendation of the Union Public Service Commission, claiming that, in law they could only be and were appointed to the Indian Railway Service of Engineers Class I right from the beginning and that the Railway Board was wrong in treating them as belonging to neither Class I nor Class II.
They claimed that they were appointed to temporary posts in the cadre of Indian Railway Service of Engineers Class I and that their seniority had to be reckoned on the basis of their length of continuous service, though they 141 conceded that in any given year those appointed on the basis of the results of the competitive examination might be placed above those appointed on the basis of the selection by the Union Public Service Commission.
Dismissing the petitions the Court ^ HELD: (1) articles 53, 73(1)(a) and 309, make it clear that the President, acting directly or through officers subordinate to him is free to constitute a service (with as many cadres as he chooses), to create posts without constituting a service or to create posts outside (the cadres of) the constituted service.
The President (or the person directed by him) may, or, again, if he so chooses he may not make rules regulating the recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to such service or posts.
He is also free to make or not to make appointments to such services or posts.
Nor is it obligatory for him to make rules of recruitment etc.
before a service may be constituted or a post created or filled.
But, if there is an Act of Parliament or a rule under the proviso to Article 309 on the matter, the executive power under Articles 53 and 73, may not be exercised in a manner inconsistent with or contrary to such Act or rule.
[162D F] B.N. Nagarajan vs State of Mysore, [1966] SCR 682 @ 686; State of Kerala vs M.K. Krishnan Nair and ors.
; , at 874; referred to.
(2) The previous existence of the Indian Railway Service of Engineers and the rules made for recruitment to that service do not bar the constitution of another service or the creation of posts outside the cadres of the Indian Railway Service of Engineers.
Though to start with there was no Presidential sanction for the creation of the posts of Temporary Assistant Officers in the various departments of Indian Railways, which were neither in Class I nor in Class II but merely in gazetted service, the matter was soon rectified by the grant of Presidential sanction for the posts in November 1956, and by the President further specifying the Railway Board as the authority competent to make appointment of such temporary Assistant Officers.
The posts of Temporary Assistant Officers were thus created and appointments made, under valid authority and outside the existing cadres of the Indian Railway Service of Engineers.
The letters of "indent", the advertisements, the letters of appointment and the agreements show that the temporary Assistant Officers appointed in this fashion after selection by the Union Public Service Commission were to be a source of recruitment to the Indian Railway Service of Engineers Class I.
If Temporary Assistant Officers were to be a source of recruitment to the Indian Railway Service of Engineers Class, no temporary Assistant Officer could possibly be under any misapprehension that he was 142 appointed to the Indian Railway Service of Engineers Class I or could claim that he was appointed to such service.
[162G H, 163G H, 164A] The petitioners cannot be considered to have been appointed under rule 130(d) of the Indian Railway Establishment Code which provides for occasional admission of other qualified persons on the recommendation of the Union Public Service Commission merely because they were selected for appointment by the Union Public Service Commission, their scale of pay was the same as that of the Class I Junior Scale Officers of the Indian Railway Service of Engineers and their duties were the same.
[164A C] (3) It is no doubt true that a cadre may consist of permanent vacancies in permanent as well as temporary posts borne on the cadre.
But it does not follow that appointments stated to be made to posts outside the very service and therefore necessarily outside the cadre must be considered to be made to temporary posts borne on the cadre merely because the posts were likely to continue indefinitely and did so continue.
[164 F G] The Annual Administrative Reports merely refer to appointments, temporary as well as permanent, made in the gazetted service by direct recruitment.
Gazetted Railway services must include both the Indian Railway Service of Engineers and the Gazetted Railway Service constituted by the temporary Assistant Officers.
Therefore, by merely taking into account the number of Temporary Assistant Officers for the purpose of calculating the total number of persons appointed to Gazetted Railway Service it cannot conceivably be said that Temporary Assistant Officers were appointed to cadre posts in the Indian Railway Service of Engineers.
Even the classified lists of Gazetted officers do not indicate that persons who were appointed as Temporary Assistant Officers were appointed to posts borne on the cadre of Indian Railway Service of Engineers.
On the other hand under the column "Date of appointment to Class" no entry is made against the names of any of the Temporary Assistant Officers who had not yet been absorbed into the Indian Railway Service of Engineers.
[165 B C, D E] If posts were initially created and sanctioned, the subsequent continuance of the posts indefinitely would not make persons appointed to the posts members of the Railway Service, namely, the Indian Railway Service of Engineers Class I. [165 F G] (4) The note below Rule 106 of the Railway Establishment Code merely states an existing fact known to all concerned, namely, that posts of Temporary Assistant Officers in gazetted railway service who were not to be classified 'either as Class I or as Class II ' had been sanctioned by the President 143 who had designated the Railway Board as the authority competent to make appointments to those posts.
With or without the note, the Temporary Assistant Officers would still not be classified either as Class I or Class II.
Their classification outside Class I and Class II was not dependant on the note but on the Presidential sanction in regard to the creation of the posts.
[166 A B] (5) Temporary Assistant Officers are not Assistant Officers within the meaning of that expression in the Indian Railway Establishment Code.
The expression "Temporary Assistant Officer", which was not previously defined in the Railway Establishment Code, was sought to be defined by new clause 17 of R.102 to mean "a Gazetted Railway Servant drawing pay on the scale applicable to junior Scale Officers but not classified either as Class I or as Class II Officers.
The expression Assistant Officer was redefined so as not to include a Temporary Assistant Officer who was not 'classified ' either as Class I or as Class II.
[166 C D] The amendments do not have any effect one way or the other on the status of the Temporary Assistant Officers.
What was always well known to the Temporary Assistant Officers and the Railway Board and what was the inevitable result of the Presidential sanction for the creation of posts which were not to be classified either as Class I or Class II, was made explicit in the Indian Railway Establishment Code also by the introduction of these amendments.
This became necessary because in the Writ Petition filed by Katyani Dayal, the Allahabad High Court, while appearing to hold that Temporary Assistant Officers belonged neither to Class I nor to Class II service, held that they came within the then existing definition of 'Assistant Officer ' so as to entitle them for promotion under r. 133 of the Indian Railway Establishment Code.
[166E G] The definition of Assistant Officer was not to be read in isolation but should have been read conjunctively with Rules 105, 106 and 108.
A reference to Rule 105 would show that for the purposes of the rules in the Indian Railway Establishment Code, Railway services were to be classified into Class I, Class II, Class III, Class IV and workshop staff.
Rule 106 specified the appointments and categories falling under the services mentioned in Rule 105.
Rule 108 required the Railway Board to fix the strength of the Railway Services, Class I and II.
There could therefore, be no question of an officer not falling within the class, category or cadres specified in rules 105, 106 and 108 claiming to be an 'Assistant Officer ' within the meaning of that expression.
A person recruited to the post of Temporary Assistant Officer not classified as Class I or Class II Officer could not claim to belong to the Class, category or cadre spe 144 cified in Rules 105, 106 and 108 and was, therefore, not an Assistant Officers within the meaning of that expression even before the 1975 amendment.
[167 D F] (6) There are and there can be no absolutes when the Court considers claims to justice on complaints of inequality.
The Marxian of a classless society, however laudable that may be, is evidently not what is sought to be achieved by articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The goal is a limited one.
It is equality among comparables.
A necessary, but not necessarily cynical, implication of equality among comparables is the permissibility of reasonable classification, having nexus with the object to be achieved.
If two services started and continued dissimilarly, though they apparently discharged similar duties, they were not comparable services so as to furnish a basis for the claim to equality.
But if in the same service there were two sources of recruitment to the same service, a classification based solely on source of recruitment was not permissible.
[176 E G] State of Punjab vs Joginder Singh, [1963] Supp.
2 SCR 169, 191, 192; Roshan Lal Tandon vs Union of India, ; and Mervyn Coutindo & Ors.
vs Collector of Customs, Bombay and Ors.
, ; ; referred to.
(7) Those who were appointed to ex cadre posts outside the rules and whose tenure was therefore precarious could not claim to be treated on the same footing as those who were appointed strictly in accordance with the rules and posts borne on the cadre of the service.
[177 F G] H.S. Varma & Ors.
vs Secretary, Ministry of Shipping and Transport & Ors.
; @ 427, 428; referred to.
(8) The classification of Temporary Assistant Officers separately from the Indian Railway Service of Engineers Class I is neither discriminatory nor is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution for the reason that it had no nexus to the object to be achieved namely efficiency of service.
[167 G H] The service comprising the Temporary Assistant Officers and the Indian Railway Service of Engineers Class I started separately and never became one.
The objects of their recruitment were different, the methods of recruitment were dissimilar and the appointing authority was not the same.
The training that was imparted was also unlike.
The very tenure of the Temporary Assistant Officers was precarious and their immediate aspiration was only to be absorbed into the Indian Railway Services of Engineers Class I.
These distinctive features marked out the Temporary Assistant Officers as a Class apart from the Indian 145 Railway Service of Engineers Class I and therefore there was no question of entitlement of equal rights with the latter.
Of course, once they were absorbed into the Indian Railway Service of Engineers they would be entitled not to be treated differently thereafter.
Their seniority would ordinarily be reckoned from the date of their absorption into the Indian Railway Service of Engineers, as promised in their letters of appointment.
No doubt these Officers merited something more than the 'long wait ' at the portals of the Indian Railway Service of Engineers.
The Railway Board however, appears to have tried to make the long wait a little less tedious by giving them weightage of half of their length of service as Temporary Assistant Officers, subject to maximum of five years [177D G] Equally important, is the fundamental qualitative difference, linked with the method of recruitment.
True, the minimum educational qualification is the same.
But, those who are recruited directly to the Indian Railway Service of Engineers Class I are subjected to stiff and competative, written and personality tests.
Only the very best can aspire to come out successful.
The Temporary Assistant Officers were not subjected either to a written or to a personality test but were selected on the basis of an interview by the Union Public Service Commission.
In addition to the minimum educational qualification, three years ' experience as a Civil Engineer was also prescribed.
Thus while brilliance was the beacon light which beckoned those aspiring to become members of the Indian Railway Service of Engineers Class I, it was replaced by experience in the case of those wanting to be Temporary Assistant Officers.
Again the appointing authority in the case of Indian Railway Service of Engineers Class I is the President while the appointing authority in the case of Temporary Assistant Officers was the Railway Board, no doubt, pursuant to the authority given by the President.
Different courses of training were prescribed for the Indian Railway Service of Engineers and the Temporary Assistant Officers.
For the Indian Railway Service of Engineers the training is an intensive and comprehensive one designed to equip them for higher posts in the Department too; while the training for Temporary Assistant Engineers was a brief six months ' training intended merely to equip them for carrying out the specific jobs.
In the matter of terms and conditions of service, while the provisions of the Indian Railway Establishment Code are fully applicable to the Indian Railway Service of Engineers Class I, those provisions are applicable to 'Temporary Assistant Officers ' to the extent there is no specific provision in their letter of appointment and agreement.
[169 C H] State of Punjab vs Joginder Singh, [1963] Supp.
2 SCR 169, @ 191, 192, Kishori Mohanlal vs Union of India, A.I.R. , Jammu & Kashmir vs Triloki Nath Khosa and Ors., ; @ 790, 792 Roshan Lal Tandon vs Union of India, ; ; Mervyn Coutindo and Ors.
vs 146 Collector of Customs, Bombay and Ors.
, ; , Mohammad Sujat Ali and Ors.
vs Union of India and Ors.
; , @ 481, S.B. Patwardhan and Ors.
vs State of Maharashtra and Ors.
; ; A. K. Subraman vs Union of India, [1975] 2 SCR 979 and M.S. Verma and Ors.
vs Secty.
Ministry of Shipping & Transport and Ors.
, ; @ 427, 428; discussed.
Observation: There is nothing 'doctrinaire ' in the principle of "equal pay for equal work" and "equal status for equal pay and equal work".
They are not goals to be scoffed at.
It may be that in the present societal context, the goals may appear to be distant.
But they are goals worthy of attainment and would be achieved in the not too distant future.
[178 A B]
