The appellant field a suit in the civil court alleging that the house in dispute was owned by one Abdul Rashid and that he had let out the house to his father who was paying rent to him, that Abdul Rashid had migrated to Pakistan and the house was declared evacuee property.
Later, the house was put to auction on January 29, 1969 under section 20 of the , was purchased by him and that the sale certificate was also issued.
He further pleaded that the respondents defendants had also filed suit No. 67 of 1970 for ejected and arrears of rent against his father, that the suit was decreed on May 10, 1971, and that in pursuance of that decree they tried to dispossess him, and as he was not impleaded in the ejected suit, he was not bound by that decree.
The appellant claimed a declaration of his title to the property and prayed for perpetual injunction restraining the defendants respondents from dispossessing 13: him in execution of the ejected decree.
The respondents resisted the suit, denied that the property in dispute was ever declared evacuee property or that it was ever acquired under the provisions of the Act of 1954, and asserted that the appropriate authorities never passed any order under section 7 of the declaring the property to be evacuee property.
The 1st defendant further pleaded that Abdul Rashid had only 1/6th share in the house in question which was purchased by his father and therefore the respondents are exclusive owners of the House.
The said Abdul Rashid had migrated to Pakistan in the year 1967 long after he had transferred his interest and share in the house in question and that the father of the appellant had in collusion with the Custodian Department prepared fictitious proceedings relating to the sale of the house in question, that the Custodian Department had no jurisdiction to declare the property was evacuee property, much less could they sell it under the Act of 1954, and that the auction if any held, was nullity having been brought about by misrepresentation and fraud.
The trial court held that Abdul Rashid was not the owner of the house in question, that the entire proceedings taken by the Custodian Department were illegal and without jurisdiction and the plaintiff did not acquire any title by virtue of the sale held by the Authorities under the of 1954, and accordingly dismissed the suit.
208 On appeal, the Additional District Judge, affirmed the findings of the trial court and held that the jurisdiction of the Civil Court was not burred by section 46 of the and that it could go into the question whether or not the matter had been adjudicated upon by the authorities under that Act.
It found that no inquiry, as contemplated under section 7 of the 1950 Act was held and no Notification was issued by the Authorities under that Act, declaring the suit property to be evacuee property.
It further held that Abdul Rashid had no title or interest, whatever, in the house in question after July 31, 1953, when, in accordance with the decree of the Civil Court in partition Suit No. 289 of 1953, Phool Chand had deposited the value of 1/6th share of Abdul Rashid in this property.
The High Court dismissed the Second Appeal preferred by the appellant affirming the concurrent findings of the court below.
It also held that Abdul Rashid was in India much after the repeal of UP ordinance No. 1 of 1949 and consequently there was no question of the property vesting automatically in the Custodian under the aforesaid ordinance.
In the appeal to this court it was contended on behalf of the appellants: (1) in view of the decision in Custodian of Evacuee Property, Punjab & Ors vs Jatran ; and section 46 of the 1950 Act, the Civil Court had no jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the question whether the suit property or any right or interest therein is or is not evacuee property, (2) the sale of the suit property had been effected in favour of the appellant under section 20 of the 1954, Act, after it had been acquired by the Central Government under section 12 of that Act, free from all encumbrance and formed part of the compensation pool, (3) the order of its acquisition passed under section 12, and its sale under section 20 of the 1954 Act had become final and conclusive, the respondents could not be allowed to go behind those orders and question their finality on the ground that the property has never been evacuee property vesting in the Custodian, because section 27 of the 1954 Act bars the jurisdiction of the Civil Court to go into this question Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1 (i) Section 46 will not bar the jurisdiction of the Civil Court where the Custodian has never declared the property as evacuee property after taking proceedings under section 7 of the 1950 Act.
[219 C] Custodian of Evacuee Property, Punjab & ors.
vs Jafran Begum ; referred to and explained.
(ii) Form a conjoint reading of section 7 & 8 of the 1950 Act it is clear that the making of a declaration after inquiry under section 7 that the property is 'evacuee property ' is a sine qua non for giving the Custodian dominion over the property.
If no proceeding is taken under section 7, there CHD be no vesting of the property in the Custodian.
[216 C] Fazalbhoy vs Official, Trustee of Maharashtra [1979] 2 S.C.R. 699 at p. 712 referred to.
In the instant case Abdul Rashid was throughout residing in India and personally managing the suit property And collecting its rent till 1963.
He migrated or went away from India for good some time in 1963 or thereafter.
Therefore, if the Custodian had not taken any proceedings under section 7 209 of the 1950 Act to declare the suit property as evacuee property before the 7th day of May, 1954, and no such proceedings were pending on May 7, 1954, the property of Abdul Rashid could not be declared evacuee property under the Act, the poor of the Custodian to do so having been terminated by section 7A. [217 B C] (iii) It was for the plaintiff appellant to show by producing relevant notifications or other documentary evidence that the Custodian had taken proceedings and declared the suit property to be evacuee property in Accordance with the provisions of section 7 or that such proceedings had been initiated earlier and were pending on the 7th day of May, 1954.
Despite ample opportunity granted to the plaintiff he did not produce any such documentary evidence in the courts below.
All that he showed was that Rehabilitation Authorities had purporting to act under the 1954 Act sold the suit property to him and issued the sale certificate in his favour on April 1st, 1969.
[217 D] (iv) Clauses (a), (c) and (d) of section 46 postulate that at the time when the question whether or not a property is evacuee property comes for adjudication the power of the Custodian General or the Custodian under this Act of 1950 to determine the question is subsisting.
That is to say, if at the point of time when the question arises, the power of the authorities constituted under this Act to adjudicate that question stands terminated or extinguished by the operation of section 7A of the 1954 Act, none of the clauses (a), (c) and (d) of section 46 will bar the jurisdiction of the Civil Court to determine that question, which had not been decided by the Custodian during the period he had the power to determine it.
[219 P G] (v) Section 28 has no application to the facts of the instant case because no order made by any of the authorities mentioned in that section is being called in question.
Section 46, also, does not come in the way because no proceedings under section 7 of the 1950 Act to declare the suit house ns evacuee property can be taken by the Custodian against Abdul Rashid.
[219 H220 A] (vi) No notification under Sub section (3) of section 7 published in the official Gazette has been placed on the record Nor was it shown that any proceedings initiated under section 7 of the Act to declare it evacuee property were pending on MAY 7, 1954, and the question of saving those proceeding under the Proviso to section 7A does not arise.
[220 Bl In the instant case Qazi Abdul Rashid was throughout resident of India till 1963 and was personally managing the suit house and collecting rent of it from the tenant.
After May 7, 1954, therefore, the Custodian had no jurisdiction under the 1950 Act to declare the suit house as evacuee property.
The jurisdiction of the Courts below to go into this question was thus not barred by anything in sections 28 and 46 of the 1950 Act.
[220 C] 2(i) Section 20 of the 1954 Act confers powers on the managing officer to transfer any property out of the compensation pool by sale or in any other manner indicated in clauses (b) to (e) of that Section.
The necessary prerequisite for sale is that the property must have been declared under section 7 of the 1950 Act to be evacuee property by the Custodian or it must be evacuee property under the deeming provisions of any law which may be applicable to the case of the evacuee.
In other words, only that property could be acquired 210 under section 12 and form part of the compensation pool which satisfies the definition of "evacuee property" even in section 2(c) of the 1954 Act.
If the property was never evacuee property, as defined in section 2(c), it does not legally form part of the compensation pool and, therefore, cannot be disposed of under section 20 or the Rules framed under this statue.
[220 C, 221 H 222 B] (ii) The necessary prerequisite for acquiring property under section 12 is that it must be 'evacuee property ' as defined in section 2(c) of the 1954 Act.
In the absence of this essential prerequisite the Central Government is not competent to acquire, that property under this section for throwing it into the compensation pool.
This prerequisite or condition precedent, was lacking in the instant case.
No notification published in the official Gazette either under sub section (1) or sub section (3) of section 12 appears to have been brought on the record of this case, nor attention drawn to any such notifications.
[221 F G] 3.
Section 27 of the 1954 Act is not ' attracted because the plaintiff, who filed the original suit and is now appellant in this appeal, is not questioning the finality of the order of the sale alleged to have been made by the managing officer.
It is the defendant respondents who are resisting the plaintiff 's claim on the ground that the sale is a nullity.
It could not be made under this Act of 1954 for the reason that it was never declared evacuee property under section 7 of the Act and thus never formed part of the compensation pool.
The words "under this Act" occurring in section 27 are significant.
They show that those orders which are not made by any officer or authority in accordance with the provisions of this Act, but outside the provisions of this Act in excess of jurisdiction, can be called in question in the civil court.
The language of section 27 is not as wide as that of section 46 of the 1950 Act.
[222 G 223 A] 4.
As Qazi Abdul Rashid remained in India continuously upto 1963, no question of automatic vesting under the U.P. Ordinance No. 1 of 1949 could arise.
That ordinance was not applicable to him at all.
[214 H]
