The respondent 's forefather was the landholder of a piece of land in the State.
The land was taken possession of in 1897 as the land came under a Timber depot established on land adjacent to Government land.
The practice prevalent during the Maharaja 's time was that only rent was remitted and no compensation was paid for the taking over the land.
The respondent 's ancestors had no proprietory right in the land and the right of possession was also lost on the Government dispossessing him.
Some sixty years later, the respondent filed an application before the then Prime Minister of the State for payment of compensation of the said land.
Instead of deciding as to whether the State was liable to pay compensation in respect of the land which had been taken over sixty years ago, a new land acquisition proceeding under the Jammu and Kashmir State Land Acquisition Act, 1934 was started in the year 1955 and an Award for Rs. 32,645.62 as compensation for the land was made by the Collector.
On reference the District Judge increased the amount of compensation.
On appeal by the State, the High Court restored the amount fixed by the Collector.
The respondent 's application under order 41 Rule 27 C.P.C. was dismissed by the High Court.
A review petition that the land had already been acquired and that the land acquisition proceeding was without jurisdiction and a nullity was rejected.
A suit was filed that the land acquisition proceedings had been taken as a result of taken of fact and law and that the entire proceeding was vitiated.
The suit was dismissed.
Appeal to a division Bench was also dismissed.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: In 1894 the Assamidar lost his assamidari right when the State p resumed the land from him.
There was no law then that compensation was to be given.
It depended upon the sweet will of the Riyasat to give some other land in lieu of the land acquired.
Only the land revenue was remitted, and documents indicate, compensation was also paid for the standing crops in the land.
No right was left in the landholder in respect of which he could acquire a better right.
Whatever right was possessed by the respondent 's ancestor was dead and gone in the year 1894.
[285H, 286A B] 2.
The land was resumed by the Durbar from the ancestor of the respondent before the end of the 19th century and it was recorded as 'Khalsa '.
The land had become the State land in the full sense of the term and belonged to the State since then.
No semblance of any right, title or interest was left in the respondent 's ancestor thereafter.
[286D E] 3.
A queer procedure was adopted for acquiring the land under the State Land Acquisition Act afresh, thus determining the compensation on the basis of the market value of the land prevailing 60 years later.
Under the influence of 282 some high ups, a case was made out for payment of compensation to the respondent in respect of the land acquired sixty years ago by acquiring it again which led to the determination of the market value of the land in the year 1955.
[286G, 287A] 4.
The State Exchequer cannot be made to suffer for illegal actions of its officers.
The land had been resumed long ago and belonged to the State.
The whole proceeding of land acquisition was a nullity and the Award resulting therefrom was ultra vires.
It mattered little whether the proceeding was taken as a result of fraud or mistake or otherwise.
The respondent had not practised any fraud nor was the land acquisition proceeding started as a result of any mistake of fact.
It was either as a result of gross negligence or a deliberate act on the part of the officials at the instance of some high ups to help the respondent.
There is no question of any acquisition of the State 's own land as was purported to be done in this case.
[287B D] Government of Bombay vs Esufali Salebhai, I.L.R XXXIV Bombay, 618; Mohammad Wajeeh Mirza vs Secretary of State for India in Council, A.I.R. 1921 oudh, 31, The Deputy Collector Calicut Division vs Aiyavu Pillay and others, IX Indian Cases, 341; The Collector of Bombay vs Nusserwanji Rattanji Mistri & others ; referred to.
of State vs Tayasaheb Yeshwantrao Holkar, A.I.R. , & Narriot vs Hamoton distinguished.
The plea taken in the appeal by filing a petition under order 41 Rule 27 or in the review matter in the High Court was beyond the scope of the appeal filed under the State Land Acquisition Act.
The scope of that appeal was the determination of the amount of compensation and not to declare the whole of the land acquisition proceeding a nullity.
Whatever, therefore, was said by the High Court either in appeal on the question of adverse possession or while rejecting the review petition was outside the scope of the land acquisition appeal.
It could not operate as res judicata in the present suit.
The observations of the High Court were without jurisdiction.
Nor did any question of estoppel arise in this case because the respondent was not made to change his position by starting the land acquisition proceeding against him.
He had already lost his land.
He merely wanted compensation.
The method adopted for the payment of compensation was wholly ultra vires and without jurisdiction.
[288H, 289A B]
