The appellant tenant, a working woman engaged an advocate to appear on her behalf and take proper steps to protect her interests, as she had a difficulty in appearing in Court for every hearing.
She paid all the arrears of rent by cheque or in cash to her advocate who failed either to deposit the Court or to pay to the landlord.
The Rent Controller refused to look into this and struck off her defence under section 15(7) of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958.
The appeal was dismissed as not maintainable in view of section 25B of tho Act.
Hence the appeal by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, the Court.
^ HELD :1.
Rent Control laws are basically designed to protect tenants because scarcity of accommodation is a nightmare for those who own none and, if evicted, will be helpless.
Even so, the legislature has provided some grounds for eviction, and the Delhi law contains an extreme provision for striking out together the defence of the tenant which means that even if he has excellent pleas to negative the landlord 's claim the Court will not hear him.
Obviously, this is a harsh extreme and having regard to the benign scheme of the legislation this drastic power is meant for use in grossly recalcitrant situations where a tenant is guilty of disregard in paying rent.
That is why a discretion vested, not a mandate imposed in Section 15(7) of the Delhi Rent Control Act.
[327 C D] 2.
If a socially informed perspective is adopted while construing the provision of Section 15(7), then it will be plain that the Controller is armed with facultative power.
He may, or may not strike out the tenant 's defence.
A Judicial discretion has built in self restraint, has the scheme of the statute in mind, cannot ignore the conspectus of circumstances which are present in the case and has the brooding thought playing on the power, that, in a court, striking out a 6 party 's defence is an exceptional step, not a routine visitation of a punitive extreme following upon a mere failure to pay rent.
First of all, there must be failure to pay rent which, in the content, indicates willful failure, deliberate default or volitional non performance.
Secondly, the Section provides no automatic weapon but prescribes a wise discretion, inscribes no mechanical conse quence but invests a power to overcome intransigence.
Thus, if a tenant fails or refuses to pay or deposit rent and the court discerns a mood of defiance or gross neglect, the tenant may forfeit his right to be heard in defence.
A last resort cannot be converted into tho first resort a punitive direction of court 326 cannot be used as a booby trap to get the tenant out.
Once this teleological interpretation dawns, the mist of misconception about matter of course invocation of the power to strike out will vanish.
Farewell to the realities of a given case is playing truant with the duty underlying the power.
[327 F H, 328 A B] 3.
The exercise of the power of striking out of the defence under section 15(7) is not imperative whenever the tenant fails to deposit or pay any amount as required by section 15.
The provisions contained in section 15(7) of the Act are directory and not mandatory.
It cannot be disputed that s.15(7) is a penal provision and given to the Controller discretionary power in the matter of striking out of the defence, and that in appropriate cases, the Controller may refuse to visit upon the tenant the penalty of non payment or non deposit.
The effect of striking out of the defence under s.15(7) is that the tenant is deprived of the protection given by s.14 and, therefore, the powers under s.15(7) of the Act must be exercised with due circumspection.
Section 15(7) of the Act is not couched in mandatory language.
It uses the word "may".
The difference in the language of Section 15(7) with that of Section 13(5) of the repealed Act is significant and indicates that in the present Act there is a deliberate modification of law in favour of the tenant.
Under Section 15(7) of the Act, it is in the liberal discretion of the Rent Controller, whether or not to strike out the defence.
The Court should be aware of the milieu before exercise of this extreme power.
[328 B D, 329 A B] In the instant case, the tenant did all she could by paying to the advocate the sums regularly but the latter betrayed her and perhaps helped himself.
To trust one 's advocate is not to sin deliberately.
She was innocent but her advocate was innocent.
No party can be punished because her advocate behaved unprofessionally.
The Rent Controller should have controlled himself by a plain look at the eloquent facts and not let down the helpless woman who in good faith believed in the basic ethic of a noble profession.
She did not fail to pay or deposit and, in any view, no case for punitive exercise of discretion has been made out.
The conclusion necessarily follows that the striking out of the defence was not legal and the appellant should have been given an opportunity to contest the claim of the landlord for her eviction.
A sensitized judicial appreciation was missing and unfortunately, the High Court did not closely look at this facet of the issue.
[329E H] V. K. Varma vs Radhey Shyam, A.I.R. 1964 S.C. 1370, referred to.
An order striking out the defence is appealable under s.38.
So this order is appealable.
The reliance on section 25B(8) to negative an appeal is inept because this is not an order under that special section but one under section 15.
Moreover, s.25B(10) preserves the procedure except to the extent contra indicated in s.25B. Negation of a right of appeal follows from s.25B(8) only if the order for recovery is made 'in accordance with the procedure specified in this Section ' (i.e. 25B).
Here the dispossession was not ordered under the special provision in s.25B but under s.15.
Nor can the theory of merger salvage the order because the legality of the eviction order depends on the legality of the order under s.15(7).
Once that order is found illegal what follows upon that cannot be sustained.
[330 A C]
