The Cochin Town Planning Act in particular contemplates the creation of a town planning trust, the preparation of town planning schemes (section 12) acquisition of lands in this behalf (section 32) compensation for such compulsory taking (section 34) and modifications in the manner of acquisition and the mode of compensation in the Kerala Land Acquisition Act.
The petitioners ' writ petitions challenging the validity of the Town Planning Act were allowed by the High Court on the ground that the provisions of Section 34(1) and 34(2A) were unconstitutional being violative of article 14 of the Constitution.
In appeal to this Court it was contended that by the use of the provisions for making schemes under section 8 or section 10, the authority may indefinitely immobilize the owner 's ability to deal with his land since section 15 clamps restrictions and this is unreasonable. ^ HELD: 1.
City improvement schemes have facets which mark them out from other land acquisition proposals.
To miss the massive import of the 15 specialised nature of important schemes is to expose one 's innocence of the dynamics of urban development.
The statute has left it to the government to deal expeditiously with the scheme and there are sufficient guidelines in the Act not to make the gap between the draft scheme and governmental sanction too procrastinatory to be arbitrary.
[294 G H] 2.
Section 12(6) imparts finality to The scheme and this corresponds to the declaration under section 6 of the Land Acquisition Act.
A conspectus of the relevant provisions of the Act makes it clear that improvement scheme cannot hang on indefinitely and an outside limit of two years is given for the preparation and publication of draft schemes from the time the initial resolution to make or adopt the scheme is passed by the Municipal Council.
Conceptwise and strategy wise development schemes stand on a separate footing and classification of town planning schemes differently from the routine projects demanding compulsory acquisition may certainly be justified as based on rational differentia which has a reasonable relation to the end in view namely improvement of towns and disciplining their development.
[295 F G] 3.
There is no substance in the argument that if the land is acquired under the Town Planning Act no solatium is payable while if the land is acquired under the Land Acquisition Act it is a statutory obligation of the acquiring government to pay solatium.
The Town Planning Act is a special statute where lands have to be acquired on large scale and as early and as quickly as possible so that schemes may be implemented with promptitude.
There is in addition a specific and purposeful provision excluding some sections of the 291 Kerala Land Acquisition Act.
In such circumstances it is incredible that the authority acting under the Act will sabotage chapter VII, in particular section 34, by resorting to the Kerala Land Acquisition Act in derogation of the express provision facilitating acquisition of lands on less onerous terms.
[299C D] Maganlal vs Municipal Corporation, [1975] 1 S.C.R. p. 23, referred to.
The amount of compensation payable has no bearing on the distinction whether the lands are acquired for housing or hospital, irrigation schemes or town improvement, school building or police station.
5(a) The exclusion of section 25 of the Land Acquisition Act from section 34 of the Act is unconstitutional.
But it is severable.
[302G] (b) The only discriminatory factor as between section 34 of the Act and section 25 of the Land Acquisition Act vis a vis quantification of compensation is the non payment of solatium in the former case because of the provisions of section 34(1) and that section 25 of the Land Acquisition Act shall have no application.
To achieve the virtue of equality and eliminate the vice of inequality what is needed is the obliteration of section 25 of the Land Acquisition Act from section 34(1) of the Town Planning Act.
The whole of section 34(1) does not have to be struck down.
Once the discriminatory and void part in section 34(1) of the Act is excised equality is restored.
The owner will then be entitled to the same compensation including solatium that he may be eligible under the Land Acquisition Act.
[303E F]
