Appellants Nos.
1 to 6 were charged and convicted for two offences under section 302 read with section 149 and one under section 148 of the Indian Penal Code for having caused the death of two persons.
Appellants Nos.
1 to 4 and 6 are inter related, while appellant No. 5 is Their friend, and the two deceased are brothers.
Appellants Nos.
1 to 4 and 6 lived Jointly in a house which abutted on a road 14 feet wide.
Opposite, their house lay the one belonging to the two deceased.
The waste water emanating from the house of the appellant No. 1 had been flowing towards the road and seeping into the western wall of the house of the deceased.
This resulted in inimical relation between the two parties.
Animosity also prevailed among the parties on account of the fact that The family of the deceased had earlier sold to a third person some land which they wanted to repurchase but were thwarted in their designs by the appellants who were instigating the vendee not to re sell the land to the deceased.
The prosecution alleged that on the fateful day, in the morning there was a dispute and altercation between the two deceased and the appellants.
The incident was noticed by PW 20 who intervened and separated them disarmed the two deceased and threw away the sticks which he snatched from them.
At about 2 P.M.
On the same day all the appellants entered the house of the deceased armed with axes and sticks dragged out the deceased on the road and started beating them with their respective weapons.
PW 10 and PW 11, the wives of the deceased intervened and they also received injuries at the hands of the appellants.
In the meantime PW 13, PW 14 and their brother Jayakar who came to the place of occurrence were beaten by the appellants who thereafter made good their escape.
The four injured brothers and the two ladies were removed to the Civil Hospital.
The two deceased succumbed to their injuries later.
Meanwhile appellant No. 1 reached the police station and he complained to the sub inspector (P.W. 24) that he and his family members had been attacked by the party of the deceased.
On learning that the opposite party had arrived at the local Civil Hospital, the sub inspector reached the hospital and recorded the statement (exhibit 55) of P.W. 12.
This formed the basis of the first information report registered at the police station.
On returning to the police station the sub inspector arrested appellant No. 1.
310 The case of the appellants was that feelings of enmity existed between the two opposing families for two or three years prior to the date of the occurrence, that on that dale there was exchange of abuses between appellants Nos. 1 to 3 on the one hand and the deceased on the other when the latter were about to assault the former but could not do so on account of the intervention of PW 20s that soon afterwards the two deceased and their three brothers assaulted appellants Nos. 1 to 4 with sticks and axes at the latters house when some of the assailants were disarmed and beaten back, and that appellants Nos.
4 to 6 were not present at the scene of the occurrence and had been involved in the case merely because they were related to the other appellants by ties of blood or friendship.
The Sessions Judge was of the opinion that the incident in which the two contending parties exchanged abuses and which came to a close with the intervention of PW 20 provided the motive for the assault in which the two deceased lost their lives and that the eye witnesses had given details of the occurrence which were omitted from their statements made to the police but that no significance could be attached to this aspect of the matter.
He further held that the occurrence took place on the road Lying in between the respective houses of the parties, that the participation of all the accused in the occurrence was natural and probable, that the party of the accused were able to inflict serious injuries on their opponents and themselves escaped with comparatively a mild beating and that therefore, there was no right of private defence available to the appellants.
On this finding the Sessions Judge convicted and sentenced the six appellants.
The appeal to the High Court was heard by a Division Bench, but on Account of difference of opinion among the Judges, the matter was referred to a third Judge and the appeal was dismissed in accordance with the majority opinion.
All the three Judges re appraised the evidence and while the majority arrived at the same conclusion as the Sessions Judge, the third Judge came to the finding that there was no reliable evidence to support he prosecution case that the accused were the aggressors.
In the appeals to this Court on the questions: (a) Whether the prosecution had proved beyond reasonable doubt that the party of the appellants were the aggressors and whether it was made out from the records that the latter may have acted in exercise of the right of private defence, and (b) whether the participation of all the appellants in the occurrence was satisfactorily made out: ^ HELD: (a) (i) The consideration of the ocular evidence coupled with the testimony of PW 20 and the circumstantial evidence especially the medical part, of it, prove beyond reasonable doubt that the party of the appellants were the aggressors.
[323F] (ii) The occurrence admittedly took place on the road in between the respective houses of the deceased and the appellants which is fully made out from the deposition of PW 20 who is no doubt a wholly independent and reliable witness.
He was attracted to the place of occurrence by a noise which reached him in his field after he had gone there subsequent to his witnessing the three brothers of the deceased running towards their house.
The circumstance that their other two injured brothers were also found lying on the road lends further strength to the conclusion that the occurrence took place on the road 311 itself and not at the house of the appellants.
It may also be safely assumed, apart from the fact that all the prosecution witnesses say so, that PW 's 12, 13 and Jayakar were not with the deceased at the inception of the fight and were, on the other hand, working in their fields.
[320 D G] (iii) If the party of the deceased were the aggressors and had made a concerted attack on the appellants who were taken unawares there is no reason why the former should have come out second best in the combat.
The fact that practically all the injuries received by the deceased were located in the head region and were inflicted with great force makes it highly probable that it was they who were taken unawares and had to bear the brunt of the attack which they had perhaps no means to repulse.
[321 B] (iv) The fact that the women folk of the deceased were also injured during the occurrence makes it probable that the ladies had to intervene because the fight was unequal and their respective husbands found it difficult to cope with it.
[321 G] (v) Another inference which may well be drawn from the consequences of the combat is that PWs 12 and 13 and their brother Jayakar probably reached the place of occurrence while their brothers were being belabored and that it was at this stage that the three new comers entered the arena and took up cudgels on behalf of their hapless family members.
[321 D] (vi) It is not unoften that improvements in an earlier version are made at the trial in order to give a boost to the prosecution case, albeit foolishly.
But that does not mean that falsity of testimony in one material particular would ruin it from beginning to end.
On the other hand the circumstance will be a goo reason merely for the court to be put on guard and sift the evidence with extraordinary caution and to accept those portions of it which appear fully trustworthy either intrinsically or by reason of corroboration from other trustworthy sources.
[321 G] (vii) The road has a width of only 14 feet and if two opposing parties consisting in all of six to ten persons, engage themselves in violence against each other, the exact place where the members of each would be injured may not mean anything especially if one of the parties is taken unawares and is unarmed.
[323 B] In the instant case, none of the injuries suffered by the appellants (except for one) was located on a vital part and all of them without exception were simple in nature, the injuries on the two deceased persons being in contrast practically all deadly.
[323 D] (b)(i) Appellants Nos.
4 to 6 are entitled to the benefit of doubt in the matter of their participation in the occurrence.
[324 B] (b) (ii) Appellants Nos. 1 to 3 are proved beyond reasonable doubt to have taken part in the fight.
They are not merely named in that behalf by the eye witness but admit their participation in the occurrence which is further assured by reason of the fact that all three of them were found injured immediately thereafter.
The same is not true of the other there who have denied their presence at the time and place of the occurrence and about whose participation in the fight no other assuring factors is forthcoming.
[323 G] 312 (iii) According to PW 20, appellant No. 4 was present at the scene when the abuses were exchanged but that fact is no guarantee of his participation in the occurrence which took place about a couple of hours later.
No incongruity results from the exclusion of appellants Nos. 4 to 6 from the fight be cause the other three appellants would have as effectively caused all the injuries found on the two deceased and the two ladies all by themselves as if they were caused by them with the assistance of appellants Nos. 4 to 6.
[323H 324A] (c) The offence under section 148 of the Code falls to the ground with the acquittal of appellant Nos. 4 to 6, and so does that under section 149 thereof.
The two offences of murder were committed by appellants Nos. 1 to 3 in furtherance of their common intention so that each one of them is liable to conviction on two counts under section 302 read with section 34 of the Indian Penal Code.
[324C D]
