Himachal Pradesh was a Union Territory till January 25, 1971, when at the apex of the Judicial hierarchy there was a court of Judicial Commissioner.
On the introduction of the Punjab Reorganization Act, 1966 effective from November 1, 1966, certain territories were transferred and added to the Union Territory of Himachal Pradesh simultaneously extending the jurisdiction of the Court of Judicial Commissioner of Himachal Pradesh to the transferred territories.
Consequently provision was made for allocation of persons belonging to different services in pre reorganized State of Punjab (Respondent 4 to 7 being such officers) to Union Territory of Himachal Pradesh.
On May 2, 1967, the judiciary of Union Territory of Himachal Pradesh was placed under the jurisdiction of Delhi High Court which continued till January 25, 1971, when state hood was conferred on the Union Territory and a full fledged High Court of Himachal Pradesh was set up.
Promotional avenues in Himachal Pradesh Subordinate Judicial service moved vertically from the grass root entry as subordinate judge promoted as senior sub Judge cum Assistant Sessions Judge and when the further promotional avenue is DSJ/ADSJ.
They were initially governed by the Himachal Pradesh (Courts) Order, 1948 issued by the Union Government in exercise of the power conferred by sections 3 and 4 of the Extra Provincial Jurisdiction Act, 1947.
This order remained in force till it was replaced by the Himachal Pradesh Subordinate Judicial Service Rules, 1962.
Rule 16(2) of the 1948 Order provided for the appointment of District and Sessions Judges.
The Chief Commissioner had power to appoint as many persons as he considered necessary to be District Judges.
In the 1962 Rules, there was no change in this regard.
Effective from January 25, 1971 when statehood was conferred on the Union Territory of Himachal Pradesh, the Chief Commissioner was replaced by the Governor and the Judicial Commissioner by High Court.
Both the appellants were working as Senior Sub Judge cum Assistant Sessions Judge and they questioned the validity and legality of promotion of respondents 3, 4 and 5 given on May 18, 1971 as DSJ/ADSJ on the ground that the 365 post of DSJ/ADSJ is a selection post and the criterion for selection must be merit alone, seniority being treated as thoroughly irrelevant and therefore, all those who were within the zone of eligibility should have been considered before selecting respondents 3, 4 and 5 and this having not been done the promotion having been purely as the basis of seniority, their promotion is invalid.
Simultaneously they contended that same criterion would mutatis mutandis apply while giving promotion to senior sub Judge cum Assistant Sessions Judge to selection grade post and that having not been done and the promotion having been given only on the basis of seniority, the same is invalid, as per the memorandum dated June 15, 1957 issued by the Himachal Administration.
The High Court through its Registrar did not appear and participate in the proceedings, though made a party.
Nor did the Bench hearing the matter call for the relevant files from the office of the High Court though a prayer was made to that effect in the writ petition.
The State of Himachal Pradesh, Respondent No. 1 contended that appointment to the post of D.S.J. was governed by article 233 of the Constitution under which appointments were to be made by the Governor in consultation with the High Court and since respondents 3, 4 and 5 were promoted and appointed as DSJ/ADSJ on the recommendation of the High Court, the appointments were not open to challenge.
The High Court accepted this plea of the State Government and dismissed the writ petitions.
Hence the appeal by special leave.
Dismissing the appeal the Court, ^ HELD: (1) Article 309 of the Constitution confers power on the legislature by appropriate legislation to regulate the recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to public services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of a State and till such legislation is enacted the power is conferred by the proviso to Article 309 of the President and the Governor, as the case may be, to make rules in that behalf.
Undoubtedly such rules will have to be in conformity with other provisions of the Constitution such as Article 16 and the provisions included in Chapter VI of Part VI of the Constitution.
No rules have been enacted under Article 309 proviso regulating the recruitment and conditions of service of DSJ/ADSJ till such rules are framed appointment to the post of DSJ/ADSJ will have to be made in accordance with the provisions of Articles 233 and 235 of the Constitution.
[371 F H, 372 A] Article 233 confers power on the Governor of the State to appoint persons either by direct recruitment or by promotion from amongst those in the judicial service as District Judges but this power is hedged in with the condition that it can be exercised by the Governor in consultation with the High Court.
In order to make this consultation meaningful and purposive the Governor has to consult High Court in respect of appointment of each person as District Judge which includes an Additional District Judge and the opinion expressed by the High Court must be given full weight.
Article 235 invests control over subordinate courts including the officers manning subordinate courts as well as the ministerial staff attached to such courts in the High Court.
Therefore, when promotion is to be given to the post of District Judge from amongst these 366 belonging to subordinate judicial service, the High Court unquestionably will be competent to decide whether a person is fit for promotion and consistent with its decision to recommend or not to recommend such person.
The Governor who would be acting on the advice of the Minister would hardly be in a position to have intimate knowledge about the quality and qualification of such person for promotion.
Similarly, when a person is to be directly recruited as District Judge from the Bar the reasons for attaching full weight to the opinion of the High Court for its recommendation in the case of subordinate judicial service would mutatis mutandis apply because the performance of a member of the Bar is better known to the High Court than the Minister or the Governor.
[372 A F] Chandra Mohan vs State of Uttar Pradesh at 83, Chandramouleshwar Prasad vs Patna High Court & Ors. ; and A. Panduranga Rao vs State of Andhra Pradesh ; ; followed.
Right to be considered for selection is distinct from an assertion that if considered the person so considered would of necessity be selected and then alone his grievance that he was not considered even though eligible could be examined by the court.
And it is impossible to expect a person to aver that if along with others eligible he was considered he would have been selected.
[376 B C] In the instant case, as the situation stood at the time of the impugned recommendations for promotion and the consequent appointment made by Governor there was no such rule providing merit alone as the criterion for promotion and the High Court, though it does not reveal its mind, appears to have proceeded on the criterion of seniority cum merit which is a valid criterion under Article 16 and not violative of article 233 and the appellants, therefore, who were juniors to respondents 3, 4 and 5 cannot be heard to make a grievance about the promotion of respondents 3, 4 and 5 who as and when their turn came were considered and on being found fit were recommended for promotion and the Governor appointed them.
[376 C E] 3.
It is true that the Office Memorandum No. F.1/4/55/RPS dated May 16, 1957, issued by the Government of India Ministry of Home Affairs did contain certain guidelines laying down criterion in giving promotions to selection posts.
In the absence of any material as to whether the Memorandum was endorsed to the High Court or whether the High Court adopted or acted upon the same or not it is difficult to accept that it was binding on the High Court and any recommendation for promotion made in breach of contravention thereof would render the promotion invalid.
Even apart from this, the impugned promotions were made on May 18, 1971, after Himachal Pradesh became a full fledged State with a High Court at the apex of judiciary and the memorandum would cease to have any force or binding effect.
[377 G, 378 C E] 4.
Promotion from the post of subordinate Judge to the selection grade post of subordinate Judge is a promotion from one post in subordinate judicial service to another post in the same service.
This promotion would definitely be under the control of the High Court as provided in article 235 of the Constitution.
In the absence of a statutory rule, the High Court would be the sole authority to decide the question of promotion in exercise of its control under article 235.
By article 235 the High Court has been vested with complete 367 control over the subordinates courts and this exercise of control comprehends the power to decide eligibility for promotion from one post in the subordinate judicial service to higher post in the same service except where one reaches the stage of giving promotion as DSJ/ADSJ when article 233 would be attracted and the power to give promotion would be in Governor hedged in with the condition that the Governor can act after consultation with the High Court which has been understood to mean on the recommendation of the High Court.
But when it comes to promotion in the judicial service under the Distt.
Judge the High Court would be the sole authority to decide the question of promotion.
[378 F H, 379 A B] While promotion to the post of Distt.
Judge which includes various posts as set out in Art 236, is with the Governor, the High Court would be competent to decide the promotion from one post in subordinate judicial service to any higher post in subordinate judicial service under the District Judge.
In the present case promotions of respondents 6 and 7 from the rank of subordinate Judge to the selection grade post of subordinate Judge is also valid.
[379 G H, 380 A] High Court of Calcutta vs Amal Kumar Roy ; at 454; State of Assam & Anr.
vs Kuseswar Saikia 5.
The power to confirm any one in the subordinate judicial service vests in the High Court in exercise of the control vested in the High Court under article 235; in fact the power to promote to various posts in the subordinate judicial service under the District Judge comprehends also the power to confirm and that vests in the High Court.
[380 D E] The impugned appointments were made by promotion as DSJ/ADSJ of those belonging to subordinate judicial service by the Governor on the recommendation of the High Court as envisaged by article 233 and in the absence of any other valid rule promotion made on the generally well accepted principle of seniority cum merit is valid.
Therefore the promotion of respondents 3, 4 and 5 to the post of DSJ/ADSJ and promotions of respondents 6 and 7 to the selection grade post are valid.
[381 A C] State of Assam & Anr.
vs section N. Sen & Anr. ; ; State of Bihar vs Madan Mohan Prasad & Ors. ; ; followed.
