The appellant herein, Sri Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia was a Minister of Irrigation and Power in the Congress Ministry of the Government of Punjab.
Grave allegations of political corruption were made against him and others whereupon applications were filed in the High Court of Punjab and Haryana under section 438 of the Criminal Procedure Code, praying that the appellants be directed to be released on bail, in the event of their arrest on the aforesaid charges.
Considering the importance of the matter, a learned single Judge referred the applications to a Full Bench, which by its judgment dated September, 13, 1977 dismissed them, after summarising, what according to it is the true legal position, of section 438 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Act 2 of 1974) thus: (1) The power under Section 438, Criminal Procedure Code, is of an extra ordinary character and must be exercised sparingly in exceptional cases only.
(2) Neither Section 438 nor any other provision of the Code authorises the grant of blanket anticipatory bail for offences not yet committed or with regard to accusations not so far levelled.
(3) The said power is not unguided or uncanalised but all the limitations imposed in the preceding Section 437, are implicit therein and must be read into Section 438.
(4) In addition to the limitations mentioned in Section 437, the petitioner must make out a special case for the exercise of the power to grant anticipatory bail.
(5) Where a legitimate case for the remand of the offender to the police custody under Section 167(2) can be made out by the investigating agency or a reasonable claim to secure incriminating material from information likely to be received from the offender under Section 27 of the Evidence Act can be made out, the power under Section 438 should not be exercised.
(6) The discretion under Section 438 cannot be exercised with regard to offences punishable with death or imprisonment for life unless the Court at that very stage is satisfied that such a charge appears to be false or groundless.
384 (7) The larger interest of the public and State demand that in serious cases like economic offences involving blatant corruption at the higher rungs of the executive and political power, the discretion under Section 438 of the Code should not be exercised; and (8) Mere general allegations of mala fides in the petition are inadequate.
The court must be satisfied on materials before it that the allegations of mala fides are substantial and the accusation appears to be false and groundless.
The argument that the appellants were men of substance and position who were hardly likely to abscond and would be prepared willingly to face trial was rejected by the Full Bench with the observation that to accord differential treatment to the appellants on account of their status will amount to negation of the concept of equality before the law and that it could hardly be contended that every man of status, who was intended to be charged with serious crimes including the one under section 409 was punishable with life imprisonment, "was entitled to knock at the door of the Court for anticipatory bail".
The possession of high status, according to the Full Bench, is not only an irrelevant consideration for granting anticipatory bail, but is, if anything, an aggravating circumstance.
Hence the appeals by special leave.
The appellants contended: (a) The power conferred by section 438 to grant anticipatory bail is "not limited to the contigencies" summarised by the High Court; (b) The power to grant anticipatory bail ought to be left to the discretion of the Court concerned, depending on the facts and circumstances of each particular case; (c) Since the denial of bail amounts to deprivation of personal liberty; Courts should lean against the imposition of unnecessary restrictions on the scope of Section 438, when no such restrictions are imposed by the legislature in the terms of that section (d) Section 438 is a procedural provision which is concerned with the personal liberty of an individual who has not been convicted of the offence in respect of which he seeks bail and who must be presumed to be innocent.
The validity of that section must accordingly be examined by the test of fairness and which is implicit in Article 21.
If the legislature itself were to impose an unreasonable restriction could have been struck down as being violative of Article 21.
Therefore, while determining the scope of section 438, the Court should not impose any unfair or unreasonable limitation on the individual 's right to obtain an order of anticipatory bail.
Imposition of an unfair or unreasonable limitation would be violative of Article 21 irrespective of whether it is imposed by legislation or by judicial decision.
Allowing the appeals in part, the Court, ^ HELD: 1.
The society has a vital stake in both of these interests namely, personal liberty and the investigational power of the police, though their relative importance at any given time depends upon the complexion and restraints of political conditions.
The Court 's task is how best to balance these interests while determining the scope of section 438 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
[393 C D] 2.
The High Court and the Court of Session should be left to exercise their jurisdiction under section 438 by a wise and careful use of their discretion 385 which by their long training and experience, they are ideally suited to do.
The ends of justice will be better served by trusting these courts to act objectively and in consonance with principles governing the grant of bail which are recognised over the years, than by divesting them of their discretion which the legislature has conferred upon them, by laying down inflexible rules of general application.
It is customary, almost chronic, to take a statute as one finds it on the ground that, after all, "the legislature in its wisdom" has thought it fit to use a particular expression.
A convention may usefully grow whereby the High Court and the Court of Session may be trusted to exercise their discretionary powers in their wisdom, especially when the discretion is entrusted to their care by the legislature in its wisdom.
If they err, they are liable to be corrected.
[417 B D] 3.
Section 438(1) of the Code lays down a condition which has to be satisfied before anticipatory bail can be granted.
The applicant must show that he has "reason to believe" that he may be arrested for a non bailable offence.
The use of the expression "reason to believe" shows that the belief that the applicant may be so arrested must be founded on reasonable grounds.
Mere 'fear ' is not 'belief ', for which reason it is not enough for the applicant to show that he has some sort of a vague apprehension that some one is going to make an accusation against him, in pursuance of which he may be arrested.
The grounds on which the belief of the applicant is based that he may be arrested for a non bailable offence, must be capable of being examined by the court objectively, because it is then alone that the court can determine whether the applicant has reason to believe that he may be so arrested.
Section 438(1), therefore, cannot be invoked on the basis of vague and general allegations, as if to arm oneself in perpetuity against a possible arrest.
Otherwise, the number of applications for anticipatory bail will be as large, as, at any rate, the adult populace.
Anticipatory bail is a device to secure the individual 's liberty; it is neither a passport to the commission of crimes nor a shield against any and all kinds of accusation, likely or unlikely.
[417 E H, 418 A] Secondly, if an application for anticipatory bail is made to the High Court or the Court of Session it must apply its own mind to the question and decide whether a case has been made out for granting such relief.
It cannot leave the question for the decision of the Magistrate concerned under Section 437 of the Code, as and when an occasion arises.
Such a course will defeat the very object of Section 438.
[418 A B] Thirdly, the filing of a First Information Report is not a condition precedent to the exercise of the power under Section 438.
The imminence of a likely arrest founded on a reasonable belief can be shown to exist even if an F.I.R. is not yet filed.
[418 B C] Fourthly, anticipatory bail can be granted even after an F.I.R. is filed, so long as the applicant has not been arrested.
[418 C] Fifthly, the provisions of Section 438 cannot be invoked after the arrest of the accused.
The grant of "anticipatory bail" to an accused who is under arrest involves a contradiction in terms, in so far as the offence or offences for which he is arrested, are concerned.
After arrest, the accused must seek his remedy under Section 437 or Section 439 of the Code, if he wants to be released on bail in respect of the offence or offences for which he is arrested.
[418 C E] 386 4.
However, a "blanket order" of anticipatory bail should not generally be passed.
This flows from the very language of the section which requires the appellant to show that he has "reason to believe" that he may be arrested.
A belief can be said to be founded on reasonable grounds only if there is something tangible to go by on the basis of which it can be said that the applicant 's apprehension that he may be arrested is genuine.
That is why, normally, a direction should not issue under Section 438(1) to the effect that the applicant shall be released on bail "whenever arrested for which ever offence whatsoever".
That is what is meant by a 'blanket order ' of anticipatory bail, an order which serves as a blanket to cover or protect any and every kind of allegedly unlawful activity, in fact any eventuality, likely or unlikely regarding which, no concrete information can possibly be bad.
The rationale of a direction under Section 438(1) is the belief of the applicant founded on reasonable grounds that he may be arrested for a non bailable offence.
It is unrealistic to expect the applicant to draw up his application with the meticulousness of a pleading in a civil case and such is not requirement of the section.
But specific events and facts must be disclosed by the applicant in order to enable the court to judge of the reasonableness of his belief, the existence of which is the sine qua non of the exercise of power conferred by the section.
[418 E H, 419 A] Apart from the fact that the very language of the statute compels this construction, there is an important principle involved in the insistence that facts, on the basis of which a direction under Section 438(1) is sought, must be clear and specific, not vague and general.
It is only by the observance of that principle that a possible conflict between the right of an individual to his liberty and the right of the police to investigate into crimes reported to them can be avoided.
[419 A C] A blanket order of anticipatory bail is bound to cause serious interference with both the right and the duty of the police in the matter of investigation because, regardless of what kind of offence is alleged to have been committed by the applicant and when, an order of bail which comprehends allegedly unlawful activity of any description whatsoever, will prevent the police from arresting the applicant even if the commits, say, a murder in the presence of the public.
Such an order can then become a charter of lawlessness and weapon to stifle prompt investigation into offences which could not possibly be predicated when the order was passed.
Therefore, the court which grants anticipatory bail must take care to specify the offence or offences in respect of which alone the order will be effective.
The power should not be exercised in a vacuum.
[419 C E] 5.
An order of bail can be passed under section 438(1) of the Code without notice to the Public Prosecutor.
But notice should issue to the public prosecutor or the Government Advocate forthwith and the question of bail should be re examined in the light of the respective contentions of the parties.
The ad interim order too must conform to the requirements of the section and suitable conditions should be imposed on the applicant even at that stage.
[419 E F] 6.
Equally the operation of an order passed under section 438(1) need not necessarily be limited in point of time.
The Court may, if there are reasons for doing so, limit the operation of the order to a short period until after the filing of an F.I.R. in respect of the matter covered by the order.
The applicant may in such cases be directed to obtain an order of bail under Section 437 or 439 of the Code within a reasonably short period after the filing of the F.I.R. 387 as aforesaid.
But this need not be followed as an invariable rule.
The normal rule should be not to limit the operation of the order in relation to a period of time.
[419 F H] 7.
Bail is basically release from restraint, more particularly release from the custody of the police.
The act of arrest directly affects freedom of movement of the person arrested by the police, and speaking generally, an order of bail gives back to the accused that freedom on condition that he will appear to take his trial.
Personal recognizance suretyship bonds and such other modalities are the means by which an assurance is secured from the accused that though he has been released on bail, he will present himself as the trial of offence or offences of which he is charged and for which he was arrested.
[397 E G] The distinction between an ordinary order of bail and an order of anticipatory bail is that whereas the former is granted after arrest and therefore means release from the custody of the police, the latter is granted in anticipation of arrest and is therefore effective at the very moment of arrest.
Police custody is an inevitable concomitant of arrest for non bailable offences.
An order of anticipatory bail constitutes, so to say, an insurance against police custody following upon arrest for offence or offences in respect of which the order is issued.
In other words, unlike a post arrest order of bail, it is a pre arrest legal process which directs that if the person in whose favour it is issued is thereafter arrested on the accusation in respect of which the direction is issued, he shall be released on bail.
Section 46(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure which deals with how arrests are to be made, provides that in making the arrest the police officer or other person making the arrest "shall actually touch or confine the body of the person to be arrested, unless there be a submission to the custody by word or action".
A direction under section 438 is intended to confer conditional immunity from this 'touch ' or confinement.
[397 G H. 398 A B] 8.
No one can accuse the police of possessing a healing touch nor indeed does anyone have misgivings in regard to constraints consequent upon confinement in police custody.
But, society has come to accept and acquiesce in all that follows upon a police arrest with a certain amount of sangfroid, in so far as the ordinary rut of criminal investigation is concerned.
It is the normal day to day business of the police to investigate into charges brought before them and, broadly and generally, they have nothing to gain, not favours at any rate, by subjecting ordinary criminal to needless harassment.
But the crimes, the criminals and even the complaints can occasionally possess extraordinary features.
When the even flow of life becomes turbid, the police can be called upon to inquire into charges arising out of political antagonism.
The powerful processes of criminal law can then be perverted for achieving extraneous ends.
Attendant upon such investigations, when the police are not free agents within their sphere of duty, is a great amount of inconvenience, harassment and humiliation.
That can even take the form of the parading of a respectable person in hand cuffs, apparently on way to a court of justice.
The foul deed is done when an adversary is exposed to social ridicule and obloquy, no matter when and whether a conviction is secured or is at all possible.
It is in order to meet such situations, though not limited to these contingencies, that the power to grant anticipatory bail was introduced into the Code of 1973.
[398 C F] 9.
Clause (1) of Section 438 is couched in terms, broad and unqualified.
By any known canon of construction, words of width and amplitude ought not 388 generally to be cut down so as to read into the language of the statute restraints and conditions which the legislature itself did not think it proper or necessary to impose.
This is especially true when the statutory provision which falls for consideration is designed to secure a valuable right like the right to personal freedom and involves the application of a presumption as salutary and deep grained in our Criminal Jurisprudence as the presumption of innocence.
[401 A C] The legislature conferred a wide discretion on the High Court and the Court of Session to grant anticipatory bail because it evidently felt, firstly, that it would be difficult to enumerate the conditions under which anticipatory bail should or should not be granted and secondly; because the intention was to allow the higher courts in the echelon a somewhat free hand in the grant of relief in the nature of anticipatory bail.
That is why, departing from the terms of Sections 437 and 439, Section 438(1) uses the language that the High Court or the Court of Session "may, if it thinks fit" direct that the applicant be released on bail.
Sub section (2) of Section 438 is a further and clearer manifestation of the same legislative intent to confer a wide discretionary power to grant anticipatory bail.
It provides that the High Court or the Court of Session, while issuing a direction for the grant of anticipatory bail, "may include such conditions in such directions in the light of the facts of the particular case, as it may think fit" including the conditions which are set out in clauses (i) to (iv) of sub section (2).
The proof of legislative intent can best be found in the language which the legislature uses.
Ambiguities can undoubtedly be resolved by resort to extraneous aids but words, as wide and explicit as have been used in Section 438, must be given their full effect, especially when to refuse to do so will result in undue impairment of the freedom of the individual and the presumption of innocence.
It has to be borne in mind that anticipatory bail is sought when there is a mere apprehension of arrest on the accusation that the applicant has committed a non bailable offence.
A person who has yet to lose his freedom by being arrested asks for freedom in the event of arrest.
That is the stage at which it is imperative to protect his freedom, in so far as one may, and to give full play to the presumption that he is innocent.
In fact, the stage at which anticipatory bail is generally sought brings about its striking dissimilarity with the situation in which a person who is arrested for the commission of a non bailable offences asks for bail.
In the latter situation, adequate data is available to the Court, or can be called for by it, in the light of which it can grant or refuse relief and while granting it, modify it by the imposition of all or any of the conditions mentioned in Section 437.
[404 A G] 10.
The amplitude of judicial discretion which is given to the High Court and the Court of Sessions, to impose such conditions as they may think fit while granting anticipatory bail, should not be cut down, by a process of construction, by reading into the statute conditions which are not to be found therein like those evolved by the High Court.
The High Court and the Court of Session to whom the application for anticipatory bail is made ought to be left free in the exercise of their judicial discretion to grant bail if they consider it fit so to do on the particular facts and circumstances of the case and on such conditions as the case may warrant.
Similarly, they must be left free to refuse bail if the circumstances of the case so warrant, on considerations similar to those mentioned in Section 437 or which are generally considered to be relevant under Section 439 of the Code.
[405 B D] 389 Generalisations on matters which rest on discretion and the attempt to discover formulae of universal application when facts are bound to differ from case to case frustrate the very purpose of conferring discretion.
No two cases are alike on facts and therefore, Courts have to be allowed a little free play in the joints if the conferment of discretionary power is to be meaningful.
There is no risk involved in entrusting a wide discretion to the Court of Session and the High Court in granting anticipatory bail because, firstly these are higher courts manned by experienced persons, secondly their order are not final but are open to appellate or revisional scrutiny and above all because, discretion has always to be exercised by courts judicially and not according to whim, caprice or fancy.
On the other hand, there is a risk in foreclosing categories of cases in which anticipatory bail may be allowed because life throws up unforeseen possibilities and offers new challenges.
Judicial discretion has to be free enough to be able to take these possibilities in its stride and to meet these challenges.
[405 D G] Hyman and Anr.
vs Rose, ; referred to 11.
Judges have to decide cases as they come before them, mindful of the need to keep passions and prejudices out of their decisions.
And it will be strange if, by employing judicial artifices and techniques, this Court cuts down the discretion so wisely conferred upon the Courts, by devising a formula which will confine the power to grant anticipatory bail within a strait jacket.
While laying down cast iron rules in a matter like granting anticipatory bail, as the High Court has done, it is apt to be overlooked that even Judges can have but an imperfect awareness of the needs of new situations.
Life is never static and every situation has to be assessed in the context of emerging concerns as and when it arises.
Therefore, even if this Court were to frame a 'Code for the grant of anticipatory bail ', which really is the business of the legislature, it can at best furnish broad guidelines and cannot compel blind adherence.
In which case to grant bail and in which to refuse it is, in the very nature of things, a matter of discretion.
But apart from the fact that the question is inherently of a kind which calls for the use of discretion from case to case, the legislature has, in terms express, relegated the decision of that question to the discretion of the Court, by providing that it may grant bail "if it thinks fit".
The concern the Courts generally is to preserve their discretion without meaning to abuse it.
It will be strange if the Court exhibits concern to stultify the discretion conferred upon the Courts by law.
[406 D H] Discretion, therefore, ought to be permitted to remain in the domain of discretion, to be exercised objectively and open to correction by the higher courts.
The safety of discretionary power lies in this twin protection which provides a safeguard against its abuse.
[407 F G] 12.
It is true that the functions of judiciary and the police are in a sense complementary and not overlapping.
An order of anticipatory bail does not in any way, directly or indirectly, take away from the police their right to investigate into charges made or to be made against the person released on bail.
In fact, two of the usual conditions incorporated in a direction issued under section 438(1) are those recommended in Sub section (2)(i) and (ii) which require the applicant to co operate with the police and to assure that he shall not tamper with the witnesses during and after the investigation.
While granting relief under Section 438(1), appropriate conditions can be imposed under Section 438(2), so as to ensure an uninterrupted investigation.
One of 390 such conditions can even be that in the event of the police making out a case of a likely discovery under Section 27 of the Evidence Act, the person released on bail shall be liable to be taken in police custody for facilitating the discovery.
Besides, if and when the occasion arises, it may be possible for the prosecution to claim the benefit of Section 27 of the Evidence Act in regard to a discovery of facts made in pursuance of information supplied by a person released on bail.
[409 D, 410 A D] King Emperor vs Khwaja Nazir Ahmed, 71 I.A., 203, State of U.P. vs Deoman Upadhyaya, [1961] 1 S.C.R. p. 14 @ 26; referred to. 13.
In Balchand Jain vs State of Madhya Pradesh, ; , this Court was considering whether the provisions of Section 438 relating to anticipatory bail stand overruled or repealed by virtue of Rule 184 of the Defence and Internal Security of India Rules, 1971 or whether both the provisions can by rule of harmonious interpretion, exist side by side.
It was in that context that it was observed that "As section 438 immediately follows Section 437 which is the main provision for bail in respect of non bailable offences, it is manifest that the conditions imposed by section 437(1) are implicitly contained in Section 438 of the Code".
These observations regarding the nature of the power conferred by section 438 and regarding the question whether the conditions mentioned in Section 437 should be read into section 438 cannot, therefore be treated as the ratio of the decision.
[413 C D, E] The power conferred by section 438 is of an "extra ordinary" character only in the sense that it is not ordinarily resorted to like the power conferred by sections 437 and 439.
[413 E F] Bal Chand Jain vs State of M.P., ; , distinguished.
Since denial of bail amounts to deprivation of personal liberty, the Court should lean against the imposition of unnecessary restrictions on the scope of section 438, especially when no such restrictions have been imposed by the legislature in the terms of that section.
Section 438 is a procedural provision which is concerned with the personal liberty of the individual, who is entitled to the benefit of the presumption of innocence since he is not, on the date of his application for anticipatory bail, convicted of the offence in respect of which he seeks bail.
An over generous infusion of constraints and conditions which are not to be found in Section 438 can make its provisions constitutionally vulnerable since the right to personal freedom cannot be made to depend on compliance with unreasonable restrictions.
[413 F H, 414 A] Maneka Gandhi vs Union of India, [1978] 1 S.C.C. 248; applied.
In regard to anticipatory bail, if the proposed accusation appears to stem not from motives of furthering the ends of justice but from some ulterior inotive, the object being to injure and humiliate the applicant by having him arrested a direction for the release of the applicant on bail in the event of his arrest would generally, be made.
On the other hand, if it appears likely considering the antecedents of the applicant, that taking advantage of the order of anticipatory bail he will flee from justice, such an order would not be made.
But the converse of these propositions is not necessarily true.
That is to say it cannot be laid down as an inexorable rule that anticipatory bail cannot be granted unless the proposed accusation appears to be actuated by mala fides; 391 and, equally, that anticipatory bail must be granted if there is no fear that the applicant will abscond.
There are several other considerations, too numerous to enumerate the combined effect of which must weigh with the court while granting or rejecting anticipatory bail.
The nature and seriousness of the proposed charges, the context of the events likely to lead to the making of the charges, a reasonable possibility of the applicant 's presence not being secured at the trial, a reasonable apprehension that witnesses will be tampered with and "the larger interests of the public or the state" are some of the considerations which the court has to keep in mind while deciding an application for anticipatory bail.
[415 G H, 416 A C] State vs Captain Jagjit Singh, ; , followed.
