Dismissing the petitions, the Court ^ HELD 1.
"Coal Mine" in the 1976 Act includes coking coal mine and section 3(3) of that Act clamps down the ban on extraction of Coking Coal also [601B C] History may illumine but cannot imprison interpretation.
It is true that in 1971 when Parliament was faced with a crisis regarding need for coking coal in iron and steel industries, on an emergency footing was made solely confined to coking coal mines.
The plan of the nation in regard to these natural resources was then embryonic and later final and there was step by step legislation to implement the policy on a phased programme.
The culmination came in the blanket ban of 1976.
[599D E] The expression in Section 3(3) is semantically sweeping and is wide in meaning so as to spare no class of coal, including even coking coal, because coking coal is a species of coal, coal itself being the genus.
Section 2(b) of the 1973 Act defines coal mine to mean "a mine in which there exists one or more seams of coal".
Even a coking coal mine is a coal mine because the definition is broad and this is clear from the definition of coking coal mine in Section 3(c) of the .
[600E G] Coking coal is more precious, strategically speaking, than other forms of coal and it would be an error, nay a blunder, to prevent private extraction of common coal and to permit removal of coking coal.
It would be pathetic and bathetic for any policy maker to be so egregious.
Parliament may err but not be absurd! So construed, it is obvious that coking coal, which is more importantly needed for the nation than other supplies of coal, must be the last to be squandered away by permitting it to be privately exploited.
[601A B] 3.
Even assuming there is a fire clay or other layer somewhere in the bowels of the earth tho statutory mandatory is that once you come up on a coal seem you shall stop extracting it to proceed beyond.
May be some injury may be caused, fancied or real, but it is permissible for Parliament to make provision to prevent evasion of the purpose of the statute by prohibition of mining other minerals which may incidentally defeat tho coal nationalisation measure.
[601D F] 596 4.
Section 3(3) of the 1976 Act, being all inclusive and having been constitutionally upheld it is no longer permissible for any Court In India to appoint a receiver for or otherwise permit extraction of coal or coking coal.
The Court cannot sanction the commission of a crime.
[601G, H, 602A]
