One Sri Ahluwalia a senior member of the Indian Police Service sought to quash the decision of the Union of India dated 26 6 1976 whereby his year of allotment was fixed as 1965.
When the Writ Petition of Sri Ahluwalia was pending in the High Court of Himachal Pradesh, some of the respondents in that Writ Petition and one R. R. Verma all direct recruits, choose to file a Writ Petition in the Delhi High Court questioning the notice dated June 29, 1973 calling upon them to submit representations against the year of allotment proposed to be allotted to M/s. Sahney, Dhaliwal and Ahluwalia.
After the Writ Petition of Ahluwalia was allowed, and after the Central Government passed the order dated July 27, 1979, pursuant to the direction issued by the High Court of Himachal Pradesh to Union of India to refix the seniority and year of allotment to Sri Ahluwalia, the Delhi High Court dismissed the Writ Petition filed by the direct recruits as infructuous.
The High Court, however granted a certificate of fitness to appeal to this Court under Article 133 of the Constitution.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
The Writ Petition having been dismissed as infructuous it is not proper on the part of the High Court to grant a certificate of fitness under Article 133 of the Constitution.
[480G H] 2.
Rule 3 of the All India Services (Conditions of Service residuary matters) Rules, 1960 is couched in a language suggestive of near autocratic power reminiscent of "bad old days" of the Imperial Raj but, the rule is not ment to vest the Central Government with power to pass any order they like with a view to promote the interests of a favoured Civil servant.
It is really meant to relax.
In appropriate cases, the relentless rigour of a mechanical application of the rules, so that civil servants may not be subjected to undue and undeserved hardship.
Sufficient guidance can be had from the very rule and from the scheme of the various statutory provisions dealing with the conditions of service of Members of the All India Service.
[481G H, 482A B] 3.
Rule 3 is not unconstitutional on the ground that it vests an unfettered discretion in the Government.
Section 3 of the All India Services Act enables 479 the Central Government in consultation with the Governments of the States concerned to make rules for the regulation of recruitment, and the conditions of service of persons appointed to an All India Service.
Pursuant to the power given by Section 3 of the All India Services Act the Central Government has made innumerable sets of rules, some common to all the All India Services and some applicable separately to each of the All India Services.
The All India Services (Leave) Rules, the All India Services (Conduct) Rules, the All India Services (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, the all India Services (Travelling Allowance) Rules, and the All India Services (Conditions of Service residuary matters) Rules are examples of rules made under Section 3 of the All India Services Act which are common to all the All India Services.
The Indian Police Service (Cadre) Rules, the Indian Police Service (Recruitment) Rules, the Indian Police Service (Probation) Rules, the Indian Police Service (Regulation of Seniority) Rules are examples of rules made under section 3 of the All India Services Act applicable to a single All India Service, namely, the Indian Police Service.
The rules deal with countless matters which concern a civil servant, such as creation of cadre, fixation of Cadre Strength, recruitment, seniority, promotion, leave, allowances, conduct, discipline and appeal, and a host of such other matters.
The golden thread, which runs through the entire complex fabric or rules is the securing of honest and competent civil servants.
Integrity and efficiency are the hall marks of any Civil service anywhere and they are what are contemplated and aimed at by the wide range of rules.
The interest to be served is always the public interest and not individual interest.
Public interest, in the matter of the conditions of service of civil servants, is best served by rules which are directed towards efficiency and integrity.
[482B G & 483D] Now very wide as the range covered by the rules is, the rules can never be exhaustive.
Unforeseen and complex situations often arise.
Very often it is found that all too strict application of a rule works undue hardship on a civil servant.
resulting in injustice and inequity, causing disappointment and frustration to the civil servant and finally leading to the defeat of the very objects aimed at by the rules namely efficiency and integrity of civil servants.
Hence it is that the Central Government is vested with a reserve power under rule 3 to deal with unforeseen and unpredictable situations, and to relieve the civil servants from the infliction of undue hardship and to do justice and equity.
It does not mean that the Central Government is free to do what they like, regardless of right or wrong; nor does it mean that the Courts are powerless to correct them.
The Central Government is bound to exercise the power in the public interest with a view to secure civil servants of efficiency and integrity, and when and only when undue hardship is caused by the application of the rules, the power to relax is to be exercised in a just and equitable manner but, again, only to the extent necessary for so dealing with the case Moreover, the exercise of the power of relaxation like all other administrative action affecting rights of parties is subject to judicial review on grounds now well known.
[482G H, 483A C] 4.
It is not correct to say that the principle that the power to review must be conferred by statute either specifically or by necessary implication is applicable to decisions purely of an administrative nature.
To extend the principle to pure administrative decisions would indeed lead to untoward and startling re 480 sults.
Surely, any Government must be free to alter its policy or its decision in administrative matters.
If they are to carry on their daily administration they cannot be hide bound by the rules and restrictions of judicial procedure though of course they are bound to obey all statutory requirements and also observe the principles of natural justice where rights of parties may be affected.
Again, if administrative decisions are reviewed, the decisions taken after review are subject to judicial review on all grounds on which an administrative decision may be questioned in a Court.
[483F H, 484A] Patel Narshi Thakershi and Ors.
vs Pradvamunsinghji Arjunsinghji, AIR 1970 SC 1273; D. N. Roy and section K. Banerjee and Ors.
vs State of Bihar and Ors.
, ; and State of Assam and Anr.
vs J. N. Roy Biswas [1976] 2 S.C.R. 128, distinguished.
