Under the Special Rules of the Tamil Nadu Commercial Taxes Service, recruitment to the junior most post, Joint Commercial Tax Officer is made by direct recruitment and recruitment by transfer from Deputy Commercial Tax Officers in the State Commercial Taxes Subordinate Services in the proportion 1:2.
The higher posts are filled by promotion from officers in the category of posts immediately below.
Under Rule 2(b) all promotions are to be made on the grounds of merit and ability, seniority being considered where merit and ability are equal.
Rule 5(c) provides that every person appointed as a Joint Commercial Tax Officer must be on probation for at least two years on duty; in the case of direct recruitment the probationary period commences from the date on which the officer completes his training and; in the case of recruitment by transfer it commences from the date the officer joins duty.
Under rule 7(b), the period of training of a direct recruit does not count towards probation.
The petitioner was recruited to the Cadre of Joint Commercial Tax Officer as a direct recruit in 1966 and was posted for training which he joined on 6th June 1966; he commenced his period of probation on 18th August 1967.
On 16th August 1972, the petitioner was promoted to the post of Commercial Tax Officer and on 14th January 1976 he was promoted as Assistant Commissioner.
The second respondent joined the post of Joint Commercial Tax Officer as a promotee on 25th January 1967 and commenced his probation from that date.
He was promoted as Commercial Tax Officer on 17th December 1972 and as Assistant Commissioner on 26th August 1976.
In the combined inter se seniority list issued in G.O.Ms.
No. 4103 dated 9th July 1973, herein the petitioner and the second respondent were shown in the 1966 list at serial numbers 43 and 52 respectively.
The validity of the combined inter se seniority list was challenged in two writ petitions Nos. 2016 and 2017 of 1972 filed by certain other officers in respect of the ranking from serial numbers 51 to serial number 78.
The petitioner was not a party to the writ petition.
The writ petition was allowed by the Madras High Court.
The High Court took note of the fact that no rules had been framed indicating how the inter se seniority between the direct recruits and the transferee recruits had to be fixed and therefore directed a fresh determination of the inter se seniority on the basis of three principles: (i) Each year should be taken as a unit for fixing the inter se seniority; (ii) Persons not actually appointed in the year 1966 should not be included in the 1966 year 's list 778 and their seniority should be determined with reference to the date of their joining as Joint Commercial Tax Officers; and (iii) The date on which an officer commences probation is the proper criterion for fixing the inter se seniority.
In the new combined inter se seniority list, so prepared and issued by the Government in their order No. G.O. Ms. No. 2228 dated 27th December 1977, both the second respondent and the petitioner were shown at serial number 48 and serial No. 49 respectively in the 1967 List.
The petitioner, apprehending that the seniority assigned to him in the second combined inter se seniority list of Joint Commercial Tax Officers would prejudice him in the promotions to be made to the category of Deputy Commissioners has challenged the validity of that seniority list.
Dismissing the petition, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
Where the rules are specifically silent there is no doubt that the Government is entitled to make an order filling up any lacuna or uncovered gap in the rules.
There is good reason in the principle followed in this case that seniority should be based on the length of effective service.
The date of confirmation in a post then loses its relevance.
[781 F G] 2.
The principle that officers whose effective entry into the service pertains to a particular year should be regarded as a unit in themselves for fixing their inter se seniority is valid.
Correctly, therefore, the petitioner and the second respondent have been placed in the 1967 List.
Since the Special Rules do not contemplate any credit being given for the period of training undergone by a direct recruit and the probationary period commences only when the training ends, the year of appointment is of little moment.
[781 B C, D E] 3.
The principles propounded by the High Court are principles of general application and drawn from the rules governing the service and the concepts implied therein.
They are not principles applicable peculiarly only to the parties to the writ petitions.
They are principles which could legitimately form the basis of a combined inter se seniority list in respect of Joint Commercial Tax Officers.
The places assigned to the petitioner and the second respondent duly represent their relative seniority.
The second seniority list was prepared after issuing notice to all including the petitioner and prepared after considering objections raised.
[782 A C]
