The respondent Piara Singh was apprehended in September 1958 by the Indian Police while crossing the Indo Pakistan border into Pakistan.
A sum of Rs. 65,500/ in currency notes was recovered from his person.
On interrogation he stated that he was taking the currency notes to Pakistan to enable him to purchase gold in that country with a view to smuggling it into India.
The Collector of Central Excise and Land Customs ordered the confiscation of the currency notes.
In the proceedings initiated by the Income Tax Officer, he found that Rs. 60,500/ constituted the income of the assessee from undisclosed sources.
An appeal by the assessee was dismissed by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner.
In second appeal before the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, the assessee represented that if he was regarded as engaged in the business of smuggling gold he was entitled to a deduction under section 10(1) of the Income Tax Act, 1922 of the entire sum of Rs. 65,500/ as a loss incurred in the business on the confiscation of the currency notes.
The Tribunal upheld the claim to deduction.
It proceeded on the basis that the assessee was carrying on a regular smuggling activity which consisted of taking currency notes out of India and exchanging them with gold in Pakistan which was later smuggled into India.
The High Court on a reference at the instance of the Revenue answered the reference against the Revenue.
Hence the appeal.
Allowing the appeal, the Court.
^ HELD: 1.
The assessee is entitled to the deduction of Rs. 65,500/ under section 10(1) of the Income Tax Act, 1922.
[1124 C, 1126 B] 2.
The assessee was carrying on the business of smuggling and, therefore, was liable to income tax on income from that business.
The currency notes carried by the assessee across the border was an essential part of the smuggling operation.
If the activity of smuggling can be regarded as a business, those who are carrying on that business must be deemed to be aware that a necessary incident involved in the business is detection by the Customs authorities and the consequent confiscation of the currency notes.
It is an incident as predictable in the course of carrying on the activity as any other feature of it.
Having regard to the nature of the activity possible detection by the Customs authorities constitutes a normal feature integrated into all that is implied and involved in it.
The confiscation of the currency notes is a loss occasioned in pursuing the business; it is a loss in much the same way as if the currency 1123 notes had been stolen or dropped on the way while carrying on the business.
It is a loss which springs directly from the carrying on of the business and is incidental to it.
Applying the principle laid down by this Court in Badridas Daga vs Commissioner of Income Tax the deduction must be allowed.
[1124 D E] Badridas Daga vs Commissioner of Income Tax, ; Commissioner of Income Tax, Gujarat vs section C. Kothari ; applied.
Haji Aziz and Abdul Shakoor Bros. vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay City II, , Sari Hinduji Khushalji 7 Co. vs Commr.
of Income Tax, A.P. ; J. section Parkar vs V. B. Palekar and Ors.
; distinguished and explained.
