Right from 1939, the demand of jute in the world market was rather lean and with a view to adjusting the production of the jute mills to the demand of the world market, various jute mills formed an Association styled as Indian Jute Mills Association and the appellant is one such member of the said Association.
As per the objects of the Association a quinquenniel working time agreement was entered into between the members of the Association restricting the number of working hours per week, for which the mills shall be entitled to work their looms.
The fourth working time Agreement was entered into between the members of the Association on 9th December, 1954 and it was to remain in force for a period of five years from 12th December 1954.
As per the first clause of the fourth working time Agreement no signatory shall work more than forty five hours of work per week subject to alteration in accordance with the provisions of clauses 7(1)(2) and (3) and further subject inter alia to the provision of clause (10) and under that clause, a joint and several agreement could be made providing that throughout the duration of the working time agreement, members with registered complements of loom not exceeding 220 shall be entitled to work upto seventy two hours per week.
Clause 6(a) enabled members to be registered as a "Group of Mills" if they happened to be under the control of the same managing agents or were combined by any arrangement or agreement and it was open to any member of the Group Mills so registered to utilise the allotment of hours of work per week of other members in the same group who were not fully utilising the hours of work allowable to them under the working time agreement, provided such transfer of hours of work was for a period not less than six months.
Clause 6(b) further (J prescribed three other conditions precedent subject to which the allotment of hours of work transferred by one member to another could be utilised by the latter and two of them were: (i) All agreements to transfer shall, as a condition precedent to any rights being obtained by transferee, be submitted with an explanation to the Committee and Committee 's decision .
whether the transfer shall be allowed shall be final and conclusive and (ii) If the Committee sanctions the transfer, it shall be a condition precedent to its utilisation that a certificate be issued and the transfer registered.
This transaction of transfer of allotment of hours of work per week was commonly referred to as sale of looms hours by one member to another.
The consequence of such 1371 transfer was that the hours of work per week transferred by a member were liable to be deducted from the working hours per week allowed to such member under the working time agreement and the member in whose favour such transfer was made entitled to utilise the number of working hours per week transferred to him in addition to the working hours per week allowed to him under the working time agreement.
The assessee, under this clause purchased loom hours from four different jute manufacturing concerns which were signatories to the working time agreement, for the aggregate sum of Rs. 2,03,255/ during the year 1st August 1958 to 31st July 1959.
In the course of the assessment year 1960 61 for which the relevant accounting year was the previous year 1st August 1958 to 31st July 1959, the assessee claimed this amount of Rs. 2,03,255/ as revenue expenditure on the ground that it was part of the cost of operating the looms which constituted the profit making apparatus of the assessee.
claim was disallowed by the Income Tax officer, but on appeal, the Appellate Assistant Commissioner accepted the claim and allowed the deduction on the view that the assessee did not acquire any capital asset when it purchased the loom hours and the amount spent by it was incurred for running the business of working it with a view to producing day to day profits and it was part of operating cost or revenue cost of production.
The Revenue preferred an appeal to the Tribunal, and, having lost before it, carried the matter before the High Court by a reference.
The High Court, following the decision of the Supreme Court in Commissioner of Income Tax vs Maheshwari Devi Jute Mills Ltd., held that the amount paid by the assessee for purchase of the loom hours was in the nature of capital expenditure and was therefore not deductible under section 10(2) (xv) of the Income Tax Act.
Hence the appeal by assessee by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
An expenditure incurred by an assessee can qualify for deduction under section 10(2)(xv) only if it is incurred wholly and exclusively for the purpose of his business, but even if it fulfills this requirement, it is nob enough; it must further be of revenue as distinguished from capital nature 2.
Maheshwari Devi Jute Mills ' case was a converse case where the question was whether an amount received by the assessee for sale of loom hours was m the nature of capital receipt or revenue receipt and the Supreme Court took the view that it was in the nature of capital receipt and hence not taxable.
The decision in Maheshwari Devi Jute Mills ' case cannot on this account be regarded as an authority for the proposition that payment made by an assessee for purchase of loom hours would be capital expenditure, because it is not a universally true proposition that what may be capital receipt in the hands of the payee must necessarily be capital expenditure in relation to the payer.
The fact that a certain payment constitutes income or capital receipt in the hands of a recipient is not material in determining whether the payment is revenue or capital disbursement qua the payer.
Whether it is capital expenditure or revenue expenditure would have to be determined having regard to the nature of the transaction and other relevant factors.
[1378 G H, 1379 A D] H Race Course Betting Control Board vs Wild, 22 Tax Cases 182.
quoted with approval.
1372 3.
Again, Maheshwari Devi Jute Mills ' Case proceeded on the accepted basis that loom hours were a capital asset and the only issue debated was whether the transaction in question constituted sale of this asset or it represented exploitation of the asset by permitting its user by another while retaining ownership.
No question was raised before the Court as to whether tho loom hours were an asset at all nor was any argument advanced as to what was the true nature of the transaction.
This question is res integra and therefore this decision cannot be regarded as an authority for the proposition that The amount paid for purchase of loom hours was capital and not revenue expenditure.
[1379 E, 1380 F] 4.
It is quite clear from the terms of the working time agreement that the allotment of loom hours to different mills constituted merely a contractual restriction on the right of every mill under the general law to work its looms to their full capacity.
If there had been no working time agreement, each mill would have been entitled to work its looms uninterruptedly for twenty four hours a day throughout the week, but that would have resulted in production of jute very much in excess of the demand in the world market, leading to unfair competition and precipitous fall in jute price and in the process, prejudicially affecting all the mills and therefore with a view to protecting the interest of the mills who were members of the Association, the working time agreement was entered into restricting the number of working hours per week for which each mill could work its looms.
The allotment of working hours per week under the working time agreement was clearly not a right conferred on a mill, signatory to the working time agreement.
It was rather a restriction voluntarily accepted by each still with a view to adjusting the production to the demand in the world market and this restriction could not possibly be regarded as an asset of such mill.
This restriction necessarily had the effect of limiting the production of the mill and consequentially also the profit which the mill could otherwise make by working full looms hours.
But a provision was made in clause 6(b) of the working time agreement that the whole or a part of the working hours per week could be transferred by one mill to another for a period of not less than six months and if such transfer was approved and registered by the Committee of the Association, the transferee mill would be entitled to utilise the number of working hours per week transferred to it in addition to the working hours per week allowed to it under the working time agreement, while the transferor mill could cease to be entitled to avail of the number of working hours per week so transferred and those would be liable to be deducted from the number of working hours per week otherwise allotted to it.
The purchase of loom hours by a mill had therefore the effect of relating the restriction on the operation of looms to the extent of the number of working hours per week transferred to it, so that the transferer mill could work its looms for longer hours than permitted under the working time agreement and increase is profitability.
The amount spent on purchase of looms hours thus represented consideration paid for being able to work the looms for a longer number of hours.
Such payment for the purchase of loom hours cannot be regarded as expenditure on capital account.
[1380 F H, 1381 A E] 6.
The decided cases have, from time to time, evolved various tests for distinguishing between capital and revenue expenditure but no test is amount or conclusive.
There is no all embracing formula which can provide a ready solution to the problem; no touchstone has been devised.
Every case has to be decided on its own facts keeping in mind the broad picture of the whole 1373 Operation in respect of which the expenditure has been incurred.
Two of these tests are: (a) The test of enduring benefit as laid down in British Insulated and .
Helsby Cables Ltd. vs Atherton, 10 Tax Cases 155.
Even this test must yield were there are special circumstances leading to a contrary decision There may be cases where expenditure, even if incurred for obtaining advantage of enduring benefit, may, none the less, be on revenue account and the test one during benefit may break down.
It is not every advantage of enduring nature acquired by an assesses that brings the case within the principle laid down in this test.
What is material to consider is the nature of the advantage in a commercial sense.
that it is only where the advantage is in the capital field that the expenditure would be disavowable on an application of this test.
If the advantage consists merely in facilitating the assesses 's trading operations or enabling the management and conduct of the assesses 's business to be carried on more efficiently or more profitably while leaving the filed capital untouched.
the expenditure would be on revenue account, even though tho advantage may endure for an indefinite future.
The test of enduring benefit in therefore not a certain or conclusive test and it cannot be applied blindly and mechanically without regard to the particular facts and circumstances off a given case.
[1381 E G, 1382 A E] commissioner of Taxes vs Nchanga Consolidated Copper Mines Ltd., followed.
(b) The test based on distinction between fixed and circulating capital as applied in John Smith and Sons vs Moore, 12 Tax Cases, 266.
So long as tho expenditure in question can be clearly referred to the acquisition of an asset which falls within one or the other of these two categories such a test would be a critical one.
But this test also sometimes breaks down because there are many forms of expenditure which do not fall easily within these two categories and not infrequently, the line of demarcation is difficult to draw and leads to subtle distinctions between profit that is made "out of" assets and profit that is made "upon" assets or "with" assets.
Moreover, there may be cases where expenditure though referable to or in connection with fixed capital is nevertheless allowable as revenue expenditure e.g. expenditure incurred in preserving or maintaining capital assets.
This test is therefore clearly not one of universal application.
[1383 A D] Commissioner of Taxes vs Nchanga Consolidated Copper Mines LTD [1965]58 ITR 241; followed.
It is true that if disbursement is made for acquisition of a source of profit or income, it would ordinarily be in the nature of capital expenditure But it cannot be said in the present case that the assesses acquired a source d profit or income when it purchased loom hours.
The source of profit or income was the profit making apparatus and this remained untouched and unaltered, There was no enlargement of the permanent structure of which the income would be the produce or fruit.
What the assesses acquired wag merely an advantage in the nature of relation of restriction on working hours imposed by the working time agreement, so that the assesses could operate its profit earning structure for a longer number of hours.
Undoubtedly the profit earn 1374 ing structure of the assesses was enabled to produce more goods, but that was not because of any addition or augmentation in the profit making structure but because the profit making structure could be operated for longer working hours.
The expenditure incurred for this purpose was primarily and essentially related to the operation or working of the looms which constituted the profit earning apparatus of the assesses.
It was an expenditure for operating or working the looms for longer working hours with a view to producing a larger quantity of goods and earning more income and was therefore in the nature of revenue expenditure.
[1384 A D] 7.
When dealing with cases where the question is whether expenditure incurred by an assesses is capital or revenue expenditure, the question must be viewed in the larger context of business necessity or expediency.
If the outgoing expenditure is so related to the carrying on or the conduct of the business that it may be regarded as an internal part of the profit earning process and not for acquisition of an asset or a right of a permanent character.
the possession of which is a condition of the carrying on of the business, the expenditure may be regarded as revenue expenditure.
[1384 H, 1385 A C Nelletroms ' Property Ltd. vs Federal Commr.
Of Taxation, ; ; Robert Addis & Sons Collieries Ltd. vs Inland Revenue 8 Tax Case, 671 quoted with approval.
Bombay Steam Navigation Co. P. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income Tax, ; followed.
In the instant case (a) the payment made by the assesses for the purchase of loom hours was expenditure laid out as part of the process of profit earning.
It was an outlay of a business in order to carry it on and to earn profit out of the expense as an expense of carrying it on.
It was part of the cost of operating the profit earning apparatus and was clearly in the nature of revenue expenditure; and [1385 D E (b) the payment of Rs. 2,03,255/ made by the assesses for purchase of loom hours represented Revenue expenditure and was allowable as a deduction under section 10(2) (xv) of the Income Tax Act.
[1387 C D] Commissioner of Income Tax v Nchanga Consolidated Copper Mines ltd. ; Commissioner of Taxes vs Curron Company 45 Tax Cases 18; followed.
