In July, 1940 the plaintiffs father leased out the building of which he was the owner, to the defendant on a monthly rent of Rs. 950 for running a restaurant.
Even after the expiry of the period of lease in July, 1943 the defendant continued to be in possession of the building.
By virtue of the Madras Non residential Buildings Rent Control order, 1946 the defendant became a statutory tenant and under the order fair rent was fixed at Rs. 1680 p.m.
In 1949 the 1946 order was replaced by the Madras Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act.
On the death of his father in 1955 the plaintiff became the owner of the building.
The 1949 Act was repealed and replaced by the Tamil Nadu Buildings (Lease and Rent Control ) Act, 1960 (the Principal Act).
Section 30(iii) of the Principal Act provided that it was not applicable to non residential buildings, the rental value of which, according to the assessment of the Corporation of Madras, exceeded Rs. 400 p.m.
Even so the defendant continued to be in possession of the building.
Since the building was not governed by the Principal Act the plaintiff issued notice to the defendant to quit and instituted a civil suit in the City Civil Court on March 2, 1964 for eviction and damages.
In the meantime in June, 1964, by an amendment Act, the exemption contained in section 30 of the Principal Act in respect of non residential buildings was withdrawn so that from then on non residential buildings with a monthly rent of Rs. 400/ and above were also governed by the Principal Act.
Sec ion 3 of the Amending Act also provided that proceedings for eviction of the tenants of such non residential buildings instituted in civil courts should be treated as having abated.
In view of the amendment in December 1964 the City Civil Court dismissed the plaintiff s suit as having abated.
Thereupon the plaintiff filed an application under O. IX, r. 9 of the Code of Civil Procedure to set aside, its order dismissing the suit as having abated.
This application was allowed.
The defendants filed additional written statements in the City Civil Court raising the plea that the suit had actually abated by virtue of section 3 of the Amending Act.
In the meantime as a result of the plaintiff s application under section 24, Code of Civil Procedure the High Court withdrew the suit to its file (on the death of the original defendant, defendants 2 to 10 were impleaded as his legal representatives).
On the issue whether the suit had abated on June 10, 1964 by virtue of section 3 of the Amending Act the trial judge of the High Court refused to record a finding and disposed of the suit as if it was a fresh suit after the death of the 876 original defendant.
He passed a decree for possession and damages for use and occupation.
On appeal by the defendants the Division Bench of the High Court held that from March 1, 1964 the original defendant was a trespasser, that he was not entitled to the benefit of the Principal Act, that with the coming into force of the Amending Act the building itself was outside the scope of the principal Act, that section 3 of the Amending Act did not apply to the suit and so it did not abate on June 30, 1964 and that on the death of the original defendant, defendants 2 to 10 were not entitled to the protection against eviction under the Principal Act as amended in 1973.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: Section 3 of the Amending Act was applicable to the suit as it was a proceeding instituted in the City Civil Court on the ground that the building was exempt from the provisions of the Principal Act by virtue of section 30(iii) thereof although no express allegation was made in the plaint to that effect.
[891 B] 1.
(a) The view of the Division Bench that section 3 of the Amending Act was not applicable to this case was erroneous in the absence of a contention by the plaintiff that section 3 was unconstitutional.
It was not for the court to ask whether there was any justification for the legislature to make a contrary provision in respect of the suits of the present nature.
There was every justification for enacting section 3 in order to give protection to the tenants against whom suits for eviction had been filed for buildings.
which were brought within the scope of the Principal ACT by deleting cl.
(iii) of section 30 of the Principal Act.
[886G, 887B] (b) In the context in which section 3 of the Amending Act was enacted it could not be said that it was not possible to identify the proceedings to which that provision referred.
In P. J. Gupta 's case this Court held that a proceeding which had been instituted on the ground that a non residential building was exempt from the provisions of the Principal Act by virtue of section 30(iii) and was pending on the date of publication of the amendment in the official gazette would abate but did not consider the type of cases which would fall within the scope of 3 of the Amending Act [888A B, 889G H] P. J. Gupta & Co. vs K. Venkatesan Merchant & ors.
; ; held inapplicable.
(e) The words "instituted on the ground that such building or part was exempt from the provisions of the Principal Act by virtue of cl.
(iii) of section 30 of the Principal Act" should be construed in the context in which they appeared as referring to a proceeding which had been instituted in the light of section 30(iii) of the Principal Act which granted exemption in respect of the buildings refer red to therein from the operation of the Principal Act.
Any other construction would defeat the object of the Amending Act.
[890E F] In the instant case the original plaint was filed on the basis that The tenancy had been terminated with effect from the expiry of February 29, 1964.
The plaintiff prayed for the eviction of the defendant damages for use and occupation and not the fair rent fixed under the Rent Control law.
The suit could be filed only because of the exemption contained in section 30(iii) of the Principal Act 877 because in the absence of such exemption no effective decree for ejectment could be passed by the City Civil Court in view of section 10 of the Principal Act.
[890 G H] 2.
The original defendant was not a trespasser in possession of the premises after June 10, 1964.
He became a statutory tenant of the premises and could not be evicted from them except in accordance with the procedure specified in the Principal Act.
The position would not have been different even if a decree for eviction had been passed against him before June 10, 1964 and the decree had not been executed or satisfied in full on that date [894 C D] 3.
(a) The building in question was a building within The meaning of that expression in section 21 '>) of the Principal Act on the date when section 3 of the amending Act came into force.
[896 F G] (b) The view of the Division Bench that the suit property was not a "building" within the meaning of section 2(2) on the ground that there was no lease in force and hence it was not let and that on that date the plaintiff had no intention to lease it and therefore it was not to be let was erroneous.
A definition clause does not necessarily apply in all possible contents in which the word may be found.
The opening clause of section 2 of the Principal Act suggests that any expression defined in that section should be given a meaning assigned to it therein unless the context otherwise requires.
[896 B C] 4.
The original defendant became entitled to The protection of the Principal Act on June 10, 1964 and he could be evicted from the building only after an order was made by the Rent Controller.
The High Court did not pass an order the suit had abated on June 10, 1964 till the death of the original defendant on January 15, 1968.
As a result of the proceedings instituted by one or the other of the parties the case was treated as pending although in law it was not open to the Court to proceed with it after 10.
[896G 897A] 5.
It has not permissible for the trial court to treat the proceeding which had been instituted against the original defendant prior to June 10, 1964 as a live proceeding which could be converted into fresh suit instituted against defendants No. 2 to 10 after the death of the original defendant.
An amendment of the plaint by inclusion of a new prayer or by addition of new parties can be made only where in the eye of law a suit is pending before a Court.
When the suit filed on March 2, 1964 stood terminated with the coming into force of the amending Act on June 10, 1964 there was no plaint in a live suit which could be amended by the addition of new parties and the inclusion of a new prayer.
Therefore the addition of parties which took place after the death of the original defendant and the amendment of the plaint in 1973 requesting the court to pass a decree against defendants 2 to 10 who were not ' parties to the suit prior to June 10, 1964 on a cause of action which accrued subsequent to January 15, 1968 were without jurisdiction.
[898A D] B. Banerjee vs Anita Pan, ; ; held inapplicable.
