Respondent Ram Ratan was employed as a Forest Guard in the Forest Department of Madhya Pradesh Government.
He was served with a charge sheet dated March 6, 1969, in which he was accused of misconduct.
Respondent refuted the charges.
A departmental enquiry was held by the Divisional Forest Officer, Mr. Mathotra, in respect of the charges framed against the respondent.
Charge of misconduct was held proved whereupon the punishing authority served respondent with a second show cause notice dated February 12, 1970, as contemplated by Article 311(2) of the Constitution as it stood prior to its amendment in 1976.
After the respondent replied to the notice the disciplinary cum punishing authority imposed the penalty of compulsory retirement on the respondent.
The respondent questioned the validity and correctness of the punishment in Civil Suit No. 227 A/73 filed by him in the Court of the Civil Judge, Civil Court, Class II, Sabalgarh.
The trial Court decreed the suit and set aside the order imposing the major penalty of compulsory retirement and granted a declaration that respondent continues in service.
On appeal by the State of Madhya Pradesh, the Second Additional District Judge, Morena, set aside the decree of the trial Court and dismissed the suit of the respondent.
On appeal by the respondent to the High Court a learned single judge of the Madhya Pradesh High Court a allowed the appeal of respondent and set aside the decree made by the District Judge and restored the one passed by the trial Court with the result that a declaration was granted that the respondent would continue in service till the date of his superannuation.
Hence this appeal by special leave by the State of Madhya Pradesh.
Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1. Article 311(2) as it stood at the relevant time prior to its amendment in 1976 imposed a constitutional obligation upon the punishing authority to serve a second show cause notice where it was proposed after departmental inquiry to impose on the delinquent Government servant any of the 1244 penalties referred to in article 311 so as to give a reasonable opportunity of making representation on the penalty proposed.
Rule 15(4)(i)(b) of the 1966 Rules prescribes procedure to be followed by the disciplinary authority before imposing punishment to the effect that the concerned authority should give a notice setting out the penalty proposed to be imposed on the concerned government servant, and calling upon him to submit within 15 days of the receipt of notice or such further time not exceeding 15 days, as may be allowed, such representation as he may wish to make on the proposed penalty on the basis of the evidence adduced during the inquiry held under rule 14.
The punishing authority has in the second show cause notice to specify the punishment which it tentatively or provisionally decides upon to impose looking to the gravity of the charge which is held proved.
At that stage the decision of the punishing authority is a tentative decision and in the very nature of things it must be so because an opportunity has to be given to the delinquent government servant to make a representation on the nature of penalty.
This would imply that if the delinquent officer in his representation makes out a case for a lesser punishment the disciplinary authority would keep an open mind and after applying its mind to the representation made by the delinquent government servant, the authority may either confirm its earlier tentative decision or it would be open to it to award a lesser penalty then the one tentatively decided.
[1247 C H] 2.
Principle of natural justice and fair play implicit in article 311(2) and rule 15(4)(i)(b) would require that the disciplinary authority has to take into consideration the representation made by the delinquent government servant in response to the notice which is a constitutional obligation, and if the delinquent officer is in a position to pursuade by his representation, to so modulate the punishment as would accord with the gravity of the misconduct and other mitigating or extenuating circumstances all of which may enter into the verdict of deciding upon the penalty, and consequently the disciplinary authority would be free to impose a lesser penalty than the one proposed in the second notice.
This is the constitutional scheme.
[1248 A B] If the view, namely, that the disciplinary authority must tentatively decide upon the penalty and specify the penalty in the second show cause notice and after taking into consideration the representation made by the delinquent government servant in response to the notice it can only confirm the tentative decision but cannot award a lesser punishment, the exercise of giving second show cause notice becomes self defeating and giving of the notice inviting the representation on the question of penalty would be an exercise in futility.
Such an approach would render a tentative decision as final and the rest being an empty formality.
Such could not be the underlying object in enacting a constitutional mandate for the protection of government servants.
[1248 C E] In service jurisprudence for different types of misconduct various penalties are prescribed in service rules.
1966 Rules prescribe as many as 9 penalties which can be awarded for good and sufficient reasons.
Compulsory retirement is one of the major penalties.
Similarly, removal from service which shall not be a disqualification for future appointment in government service and dismissal from service which shall ordinarily be a disqualification for future employment under the government are the other two major penalties.
The disciplinary authority keeping in view the gravity of misconduct committed by the government servant will tentatively determine the penalty to be imposed upon the delinquent government servant.
Degree of seriousness of misconduct will ordi 1245 narily determine the penalty keeping in view the degree of harm that each penalty can inflict upon the government servant.
Before serving the second show cause notice the disciplinary authority will determine tentatively the penalty keeping in view the seriousness of misconduct.
But this is a tentative decision.
On receipt of representation in response to notice, the disciplinary authority will apply its mind to it, take into account any extenuating or mitigating circumstances pleaded in the representation and finally determine what should be the penalty that would be commensurate with the circumstances of the case.
[1248 E H, 1249 A] It a major penalty was tentatively decided upon and a lesser or minor penalty cannot be awarded because this was not the specified penalty, the government servant to whom a notice proposing major penalty is served would run the risk of awarded major penalty because it would not be open to award a lesser or a minor penalty than the one specified in the show cause notice.
Such a view runs counter to the principle of penology.
In criminal and quasi criminal jurisprudence where the penalties are prescribed it is implicit thereunder that a major penalty would comprehend within its fold the minor penalty.
If a major penalty is proposed looking to the circumstances of the case, at that stage, after taking into consideration the representation bearing on the subject and having an impact on the question of penalty a minor penalty can always be awarded.
In penal statute maximum sentence for each offence is provided but the matter is within the discretion of the judicial officer awarding sentence to award such sentence within the ceiling prescribed by law as would be commensurate with the gravity of the offence and the surrounding circumstances except where minimum sentence is prescribed and Court 's discretion is by legislation fettered.
[1299 A D] Therefore, if any particular penalty is specified as tentatively proposed in the second show cause notice the disciplinary authority after taking into consideration the representation made by the delinquent government servant can award that penalty or any lesser penalty and in so doing article 311(2) will not be violated.
In fact, this leaves open a discretion to the punishing authority which accords with reason, fair play and justice.
[1251 B C] Hukam Chand Malhotra vs Union of India,[1959] Suppl.
1 SCR 892; followed.
Union of India and Ors.
vs K. Rajappa Menon,[1969] 2 SCR 343; explained.
Supreme Court while exercising its extraordinary jurisdiction under Act.
136 of the Constitution, is not bound to set aside the order of the High Court directing reinstatement of the employee, when he has succeeded in the two courts below.
Quantifying the backwages and the costs would accord with the demands of social justice, reason and fairplay.
[1252 D E] Punjab Beverages P. Ltd. vs Suresh Chand and Ors. ; ; followed.
