The selection of candidates admitted to the Government Medical College, Jammu are to be made in accordance with the manner and procedure laid down in the various orders issued by the Government of Jammu and Kashmir from time to time.
The earliest order made on July 9, 1973 concerns admission to technical institutions which include medical colleges and says that "the man power requirements of various parts of the State have not received uniform and equal treatment with the result that there has been imbalance in the development of human resources in these parts", and "since the admissions to technical institutions also lead to the development of human resources", it had, therefore, "become necessary to provide equal opportunities to the permanent resident candidates of all parts of the State and all sections of the society".
As, per this order 50% of the seats were earmarked for selection on open competition, 25% of the seats were reserved for candidates belonging to the categories specified in clause (2) of the order according to the percentage indicated against each.
It was further provided in the order that after selection, as above, the remaining 25% of the seats "should be filled on the basis of inter se merit to ensure rectification of imbalance in the admissions for various parts of the State, if any, so as to give equitable and uniform treatment to those parts".
In case there was no "visible imbalance" or where no candidates were available under a particular category mentioned in clause (2) above the seats earmarked under these two heads "shall be added to the percentage under [clause] I above".
The annexure to the order contained instructions concerning the "identification of the persons claiming benefit" under clause 2 of the order and "the procedure connected therewith".
The instructions defined the different categories mentioned in clause (2): "Areas adjoining actual line of control Candidates permanently residing in any village of the State specified in Appendix I to these instructions".
"Bad pockets Candidates permanently residing in any village of the State specified in Appendix II to these instructions". "Social Castes Candidates of the State belonging to any of the castes indicated in Appendix III to these instructions".
The instructions also provided for the issue of a certificate by the concerned authority stating that a candidate fell under any of the categories.
1254 On June 27, 1974 another order was issued refixing the percentage of seats reserved for the different categories "with a view to affording more accommodation for open merit".
Open merit percentage was increased to 60, by reducing by 5% the percentage of seats allotted for children of freedom fighters and by reducing the percentage of seats of 25% earmarked to ensure "rectification of imbalance" from 25% to 20%.
3% of seats reserved for candidates from areas known as bad pockets which included Ladakh under the category "socially and educationally backward classes" was reduced to 1% and the resultant difference of 2% was earmarked to candidates from Ladakh which was excluded from the above category.
By another order dated April 21, 1976, the existing reservation of 20% for meeting regional imbalance was reduced to 18% and the "resultant 2% vacancies earmarked for candidates possessing, outstanding proficiency in sports".
An order made on April 16, 1976 earmarked 10 seats at the Government Medical College, Jammu, for girl students "subject to enough girl students being found otherwise suitable".
The order also laid down the procedure to be followed by the selection committee in selecting candidates for admission to technical training course.
By this order, comparative performance of the candidates at an interview to be conducted for the purpose by the selection committee was made the only basis of selection.
The order added that the marks obtained by a candidate in the qualifying university examination should be taken into consideration only to determine the initial eligibility to compete for selection.
This order was modified by a subsequent order issued on April 3, 1978.
Instead of the marks obtained by a candidate in the qualifying university examination being treated as relevant only to determine eligibility, the subsequent order provided: "there will be 100 marks for academic merit which shall be allotted to each candidate in accordance with the percentage of marks secured by him/her in the basic qualifying examination or its equivalent".
This order further provided that 50 marks would be allotted for interview, 10 marks for each of the five factors: physical, fitness, personality, aptitude general knowledge and general intelligence.
By notification published in the Jammu and Kashmir Government Gazette on June 21, 1979 applications were invited for admission to the M.B.B.S. course in the aforesaid college.
Only those candidates who had passed the Pre Medical or Inter Science or First Year T.D.C. (Medical Group) examination from the University of Jammu or any other equivalent examination and had secured not less than 50 per cent marks in science subjects in aggregate (theory and practical) were eligible to apply for admission; however, for scheduled castes, scheduled tribes Bakarwal and Gujjar candidates and candidates from Ladakh district and 'Bad pockets ' the qualifying marks was 45 per cent.
Candidates who had been selected or nominated by the Government of Jammu and Kashmir or had been already selected by a selection committee constituted by the Government for any training course in or outside the State were not eligible to apply or to appear for interview for admission to this college.
The notification added: "Comparative merit of the candidates will be adjudged with respect to physical fitness, aptitude personality, general knowledge and general intelligence in the interview, for which marks will be awarded according to the performance of the candidates".
It was further provided that the selection would be made in accordance with the manner and procedure laid down in the various orders issued by the Government from time to time.
The total number of seats filled by selection in this college for the year 1979 80 was 52.
The candidates numbered 526, out of which 473 actually appeared for interview.
In addition 10 1255 seats were filled by candidates nominated by the Government.
The nomination had to be made only from two sources: wards of non resident Defence personnel, and students from other states.
The petitioners challenged the selection of candidates admitted to the Government Medical College, Jammu for the academic year 1979 80 as bad and that the categories mentioned in the several orders as arbitrary and unconstitutional.
^ HELD: 1.
The classification made for rectification of regional imbalance is vague and the selections (serial Nos.
43 to 51 to the List) made under this head are invalid for the following reasons: [1263 C D,] (i) The notification dated June 21, 1979 by which applications were invited for admission to the medical college provided that the selection of candidates would be made in accordance with the manner and procedure laid down in the various orders issued by the Government from time to time, but none of these orders contains an explanation offered in the supplementary affidavit filed by the State of Jammu & Kashmir that: ". the State Government has found that for peculiar historical, geographical and topographical reasons there prevails an imbalance in the matter of development of the various parts of the State which has resulted in certain areas being backward as compared with the rest.
In order therefore to rectify the distinction which inevitably would otherwise creep in to the selection, the State Government has reserved 18% of seats for rectification of such imbalance".
Even with this explanation, the affidavit, does not identify the area of imbalance.
There was thus no objective standard to guide the selection committee.
[1261 E H, 1262 A] (ii) Even in the supplementary affidavit it is not claimed that the area of imbalance is only another name for the areas adjoining the actual line of control and the had pockets, as contended on behalf of the State.
What is said in the affidavit is that the areas of imbalance are similar to the aforesaid areas in being equally backward.
But this does not mean that these categories are all identical and co extensive in all respects.
Further in spite of similarity, even areas adjoining the actual line of control and the bad pockets have been put under different categories; and [1262 B ] (iii) The contention was that the classification was justified on the report of the Anand Committee.
The Selection Committee was required to follow not the Anand Committee report but what was provided in the orders passed by the Government.
There is no order containing any reference to the Anand Committee Report.
Neither the Government adopted the Anand Committee 's report nor did the Selection Committee proceeded on the basis of that report.
Though the Anand Committee did not accept "social castes" as a category indicative of backwardness, the Selection Committee has selected one candidate under this category which clearly shows that the Selection Committee was not guided by the Anand Committee Report, the selection made was not and could not be on the basis of that report.
[1263 A C] 2.
In Janki Prasad Parimoo and Ors.
vs State of Jammu and Kashmir and Ors., [1973] 3 SCR p. 236, the Supreme Court did not approve 4 out of 23 "low social castes" mentioned in the Wazir Committee Report "as educationally and economically extremely backward", as having no basis for inclu 1256 sion in the List.
In Appendix III, 19 of these castes have been retained which were not disapproved in Parimoo 's case.
Chapter XIII of the Wazir Committee report makes it clear that the classification is with reference to the nature of occupations which the people belonging to this category pursue.
That being so, the classification does not offend Article 14 or Article 15 of the Constitution.
The selection of Edwin Khakkar, a Christian is in order since he falls under one such category listed and since the category is based on occupation and not on caste as such.
[1263 G H, 1264 A B] 3.
The areas adjoining actual line of control and bad pockets are really backward areas and the residents of these areas are indisputably socially and educationally backward.
Reservations made for such candidates from such backward classes cannot be said to offend Article 14 of the Constitution.
[1264C D] Janaki Prasad Parimoo and Ors. etc.
vs State of Jammu & Kashmir and Ors., [1973]3 SCR p. 236; followed.
Though the contention that "interviewing candidates to judge their suitability was not a reliable test as many uncertain factors were likely to affect the result of the interview" reflects a legitimate point of view, but it is a point of view only and cannot be taken as the last word on the subject.
However, it is impossible within allotted span of time (4 minutes) to make a fair estimate of a candidate 's suitability on a consideration of the five specified factors which are not capable of easy determination such as physical fitness, personality, aptitude, general knowledge and general intelligence.
By merely looking at a candidate, the selection committee could not come to a conclusion about one 's physical fitness.
Therefore, the fact that the allotment of marks is in accordance with a policy decision may not conclude the matter in all circumstances; if that decision is found to be arbitrary and infringing Article 14 of the Constitution it cannot claim immunity from challenge.
[1264 E H, 1265 G H, 1266 A] R. Chitralekha and anr.
vs State of Mysore and Ors. ; ; A Peeriakaruppan etc.
vs State of Tamil Nadu and Ors., [1971] 2 SCR 430; distinguished and held inapplicable to the facts of the instant case.
The selection under the category "wards of Medical College Staff" is invalid as such a category does not find place in any of the orders.
[1266 G H] 6.
Reservation for students from other states on reciprocal basis, as seen from Anita Jain 's case has not worked in practice and she is entitled to a seat.
Nor did the two clauses 17 and 18 of the notification dated June 21, 1979 apply to Kulbhushan Gupta since he was not selected or nominated by the Government of Jammu and Kashmir for admission to the Engineering College nor was he selected by any selection committee constituted by the Government of Jammu and Kashmir.
[1267 E H, 1268 G H]
