The appellant company carries on business as valuers and surveyors undertaking inspection of quality, weighment analysis, sampling of merchandise and commodities, cargoes, industrial products, machinery, textiles etc.
It has established a reputation and goodwill in its business by developing its own techniques for quality testing and control and possess trade secrets in the form of these techniques and clientele.
It has its head office at Calcutta and a branch at New Delhi and employs various persons as managers and in other capacities in Calcutta; New Delhi and other places.
On March 27, 1971, the respondent was employed by the appellant company as the Branch Manager of its New Delhi office on terms and conditions contained in the letter of appointment issued to him on the same date.
Clause (10) of the terms and conditions of employment placed the respondent under a post service restraint that he shall not serve any other competitive firm nor carry on business on his own in similar line as that of the appellant company for two years at the place of his last posting.
On November 24, 1978, the appellant company terminated the respondent 's services with effect from December 27, 1978.
Thereafter, respondent started his own business under the name and style of "Superintendence and Surveillance Inspectorate of India" at E 22 South Extension New Delhi on lines identical with or substantially similar to that of the appellant company.
On April 19, 1979 the appellant company brought a suit in the Delhi High Court on its original side, claiming Rs. 55,000/ as damages on account of the breach of negative covenant contained in clause (10); and for permanent injunction restraining the respondent by himself, his servants, agents or otherwise, from carrying on the said business or any other business on lines similar to that of the appellant company or associating or representing any competitors of the appellant company before the expiry of two years from December 27, 1978.
After filing the suit the appellant company sought an ad interim injunction by way of enforcing the aforesaid negative covenant and a Single Judge of the Delhi High Court initially granted an ad interim injunction on April 29, 1979 which was confirmed by him on May 25, 1979 after hearing the respondent.
On appeal by the respondent, the Division Bench of the High Court reversed the interim order and hence the appeal by certificate.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court 1279 ^ HELD: (Per Tulzapurkar J., on behalf of Untwalia, J. and himself).
Assuming that the negative covenant contained in clause (10) of the service agreement is valid and not hit by section 27 of the Indian Contract Act, it is not enforceable against the respondent at the instance of the appellant company.
The appellant company should have taken care to use appropriate language, while incorporating such restrictive covenant so as to include every case of cessation of employment arising from any reason whatsoever and not used the expression "leave", which normally is synonymous to the expression "quit" and indicates voluntary act on the part of the employee.
A, B C] (2) The word "leave" has various shades of meaning depending upon the context or intent with which it is used.
According to the plain grammatical meaning that word in relation to an employee would normally be construed as meaning voluntary leaving of the service by him and would not include a case where he is discharged or dismissed or his services are terminated by his employer.
Ordinarily, the word connotes voluntary action.
[1286 D] (3) In the instant case, having regard to the context in which the expression leave occurs in clause (10) of the service agreement and reading it alongwith all the other terms of agreement, it is clear that the word "leave" was intended by the parties to refer to a case where the employee voluntarily left the services of his own.
[1286 G H, 1287 A] Murray vs Close, 32 Law Times Old series p. 89; held inapplicable to Indian Law.
Muesling vs International Rly.
Co., , 178 ; quoted with approval.
Per Sen J.: 1.
Agreements of service, containing a negative covenant preventing the employee from working elsewhere are not void under section 27 of the Contract Act, on the ground that they are in restraint of trade.
Such agreements are enforceable, the reason being that the doctrine of restraint of trade never applies during the continuance of a contract of employment and applies only when the contract comes to an end.
While during the period of employment the Courts undoubtedly would not grant any specific performance of a contract of personal service, nevertheless Section 57 of the clearly provides for the grant of an injunction to restrain the breach of such a covenant, as it is not in restraint of, but in furtherance of trade.
[1289 C E] 2.
There is a clear distinction between a restriction in a contract of employment which is operative during the period of employment and one which is to operate after the termination of employment.
Mere existence of negative covenant in a service agreement does not make it void on the ground that it was in restraint of trade and contrary to the Contract Act.
The restriction contained in clause 10 of the agreement in this case is clearly in restraint of trade and therefore illegal under section 27 of the Contract Act.
It is not seeking to enforce the negative covenant during the term of employment of the respondent but after the termination of his services.
[1289 F G, 1290 F G, 1291 C D] 1280 Niranjan Shankar Golikari vs Century Spinning and Manufacturing Co., Ltd., ; , distinguished.
When a rule of English law receives statutory recognition by the Indian Legislature, it is the language of the Act which determines the scope, uninfluenced by the manner in which the anologous provision comes to be construed narrowly or otherwise modified in order to bring the construction within the scope and limitations of the rule governing the English doctrine of trade.
[1291 H, 1292 A] Satyavrata Ghosh vs Kurmee Ram Bangor, ; , followed.
A contract which has for its object a restraint of trade is, prima facie void.
The question whether an agreement is void under section 27 must be decided upon the wording of that section.
There is nothing in the wording of section 27 to suggest that the principle stated therein does not apply when the restraint is for a limited period only or is confined to a particular area.
Such matters of partial restriction have effect only when the fact fall within the exception to the section.
Section 27 of the Contracts Act is general in terms, and declares all agreements in restraint void pro tanto, except in the case specified in the application and unless a particular contract can be distinctly brought within Exception I there is no escape from the prohibition.
Here the agreement in question is not a "good will of business", type of contract, and, therefore does not fall within the exception.
If the agreement on the part of the respondent puts a restraint even though partial, it was void, and, therefore, the contract must be treated as one which cannot be enforced.
[1292 E H, 1293 A, F G] Madhub Chander vs Raj Coomar Dass, @ 85 86; approved.
A contract in restraint of trade is one by which a party restricts his future liberty to carry on his trade, business or profession in such manner and with such persons as he chooses.
A contract of this class is prima facie void, but it becomes binding upon proof that the restriction is justifiable in the circumstances as being reasonable from the point of view of the parties themselves and also of the community.
Under Section 27 of the Contract Act the onus is upon the covenanter.
[1292 H, 1293 A, & 1294 D E] 6.
A law does not cease to be operative because it is an anachronism or because it is antiquated or because the reason why it originally became the law could be no reason for the introduction of such a law at the present times.
Neither the test of reasonableness nor the principle of that the restraint being partial was reasonable are applicable to a case governed by Section 27 of the Contract Act, unless it falls within Exception I. Under Section 27 of the Contract Act, a service covenant extended beyond the termination of the service is void.
[1299 A C] Nordenfelt vs Maxim.
Nordenfelt Guns and Ammunition Co. Ltd. ; Mason vs Provident Clothing and Supply Co. Ltd., ; Herbert Morris Ltd. vs Saxelby; discussed.
On a true construction of clause 10 of the agreement the negative convenant not serve elsewhere or enter into a competitive business does not, arise 1281 when the employee does not leave the services but is dismissed from service.
Wrongful dismissal is a repudiation of contract of service which relieves the employee of the restrictive covenant.
[1299 E F] General Billposting Co. vs Atkinson, L. R. ; referred to.
The word 'leave ' has various shades of meaning depending upon the context of intent with which it is used.
According to the plain meaning, the word 'leave ' in relation to an employee, should be construed to mean where he "voluntarily" leaves i.e. of his own volition and does not include a case of dismissal.
The word 'leave ' appears to connote voluntary action, and is synonymous with the word 'quit '.
It does not refer to the expulsion of an employee by the act of his employer without his consent and against his remonstrance.
That is a meaning in consonance with justice and fair play.
[1299 H, 1300 A B] 9.
Restrictions on competitions during the period of service are normally valid and indeed may be implied by law by virtue of the servant 's duty of fidelity.
In such cases the restriction is generally reasonable, having regard to the interest of the employer and does not cause any undue hardship to the employee, who will receive a wage or salary for the period in question.
But if the covenant is to operate after the termination of services, or is too widely worded, the Court may refuse to enforce it.
[1300 C D] 10.
It is well established that employee 's covenants should be carefully scrutinised because there is inequality of bargaining power between the parties; indeed no bargaining power may occur because the employee is presented with a standard form of contract to accept or reject.
At the time of the agreement, the employee may have given little thought to the restriction because of his eagerness for a job; such contracts "tempt improvident persons, for the sake of present gain, to deprive themselves of the power to make future acquisitions and expose them to imposition and oppression".
[1300 E F] 11.
The Courts view with disfavour a restrictive covenant by an employee not to engage in a business similar to or competitive with that of the employer after the termination of his contract of employment since a restrictive covenant ancillary to a contract of employment is likely to affect the employee 's means or procuring a livelihood for himself and his family.
[1301 B C] 12.
The true rule of construction is that when a covenant or agreement is impeached on the ground that it is in restraint of trade, the duty of the Court is, first to interpret the covenant or agreement itself, and to ascertain according to the ordinary rules of construction what is the fair meaning of the parties.
If there is an ambiguity it must receive a narrower construction than the wider.
The restraint may not be greater than necessary to protect the employer, nor unduly harsh and oppressive to the employee.
Even if the word 'leave ' contained in clause 10 of the agreement is susceptible of another construction as being operative on termination, however, accomplished of the service e.g. by dismissal without notice, would having regard to the provisions of section 27 of the Contract Act, 1972, try to preserve the Government in clause 10 by giving to it a restrictive meaning, as implying volition i.e. where the employee resigns or voluntarily leaves the services.
The restriction being too wide; and violative of section 27 of the Contract Act, must be subjected to a narrower construction.
[1301 C G] 1282
