Section 56 of the Bombay Police Act, 1951, is not unconstitutional and does not contravene the provisions of article 19 of the Constitution.
Gurbachan Singh vs State of Bombay ( ; , followed.
In order to attract the operation of the section the Officer concerned should be satisfied that the witnesses are not willing to come forward to give evidence in public, but it is not necessary to show that all the witnesses are unwilling to give evidence.
The terms of the section do not justify any restricted meaning being given to the word "witnesses" and it is applicable to members of the police force and employees and officers of the Customs Department also.
Gurbachan Singh vs State of Bombay ( ; , explained.
Under the provisions of section 56 of the Bombay Police Act, 1951, an order of externment was passed against the petitioner by which he was directed to remove himself outside the limits of Greater Bombay and not to enter the said area for a period of two years without the prescribed permission; and subsequently he entered Greater Bombay in order to attend Court in a case pending against him in which a warrant of arrest had been issued.
He was convicted for committing the breach of the externment order and he contended that his conviction was in itself an indication of the unreasonableness of the restriction.
Held, that the restrictions cannot be said to be unreasonable, as the petitioner could have avoided the prosecution.
and the conviction by obtaining the previous permission of the prescribed authority.
Per JAGANNADHADAS J.
If the matter were res integra should have felt difficulty in upholding the validity of section 56(b) of 534 the Bombay Police Act, 1951, in so far as it did not demarcate the application thereof to the more serious classes of offences falling within the specified Chapters.
I.should also have felt difficulty in holding a provision to be reasonable which clothes the executive officers with an authority to extern a person for so long a period as two years.
