Dismissing the appeals and the Writ Petitions, the Court ^ HELD: (1).
It is fundamental that the nation 's Constitution is not kept in constant uncertainty by judicial review every season because it paralyses, by perennial suspense, all legislative and administrative action on vital issues deterred by the brooding interest of forensic blow up.
This, if permitted, may well be a kind of judicial destabilisation of State action too dangerous to be indulged in save where national crisis of great moment to the life, liberty and safety of this country and its millions are at stake, or the basic direction of the nation itself is in peril of a shake up.
The decision in Kesavananda Bharati 's case, therefore, upholding the vires of Article 31A in unequivocal terms binds the court on the simple score of stare decisis and the constitutional ground of Article 141.
Further, fatal flaws silenced by earlier rulings cannot survive after death because a decision does not lose its authority "merely because it was badly argued, inadequately considered and fallaciously reasoned".
And none of these misfortunes can be imputed to Bharati 's case.
[1164 C G, 1165 C D] (2).
The sweep of Article 31A is wide and indubitably embraces legislation on land ceilings.
Equitable distribution of lands, annihilation of monopoly of ownership by imposition of ceiling and regeneration of the rural economy by diverse planning and strategies are covered by the armour of Article 31A. Article 31A repulses, therefore, all invasions on ceiling legislation armed with Articles 14, 19 and 31.
[1165 D E, 1166 D E] Ranjit Singh and ors.
vs State of Punjab and Ors.
; , State of Kerala and Anr.
vs The Gwalior Rayon Silk Manufacturing (Weaving) Co. Ltd. etc. ; , reiterated.
The decision in Maneka Gandhi 's case is no universal nostrum or cure all.
Nor can it be applicable to the land reform law which is in another domain of constitutional jurisprudence and quite apart from personal liberty in Article 21.
To contend that land reform law, if unreasonable violates Article 21 as expansively construed in Maneka Gandhi case is incorrect.
[1168 E G] (4).
Section 5(6) d the U.P. Imposition of Ceiling on Land Holdings Act, 1960 is fair, valid and not violative of Article 19(1)(f) of the Constitution.
There is no blanket ban by it but only qualified invalidation of certain sinister assignments etc.
There is nothing in this section which is morally wrong nor is such an embargo which comes into force only on a well recognised date not from an arbitrarily retrospective past constitutionally anathematic.
Article 19(1)(f) is not absolute in operation and is subject, under Article 19(6), to 1160 reasonable restrictions such as the one contained in Section 5(6).
Further it is perfectly open to the legislature as ancillary to its main policy to prevent activities which defeat the statutory purpose, to provide for invalidation of such action.
When the alienations are invalidated because they are made after a statutory date fixed with a purpose, there is sense in this prohibition.
Otherwise, all the lands would have been transferred and little would have been left by way of surplus.
[1169 A B, D, F G, 1170 C, E F] (5).
Articles 14 and 15 and the humane spirit of the Preamble rebel against the defacto denial of proprietory personhood or womanhood.
But this legal sentiment and jural value must not run riot and destroy the provisions which do not discriminate between man and woman qua man and woman but merely organise a scheme where life realism is legislatively pragmatised.
Such a scheme may marginally affect gender justice but does not abridge, wee bit, the rights of women.
If land holding and ceiling thereon are organised with the paramount purpose of maximizing surpluses without maiming women 's ownership, any plea of sex discrimination as a means to sabotage what is socially desirable measure cannot be permitted. [1173 D F] From a reading of Section 3(7) read with Section S(3) it is clear that no woman 's property is taken away any more than a man 's property.
Section 5(3) does not confer any property on an adult son nor withdraw any property from adult daughter.
Legal injury can arise only if the daughter 's property is taken away while the son 's is retained or the daughter gets no share while the son gets one.
The legislation has not done either.
[1171 G, 1173 F, H, 1174 C D] (6).
Section 3(17) of the Act is not discriminatory Land does not offend Articles 14 & 15 of the Constitution.
True, Section 3(17) makes the husband a tenure holder even when the wife is the owner.
This is a legislative device for simplifying dealings and cannot therefore be faulted.
[1174 E, F G] (7).
Neither ceiling proceedings abate nor taking surplus land from the tenure holder is barred under the provisions of Section 4 of the U.P. Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953 read with Section 5(2) of the Ceiling Act.
[1177 C] The whole scheme of consolidation of holdings is to restructure agrarian landscape of U.P. so as to promote better farming and economic holdings by 'eliminating fragmentation and organising consolidating.
No one is deprived of his land.
What happens is, his scattered bits are taken away and in lieu thereof a continuous conglomeration equal in value is allotted subject to minimal deduction for community use and better enjoyment.
Whatever land belongs to the tenure holder at the time when consolidation proceedings are in an on going stage, may or may not belong to him after the consolidation proceedings are completed.
Alternative allotments may be made and so the choice that he may make before the prescribed authority for the purpose of surrendering surplus lands and preserving 'permissible holding ' may have only tentative value.
But this factor does not seriously prejudice the holder.
While he chooses the best at the given time the Consolidation Officer will give him its equivalent when a new plot is given to him in tho place of the old.
There is no diminution in the quantum of land and quality of land since the object of consolidation is not deprivation but mere substituting of scattered pieces with a consolidated plot.
The tenure holder may well exercise his option before the prescribed officer and if, later, the Consolidation Officer takes away there lands, he will allot a real equivalent thereof to the tenure holder elsewhere.
There is no reduction or damage or other prejudice by this process of statutory exchange.
[1177 C G] 1161 When land is contributed for public purposes compensation is paid in that behalf, and in the event of illegal or unjust orders passed, appellate and revisory remedies are also provided.
On such exchange or transfer taking place, pursuant to the finalisation of the consolidation scheme, the holding, upto the ceiling available to the tenure holder, will be converted into the new allotment under the consolidation scheme.
Thus there is no basic injustice nor gross arbitrariness in the continuance of the land reforms proceedings even when consolidation proceedings are under way.
[1178 B D] Agricultural & Industrial Syndicate Ltd. vs State of U.P. and Ors., [1974] 1 S.C.R. 253, distinguished.
Khetarpal Singh vs State of U.P. (High Court) [1975] Recent Decisions p. 366, approved.
There is no time wise arbitrariness vitiating the statute in that various provisions in the Act were brought into force on random dates without any rhyme or reason, thus violating, from the temporally angle, Article 14.
It is true that neither the legislature nor the Government as its delegate can fix fanciful dates for effectuation of provisions affecting the rights of citizens.
Even so, a larger latitude is allowed to the State to notify the date on which a particular provision may come into effect.
Many imponderables may weigh with the State in choosing the date and when challenge is made years later, the factors which induced the choice of such dates may be buried under the debris of time.
Parties cannot take advantage of this handicap and audaciously challenge every date of coming into force of every provision as capriciously picked out.
[1179 B D]
