Section 68F(1D) of the provides that no permit shall be granted or renewed during the period intervening between the date of publication, under section 68C of any scheme and the date of publication of the approved or modified scheme, in favour of any person in relation to an area or route or portion thereof covered by that scheme.
Respondent No. 2 was a private operator operating a Stage carriage route.
Its permit was due to expire on October 9, 1974 and it applied for its renewal.
The application was notified on June 5, 1974 under section 57(3) of the .
Objections to the renewal application were filed by the appellant Corporation on June 25, 1974 which also simultaneously applied for the grant of a permit to itself.
The Regional Transport Authority fixed December 21, 1974 for hearing and the case was adjourned.
In the meanwhile, respondent No. 2 filed a Writ Petition and challenged the validity of Rule 155A of the Motor Vehicles Rules and obtained stay of the hearing of the matter which was pending before the Regional Transport Authority.
The validity of the said rule was upheld by the High Court and the writ petition was dismissed.
A draft scheme of road transport service of the appellant corporation was published on June 4, 1976 under section 68C of the Act and that scheme overlapped a section of the route operated by respondent No. 2.
The Regional Transport Authority rejected the application of respondent No. 2 on October 30, 1976 and granted a permit to the appellant, which order was confirmed by the State Transport Appellate Tribunal.
The High Court, however in revision took the view that the matter fell within the purview of sub section (1D) of section 68, but held on a reading of the decision in Cheran Transport Co. Ltd. vs Kanan Lorry Service & Anr. ; , that the case fell within the purview of the "rider" to proposition No. 2 set out in that judgment with reference to the proviso to section (1D) of section 68F of the Act and allowed the revision petitions.
Allowing the appeals to this Court, ^ HELD: (i) By virtue of the clear provision of sub section (1D) of section 68F of the Act, no permit could be granted or renewed during the period intervening between the date of publication of the scheme under section 68C, and the date of publication of the approved or modified scheme, in favour of any person in any class of road transport service.
[72E] 70 (ii) The High Court clearly went wrong in thinking that the case fell within the purview of the proviso to sub section (1D) and it consequently erred in taking into consideration the so called rider to proposition 2 mentioned in the judgment in Cheran 's case.
[72F] (iii) The proviso would have been applicable only if the period of operation of the permit of the respondent had expired after the publication of the scheme prepared under section 68C; but that was not so in this case.
[72F] In the instant case, it was respondent No. 2 who filed a fruitless writ petition and prevented the disposal of the renewal application for a long time by obtaining a stay order.
