One V. Krishna Reddy filed an election petition against Veera Reddy, respondent No. 1, a returned candidate in the elections held for the Andhra Pradesh Legislative Assembly in February, 1978 on the ground that the returned candidate was disqualified to be chosen to fill the post under Section 9A of the Representation of People Act, 1951 inasmuch as he has subsisting contracts with the Government of Andhra Pradesh.
The appellant, Thammarna was impleaded as original respondent No. 5 though he is not a necessary party.
He did not file any written statement.
Neither did he lead any evidence nor did he cross examine the witnesses produced by respondent No. 1 and the election petitioner.
In fact, he did not even participate in the arguments before the High Court.
In the appeal filed by Thammanna against the Judgment dated April 24, 1979 of the High Court of Andhra Pradesh dismissing the election petition filed by Krishna Reddy, a preliminary objection was raised as to whether the appellant had the locus standi to maintain the appeal.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: (1) The appellant cannot, by any reckoning, be said to be a 'person aggrieved ' by the decision of the High Court, dismissing the Election Petition.
[84C] (2) Before a person is entitled to maintain an appeal under Section 116C of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 which is analogous to Section 96(1) of the Civil Procedure Code, all the following three conditions must be satisfied: (1) that the subject matter of the appeal is a conclusive determination by the High Court of the rights with regard to all or any of the matters in controversy, between the parties in the election petition.
(2) that the person seeking to appeal has been a party in the election petition, and (3) that he is a "person aggrieved", that is a party who has been adversely affected by the determination.
In the present case, these conditions, particularly Nos. (1) and (3) have not been fulfilled.
[79B D] 74 (3) Just as the term "decree" in Section 96(1) of the Civil Procedure Code means an adjudication which "conclusively determines all or any of the matter in controversy in the suit", the expression "any final order" as used in Section 116C of the Representation of the People Act contemplates a conclusive determination of all or any of the matters in controversy in the election petition between the parties.
[78F G] (4) The appellant was not a necessary party to be impleaded as there was no allegations or claims in the election petition which would attract section 82 of the Representation of the People Act.
In this case, the question of the Court joining him as a party respondent under Section 86(4) of the Act also did not arise, as he was impleaded before the High Court as respondent No. 5 though it was not obligatory for the Election Petitioner to do so.
Even so, respondent No. 5 did not join the controversy.
He neither joined issue with the contesting respondent No. 1 nor did he do anything tangible to show that he had made a common cause with the Election Petitioner against respondent No. 1.
In fact, the only parties between whom the matters in controversy, were at issue, were the Election Petitioner and Respondent No. 1.
[79F H] (5) Although the meaning of the expression "person aggrieved" may vary according to the context of the statute and the facts of the case, nevertheless, normally a 'person aggrieved ' must be a man who has suffered a legal grievance, a man against whom a decision has been pronounced which has wrongfully deprived him of something or wrongfully refused him something, or wrongfully affected his title to something.
[80A B] Bar Council of Maharashtra vs M. V. Dabholkar, [1975] 2.S.C.C. 703 and J. N. Desai vs Roshan Kumar A.I.R. 1976 S.C. 576 at p. 534 referred to.
(6) The principle that election petition is a representative action on behalf of the whole body of electors in the constituency has a very limited application to the extent it has been incorporated in Sections 109 to 116 of the Representation of the People Act and its application cannot be extended to appeals under the Act.
Firstly, these provisions are to be found in Chapter IV, under the main caption: 'WITHDRAWAL AND ABATEMENT OF ELECTION PETITIONS '.
Then, the provisions of these sections, also repeatedly refer to the withdrawal or abatement of 'election petitions ' and also to procedure in respect thereof before the 'High Court '.
The provision relating to Appeals in Sections 116A, 116B and 116C, have been included separately, in Chapter 'IV A ', captioned "APPEALS".
[81E G, 83G H, 84A] Secondly, Section 116C, enjoins upon the Supreme Court to hear and determine every appeal under this Act in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure and the Rules of the Court.
No doubt this is, "subject to the provisions of the Act and the rules if any, made thereunder".
But this clause only means that the provisions of the Code and the Rules of the Court in hearing an appeal to this Court will apply except to the extent their application has been excluded expressly or by necessary implication by any provision of the Act.
There is no provision in Chapter IV A of the Act, analogous to Sections 109 to 116 of the Act, which curtails, restricts or fetters an appellants ' right to withdraw an appeal.
Nor is there any such provision in the Code or the Rules of this Court which does so.
If the intention of the Legislature was that the provision of Sections 109 to 116 which apply to the withdrawal of election petition, should also govern the withdrawal of appeals, there was no difficulty in inserting similar provisions in Section 116C or elsewhere in Chapter IV A. [81G H, 82A C] 75 Bijayananda Patnaik vs Satrughna Sahu, [1964] 2 S.C.R. 538 at p. 545, followed.
