The Kerala Motor Vehicles Taxation Act (Act 24 of 1963) was brought into force on 1 7 63.
The Act provides that a "tax at the rates fixed by the Government by notification in the Gazette not exceeding the maximum rate specified in the First Schedule shall be levied on all motor vehicles used or kept for use in the state".
The appellant company owned 17 motor vehicles, tractors, trailers and lorries all of which are registered in the Company 's name under the Motor Vehicles Act.
The Company alleged that the vehicles were purchased by it solely and exclusively for use in the estates and intended to be used only for an cultural purpose and were not used nor kept for use in the State as contemplated under section 3 of the Act.
The Company is a tea plantation having eight estates which lie contiguous to each other and have an extent of 9422.44 acres in the aggregate.
The Company for the purpose of plantation are maintaining roads fit for vehicular traffic in the eight estates covering length of 131 miles in the aggregate.
On 23rd September, 1964 a Bedford Lorry owned by the Company and bearing registration No. KLK 1540 was seized by the Police and taken into custody in Tangamullay Estate which is one of the estates owned by the Company but later released on payment under protest a sum of Rs. 3150/ as tax for the period between 1 7 1963 to 31 12 64.
The appellant Company filed O.P. 199/65 before the High Court of Kerala claiming that they were not liable to pay any tax on the Motor Vehicles The High Court remanded the matter to the Transport Authority for a finding on the question raised.
Since the Transport authorities was of the view that Section 3 covers private roads as well and decided against the appellant, the appellant moved the High Court once again in O.P. 2173/68.
Having lost before the single bench and the Division Bench in the Letters Patent appeal, the appellant same up in appeal by special leave.
Allowing the appeals in part, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
On reading sections 3, S and 6 of the Kerala Motor Vehicles Taxation Act (Act 24 of 1963), it is clear that a levy of tax is contemplated only on the vehicles that are used or kept for the use on the public roads of the State.
[1394G] Bolalni ores Ltd. vs State of Orissa, ; @ 155, explained and distinguished.
Entry 57 in List IT of the Constitution relates to taxes on vehicles, whether mechanically propelled or not, suitable for use on roads, including tram 1389 cars subject to the provisions of entry 35 of List III This entry enables the A State Government to levy a tax on all vehicles whether mechanically propelled or not, suitable for use on roads.
Section 3 of the Kerala.
Motor Vehicles Taxation Act (Act 24 of 1963) provides that a tax "shall be levied on all motor vehicles used or kept for use in the State".
The vehicles in the instant case are mechanically propelled and suitable for use on roads.
The levy is within the competence of the State Legislature as Entry 57 in List.
II authorises the levy on vehicles suitable for use on roads.
[1393 B E] 3.
In order to levy a tax on vehicles used or kept for use on public roads of the Stare and at the same time to avoid evasion of tax the legislature has prescribed the procedure.
Under sub section 2 of section 3 there is a presumption that a motor vehicle for which the certificate of registration is current shall be deemed to be used or kept for use in the State.
Section 3(2) safeguards the revenue of the State by relieving it from the burden of proving that the vehicle was used or kept for use on the public roads of the State.
At the same time the interest of the bonafide owner is safeguarded by enabling him to claim and obtain Q certificate of non user from the prescribed authority.
In order to enable the owner of the vehicle or the person who is in possession or being in control of the motor vehicles of which the certificate of registration is current to claim exemption from tax he should get a certificate in the prescribed manner from the Regional Transport officer.
Section 5 provides for exemption from payment of tax under certain circumstances.
Section 6 enables the registered owner or a person in possession or control of such a vehicle to get refund of tax if the conditions specified therein are satisfied.
Thus in order to enable the registered owner or person in possession or control of a vehicle to get exemption of tax, advance intimation to the R.T.O. along with the surrender of certificate of registration is necessary.
The provision of section 3 sub sec.
(2) as well as section 5 and section 6 are meant to prevent evasion of tax and to provide for exemption from tax in proper cases.
Though the purpose of the Act is to tax vehicles that are used or kept for use on the public roads of the State, the State is entitled for the purpose of safeguarding the revenue of the State and to prevent evasion of the tax to enact provision like provision as in section 3 raising a presumption that the vehicle is used or kept for use in the State without any further proof unless exemption is claimed under section 3(2), section 5 and section 6.
[1393 G H, 1394 A G] 4.
In order to claim exemption from payment of tax requirements of section 3(2) or sections 5 and 6 should be satisfied.
Surrender of the registration certificate contemplated under section 5 is for making sure that the motor vehicles is not being put to any use and does not have the effect of annulling the certificate of registration.
If the requirement contemplated under the Act is not satisfied the registered owner or person in possession or control of the vehicles would not be entitled to claim any exemption from payment of tax.
[1394 H. 1395 A Bl 5.
The Kerala Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1963 (Act 24 of 1963) came into force on 18 3 63.
Section 2(1) of the Taxation Act provides that words, and expression used but not defined in the (Central Act 4 of 1939) shall have the meaning respectively assigned to them in that Act.
On the date when the Kerala Motor Vehicles Taxation Act was enacted, was amended (by Act 100 of 1956) and the emended definition on the date when the Taxation Act came into force exempted only motor vehicles which are of a special type adopted for use 1390 only in factory or in any other enclosed premises.
This amended definition will have to be read into the Taxation Act which was enacted subsequent to the date of the amendment (by Act 100 of 1956) of the definition of "motor Vehicle" in section 2(18) of the (Central), 1939.
[1396 F H, 1397
