The first three respondents and the deceased husband of the appellant who were Dhaliwal jats of Muktsar Tehsil in Ferozepur District of Punjab were brothers.
After the death of her husband the appellant married the younger brother of her late husband in Karewa form.
The first two respondents filed a suit for a declaration that having married for the second time, the appellant had forfeited her interest in her deceased husband 's estate and that they were entitled to two third share of the land in her possession.
The appellant on the other hand claimed that they were governed by customary law and according to their custom a widow marrying her deceased husband 's brother did not forfeit her interest in the estate of her deceased husband.
In replication the respondents stated that according to the custom governing Dhaliwal jats of Tehsil Muktsar a widow remarrying even her deceased husband 's brother forfeited her right in the estate.
The trial Court declined to grant the declaration, but the District Judge allowed the plaintiffs ' appeal.
The High Court did not accept the appellant 's claim that there was a special custom.
Dismissing the appeal ^ HELD: The High Court was right in holding that there was no special custom among Dhaliwal jats of Tehsil Muktsar which permitted a widow, on remarriage with her deceased husband 's brother, to retain her interest in the estate of her deceased husband.
It is well known that custom in the Punjab changes from district to district, tehsil to tehsil and pargana to pargana.
[88A] It has been held by this Court that entries in the riwaj i am compiled in 1915 by Currie, Settlement Officer, are relevant evidence under section 35 of the Evidence Act.
[88F G] Mahant Salig Ram vs Mst.
Maya Devi, and Jai Kaur and others vs Sher Singh and others, referred to.
Entry 47 of the riwaj i am states that whenever a widow re marries, even if she marries the brother of her deceased husband, she loses her right to her deceased husband 's estate and that the estate reverts at once to his agnates.
86 As regards the effect of re marriage, all tribes that admit widow re marriage agree that no matter whom the widow marries she forfeits all rights to her deceased husband 's estate.
[89D] Another authoritative compilation is Rattigan 's Digest of Customary Law in the Punjab.
But when custom as recorded in the riwaj i am is in conflict with the general custom as recorded in Rattigan 's Digest or ascertained otherwise, the entries in the riwaj i am would ordinarily prevail.
On this aspect of the custom there is no conflict between the two because Rattigan 's Digest also states that in the absence of custom, the re marriage of a widow causes a forfeiture of her life interest in her first husband 's estate which then reverts to the nearest heir of the husband.
[90E F] One of the exceptions recorded to this general custom, however, is that among certain tribes re marriage in the Karewa form with the brother of the deceased husband does not cause a forfeiture of the widow 's life estate in the property of her first husband.
But among the cases cited in support of the special custom relating to Sikh jats of certain districts of Punjab there is no mention of Dhaliwal jats of Tehsil Muktsar.
It was for the first time that in the 12th edition of Rattigan 's Digest published long after his death that an exception was added that by custom among the Sikh jats of the Punjab a widow does not forfeit her life estate in her deceased husband 's property by reason of her remarriage in Karewa form with her husband 's brother, whether he be the sole surviving brother or there are other brothers as well of the deceased.
Sant Singh vs Rari Bai (AIR 1924 Sindh 17=76 Indian Cases 408) on which this exception is purported to be based does not lay down any such broad proposition to justify the statement added in the 12th edition of Rattigan 's book.
In Sant Singh 's case the parties were Sikh jats from Jullundur District and Basant vs Pratap on which the Sant Singh 's case relied the parties were Sikh jats from Ludhiana District.
But the headnotes in both cases stated it as the custom "among Sikh jats in the Punjab" which clearly is wrong.
Therefore, it cannot be said that there is any real conflict between riwaj i am and Rattigan 's Digest on this point.
The statement in Charan Singh vs Gurdial Singh, AIR 1961 Punjab 301 that among jats governed by custom in matters of succession a widow marrying her deceased husband 's brother remains entitled to collateral succession in the family is too wide having regard to the facts of the case.
[90H & 91A E]
