The appellants, a partnership firm assessed under sections 23(3) and 26 A of the Income tax Act, were called upon by the Income tax Officer during the assessment year 1947 48 to explain how and when they came to possess 61 thonsand rupee currency notes which they had encashed on the 18th January, 1946, after the promulgation of the High Denomination Bank Notes (Demonetisation) Ordinance of 1946, under which such notes ceased to be legal tender on the expiry of the 12th of January, 1946.
The assessees produced their cash book entries from the 20th December, 1946, to the 18th January, 1946, which were accepted as correct by the Income tax Officer, who, however, made no further scrutiny of the accounts, and,the entries showed that on the 12th of January, 1946, the cash balance in hand was Rs. 69,891 2 6.
The case of the appellants was that the said notes were a part of the cash balance and in further support of their case they filed before the Appellate Assistant Commissioner three affidavits by persons actually making the payments, in respect of certain entries in the cash book to prove that Rs. 20,000 on the 28th December, 1946, Rs. 15,000 on the 6th of January, 1946, and Rs. 8,000, out of a sum of Rs. 8,500, on the 6th of January, 1946, were paid in thousand rupee notes.
The Income tax Officer and the Appellate Assistant Commissioner in appeal, on a calculation of their own, held that the possession by the appellants of so many thousand rupee notes was an impossibility and that these notes must represent income from, undisclosed sources and as such be added to the assessable income of the appellants.
Neither the Appellate Assistant Commissioner nor the Income tax Officer, who was present at the hearing of the appeal, called for the deponents in order to cross examine them with reference to their statement in the affidavits.
The Appellate, Tribunal on appeal accepted the explanation of the assesses in respect of 31 of the notes but not with regard to the rest and rejected their application for a reference of the matter to the High Court.
The assessees moved the High Court and the Tribunal was directed under section 66(2) to state 627 a case for its decision.
In answering the main question, the High Court was of the opinion that the finding of the Tribunal was a finding of fact or an inference based on such finding and it was not possible to say that such finding or inference was unreasonable or arbitrary.
Held (per curiam), that the High Court was in error in refusing to interfere with the finding of the Tribunal which was based on no evidence and the appeal must succeed.
Per C.J. and BHAGWATI J. Conclusions based on facts proved or admitted may be conclusions of fact but whether a particular inference can legitimately be drawn from such conclusions may be a question of law.
Where, however, the fact finding authority has acted without any evidence or upon a view of the facts which could not reasonably be entertained or the facts found were such that no person acting judicially and properly instructed as to the relevant law could have found, the court is entitled to interfere.
Chunilal Ticamchand Coal Co. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bihar and Orissa, ([1955]) , applied.
Cameron vs Prendergast (Inspector of Taxes), ([1940] 8 I.T.R. (Suppl.) 75), Bomford vs Osborne (H. M. Inspector of Taxes), ([1942] 10 I.T.R. (Suppl.) 27) and Edwards (Inspector of Taxes) vs Bairstow and Another, ([1955] , referred to.
The High Court was in error in treating the finding of the Tribunal as a finding of fact and failed to apply the true principles of interference applicable to such cases.
The entries in cash book and the statements made in the affidavits in support of the explanation.
which were binding on the Revenue and could not be questioned, clearly showed that it was quite within the range of possibility that the appellants had in their possession the 61 high denomination notes on the relevant date and their explanation could not be assailed by a purely imaginary calculation of the nature made by the Income tax Officer or the Appellate Assistant Commissioner.
The Tribunal made a wrong approach and while accepting the appelants ' explanation with regard to 31 of the notes, it had absolutely no reason to exclude the rest as not covered by it in absence of any evidence to show that the excluded notes were profits earned by the appellants from undisclosed sources.
The appellants having given a reasonable explanation the Tribunal could not, by applying a rule of thumb, discard it so far as the rest were concerned and act on mere surmise.
Per VENKATARAMA AYYAR J.
The finding of the Tribunal that high denomination notes of the value Rs. 30,000 represented concealed profits of the appellants being unsupported by any evidence amounted to an error of law and was liable to be set aside.
That so many notes of high denomination should have been held as part of 628 the cash for so long a time, might be highly suspicious but decisions must be founded on legal testimony and not on suspicion.
The question whether the accounts were genuine or not was a pure question of fact and a finding that they were genuine was binding both on the Revenue and the subject.
