Section 25(ii) of the Bombay Agricultural Debtors ' Relief Act, 1947 provides that nothing in section 24 shall apply to any bona fide transferee for value without notice of the real nature of such transfer or his representative where such transferee or representative holds under a registered deed executed on or before 15th February, 1939.
The predecessors in interest of the appellants transferred two plots of land in 1927 to one Krishnaji.
The document evidencing the transfer of the plots was described as a sale deed and contained a statement that the vendors had absolutely sold both the said lands to him, that the entire ownership was his "alone" and that possession had been given to him.
In 1932 and 1935 Krishnaji sold the two plots to the predecessors in interest of the respondents at a price lower than that paid by him when he purchased the plots.
After the coming into force of the 1947 Act the appellants applied under section 4 of the Act for adjustment of debts claiming that the transaction of 1927 was really not a sale but a mortgage.
Although the trial court came to the conclusion that the transaction was mortgage and not a sale it dismissed the application on the ground that the respondents were entitled to protection under section 25(ii) of the Act.
On appeal the District Judge allowed the application under section 4.
In revision, the High Court recorded a consent order that the transaction was not a sale but a mortgage and remitted the case to the trial court for a decision whether the purchasers were transferees for value without notice of the real nature of the transaction and were entitled to protection of section 25(ii).
On remand the trial court dismissed the application under section 4 holding that the purchasers were bona fide transferees for value without notice of the real nature of the original transaction.
The lower appellate court reversed this decision.
The High Court set aside the order of the appellate court and restored that of the trial court on the view that the purchasers had no actual knowledge or notice of the real nature of the transaction of 1927.
It also held that the notice contemplated by section 25(ii) was actual notice and that constructive notice was clearly beyond the contemplation of section 25(ii).
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: Construing the notice referred to in section 25(ii) as actual notice only is likely to defeat the purpose of the statute which was enacted to provide for the relief of agricultural debtors in the province of Bombay.
Section 25(ii) does not exclude constructive notice.
[126A B] 124 In the instant case, however, the transferees had no notice, actual or constructive, of the real nature of the transaction of 1927.
[126B] The fact that the lands were sold to the respondents for a price lower than what they fetched in 1927 might have been due to various reasons and it cannot be said that this ground alone was sufficient to raise a suspicion that the transaction was really a mortgage.
The Act of 1947 could not have been within the contemplation of any one in 1932 or 1935 when the lands were sold.
The lands were fallow and barren.
The record of rights does not contain any indication that the transaction was a mortgage.
The transferees were put in possession of the lands.
Therefore there was no occasion or circumstance to impel the transferees to start an enquiry as to the real nature of the transaction between the seller and the predecessors in interest of the appellants in 1927.
[126F H, 127A B]
