Raja Ugra Sen, who was governed by the Benaras School of Mitakshara law established "Bettiah Raj" in or about the middle of 17th century.
It was known as Riyasat of Sirkar Champaran consisting of four Perghunnas known as Majhwa, Simrown, Babra and Maihsi and an impartible estate.
After the death of his great grand son, Raja Dhrub Singh dying issueless in 1762, Raja Jugal Kishore Singh, son of Raja Dhrub Singh 's daughter Benga Babui, entered into possession of the estate of "Bettiah Raj".
The East India Company officers seized the estate from him and later allotted only the zamindari of Majhwa and Simrown, while those of Maihsi and Babra were allotted to Srikishen Singh and Abdhoot Singh.
The last male holder of Raja Jugal Kishore Singh was Maharaja Bahadur Narendra Kishore Singh who died issueless on March 26, 1893, leaving behind him two widows Maharani Sheo Ratna Kuer and Maharani Janki Kuer, who succeeded him one after the other.
During the lifetime of Maharani Sheo Ratna Kuer, two suits were filed claiming the estate but they were lost in all courts including the Privy Council.
In 1897, the management of the estate was taken over by the court of Wards Bihar and the Government of Uttar Pradesh in respect of the areas falling in these two States.
Maharani Janki Kuer died on November 27, 1954.
The State of Bihar, therefore, made an application before the Board of Revenue, Bihar, praying that the estate of Maharaja Narendra Singh which was held by late Maharani Janki Kuer as a limited owner but managed by the Court of Wards be handed over to the State of Bihar by virtue of the rule of escheat.
The Board of Revenue published a Notification calling upon interested parties to prefer the claim, if any, to the properties comprised in the estate.
Since there were several claimants taking inconsistent pleas, the Board of Revenue declined to release the estate in favour of any of the claimants and as per its order dated January 18, 1955 directed that the properties would be retained by the Court of Wards until the dispute as to its succession was determined by competent Civil Court.
The title suit having been lost.
The appellants have come up in appeals by certificate.
The State of Bihar which claimed title by the rule of escheat also preferred appeals.
Dismissing Civil Appeals Nos.
114 119 of 1976, the Court ^ HELD: (1) While interpreting the ancient texts of Smritis and commentaries on Hindu Dharmasastra, it should be borne in mind the dynamic role played by learned commentators who were like Roman Juris Consults.
The 2 commentators tried to interpret the texts so as to bring them in conformity with the prevailing conditions in the contemporary society.
That such was the role of a commentator is clear even from the Mitakshara itself at least in two places first, on the point of allotment of a larger share at a partition to the eldest son and secondly on the question of right of inheritance of all agnates.
[56F H] (2) Etymologically, the word 'putrika ' means a daughter (especially a daughter appointed to raise male issue to be adopted by a father who has no sons), and 'putrika putra ' means a daughter 's son who by agreement or adoption becomes the son of her father [20C D] A careful reading of the ancient texts Manu, Yajnavalkya, (Mitakshara) (Vijnanesvara) and Apararka (Aparaditya) Baudhayana Dharmasutra, Vishnu Dharmasastra, Vasishtha Dharmasutra, Parasara Madhava, Smriti Chandrika of Devannabhatta, Dattaka Chandrika and Dattaka Mimansa by Nanda Pandita leads to the inference that the institution of "Putrika Putra" had become obsolete and not recognised by Hindu society for several centuries prior to the time when Smriti Chandrika or Dattaka Chandrika were written and these two commentaries belong to a period far behind the life time of Raja Dhrub Singh [32B C] Further, absence of cases before courts within living memory in which a claim had been preferred on the basis of application in "Putrika Putra" form showed that the said practice had become obsolete.
[34A] Thakoor Jeebnath Singh vs The Court of Wards, (1875) 2 I.A. 163 (PC), quoted with approval.
Sri Raja Venkata Narasimha Appa Row Bahadur vs Sri Rajesh Sraneni Venkata Purushotama Jaganadha Gopala Row Bahadur & Ors., I.L.R. Babui Rita Kuer vs Puran Mal, A.I.R. 1916 Patna 8 approved.
Tribhawan Nath Singh vs Deputy Commissioner, Fyzabad & Ors,. , overruled.
(3) All digests, lectures and treatises support the view that the practice of appointing a daughter as a putrika and of treating her son as "putrika putra" had become obsolete several centuries ago.
And, the reason for the abandonment of the practice of appointing a daughter to raise a son by the Hindu society is clear from the following situation.
[46C, 49F] In ancient times, the daughter and daughter 's son were given preference over even the widow of a person in the matter of succession.
Ancient commentators like Madhathithi and Haradatta had declared that the widow was no heir and notwithstanding some texts in her favour, her right was not fully recognised till Yajnavalkya stated that the widow would succeed to the estate of a sonless person.
In Yajnavalkya Smriti, the order of succession to a male was indicated in the following order (1) son, grandson, great grandson, (2) putrika putra, (3) other subsidiary or secondary sons, (4) widow and (5) daughter.
It was not expressly stated that daughter 's son would succeed, but the parents were shown as the successors.
Vijnanesvara, however, interpreted the word "cha", which meant "also" in "Duhitaraschaiva" in the text of Yajnavalkya laying down the compact series of heirs as referring to daughter 's son.
But for this interpretation a daughter 's son would have come in as an heir after all agnates (gotrajas), as the daughter 's son is only a cognate (Bandhu).
As a result of this interpretation, the daughter 's son was promoted in rank next only to his maternal grand mother and his mother whose interest in the estate was only a limited one.
[48H, 49A C, E F] 3 When a person had two or more daughters, the appointment of one of them would give her primacy over the wife and the other daughters (not so appointed) and her son (appointed daughter 's son) would succeed to the exclusion of the wife and other daughters and their sons and also to the exclusion of his own uterine brothers (i.e. the other sons of the appointed daughter).
Whereas in the case of plurality of sons all sons would succeed equally, in the case of appointment of a daughter, other daughters and their sons alongwith the wife would get excluded.
To prevent this kind of inequality which would arise among the daughters and daughter 's sons, the practice of appointing a single daughter as a putrika to raise an issue came to be abandoned in course of time when people were satisfied that their religious feelings were satisfied by the statement of Manu that all sons of daughters whether appointed or not had the right to offer oblations and their filial yearnings were satisfied by the promotion of the daughter 's sons in the order of succession next only to the son as the wife and daughters had been interposed only as limited holders.
[49F H, 50A C] Ghanta Chinna Ramasubbayya & Anr.
vs Moparthi Chenchuramayya, 74 I.A. 162, followed.
(4) It is incorrect to suggest that the theory of "a practice once recognised by law becoming obsolete" was unknown and that it would continue to be in existence until it was taken away by a competent legislature.
The court can declare it to be so.
[53G] Shiromani & Ors.
vs Hem Kumar & Ors., [1968] 3 S.C.R. 639, applied.
(5) The contention that the rule against the appointment of a daughter by a Hindu to beget an issue for himself in Kali age enunciated by Saunaka and others should be treated as only directory and if any person appointed a daughter for that purpose in contravention of that rule still her son would become "putrika putra" of the person so appointing, with all the privileges of a putrika putra is highly tenuous.
Where there is predominant opinion of commentators supporting its non existence in the last few centuries extending to a period, in the instant case, prior to the life of Raja Dhrub Singh and there are good reasons for the Hindu Society abandoning it, it would be inappropriate to resurrect the practice.
[58E F, 61A C] Sri Balusu Gurulingaswami vs Sri Balusu Ramalakshmamma
