Each of the appellants had been holding the post of Assistant Educational Officer for more than six years continuously when his reversion was ordered in implementation of the instructions issued by the State Government through a letter dated 19th May, 1977 to the effect that every Assistant Educational Officer should be transferred after six years of service as such or even earlier, on administrative grounds.
Having failed before the High Court to get these orders quashed on the ground that the posts of Assistant Educational Officers, being promotional posts, their transfer to the posts of High School Assistant amounted to reversion and, therefore, violated Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution, the appellants have now come up in appeal by special leave.
Allowing the appeals, the Court, ^ HELD: (1) The directions contained in the letter dated 19th May, 1977 that an Assistant Educational Officer should be transferred back as a High School Assistant after six years of incumbency as Assistant Educational Officer is wholly arbitrary and not based on any principle and is therefore violative of Article 16 of the Constitution.
Firstly, the post of A.E.O. carries a special pay of Rs. 50/ per month and therefore ensures for its incumbent higher emoluments than are available to a High School Assistant.
Secondly, the special pay is counted towards pension under Rules 12, 23 and 62 of the Kerala Service Rules.
Any transfer of an Assistant Educational Officer to that of High School Assistant deprives him of these benefits and, therefore, is violative of Article 14.
[137H, 138A D] P. C. Joshi and others etc.
etc vs The Director General, Posts and Telegraphs, New Delhi etc., [1975] 2 S.C.R. 115, distinguished.
(2) The very fact that the post of Assistant Educational Officer carries a special pay of Rs. 50/ falling within sub clause (a) of clause 31 of Section 12 of the Kerala Service Rules, goes to prove that the post is higher than that of High School Assistant.
[136B C, 137F G] (3) Rule 2(ii) of the Kerala State and Subordinate Service Rules, 1958, Rule 2(v), Rule 2(vii)(a) of the Kerala Education Rules, 1959 and Section 12A of the Kerala Education Act, 1958 make it clear that if so authorised by the 129 Government an A.E.O. shall have the power to take disciplinary proceedings against a teacher, including a Headmaster, of an aided school, to suspend him when such proceedings are proposed to be taken and to impose upon him all or any of the penalties to which he may be liable under the relevant rules.
Item 4 of the functions to be performed by an Assistant Educational Officer detailed in the Education Department Guide Book, 1978 empowers him to institute disciplinary proceedings against non gazetted officers under his control as per Kerala Civil Services (Qualification, Control and Appeal) Rules, and admittedly High School Assistants are non gazetted officers who are eligible for appointment and are normally appointed as Headmasters of upper primary school and, therefore, they would while functioning as Headmasters be amenable to disciplinary action by their respective Assistant Educational Officers.
It follows that the post of an Assistant Educational Officer lies in a higher category than that of a High School Assistant who does not wield any corresponding disciplinary jurisdiction.
[132C G] The qualifications prescribed by the Government order dated 25th June, 1966 and Rule 3 of the Kerala Education Subordinate Service (Special) Rules, 1972 make it clear that the two posts of Assistant Educational Officer and High School Assistant are not inter changeable.
A High School Assistant cannot be posted as an Assistant Educational Officer unless he has the qualification (in addition to those making him eligible to hold the post of High School Assistant) of having passed the test in Kerala Education Act and Rules.
The broad guidelines issued by the State Government to the effect that "care must be taken to see that only officers of high integrity and efficiency should be posted to work as Assistant Educational Officers", the Government Order of 29th August, 1961, the letter dated 7th February, 1969 issued by the Director of Public Instructions and the Order dated 19th October, 1974 issued by the State Government introducing direct recruitment to the posts of A.E.Os.
and District Educational Officers also specifically indicate that the functions to be performed by an Assistant Educational Officer are substantially different from and entail higher responsibility than those of an H.S.A. so that the appointment to the post of A.E.O. from amongst officials already serving the State Government is a matter of promotion and not a mere transfer and that is how the Kerala Government itself has been viewing the matter all along prior to the issuance of the letter dated 19th May, 1977.
[131G, 133B C, E, F, 134G H] (4) If the rules do not permit Assistant Educational Officers to become Headmasters of High Schools but the Government has been posting them as such in contravention of the rules it would not follow that the rules automatically stand amended to be read in conformity with the contravention.
There is no incongruity in the two categories of the posts, one higher and the other lower, furnishing two sources of recruitment to another higher post and it would not necessarily follow from such a practice that the two sources must be regarded as equivalent to each other for all purposes.
[135G H, 136A]
