Apprehending that the Government was considering a change of policy framed in 1964 for choosing an officer to become brigadier in charge of military farms the petitioner moved the High Court for the issue of a writ.
On directions from the High Court to the Defence Department to select the best man for the post the Department reported that the petitioner and respondent were equal in merit, but since the respondent in the review petition was senior as colonel, he be chosen for the post.
After considering the legal import of the 1964 policy the High Court allowed the petitioner to become a brigadier The respondent 's petition for special leave was granted by this Court.
The Central Government was given one month 's time to evolve its policy, if necessary.
That not having been done the respondent moved this Court again as to the non compliance and for consequential orders.
On May 9, 1980 the Court passed orders that the respondent be appointed as brigadier.
The petitioner sought review of that order. ^ HELD: A review is not a routine procedure.
An earlier order cannot be reviewed unless the Court is satisfied that material error manifest on the face of the order undermines its soundness or results in miscarriage of justice.
A review of a judgment is a serious step and resort to it is proper only where a glaring omission or patent mistake or like grave error has crept in earlier by judicial fallibility.
In the instant case the relief of review is not justified.
[173G H] Chandra Kanta vs Sheikh Habib ; at 933 34, followed.
From the affidavits filed by the Government in the Court on May 9. 1980 it is obvious that the Government had decided on abandoning the 1964 policy and was actually pursuing steps to fashion a new policy.
Therefore, no rights on the old basis, if any, can enure to the benefit of the petitioner especially because he relied on his third rank in a selection for one vacancy made in 1971 That apart, a selection of 1979 turned out in favour of the respondent.
The petitioner is postponed but by a few months and the respondent has been far senior as colonel and will retire in August, 1980.
The conspectus of circumstances hardly persuades the Court that there is injustice in the order of May 7th or May 9th.
[173D E]
