On the allegations that the appellant in the Criminal Appeal along with two other accused were in possession of railway property which they had obtained under forged railway receipts, the Inspector of the Railway Protection Force lodged a complaint against the three accused that they were guilty of offences under section 3(a) of the Railway Property (Unlawful 15 Possession) Act, 1966 and action should be taken against them.
In the Complaint it was mentioned that accused 2 and 3 were absconding and annexed to the complaint was (I) a list of prosecution witnesses and (2) a list of documents.
The appellant, who was accused I appeared before the Presidency Magistrate who commenced an enquiry and recorded the statements of four witnesses one on March 2, 1973 and of the other three on June 12, 1973.
On June 11, 1973 the appellant moved an application before the Magistrate making a grievance that although three witnesses had been examined, no copies of the document were furnished to him.
On June 25, 1973 he made a further application requesting for supply of true copies of all the documents in the case to enable him to prepare the defence and that he should be permitted to take photostat copies of the documents.
The Magistrate on August 9, 1973 rejected the appellants ' application on the ground that the offence complained of against him was not cognizable and that the provisions of section 251 (a) of the Code of Criminal Procedure were not applicable and consequently, he had no right to obtain copies of the documents concerned.
On August 24, 1973 the Magistrate framed a charge under section 3(a) of the Act.
The accused pleaded not guilty and again made an application repeating his request for copies of the statements of witnesses recorded by the Inspector R.P.F.
This application was also rejected by the Magistrate on September 7, 1973.
176 Feeling aggrieved by the orders passed by the Magistrate on August 9, 1973 and September 7, 1973 the appellant invoked the inherent jurisdiction of the High Court by a petition under section 561A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 and prayed that the orders be quashed.
He challenged the constitutional validity of section 9 of the Act in the petition.
The High Court rejected the petition.
In the appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant (a) relying on Raja Ram Jaiswal vs State of Bihar; , that the expression "Police officer" in section 25 of the Evidence Act must be considered in a wide popular sense, so as to include within its ambit all officers of Government who are in substance invested with the power to investigate certain offences in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1898 irrespective of the fact that they are differently labelled such as Excise officers or Customs officers or members of R.P.F., otherwise the very object of section 25 will be defeated.
An Inspector of the R.P.F. making an inquiry under the Railway Property (Unlawful Possession) Act 1966 into an offence under section 3 of that Act, in substance, acts and exercises almost all the powers of a 'Police officer ' making an investigation under the Code of Criminal Procedure and any confessional statement recorded by such Inspector will be hit by section 25 Evidence Act.
The case of State of U.P. vs Durga Prasad, ; was not correctly decided and that its ratio needs reconsideration by a larger Bench because it has overlooked the test laid down by the three Judge Bench in Raja Ram Jaiswal 's case.
(b) As soon as a person is arrested by an officer of the Force on a suspicion or charge of committing an offence punishable under the 1966 Act, he stands in the character of a "person accused of an offence" and any confessional or incriminating statements recorded by an officer of the Force in the course of an inquiry under section 8(1) of the 1966 Act, cannot be used as evidence in view of the constitutional ban against "compelled testimony" imposed by article 20(3) of the Constitution.
On behalf of the respondent it was submitted that: (a) an officer of the R.P.F. while making an inquiry under the 1966 Act cannot be equated with a police officer in charge of a Police Station making an investigation under the Code.
The important difference in their powers is, that the R.P.F. Inspector has no power to submit a report or a charge sheet under section 173 of the Code.
The decision of this Court in Raja Ram Jaiswal 's case stands on its own peculiar facts and was distinguished in a later decision by a Constitution Bench of this Court in Badku Joti Savant vs State of Mysore, ; The correct test for determining whether or not R.P.F. Officer is a police officer for the purpose of section 25 of the Evidence Act is the one which was consistently applied in State of Punjab vs Barkat Ram ; , & Romesh Chandra Mehta vs West Bengal (b) The conditions necessary for the attraction of the ban in article 20(3) do not exist in the instant case because before the filing of the complaint in the Court, the appellant was not a "person accused of an offence" and that it was nowhere alleged that the confessional or incriminating statements were extorted by the R.P.F. Officer under physical duress, threat, inducement or mental torture.
177 on the questions: (1) whether an officer of the Railway Protection Force making an inquiry under the Railway Property (Unlawful Possession) Act, 1966 in respect of an offence under section 3 of that Act of unlawful possession of the railway property is a police officer for the purpose of section 25 of the Evidence Act and section 162 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1898 and whether any confession or incriminatory statement recorded by him in the course of an inquiry under section 8 of the Act is inadmissible in evidence, and (2) whether a person arrested by an officer of the Railway Protection Force under section 6 of the Act for the alleged commission of an offence under section 3 of the Act is "person accused of an offence" within the meaning of article 20(3) of the Constitution: ^ HELD: 1.
An officer of the R.P.F. conducting an enquiry under section 8(1) of the 1966 Act has not been invested with all the powers of an officer in charge of a police station making an investigation under Chapter XIV of the Code.
Particularly, he has no power to initiate prosecution by filing a charge sheet before the Magistrate concerned under section 173 of the Code, which he has been held to be the clinching attribute of an investigating 'police officer '.
An officer of the R.P.F. could not therefore be deemed to be a "police officer" within the meaning of section 25 of the Evidence Act, and therefore, any confessional or incriminating statement recorded by him in the course of an inquiry under section 8(1) of the 1966 Act, cannot be excluded from evidence under the said section.
[201C E] 2.
The term 'police officer ' has not been defined in the Evidence Act The policy behind sections 25 and 26 of Evidence Act is to make a substantive rule of law that confessions whenever and wherever made to the police shall he presumed to have been obtained under the circumstances mentioned in section ' 24 and therefore, inadmissible except so far as is provided in section 27 of that Act.
[182F, E] Ariel vs State A.I.R. 1954 S.C. 15, referred to.
The primary object of constituting the Railway Protection Force is to secure better "protection and security of the railway property".
The restricted power of arrest and search given to the officers or members of the Force is incidental to the efficient discharge of their basic duty to protect and safeguard Railway Property.
No general power to investigate all cognizable offence relating to Railway Property, under the Criminal Procedure Code has bee.
conferred on any superior officer or member of the Force by the 1957 Act [185F G] 4.
The main purpose of passing the 1966 Act was to "invest powers of investigation and prosecution" of offences relating to railway property in the RPF "in the same manner as in the Excise and Customs." Inspite of provision in the Code of Criminal Procedure to the contrary, offences under this Act have been made non cognizable and, as such, cannot be investigated by a police officer under the Code.
It follows that the initiation of prosecution for an offence inquired into under this Act can only be on the basis of a complaint by an officer of RPF and not on the report of a police officer under section 173(4) of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1898.
[187A, 188B] 5.
Section 14 makes clear that the provisions of the Act shall override all other laws.
which means that anything in the 1966 Act which is inconsistent 178 with the Code, will prevail and the application of the Code pro tanto will be excluded.
The scheme of the 1966 Act, particularly the provisions in sections 5, 8, 9(3), (4) is different from that of the Code.
The Code, therefore, cannot proprio vigore apply to an enquiry conducted under section 8(1) of the 1966 Act by an officer of the Force.
[189G, 190A] 6.
An analysis of clause (3) of article 20 shows three things: Firstly, its protection is available only to a "person accused of any offence".
Secondly, the protection is against compulsion "to be a witness".
Thirdly, this protection avails "against himself".
[202F] 7.
Only a person against whom a formal accusation of the commission of an offence has been made can be a person "accused of on offence" within the meaning of article 20(3).
Such formal accusation may be specifically made against him in an F.I.R. or a formal complaint or any other formal document or notice served on that person, which ordinarily results in his prosecution in Court.
[204F] In the instant case no such formal accusation had been made against the appellant when has statement(s) in question were recorded by the R.P.F. Officer.
He did not at that time, stand in the character of a person "accused of an offence" and as such, the protection of Article 20(3) will not be available to him.
[203F G] Kathi Raning Rawat vs The State of Saurashtra ; , K. Joseph Augusthi & Ors.
vs M. A. Narayanan , Mohamed Destagir vs The State of Madras ; , Bhagwan Das, Crl.
131 132/61 decided on 20 9 63, Bhogilal Shah & Anr vs D. K. Guha & Ors ; , M. P. Sharma vs Satish Chandra ; , Smt.
Nandini Satpathy vs P. L Dani & Anr. ; , In re The Special Courts Bill, , Raja Narayanlal Bansilal vs Maneck Phiroz Mistry & Anr. ; , State of Bombay vs Kathi Kalu Oghad & Ors. ; , ref to.
