Indian Penal Code 1860, section 376 Evidence and proof Absence of injuries on prosecution Whether fatal to the prosecution Testimony of prosecutrix Corroboration whether necessary.
The petitioner was convicted on the charge of committing rape on a middle aged Bal Sewika in a village welfare organisation who was sleeping a girls school.
The trial Court imposed a sentence of 7 years ' rigorous imprisonment.
The High Court, confirmed the conviction and sentence.
In the Special Leave Petition to this Court it was contended on behalf of the petitioner relying on the decision of this Court in Pratap Mishra & Ors.
vs State of Orissa, A.I.R. 1977 S.C. 1307 that absence of injuries on the person of the victim was fatal tb the prosecution and that corroborating evidence was an imperative component of judicial credence in rape cases.
It was also submitted that the sentence of 7 years was too severe.
Dismissing the petition; ^ HELD: 1.
No interference on the score of culpability or quantum of punishment is called for.
1405 2.
Concurrent findings of fact ordinarily acquire a deterrent sanctity and tentative finality when challenged in this Court.
The special jurisdiction under Article 136 of the Constitution which is meant mainly to correct manifest injustice or errors of law of great moment cannot be invoked in the instant case.
[403 H] 3.(i) The facts and circumstances often vary from case to case, the crime situation and the myriad psychic factors, social conditions and people 's life styles may fluctuate, and so, rules of prudence relevant in one fact situation may be inept in another.
The argument that regardless of the specific circumstances of a crime and criminal milieu, some strands of probative reasoning which appealed to a Bench in one reported decision must mechanically be extended to other cases cannot be accepted.
[404 D] (ii) Pratap Misra 's case laid down no inflexible axiom of law on either point.
[404 C] 4.
Corroboration as a condition for judicial reliance on the testimony of a prosecutrix is not a matter of law, but a guidance of prudence under given circumstances.
[404 E] 403 In the instant case the testimony of the prosecutrix has commanded acceptance from two courts.
A sensitized judge who sees the conspectus of circumstances in its totality hardly rejects the testimony of a rape victim unless there are very strong circumstances militating against its veracity.
There is none in this case.
The confirmation of the conviction by the Courts below must therefore, be a matter of course.
[404H, 405B]
