The Punjab Cycle Rickshaws (Regulation of Rickshaws) Act, 1976 (Punjab Act 41 of 1975), was designed to regulate the issue of licenses to actual drivers of cycle rickshaws, plying within the municipal areas of the State.
The petitioners in their Writ Petitions challenged the Act. ^ HELD: (Per Krishna Iyer & Chinnappa Reddy, JJ.
Pathak J. agreeing with the scheme of directions framed).
The Court framed the following scheme: (a) Every rickshaw puller including every petitioner, who has been a licensee within one year of the coming into force of the Act shall be entitled to apply to the Municipal Commissioner for a certificate or other document to the effect that he has been a licensee for rickshaw pulling.
[369 F] (b) The Municipal Commissioner will verify the records and will grant the necessary certificate or other document within one month from the date of the application.
[369 G] (c) on receipt of the municipal certificate the rickshaw puller will apply to the Credit Guarantee Corporation of India (Small Loans) under the Guarantee Scheme of 1971 for advance of a loan upto Rs. 900.
[369 H 370 A] (d) The loan amount shall be repaid by the rickshaw puller in 15 monthly instalments.
If there are delayed payments of instalments of loan, higher rate of interest will be recoverable.
[370 F] (e) When the rickshaw pullers during the agricultural season go to work in their fields, they shall nominate other rickshaw pullers without employment to ply the rickshaws during that season.
The Municipal Commissioner, if satisfied that the nomination made is bona fide will issue licence to such pullers or nominees of the licensed rickshaw pullers, in the agricultural season.
[370 H 371 A] B. (I) Under the Constitutional system courts are havens of refuge for the toiler, not the exploiter, for the weaker claimant of social justice, not the stronger pretender who seeks to sustain the status quo ante by judicial writ in the name of fundamental rights.
[367 E] 367 (2) No higher duty or more solemn responsibility rests upon this Court A than to uphold every State measure that translates into living law the preambular promise of social justice reiterated in Article 38 of the Constitution.
[F] (3) The success of well meant statutory schemes depends on the symbiosis of legislative embargo on exploitative working conditions and viable facilities or acceptable alternatives whereby shackles are shaken off and self ownership substituted.
Judicial engineering to wards this goal is better social justice than dehumanised adjudication on the vires of legislation.
[H 368 A]
