Before June 27, 1973, a Section Officer in the Tamil Nadu Secretariat used to be a non Gazetted officer.
The Government by order G.O. Ms. No. 1616, Public (Services J) dated June 13, 1973 made the post of a Superintendent of the Secretariat a Gazetted post and re designated it as Section Officer, and by Government order No. 1782, Public (Services J.), dated June 27, 1973, provided that in all matters relating to appointments, transfers, postings punishments and drawl of pay, they continued to be treated as non gazetted Government servants until further orders The respondent was recruited as a Clerk in the Indian Army in the year 1943 and after demobilization was appointed in the Revenue Secretariat of the State Government (Appellant) from March 1948.
He was promoted as Section Officer in April 1969 and he continued in the post till March 2, 1976 when he was compulsorily retired from service under Fundamental Rule 56(d).
The respondent challenged his compulsory retirement in the High Court contending that the procedure set out in G.O. No. 761 dated March 19, 1973, envisaged that the Review Committee that had to consider the cases of Gazetted Government officers in the Secretariat should be headed by the Chief Secretary and not by the Departmental Secretary and since the Committee which reviewed his case was headed by a Departmental Secretary, the violation had vitiated the retirement order.
The High Court accepted this contention and quashed the retirement order In the appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that though under G. O. No. 1782 Public (Service J) dated June 27, 1973, all Superintendents or Section officers were given the status of Gazetted Officers in matters like appointments, transfer and posting they continued to be treated as non gazetted officers and that the constitution of the Review Committee headed by a Departmental Secretary was valid.
It was also contended that in the aforesaid order, the word 'appointments ' includes compulsory 'retirements ', also.
On the respondent 's behalf it was submitted that the word 'appointments ' in the order dated June 27, 1973 cannot be construed to include 'retirements ' from or 'terminations ' of service, for if that had been the intention there would not have been no difficulty in adding the word 'retirements ' or terminations ' along 472 with the words 'appointments, transfers, postings and punishments ' in the Government order and consequently a restricted interpretation should be placed on this expression.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
The order of the High Court is set aside and the order or the respondent 's compulsory retirement upheld.
[475 H] 2.
Unless a contrary intention appears from the context, a power to appoint should include a power to terminate the appointment including termination by compulsory retirement in accordance with the terms and conditions of service.
This fundamental principle underlies Section 16 of the General Clauses Act.
[474 H 475 A] 3.
The power to terminate the appointment by compulsory retirement or otherwise is a necessary adjunct of the power of appointment and is exercised as an incident to or consequences of that power.
Nothing in the Government Order No. 1782, dated June 27, 1973, militates against this rule of construction.
[475 B] 4.
The "decision ' of the Review Committee had no force proprio vigore.
The 'decisions ' were mere recommendations which did not, and could not, have a peremptory effect.
The ultimate power to accept or not to accept the recommendations of the Review Committee and to take an effective and definitive decision vests in the Government.
Even if there was some irregularity in the constitution of the Review Committee, that could not by itself, have the effect of vitiating the order of the respondent 's compulsory retirement.
[475E F] In the instant case it was not the respondent alone (from the category of Section Officers) whose case was reviewed by the Review Committee in question.
The cases of all the Section officers of the Secretariat, were reviewed by the same committee.
The respondent had therefore not been singled out for a differential treatment.
[475G]
