The petitioner after holding a number of minor posts in the Punjab Government, was appointed to the Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch) and subsequently in April 1965 to the Punjab Civil Service (Judicial Branch).
From the post of Senior Subordinate Judge he was reverted as Subordinate Judge.
Later, on 4th November, 1978, the High Court ordered withdrawal of all judicial work from the petitioner and on 8th November, 1978 a Judicial officer was posted in his place.
Subsequently he was prematurely retired with effect from 30th December, 1978 on which date he completed 25 years qualifying service for the purposes of Punjab Civil Service (Premature Retirement) Rules, 1975.
The petitioner then filed a writ petition under Article 32 of the Constitution in the Supreme Court for the quashing of the orders dated 4th November, 1978 and 8th November, 1978, for his reappointment as Senior Subordinate Judge and, thereafter, his promotion to the Selection Grade post of the Punjab Civil Service (Judicial Branch) with effect from 1st November, 1966 and his promotion to the Punjab Superior Judicial Service with effect from 1st November, 1967.
He also claimed an injunction against his premature retirement from service, which relief was refused.
Dismissing the petition, the Court. ^ HELD: (1) Inordinate delay without valid explanation therefor to the claim for promotion itself is a valid ground for refusal of relief to a petitioner.
Successive representations made by the petitioner during the period can hardly justify the delay.
[509F] (2) The High Court was justified, as borne out by the records, not promoting the petitioner to a post in the Punjab Superior Judicial Service.
The view of the High Court was neither unreasonable nor arbitrary.
[510A B] (3) The Punjab Civil Service (Premature Retirement) Rules, 1975 are applicable to judicial officers as well.
These rules were finalised after consultation with the High Court and therefore, must be regarded as complying with Article 234 of the Constitution.
Further, there is nothing in the Punjab Civil Service (Judicial Branch) which excludes the operation of the Retirement Rules.
[510 E] 508 (4) As a policy decision was taken by the High Court that all the work pending in the court of the Judicial officers, in respect of whom a recommendation for premature retirement had been made to the Governor, should be withdrawn immediately pending a decision by the Government on such recommendation, it cannot be said that the withdrawal of judicial powers in the case of the petitioner was wrong.
Even his premature retirement had been properly recommended as a policy matter under the Premature Retirement Rules.
[510G H] (5) The expression "public interest" in the context of premature retirement has a well settled meaning.
It refers to cases where the interest of public administration requires the retirement of a Government servant, who with the passage of years, has prematurely ceased to possess the standard of efficiency, competence and utility called for by the Government service to which he belongs.
No stigma or implication of misbehavior is intended and punishment is not the objective.
[511A B] (6) There is no discrimination or violation of Articles 14, 16, 17 and 46 of the Constitution in view of the fact, as borne out by the records, that no other judicial officer whose record of service was inferior or equivalent to that of the petitioner had not been prematurely retired.
[511 F, D] (7) The concept of premature retirement which has found expression in the Punjab Civil Service (Premature Retirement) Rules, 1975, does not fall within the scope of Article 311.
No element of punishment is involved in premature retirement and Article 311 therefore is not attracted.
[511 E]
