The respondent joined service in Cane Development Department of the U.P. State Government in 1949 and later on transferred to District Co operative Sugarcane Development Society Ltd., a federating unit of the U.P. Co operative Cane Union Federation Ltd. He was prosecuted and convicted for alleged embezzlement of funds, but was acquitted by the High Court in appeal.
Later as a result of departmental disciplinary proceedings, his services were terminated.
Respondent, therefore, filed a Civil Suit in 1964 which was decreed on May 24, 1967 rejecting the appellant 's plea of bar of jurisdiction by the Civil Court under Rule 115 of the Co operative Societies Rules, 1936, made under section 43 of the .
The First Appellate Court accepted the appeal and dismissed the suit holding that the dispute was one "touching the business of the Co operative Society" and its employee and hence the Civil Court is barred from entertaining the suit.
However, in the second appeal to it, the High Court reversed the First Appellate Court 's order holding that as the respondent is governed by U.P. Sugarcane (Regulation of Supplies and Purchases) Act, 1953, it being both a Co operative Society and a Cane Growers ' Co operative Society and in case of an officer or servant of such Cane Growers ' Co operative Society any dispute between its officers and servants and such society would be governed by Rules 54 and 55 framed under the 1953 Act which provide for a complete machinery for resolution of disputes and Rule 108 does not encompass dispute arising out of a disciplinary proceeding between such society and its officers and servants and therefore, in the absence of such provision for compulsory arbitration of such dispute, the jurisdiction of the Civil Court is not barred.
Dismissing the appeal by special leave, the Court ^ HELD: (1) On a conspectus of the High Court 's decision and the definition of the expression "officer" both expansive definition and its etymological sense, first respondent a Supervisor working as a Godown Keeper could not be styled as an officer of the Co operative Society, he not being either Chairman.
Secretary, Treasurer, or a member of the Committee or such other person shown to have been empowered under the rules or the bye laws to give directions in regard to the business of the society.
And the legislature never intended 559 to include every employee or servant of the society within the expression "officer".
Neither any rule made under section 43(g) of the 1912 Act refers the respondent as an officer.
[567 D, 565 G, 566 F] Co operative Central Bank vs Trimaak Narayan Shinganwadikar, ; Manjeri section Krishna Ayyar vs Secretary, Urban Bank Ltd. & Anr.
AIR 1933 Mad. 682; Kailash Nath Halwai vs Registrar, Co operative Society, U.P. & ors.
, AIR 1960 Allahabad 194 and Abu Baker & Anr.
vs District Handloom Weavers ' Co operative Society, Mau & Anr., AIR 1966 Allahabad 12, referred to.
(2) Rules 115 to 134 of the Co operative Societies Rules, 1936 make it clear that if the dispute is one contemplated by Rule 115 and arises between the parties therein envisaged it shall have to be resolved by referring the same to the Registrar who will have to get it resolved by arbitration either by himself or by arbitrator or arbitrators appointed by him.
Rule 134 provides that a decision of an arbitrator or arbitrators under the rules, if not appealed as therein provided, shall be final as between the parties to the dispute and not liable to be called in question in any civil or revenue court and shall in all respects be final and conclusive.
If, therefore, the 1912 Act confers power to enact rules and the rules so enacted are statutory and if the rules provide for certain types of disputes between certain specific parties to be resolved by arbitration and the decision of the arbitrators is made final and conclusive not correctible by the civil court or unquestionable before the civil court, undoubtedly, the jurisdiction of the civil court in respect of such specified disputes between specified parties enumerated in Rule 114 would be wholly excluded.
[567 F 568 A] (3) In order to attract Rule 115 it must be shown (i) that the dispute is the one touching the business of the co operative society; and (ii) that it is between the society and any officer of the society.
Both the conditions have to be cumulatively fulfilled before Rule 115 is attracted which would result in ouster of the jurisdiction of the civil court in respect of dispute in view of the provision contained in Rule 134.
A dispute arising out of a disciplinary proceeding resulting in dismissal of an employee of the society cannot be said to be "a dispute touching the business" of the society within the meaning of the Rule 115.
[568C, 569G] Deccan Merchants Co operative Bank Ltd vs M/s. Dalichand Jugraj Jain & Ors.
,[1969] 1 SCR 887; Co operative Central Bank Ltd & Ors.
vs Additional Industrial Tribunal, Andhra Pradesh & ors., followed.
Kisanlal & ors.
vs Co operative Central Bank Ltd., AIR 1946 Nagpur 16 approved.
(4) Section 70 of the U.P. Co operative Societies Act, 1965 also makes it clear that while making a statutory provision for resolution of disputes involving co operative societies by arbitration by the Registrar, the legislature in terms excluded a dispute relating to disciplinary action taken by the society against paid servants of the society from the purview of the compulsory arbitration.
What was implicit in the 1912 Act and the rules framed thereunder that such a dispute did not "touch the business of the society" and was not within the purview of the compulsory arbitration was made explicit by section 70 of the 1965 Act (which repeal and replace 1912 Act) by expressly excluding it from the field of compulsory arbitration.
[570C, E] 560 (5) The approach of the High Court in coming to the conclusion that the civil court will have jurisdiction to entertain the suit, however, is not correct and totally overlooks and ignores the provisions in 1912 Act and the rules enacted thereunder.
U.P. Sugarcane (Regulation of Supplies and Purchases) Act, 1953 and the operate in an entirely different field and are enacted with different objects in view.
1953 Act neither trenches upon 1912 Act nor supersedes or supplants any provision of it.
[572 C]
