Under rule 3(b) of the U. P. Service of Engineers (Junior and Senior Scales) irrigation Branch Rules a member of the service means a government servant appointed in a substantive capacity under the provisions of the rules to a post in the cadre of the service.
Rule 4 empowers the State Government to increase the cadre by creating permanent or temporary posts from time to time according to the exigencies.
Rules S and 6 contemplate recruitment (i) by direct appointment from amongst engineer students of the Thomson Civil Engineering College, Roorkee, (ii) by direct appointment, (iii) by appointment of officers in the temporary service of the United Provinces, Public Works Department (Irrigation Branch), (the selection in all these three categories was to be after consulting a permanent Board of Selection) and (iv) by promotion of members of the Subordinate Engineering Service, who have, in the opinion of the Government, shown exceptional merit.
The proviso to rule S states that it would not be necessary to consult the Commission in the case of appointment of a temporary officer to a permanent vacancy, if he has already been appointed to a temporary post in the cadre of service after consultation with the Commission.
In 1950 recruitment through Thomson College was stopped and in 1961 direct recruitment was made through the Public Service Commission.
Rule 6 empowers the Government to fill quotas for members of the Subordinate Engineering Service.
Rule 17 stipulates a period of probation in regard to all candidates who were not in the permanent employment of the Irrigation Branch.
Rule 19 provides the mode of confirmation of a probationer in his appointment.
Rule 23 regulating the inter se seniority of the officers states that seniority in the ser ice shall be determined according to the date of the order of appointment to it.
In 1948 by combining class I and class II officers into one service the Government constituted the U. P. Service of Engineers (Junior and Senior Scales) but since the rules regulating their recruitment, conditions and classifications could not be made, the Government followed the 1936 Rules which were modified from time to time by Government orders.
The High Court struck down the seniority list of engineers prepared by the State Government in 1965 and gave directions to the Government to re determine the seniority in accordance with Rules 23 of the Rules.
Purporting to act on these directions a fresh seniority list was drawn up by the Government in May, 1969 but that too was struck down by the High Court.
450 In appeal to this Court it was contended that it was not correct to say that the temporary Assistant Engineers were not members of the service on the ground that their appointment was not in a substantive capacity in permanent posts since they had fulfilled all the requirements of the rules for being appointed on a regular basis viz. possessing the requisite qualifications, selection by the State Service Commission etc.
irrespective of whether their appointments were to temporary posts or not, the long service they had put in must weigh in reckoning the seniority.
Allowing the appeal in part ^ HELD: The G. O. Of December 1961 in so far as it fixes the proportion of permanent vacancies to be filled from the various sources had statutory force being under rule 6.
So much so, the various groups can claim permanency only in terms of that proportion, although not being holder of a permanent post neither debars membership of the Service nor earning the benefit of officiating service for purposes of seniority.
[470B C] While temporary and permanent posts have great relevancy in regard to the career of the government servants, keeping posts temporary for long, sometimes by annual renewals for several years and denying the claims of the incumbents on the score that their posts are temporary, makes no sense and is arbitrary especially when both temporary and permanent appointees are functionally identified.
If, in the normal course, a post is temporary in the real sense and the appointee knows that his tenure cannot exceed the post in longevity, there cannot be anything unfair or capricious in clothing him with no right.
Not so, if the post is, for certain departmental or like purposes, declared temporary, but it is within the ken of both the government and the appointee that the temporary posts are virtually long lived.
It is irrational to reject the claim of the temporary appointee on the nominal score of the terminology of tho post.
[462 D] Officiating service in a post is for all practical purposes of seniority as good as service on a regular basis.
It may be permissible, within limits, for government to ignore officiating service and count only regular service when claims of seniority come before it, provided the rules in that regard are clear and categoric and do not admit of any ambiguity and an arbitrary cut off of long years of service does not take place.
While rules regulating conditions of service are within the executive power of the State or its legislative power under proviso to Article 309, such rules have to be reasonable, fair and not grossly unjust if they are to survive the test of articles 14 and 16.
[462 G H] For purposes of seniority, one has to go by the order of appointment to the Service in a substantive capacity.
But no fixed connotations can be attributed to expressions like 'substantive capacity ', 'service ', 'cadre ' and the like because probation even for temporary appointees is provided for in the rules which means that even temporary appointments can be substantive.
For there cannot be probation for a government servant who is not to be absolved substantively in the Ser ice on completion thereof.
Permanency carries with it other rights than mere seniority and promotion.
Permanent posts and temporary posts are in official terminology sharply different but in the historical context of the U.P. service of Engineers there is no difference because recruitment of even temporary engineers requires consultation with the Public Service Commission, undergoing physical fitness tests, probation and 451 departmental tests.
The temporary appointees, whose appointments have received the approval of the Public Service Commission and who have run out the two years of probation must be deemed to be appointed in a substantive capacity.
[465 D E] It is not correct to say that when Engineers are appointed to temporary posts but after fulfilling all the tests for regular appointment they are not appointed in a substantive capacity.
It was concluded by the State in its counter affidavit that all the persons appointed to the service who are not already in the permanent employment of the Irrigation Department shall be placed on probation for four years (since reduced to two years), which means that persons who were not permanently appointed but only temporarily appointed are also placed on probation and officer are not put on probation unless they arc on their way to membership in the Service on completion of probation.
That is to say although they are temporary appointees, if their probation was completed and other formalities fulfilled, they become members of the service.
Merely because the person is a temporary appointee it cannot be said that he is not substantively appointed if he fulfils the necessary conditions for regular appointment such as probation and consultation with the Public Service Commission.
[466 A D] Rule 23 is the relevant rule when a question of seniority arises.
The order of appointment in a substantive capacity is the significant starting point for reckoning seniority.
The appointment in a substantive capacity need not necessarily be to a permanent post.
It is sufficient even if it is to a temporary post of long duration.
[467 E G] An appointee to a permanent post acquires certain rights which one who fills a temporary post cannot claim.
Nevertheless, when the post is not purely temporary or ad hoc or of short duration or of an adventitious nature, the holder of such temporary post cannot be degraded to the position of one, who, by accident of circumstance or for a fugitive tenure occupies the temporary post for a fleeting term.
[468 F] A person is said to hold a post in a substantive capacity when he holds it for an indefinite period, especially of long duration in contradistinction to a person who holds it for a definite or a temporary period or holds it on probation subject to confirmation.
If the appointment is to a post and the capacity in which the appointment is made is of indefinite duration, if the Public Service Commission has been consulted and has approved, if the tests prescribed have been taken and passed, if probation has been prescribed and has been approved, one may well say that the post was held by the incumbent in a substantive capacity.
[469 D E]
