Dismissing the appeal by certificate, the Court ^ HELD: (1) The trichotomy originating with the Government of India (High Court Judges) Order, 1937, continued under section 10(2) of the Independence Act, 1947 and finally adopted by the does not suffer from any legal or constitutional infirmity and, on the other hand, has the sanction of the Constitution itself.
[612 F] (2) The trichotomy is good not only because it was adopted by the Constitution till legislation was enacted under Article 221(2) thereof, but also because it was necessitated by reason of High Court Judges being drawn from three different sources, namely, Indian Civil Service, State Judicial Services and directly from the Bar.
All the High Court Judges though holding equivalent posts are thus not similarly situated, particularly in regard to the payment of pension and other retirement benefits.
The classification so made is a reasonable classification based on intelligible differentia having a proper nexus to the object to be achieved and there is thus no question of any violation of Articles 14, 221 and 314 of the Constitution.
[610 H 611 A, C; 612F] (3) It is a cardinal principle of interpretation of statutes that the legislature does not use meaningless language and that every word used by it must be presumed to have some meaning even though the phraseology employed may sometimes be obscure or ambiguous.
[608 F] The expression "who is a member of the Indian Civil Service" appearing in clause (a) of section 15 of the 1954 Act cannot be just ignored as being inapplicable to an existing situation and thus rendered otiose.
What was meant was to describe as a class High Court Judges who had earlier been members of the Indian Civil Service so that they could be distinguished from High Court Judges who had not been such members.
Although the Indian Civil Service ceased to function as a Service of the Secretary of State for India after the 15th of August 1947 when the 1947 Act was enforced, its members were automatically appointed to corresponding posts under the Crown in connection with the affairs of the Dominion of India or of a Province by virtue of the provisions of sub clause (1) of clause 7 of the India (Provisional Constitution) Order, 600 1947.
The Indian Civil Service was not abolished in so many words and on the other hand, its members were given the right to continue in service on and after the 15th August, 1947 under the same conditions of service as were applicable to them immediately before that date as made out by sub sections (1) and (2) of section 10 of the 1947 Act.
[608 G 609A, C D] All that sub section (1) enacted was that the provisions of the Government of India Act, 1935 ceased to operate in relation to appointments to the civil services of, and civil posts under, the Crown in India, by the Secretary of State but sub section (2) fully preserved the rights of and conditions of service applicable to holders of appointments already made by the Secretary of State, the only difference being that in place of the Secretary of State the employers of the incumbents became the respective Governments concerned.
[610 B C] (4) The second proviso to section 14 of the 1954 Act has no application to the appellant inasmuch as he was not in actual receipt of a pension for his services in the Indian Civil Service under proviso to para 10 of Part D of second Schedule to the Constitution as added by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956.
The appellant having accepted appointment as a High Court Judge in continuation of his service as a District Judge, he never became entitled to pension for the period preceding his elevation to the Bench.
Further he did not claim such a pension until the Accountant General requested him to indicate his option in accordance with the proviso to section 15 of the 1954 Act.
The claim to two pensions, therefore, is inadmissible.
[611E, H, 612D]
