Dismissing the Revenue appeal by special leave, the Court ^ HELD: (1) The credit entries made in the books of a statutory agent do not by themselves amount to receipt by assessees who are non residents as long as the amounts so credited in their favour are not at their disposal or control.
[592 F] The non resident assessees in this case neither received nor could be deemed to have received the sums in question when their accounts with the statutory agent were credited, since a credit balance without more only represents a debt and a mere book entry in the debtor 's own books does not constitute payment which will secure discharge from the debt.
They cannot, therefore, be charged to tax on the basis of receipt of income actual or constructive in the taxable territories during the relevant accounting period.
[592 F G] P. V. Raghava Reddi & Anr.
vs Commissioner of Income tax [1962] Supp. 2 S.C.R. 596, distinguished.
(2) Under clause (a) of the Explanation to clause (i) of sub section (1) of section 9 of the Income Tax Act.
in the case of the business of which all the operations are not carried out in India, the income of the business deemed under that clause to accrue or arise in India shall be only such part of the income as is reasonably attributable to the operations carried out in India.
If all such operations are carried out in India, the entire income accruing therefrom shall be deemed to have accrued in India.
If, however, all the operations are not carried out in the taxable territories, the profits and gains of business deemed to accrue in India through and from business connection in India shall be only such profits and gains as are reasonably attributable to that part of the operations carried out in the taxable territories.
If no operations of business are carried out in the taxable territories, it follows that the income accruing or arising abroad through or from any business connection in India cannot be deemed to accrue or arise in India.
[593 B D] 588 In the instant case the non resident assessees did not carry on any business operations in the taxable territories.
They acted as selling agents outside India.
The receipt in India of the sale proceeds of tobacco remitted or caused to be remitted by the purchasers from abroad does not amount to an operation carried out by the assessees in India as contemplated by clause (a) of the Explanation to section 9(1)(i) of the Act.
The commission amounts which were earned by the non resident assessees for services rendered outside India cannot, therefore, be deemed to be incomes which have either accrued or arisen in India.
[593 E G] Commissioner of Income tax, Punjab vs R. D. Aggarwal & Co. & Anr. and M/s. Carborandum Co. vs C.I.T. Madras ; , referred to.
