The appellant University offered integrated 5 years programme of study leading to the award of M.A. degree in several disciplines and languages.
The programme was spread over ten semesters in 5 academic years.
The courses in the discipline in which a student was formally registered were known as the 'core courses ' while the other courses for which also the student had to prescribe were known as 'tool courses ' and 'optional courses '.
The respondent was a student of the five year integrated programme of study in the Master of Arts degree in Russian Language at the appellant University.
In the first two semesters, he failed to take the sessional test in any of the 'core courses ' in Russian and consequently he was not allowed to sit for the end semester examinations.
He, however, appeared for the examinations in the 'tool courses ' and the 'optional courses ' in the first two semesters.
In the third semester the respondent requested permission of the University to repeat the courses of the first semester so as to enable him to pass them.
The University permitted him to do so but he failed in all the five courses in which he was permitted to do so.
Dissatisfied with his performance the Centre of Russian Studies recommended to the Board of Studies that the respondent 's name be struck off the rolls and his name was accordingly removed from the rolls.
The High Court, allowed the respondent 's writ petition on the ground that: (1) no opportunity to show cause was given to him before his name was struck off the rolls, and (2) that the University did not apply its mind to the question whether the respondent 's performance was unsatisfactory.
In the appeal to this Court on the question: whether the respondent was entitled to an opportunity of being heard, before removing him from the rolls of the University.
Allowing the appeal: ^ HELD: 1.
In the absence of allegations of bias or mala fides, the declaration by an academic body that a student 's academic performance is unsatisfactory is not liable to be questioned in a Court on the ground that the student was not given an opportunity of being heard.
[623 E F] This is not a case of expulsion pursuant to a claim by the authorities of a University to discipline the student at their discretion and the right of the 619 student to freedom and justice.
The case is merely one of assessment of the academic performance of a student which the prescribed authorities of the University are best qualified and the Courts are least qualified to judge.
[623 A B] Herring vs Templemen & Ors. & 584; Regina vs Aston University Senata referred to.
