The Indian Oil Corporation was a manufacturer of naphtha with its works at Barauni in Bihar while the 5th respondent was a manufacturer of fertilizers with its factory at Kanpur.
The Indian Oil Corporation supplies naphtha to the 5th respondent 's fertilizer factory at Kanpur through a pipeline.
Both the buyer and the seller have their offices at Kanpur and indents are addressed by the buyer to the seller at their Kanpur office.
The pipeline from Barauni to the petitioner 's depot at Kanpur has been constructed by the petitioner, the pipeline between the buyer 's and the seller 's fences is however constructed by the buyer, the 5th respondent.
On the question whether the sale of naphtha should be taxed under the Central Sales Tax Act or under the U.P. Sales Tax Act, the U.P. authorities insisted that since the indent had been placed by the buyer on the seller at their Kanpur Office the sale was a local sale while the sale tax authorities in Bihar insisted that since there was transfer of goods from one State to another the sale was inter State chargeable to tax under the Central Sales Tax Act.
Allowing the petition, ^ HELD: On the facts of the present case the sales are clearly inter State sales and the State of U.P. had no jurisdiction to assess the petitioners to sales tax under the State Act.
As the movement of naphtha commences from Barauni in Bihar the sales tax payable on the sales under the agreement can be assessed and collected only by the authorities in the State of Bihar on behalf of the Government of India in view of section 9 of the Central Sales Tax Act.
[680E] It is now well settled by a series of decisions of this Court that a sale shall be an inter State sale under section 3(a) if there is a contract of sale preceding the movement of goods from one State to another and the movement is the result of a covenant in the contract of sale or is an incident of that contract; in order that a sale may be regarded as an inter State sale it is immaterial whether the property in the goods passes in one State or another.
[678H 679A] 674 Tata Iron & Steel Co. Ltd. vs section R. Sarkar ; ; Kelvinator of India Ltd. vs State of Haryana ; ; Oil India Ltd. vs Superintendent of Taxes ; Balabhagas Hulaschand vs State of Orissa ; ; Union of India vs K. G. Khosla & Co. (P) Ltd. [1979] 3 SCR 453, referred to.
The terms of the agreement make it quite clear that the sales of naphtha to the respondent were inter State sales.
The source of supply is the seller 's refinery at Barauni in Bihar and the destination is the buyer 's factory at Kanpur.
This clause alone is sufficient to prove that the sales in question were inter State sales.
[679B C] Clause 3(iii) of the agreement which says that the naphtha shall be supplied against indents in writing addressed to the seller at their installation at Kanpur cannot be read in isolation.
Sub clause (iv) of clause 3 sets out the details of the buyer 's requirement for the first four years and thereafter.
Under clause 8 Indian Oil Corporation are bound not only to bring the contractual quantity of naphtha from Barauni to the seller 's Kanpur installation but also to provide at their own cost storage facilities at Kanpur of a capacity equivalent to not less than 30 days ' requirement of the buyer.
The indents are therefore not outside the agreement but are relatable to the buyer 's requirements under the agreement.
It is obvious that the sales under the agreement are not possible without inter State movement of naphtha.
Clause 3 read with clause 8 also proves that really there are no two movements but only one movement from Barauni to Kanpur pursuant to the contract of sale and the arrangement regarding storage facilities provided in clause 8 is only for operational convenience, it is only a mechanism devised to facilitate the transfer of naphtha through the seller 's pipeline to their depot at Kanpur and from there to the buyer 's factory at Kanpur through the pipeline constructed at the buyer 's cost.
It is relevant in this connection to note that under clause 7(ii) the cost of transferring naphtha from Barauni to the buyer 's fence is to be borne by the buyer.
[679G H; 680A C]
