A decree, according to section 38 of the Code of Civil Procedure, may be executed either by the Court which passed it or by the Court to which it is sent for execution.
Section 39(1)(d) provides that the Court which passed a decree may, on the application of the decree holder, send it for execution to another Court of competent jurisdiction, if the Court, which passed the decree, considers for any other reason, which it shall record in writing, that the decree should be executed by such other Court.
Section 42 of the Code, which indicates the powers of the transferee Court for executing the transferred decree, before its amendment in 1954, provided that the Court executing the decree sent to it, shall have the same powers in executing such decree "as if it had been passed by itself." After the amendment the words "as the Court which has passed it" were substituted for the words "as if it has been passed by itself".
Section 3 of the U.P. Civil Laws (Reform and Amendment) Act saved certain rights already acquired or accrued.
In February, 1953 the brother of appellant No. 1 obtained a decree from the Court of Small Causes which on his application under section 39 of the Code, was transferred to the Court of Munsif in January, 1955 and put into execution after the U.P. (Amendment) Act XXIV of 1954 had come into force.
In the sale the decree holder himself purchased the land in July, 1956 and took possession of the property.
He later sold the property to defendant nos.
2 to 5.
The suit of respondent No. 1 for a declaration that the sale in favour of appellant No. 1 was without jurisdiction and therefore a nullity was dismissed by the trial Court.
On appeal the Additional Commissioner held that the executing court had no jurisdiction to sell the suit land under section 42 of the C.P.C. as amended by the U. P. Civil Laws (Amendment) Act, 1954 Dismissing the appeal, the Board of Revenue held that the auction sale in pursuance of the decree of the Judge, Small Causes Court was void and did not invest the decree holder purchaser with any title.
733 On the appellant 's writ petition a single Judge of the High Court quashed the judgment of the Revenue Board as well as of the Additional Commissioner holding that the execution sale of the land was proper under section 42 of the Code, that prior to its amendment by the U. P. Civil Laws (Amendment) Act, 1954, the executing court had the same powers in relation to execution as it would have had if the decree had been passed by itself and the decree having been passed prior to the amendment of section 42 this section did not apply and the decree should have been executed in accordance with the provisions of section 42 prior to its amendment.
On appeal a Full Bench of the High Court (by majority) held that since the Small Causes Court had no power to execute the decree by attachment and sale of immovable property, the Munsif 's Court to which the decree was transferred for execution, possessing the same powers as the Small Causes Court, had no jurisdiction to execute the decree by attachment and sale of the immovable property.
It was contended before this Court on behalf of the decree holder that he had acquired a substantive right to get the decree of the Court of Small Causes transferred to the Court of Munsif for execution and thereafter to have it executed by the transferee court in any of the modes provided in section 51 C.P.C. and this two fold substantive right having accrued to him before the coming into force of the 1954 Amendment, it was saved by section 3 of this Amendment Act.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1 (a) Under section 39(1)(d) a decree holder has no indefeasible substantive right to get his application for transfer of a decree to another Court ipso facto accepted by the Court which passed it, particularly in a case which is not covered by clauses (a), (b) & (c) of that sub section.
The effect of substitution of the words "as the court which passed it" for the words "as if it had been passed by itself" was that powers of the transferee Court in executing the transferred decree became co terminus with the powers of the Court, which passed it.
Therefore, if the power of the transferor Court to execute its own decree were in any respect restricted, the same restriction would attach to the powers of the transferee Court in executing the transferred decree notwithstanding the position that the powers of the transferee Court in executing its own decree were not so restricted.
[739E; 740C D] (b) The opening words of section 51 (subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed) put it beyond doubt that there is no wide or unrestricted jurisdiction to order execution or to claim execution in every case in all the modes indicated therein.
The High Court (per majority) was right in construing it to mean that the powers of the executing court under this section are not subject to the other conditions and limitations enacted in the other sections of the Code.
Although ordinarily a decree holder has an option to choose any particular mode for execution of his money decree it may not be correct to say that the Court has absolutely no discretion to place any limitation as to the mode in which the decree is to be executed.
[742G, 743A B] In the instant case, the decree holder 's right to make an application for transfer of his decree under section 39(1)(d) is a mere procedural right.
The Court of Small Causes could, in its discretion for reasons to be recorded, 734 refuse to transfer it to the Court of Munsif.
In other words the decree holder had no vested or substantive right to get the decree transferred to the Court of the Munsif for execution.
[743F G] (c) The well settled principle in regard to the retrospective operation of statutes is that as a general rule, a statute which takes away or impairs substantive rights acquired under the existing law is construed to have a prospective operation unless the language of that statute expressly or by inevitable intendment compels a contrary construction.
But this presumption as to prospective operation of a statute does not apply to an enactment affecting procedure or practice such as the Code of Civil Procedure because no person has a vested right in any course of procedure.
[741 B C] 2.(a) The High Court was right in holding that the provisions of section 51 are merely procedural in character.
A decree holder gets a right to execute the decree only in accordance with the procedure provided by the law in force at the time when execution is sought.
If a mode of procedure different from the one which obtained at the date of passing of the decree has been provided by law, the decree holder is bound to proceed in execution according to the altered procedure.
[744A B] (b) The Amendment Act XXIV of 1954 had taken away the power of transferee Court to execute the transferred decree by attachment and sale of the immovable property by making it co terminus with that of the transferor Court (the Small Cause Court) and in view of the prohibition contained in Order 21 Rule 82 C.P.C. it had no power to execute its decree by sale of immovable property.
That being the position, the Court of the Munsif to which the decree had been transferred for execution had no jurisdiction to order sale of the immovable property of the judgment debtor.
The sale ordered by the Munsif in execution of the decree of the Court of Small Causes transferred to him was, therefore, wholly without jurisdiction and a nullity.
[744 B D] Kiran Singh vs Chaman Paswan, ; referred to.
