Section 3D of the U. P. Sales Tax Act, 1948 provides for the levy of a tax on the turnover of purchase of goods by a dealer.
Sub section (4) provides that on the issue of a notification under sub section (1), no tax shall be levied under any other section in respect of the goods included in the notification.
In 1971 section 3F was included in the Act providing for the levy of additional tax on certain dealers.
The section provides that every dealer liable to pay tax under section 3D (among others) whose total turnover exceeds rupees two lakhs would in addition to the said tax be liable to pay for that assessment year an additional tax at the rates specified therein subject to the other provisions of the section.
Section 10 of the U. P. Krishi Utpadan Adhiniyam, 1964 provides no levy or realisation of any trade charges other than those prescribed by rules or byelaws made under the Adhiniyam in respect of transactions of sale or purchase of specified agricultural produce.
Section 17(iii)(b) empowers the market committee to levy market fees and to utilize such market fees collected by it under that section for purposes of the Adhiniyam.
Before the amendment of the provision by U. P. Act No. 7 of 1978, it specifically provided that market fee payable on transactions of sale or purchase of specified agricultural produce in the market area should be paid by the purchaser.
After the amendment which was brought into force with retrospective effect from June 12, 1973, market fees payable on transactions of sale or purchase of agricultural produce within the market area can be realized by the Market Committee from the Commission agent who is authorized to realize the same from the purchaser by virtue of section 17(iii)(b)(1).
The rules and bye laws made under the Act also provide that a commission agent shall not realise any commission higher than that prescribed by law.
The Sales Tax Officer included the market fee and commission (dami) payable to the commission agent operating within a market area established under the U. P. Krishi Utpadan Mandi Adhiniyam, 1964 in the turnover of purchases 708 of the appellant for the purposes of levy of sales tax under section 3D of the U. P. Sales Tax Act, 1948: On appeal by the appellant the Assistant Commissioner (Judicial) Sales Tax upheld the order of the Sales Tax Officer.
In an earlier case the High Court upheld the inclusion of the market fee and the commission (dami) in the purchases turnover for the purposes of levy of sales tax and therefore, the appellant was granted special leave to appeal to this Court directly from the order of the Assistant Commissioner.
Before this Court, it was contended that (i) it was not open to the Assessing Authority to demand any additional tax under section 3F in view of the provisions contained in section 3D(4)(ii).
The market fee paid on transactions of sale or purchase of specified agricultural produce in the market area could not under the Adhiniyam, be included in the turnover of purchases for the purposes of levy of tax under the Sales Tax Act.
(iii) The commission (dami) payable by a purchaser of goods to the commission agent, being a trade charge could not also be included in the turnover of purchases.
^ HELD: 1.
There is no substance in the contention that additional tax levied under section 3F could not be levied in respect of turnover of purchases of goods notified under section 3D(1) of the Sales Tax Act.
Although, section 3D(4) says that in respect of turnover of purchases of goods notified under section 3D(1), no tax can be levied under any other provisions, section 3F introduced in 1971 provides, that every dealer liable to pay tax under section 3D whose total turnover of sales or of purchases, or of both in any assessment year exceeds rupees two lakhs would, in addition to the said tax, pay for that assessment year an additional tax at the rate specified therein.
[714F, B C].
Since section 3D is expressly mentioned in section 3F, this section overrides section 3D(4), and that additional tax can be collected even in respect of turnover of purchases of goods notified under section 3D(1) notwithstanding section 3D(4).
[714D].
It cannot be said that by enacting sub section 4 of section 3D the legislature has forfeited its power to levy any other tax under the Act on the goods notified under section 3D(1) for ever.
It is always open to the legislature to modify the effect of section 3D(4) by subsequent legislation.
[714E].
The contention of the appellant that market fee payable under the Adhiniyam cannot be included in the turnover of purchases must be upheld.
Where a dealer is authorised by law to pass on any tax payable by him on transaction of sale to the purchaser, such tax does not form part of the consideration for the purposes of levy of tax on sale or purchases but where there is no statutory provision authorising the dealers to pass on tax to the purchaser, such tax does form part of the consideration when he includes it in the price and realises the same from the purchaser.
The distinguishing factor between the two is the existence of a statutory provision authorising a dealer to recover the tax payable on the transaction of sale from the purchaser.
[718D, 716D E].
The use of the word, "may" in section 17(iii)(6)(1) providing that the commission agent may realise the market fee from the purchaser is not of much consequence.
The seller or the commission agent who is liable to pay the tax or the fee is entitled statutorily to realise it from the purchaser and wherever a dealer is authorised by law to do so, the tax or fee realised by him from the purchaser cannot be treated as part of the turnover for the purpose of levy of sales tax.
[718B C].
709 M/s. George Oakes (P) Ltd. vs State of Madras ; , Delhi Cloth and General Mills Co. Ltd. etc.
vs Commissioner of Sales Tax, Indore, [1971] Supp.
S.C.R. 945, Paprika Ltd. & Anr.
vs Board of Trade , Love vs Norman Wright (Builders) Ltd. referred to.
Joint Commercial Officer, Division 11, Madras 2 etc.
vs Spencer & Co. etc.
[1975] Supp.
S.C.R. 439 applied.
There is no force in the appellant 's contention that the commission (dami) payable by the purchaser on goods to the commission agent operating within a market area established under the Adhiniyam cannot be treated as forming part of the turnover of purchases because a conspectus of the provision of the Adhiniyam and rules made thereunder and the bye laws of Market Committee shows that a commission agent cannot realise any commission higher than what is prescribed by law.
The commission chargeable by the commission agent is not a sum which he has in his turn to pay to an authority either by way of tax or by way of fee but is only a reward for the services rendered by him.
[718E, 719 C D]
