The appellant firm M/s. Kishinchand Chellaram was assessed to tax for the assessment year 1947 48, the relevant accounting year being the year ending 6th April, 1947.
The concerned Income Tax Officer on an information that a sum of Rs. 1,07,350 purported to have been sent by the assessee by a telegraphic transfer through the Punjab National Bank Ltd., Madras, to its Bombay Branch favouring one Nathirmal on 16 10 1946, has escaped assessment, called upon the assessee, through his letters dated 24th February, 1955 and 4th March, 1955 to explain the same.
The Income Tax Officer did not refer to the letters dated 14th January, 1955 and 10th February, 1955 addressed by him to the Bank Manager nor the reply of the Manager dated 18th February, 1955 in the said two letters addressed to the assessee.
Nor were the copies supplied to the assessee nor even made available on record before all authorities including the Supreme Court.
The assessee through its letter dated 24th March, 1955 replied that as per its records no such remittance was ever sent by it from Madras to Nathirmal in Bombay.
On 2nd February, 1956, the Income Tax Officer for the second time called the very same particulars to which the assessee by its letter dated 9th February, 1956 once again denied the remittance by it.
Despite this, by his letter dated 4th March, 1957 addressed to the assessee, the Income Tax Officer repeated his earlier request to it to explain about the remittance, complaining at the same time of silence by the assessee to his letter dated 2nd February, 1956.
The assessee in its reply dated 13th March, 1957 while inviting attention to its earlier replies dated 24th March, 1955 & 9th February, 1956 reiterated that no amount of Rs. 1,07,350 was remitted by it from Madras to Nathirmal.
Disbelieving it, the Income Tax Officer, by his order brought to tax the amount of Rs. 1,07,350 on the ground that it represented the concealed income of the assessee and observed that "there was no reason to doubt the banker 's statement that the amount was remitted by M/s. Kishinchand Chellaram from Madras".
The assessee preferred an appeal to the Assistant Appellate Commissioner.
At this stage, it came to light that the purported telegraphic transfer was applied for by one "Tilok Chand C/o M/s. K. Chellaram, 181, Mount Road, Madras" and it was received at Bombay by one "N.B. Bani".
In spite of the plea of the assessee that the transaction did not relate to its firm, the Assistant Appellate 721 Commissioner holding that the assessee has not discharged the burden of proof lying on it to explain the amount, rejected the appeal.
Further appeal to the Tribunal and a reference called for by the High Court at the instance of the assessee was also answered against it.
Hence the appeal after obtaining special leave of the Court.
Allowing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: (1) There was no material evidence at all on the basis of which the Tribunal could come to the finding that the amount of Rs. 1,07,350 was remitted by the assessee from Madras and that it represented the concealed income of the assessee.
[731E].
In the face of the application for remittance signed in the name of Tilok Chand, that this amount was sent by the assessee and the finding to that effect reached by the Tribunal is unreasonable and perverse.
What at the highest could be said to be established by the material evidence on record is that Tilok Chand remitted the amount of Rs. 1,07,350 from Madras and this amount was received by Nathirmal in Bombay.
Even if it is accepted that Tilok Chand and Nathirmal were employees of the assessee as held by the Tribunal, the utmost that could be said is that an employee of the assessee in Madras remitted the amount of Rs. 1,07,350 to another employee in Bombay.
But, from this premise it does not at all follow that the remittance was made by the employee in Madras on behalf of the assessee or that it was received by the employee in Bombay on behalf of the assessee.
The burden was on the Revenue to show that the amount of Rs. 1,07,350 said to have been remitted from Madras to Bombay belonged to the assessee and it was not enough for the Revenue to show that the amount was remitted by Tilok Chand, an employee of the assessee, to Nathirmal, another employee of the assessee.
It is quite possible that Tilok Chand had resources of his own from which he could remit the amount of Rs. 1,07,350 to Nathirmal.
It was for the Revenue to rule out this possibility by bringing proper evidence on record, for the burden of showing that the amount was remitted by the assessee was on the Revenue.
[730H 731D] The two documents viz. the letters dated 18th February, 1955 and 9th March, 1957 did not constitute any material evidence which the Tribunal could legitimately have taken into account for the purpose of arriving at the finding that the amount of Rs. 1,07,350 was remitted by the assessee from Madras to Bombay because while the former was not disclosed to the assessee by the Revenue Authorities till the hearing before the Tribunal in regard to the preparation of the supplemental statement of the case, giving the assessee an opportunity to cross examine the Manager of the Bank, the latter was not disclosed to the assessee at any stage.
Further, there is no explanation given by the Revenue as to how these two important documents were not traceable earlier.
Even if these two letters were to be taken into account, they did not supply any reasonable basis for reaching the finding that it was the assessee which sent the remittance of Rs. 1,07,350.
There can be no doubt that if the amount had been remitted by Tilok Chand on behalf of the assessee he would have signed the application for telegraphic transfer on behalf of the assessee and not in his own name.
This apart it is impossible to believe that the Manager of the Bank could have failed to appear before the Income Tax Officer in answer to the summons dated 5th March, 1957 and there is no doubt that this statement must have been recorded and the said statement also withheld.
[729H 730A; 729B, C; 730B, E; 729F G] 722 (2) It is true that the proceedings under the Income Tax law are not governed by the strict rules of evidence and therefore it might be said that even without calling the Manager of the Bank in evidence to prove this letter, it could be taken into account as evidence.
But before the Income Tax Authorities could rely upon it, they were bound to produce it before the assessee so that the assessee could controvert the statements contained in it by asking for an opportunity to cross examine the Manager of the Bank with reference to the statements made by him.
Moreover, this letter was said to have been addressed by the Manager of the Bank to the Income Tax Officer on 18th February, 1955 in relation to a remittance alleged to have been sent on 16th October, 1946 and it is impossible to believe in the absence of any evidence to that effect, that the Manager who wrote this letter on 18th February, 1955 must have been incharge of the Madras Office on 16th October, 1946 so as to have personal knowledge as to who remitted the amount of Rs. 1,07,350.
The Revenue authorities ought to have called upon the Manager of the Bank to produce the documents and papers on the basis of which he made the statements contained in his letter and confronted the assessee with those documents and papers but instead of doing so, the Revenue authorities chose to rely merely on the statements contained in the letter and that too, without showing the letter to the assessee.
[728A F]
