The appellant company manufactures machine tools at its factory in Faridabad employing 250 workmen including the second respondent, Sadhu Singh.
Demands of the workmen for an improvement in the conditions of the service led to conciliation proceedings and a settlement under section 12 was recorded on June 20, 1969 by the Conciliation officer.
The settlement included a provision that the workmen would not raise any demand involving further financial burden on the appellant for a period of two years.
Before the expiry of that period, however, a fresh demand was raised on August 17, 1970 by the General Labour Union asking for dearness allowance at 25 per cent.
The management having refused this demand the workmen resorted to a "sit down" strike on August 26 and 27, 1970.
The second respondent Sadhu Singh was charged with alleging serious misconduct.
Sadhu Singh did not participate in the inquiry.
Accepting the report submitted by the Inquiry officer that Sadhu Singh was guilty of instigating the workmen to go on strike the services of Sadhu Singh were terminated by the management with immediate effect by an order dated September 14, 1970.
The management dismissed some other workmen also.
The dismissal of all workmen formed the subject of another settlement under section 12 of the Act dated November 21, 1970 and it was agreed that the dismissed workmen including Sadhu Singh should be regarded as retrenched from service.
The remaining workmen agreed to resume work unconditionally.
Sadhu Singh, took up the matter before the Labour Court stating that not being a signatory to the settlement of November 21, 1970 he was not bound by it.
The Labour court accepted his plea and made its ward on September 30, 1972.
It found that the domestic inquiry was not proper inasmuch as notice of the inquiry had failed to reach Sadhu Singh, thereby preventing him from participating in the domestic inquiry.
Further it held that since Sadhu Singh had been ill from August 24, to September 9, 1970 he could not be said to have instigated the strike.
The appellant having failed before the High Court has come in appeal after obtaining special leave from this Court.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: Section 36 of the provides for representation of the parties to a dispute.
The workmen are entitled by virtue of sub section (1) to be represented in a proceeding under the Act by a member of the executive or other office bearer of a registered trade union of which 769 they are members or of a federation of trade unions to which that trade union is affiliated, and where the workmen is not a member of any trade union, he can be represented by a member of the executive or other office bearer of a trade union connected with, or by any other workman employed in the industry in which the workmen is employed.
It is not obligatory, however, that a workman who is a party to a dispute must be represented by another.
He may participate in the proceeding himself.
Where conciliation proceedings are taken and a settlement is reached, it is a valid settlement and binding on the parties even if the workmen who are party to the dispute participate in the proceedings personally and are not represented by any of the persons mentioned in section 36(1) of the Act.
In the present case; (1) by executing a memorandum the several workmen who individually signed it on 21st August, 1970 bound themselves by the terms of the settlement, but as Sadhu Singh had not signed the memorandum nor had he authorised any of the workman to sign the memorandum on his behalf he was not bound by the settlement.
(2) The settlement of 21st November, 1970 can on no account be understood as covering and concluding the demand for recalling the order dismissing Sadhu Singh, as his reinstatement was never included in the charter of demands of the workmen which led to the conciliation proceedings and those proceedings did not involve the consideration of such a demand.
In the circumstances, it was open to Sadhu Singh to assail his dismissal from service and to contend that the settlement of 21st November 1970 did not bind him.
(3) The Labour Court was right in adjudicating on the propriety of his dismissal and, having found that the dismissal was not justified, in granting relief.
[771 F 772E]
