The appellants terminated the lease of the suit lands by a notice dated 26th February, 1944 and allowed the lessee company "Narain Das Lachman Das Oil Mill" time till 30th June, 1944 for the removal of machinery, stores, buildings and other constructions in terms of clause (6) of the lease deed dated 2nd June, 1941.
The company not only secured an order from a Civil Court forbidding the appellants from ejecting it, but applied to the State Government for compulsory acquisition of the suit land.
In the land acquisition proceedings, the claim of the appellants "for the machinery, stores, buildings and other constructions made by the lessee" by virtue of automatic vesting in the appellants in terms of clause (6) of the lease deed dated 2nd June, 1941 and also, pursuant to notice of termination, was negatived.
Having failed before the District Court and the High Court to obtain the relief, the appellants obtained special leave of the Supreme Court.
Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: (1) Although the lessee continued to remain in the premises after the expiry of the notice terminating the lease, yet by force of the express recitals in clause (6) of the lease deed dated 2nd June, 1941, the buildings, etc., became the property of the lessors.
Therefore, after the Government acquired the property it was bound to pay compensation to the appellants not only for the land but also for the buildings and structures thereon.
[821H; 822A] (2) There was no waiver of the notice by the appellants.
There is no reliable evidence at all in the instant case to show the exact date when the rent was accepted or, at any rate, the fact that the rent was accepted between the 26th February, 1944, when the notice was sent, and the 30th June, 1944, when the Company was asked to vacate the premises.
Besides there is a finding of fact that the Company was treated as a trespasser ever since 26th February, 1944, namely, the date when the notice was given and that any rent which the appellants accepted was really not rent but mere compensation for wrongful use and occupation of the land.
[819C E] (3) It is no doubt true that section 114A of the Transfer of Property Act requires two conditions to be fulfilled before a suit for ejectment could lie (i) that a notice should be given to the lessee specifying the particular breach complained of, and (ii) that the lessee should be called upon to remedy the 816 breach.
If these conditions are fulfilled, then alone the lessor would be entitled to bring a suit for ejectment of the lessee.
Section 114A merely bars a suit for ejectment of the lessee in the instant case as the land had been acquired for the purpose of the lessee, namely, the Company, the question of filing a suit for ejectment did not arise at all.
In fact, the lessees themselves filed a suit and obtained injunction restraining the appellants from ejecting them before the land acquisition proceedings were taken in respect of the land in dispute.
Thus, the non compliance of sub section
(b) of section 114A is of no consequence so far as this particular case is concerned.
In the lease dated 2nd June, 1941, clause (6) clearly lays down that within four months after the expiry of the period of the lease the lessee would be entitled to remove the stocks and machinery.
The last part of that clause also empowers the lessor to re enter possession and acquire title to the buildings etc., that may be constructed by the lessee.
[819H; 820B D] (4) A construction of clause (h) of section 108 of the Transfer of Property Act clearly reveals that where there is a contract contrary to the provisions of that section would not apply.
In the lease dated June 2, 1941, there is not only an express clause under which the lessee was entitled to remove the stocks and materials within four months after the termination of the lease but thereafter there was another stipulation that in case the lessee failed to do so, all the buildings etc.
would become the property of the lessor.
[821A B]
