In 1950, the State Government issued a manufacturing licence renewable every year to the petitioners for the manufacture by hand of a specified number of guns per month.
The guns were however not proof tested.
After the , came into force, the government insisted that the guns manufactured should undergo proof testing.
Pursuant to that condition in 1960, the petitioners installed machinery and plant, by making substantial investment of funds.
From 1964, the Government of India, reduced the monthly quota of guns.
The petitioners in their writ petitions under Article 32 alleged that this reduction had resulted in considerable hardship to them because of the fixed overhead costs which could not be avoided.
They also alleged that though in the case of a number of other such manufacturers quotas were restored, in their cases, the Government refused to restore the quotas.
The Union of India, however, denied the allegation of arbitrariness, and stated that: (a) what was done was pursuant to the Industrial Policy Resolution of 1956 which envisioned an exclusive monopoly in the Central Government in the matter of manufacturing arms and ammunition and that in fixing the quota the manufacturing capacity of a concern was not a determining factor; (b) there is no fundamental right under Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution to carry on the manufacture of arms; and (c) there was laches on the part of the petitioners.
Allowing the writ petitions, ^ HELD: (a)(i) Any curtailment of the quota must proceed on the basis of reason and relevance.
The Government is entitled to take into consideration the requirements of current administrative policy pertinent to the maintenance of law and order and internal security.
If all relevant factors are not considered, or irrelevant considerations allowed to find place, the decision is vitiated by arbitrary judgment.
[850F; E] In the instant case the Government of India had not taken into careful consideration the several elements necessary for forming a decision on the 848 quota permissible to each of the petitioners.
That should be done and for that purpose the petitioners would be entitled to place before the Government a fresh and complete statement of their case, with supporting material, to enable the Government to reach a just decision.
[850G H] (ii) The Industrial Policy Resolution envisaged a prohibition against an increase in the quota of guns, not its curtailment.
No objection could be taken to the government 's instructions on the subject.
The other factors governing the fixation of the actual quota are the production capacity of the factory, the quality of the guns produced and the economic viability of the unit.
The Industrial Policy Resolution contains a specific commitment to permit the continuance of the factories which were functioning for several years earlier.
[850C; D E] (b) The , expressly contemplates the grant of licences for manufacturing arms and an applicant for a licence is entitled to have it considered in accordance with the terms of the statute and to press for its grant on the basis of the criteria set forth in it.
[851A B] (c) The licences are granted for specific periods with a right to apply for renewal on the expiry of each period.
Each renewal constitutes a further grant of rights and it is open to the applicant to show on each occasion that the quota governing the preceding period should be revised in the light of present circumstances.
[851C] In the instant case the petitioners had been continuously agitating for the restoration of their quota.
They are, therefore, not guilty of laches and are entitled to relief.
[851D]
