Prize Chits are one type of saving schemes.
In Prize Chits the organiser collects subscription in one lump sum or by monthly instalments spread over a specified period from the subscribers to the schemes.
Periodically, the numbers allotted to the members holding the tickets or units are put to a draw and the member holding the lucky ticket gets the prize either in cash or in the form of an article of utility, such as a motor car, scooter etc.
Once a person gets the prize, he is very often not required to pay further instalments and his name is deleted from further draws.
In case members do not get any prize, the schemes usually provide for the return of subscription paid by the members with or without an additional sum by way of bonus or premium at the end of the stipulated period.
As the flood of funds flowing through these prize chits benefited only the organisers of such schemes, and the total number of people victimised by these projects were considerable and injury to the community substantial, the Central Government set up a Study Group which went into the operation of these schemes.
The Report of the Study Group demonstrated the many sinister effects and also exposed the anti social impact upon the community by the operation of such schemes, and recommended to the State to intervene and interdict.
The Central Government thereupon undertook legislation for curbing the effect of the operation of these schemes by enacting the .
The petitioners in their writ petitions under Article 32 of the Constitution assailed the aforesaid statute: (1) contending that a package of proper safeguards would adequately protect the community, a total ban being recklessly excessive, unintelligently over broad and, therefore, unconstitutional, under Article 19(1)(g), (2) conventional chits and prize chits are substantially similar and, therefore, permission to continue 'conventional chits ' and prohibition of prize chits was discriminatory under Article 14, (3) there is a discriminatory exemp 802 tion from the operation of the prohibition in regard to those categories of prize chits which fall within section 11, and (4) the legislation being aimed at prize chits and intended to ban lotteries, would fall within the State List, Entry 34 List II and Parliament cannot enact such a law under Entry 7 of List III.
Dismissing the writ petitions, ^ HELD: (1) (i) There is a sufficient justification for undertaking legislation restricting the freedom to fleece through prize chits.
[810E].
(ii) The legislation cannot be struck down on the score of article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution.
[811F] (iii) The requirements of article 19(6) are, the reasonableness of the restriction upon the fundamental right to trade, the measure of reasonableness being the compelling need to promote the interest of the general public.
[810H] 2.
Conventional chits and prize chits are different categories with different financial features and different damaging effects.
There is, therefore, no force in the plea of violation of Article 14.
[812A] 3.
A bare reading of section 11 makes it clear that the exempted categories do not possess the vices of private prize chits.
What are exempted are prize chits and money circulation schemes promoted by or controlled by the State Governments, the Central Government, or the State Bank of India or the Reserve Bank.
Even Rural Banks and Cooperatives covered by section 11, are subject to public control.
Charitable and educational institutions are exempted only if they are notified by the State Government in consultation with the Reserve Bank.
There is, therefore, sufficient justification to justify the different classification of these items and their exemption cannot be called in question on the ground of violation of article 14.
[812G H; 813A] 4.
In pith and substance the present legislation is not one against lotteries.
It deals with a special species of contracts with sinister features, although one such feature is the award of prizes to subscribers.
While motives cannot validate or invalidate a legislation the core of the subject matter must govern competency.
[813 C D] 5.
In matters of economics, sociology and other specialised subjects, courts should not embark upon views of half lit infallibility and reject what economists or social scientists have, after detailed studies, commanded as the correct course of action.
The final word is with the Court in constitutional matters but judges hesitate to 'rush in ' where even specialists 'fear to tread '.
If experts fall out, court, perforce, must guide itself and pronounce upon the matter from the constitutional angle, since the final verdict, where constitutional contraventions are complained of, belongs to the judicial arm.
[811B C] 6.
When a general evil is sought to be suppressed some martyrs may have to suffer for the legislature cannot easily make meticulous exceptions and has to proceed on broad categorisations, not singular individualisations.
[811G] 7.
Judicial validation of a social legislation only keeps the path clear for enforcement.
Spraying legislative socio moral pesticides cannot serve any purpose unless the target area is relentlessly hit.
This legislation enacted in 803 response to expert recommendation and popular clamour is to be implemented by dynamic State Action.
[813E F] 8.
The possible hardship that bona fide prize chit promoters may suffer on account of the total prohibition clamped down by this legislation can be relieved against by the Central Government acting under Section 12.
[813F] 9.
Under Article 32 the Court 's function is not to give advisory opinion but to pronounce upon transgression of fundamental rights by State action.
[813H 814A]
