The issue whether a religious endowment is a public or a private one is a mixed question of law and fact the decision of which must depend on the application of legal concepts of a public and a private endowment to the facts found and is open to consideration by the Supreme Court.
Lakshmidhar Misra vs Bangalal ([1949] L.R. 76 I.A. 271), re ferred to.
The distinction between a private and a public endowment is that whereas in the former the beneficiaries are specific individuals, in the latter they are the general public or a class thereof.
757 Though under Hindu law an idol is a juristic person capable of holding property, and the properties endowed for the temple vest in it, it can have no beneficial interest in the endowment, and the true beneficiaries are the worshippers, as the real purpose of a gift of properties to an idol is not to confer any benefit on God, but the acquisition of spiritual benefit by providing opportunities and facilities for those who desire to worship.
Prosunno Kumari Debya vs Golab Chand Baboo ([1875] L.R. 2 I A. 145), Maharaja Jagadindra Nath Boy Bahadur vs Bani Hemanta Kumari Debi ([1904] L.R. 31 I.A. 203), Pramatha Nath Mullik vs Pradhyumna Kumar Mullik ([1924] L.R. 52 I.A. 245) and Bhupati Nath Smrititirtha vs Bam Lal Maitra ([1910] I.L.R. , referred to.
A pious Hindu who was childless constructed a temple and was in management of it till his death.
He executed a will whereby he bequeathed all his lands to the temple and made provision for its proper management.
The question was whether the provisions of the will disclosed an intention on the part of the testator to dedicate the temple to the public or merely to the members of the family.
Hold that the recital in the will that the testator had no sons coupled with provisions for the management of the trust by strangers was an indication that the dedication was to the public.
Nabi Shirazi vs Province of Bengal (I.L.R. [1942] 1 Cal. 211), referred to.
Held further, that the performance of ceremonies at the con secration of the temple (Prathista), the user of the temple and other evidence in the case showed that the dedication was for worship by the general public.
