The Government of India created the Savings Bank Control Organisation and Savings Bank Check Organisation (SBCO ICO).
Amongst those who were invited to opt for service in the said organisation were UDCs in the Audit Offices, LDCs who had qualified for promotion to the UDC cadre in the Audit Offices, employees under the Post Master General and those from amongst the Time Scale Clerks in the P & T Accounts Organisation.
By a letter dated May 15, 1964 the P & T Board informed all the Heads of the Circles that the sanction of the President of India was obtained to the conversion of 10% posts in the cadre of UDCs in the SBCO ICO into Selection Grade UDCs.
But, by his letter dated May 29, 1965 addressed to all Heads of P & T Circles, the Director General, Post & Telegraphs modified the policy of reservation of 10% of the post in the cadre of UDCs in the Selection Grade by directing, that the total number of Selection Grade Posts available for the UDCs who came from the Audit offices should be 10 of the total number Audit officer UDCs working in any particular circle of the Organisation.
On January 22, 1968, the Indian Posts & Telegraphs (Clerks in Savings Bank Control and Internal Check Organisation) Recruitment Rules, 1969 were framed regulating the recruitment to the cadre of UDCs and other posts in the SBCO ICO.
Col. 10 of Item 3 of the Schedule to the Rules provides that the appointment to the Selection Grade will be made from amongst UDCs with 10 years of service in that grade in case of Audit Office Staff, or with five years ' service in that grade in case of other UDCs.
Later, the Supervisory Cadre in the SBCO ICO was recognised.
Creating a cadre of Head Clerks in place of the Selection Grade posts and fixing the number of posts in the said cadre at 20% of the posts of UDCs.
By letter dated May 16, 1965, the Director General however, clarified the position by saying that "under the new scheme the audit office UDCs will get the post of Head Clerks to the extent of 20% of their strength instead of 10% as at present.
The remaining posts of Head Clerks will go to the non audit UDCs".
972 The two petitioners who belonged to the P & T Audit Offices and had qualified the departmental examination for promotion as UDCs, joined the SBCO ICO as UDCs.
They challenged the classification of UDCs for the purposes of promotion to the Selection Grade/Head Clerks cadre on the basis of the sources from which they were drawn and the limiting of the promotional posts available to them to 10% in the case of Selection Grade post and 20% in the case of Head Clerk posts thereby resulting in promotion of their Juniors who had joined the organisation from the P & T Offices, as discriminatory, arbitrary and unreasonable.
According to them the only criterion for promotion from amongst the UDCs in the SBCO ICO could be the length of service in the cadre of UDCs, subject to fitness.
The provision in Column 10 of Item 3 of the Schedule to the Recruitment Rules of 1969 was also challenged.
The respondents argued that persons drawn from different sources were not integrated into a common service and therefore different rules of promotion could be applied to the two classes and that the directive of the Director General was aimed at further and better implementation of the Recruitment Rules.
Partly allowing the petition.
^ HELD 1.
The Directions issued by Respondent 2 by his letters dated May 16, 1975 and May 29, 1965 that UDCs drawn from the Audit offices will be eligible for promotion to the Selection Grade on the basis of 10% of the posts or to the Head Clerks cadre on the basis of 20% of the posts, held by them in SBCO ICO are quashed.
[979 E F] The petitioners and the other UDCs will be entitled equality to promotional opportunities.
They and others similarly situated as them shall be promoted to the Selection Grade/Head Clerks Cadre with effect from the dates on which they were due for promotion by applying the test of seniority cum fitness.
[979 F G] 2.
The policy adopted by respondent 2 is discriminatory and unreasonable.
Apart from the injustice in specific cases where UDCs drawn from the Audit Offices are attached to comparatively smaller circles, the classification made for the purpose of determining the promotional opportunities seems unreasonable and arbitrary.
Since under the impugned directions, the number of Selection Grade/Head Clerks has to be 10% of the number of UDCs drawn from the Audit Offices, no promotional opportunities at all would be available to them in certain circles in which less than 10 UDCs drawn from the Audit Offices are working.
These persons, for a purely fortuitous reason.
will be denied for ever all promotional opportunities.
That seems wholly indefensible.
[976G, 977B F] 3.
The duties, functions and responsibilities of all the UDCs being identical, there is no reason why different tests should be prescribed for determining their respective promotional opportunities and that too solely in reference to the source from which they are drawn.
The test of educational qualifications can conceivably be an intelligible differentia bearing nexus with the object of ensuring greater efficiency in public services.
But once a cadre is formed by recruiting persons drawn from different departments of the Government, there would normally be no justification for discriminating between them by subjecting one class to more onerous terms in the matter of promotional chances.
The impugned directives are therefore unconstitutional.
[977G H, 978A B] 973 Balakrishnan vs Comptroller & Auditor General of India, 1976 Kerala Law Times 401 & C. K. Krishnamurthy vs Director General P & T , affirmed.
V. Subramanyam vs The Director General of Posts and Telegraphs, New Delhi WP 3935/75 decided on 18th November 1978 & V. section Rajagopalan vs Post Master General WP 3796/75 decided on 24th November 1976, reversed.
4.No one can issue a direction which, in substance and effect, amounts to an amendment of the Rules made by the President under Article 309.
The Recruitment Rules of 1969 do not provide for the kind of classification which is made by the Director General by his letters to the Heads of respective Circles of the new organisation.
They only provide for classification on the basis of length of service in the new organisation.
Any directive which goes beyond it and superimposes a new criterion on the rules will be bad as lacking in jurisdiction.
[978B E] 5.
The distinction made between the two classes of UDCs, in the context of the length of their service for the purposes of promotion is not arbitrary or unreasonable.
The staff of the Audit Offices which was engaged in the Savings Bank 's work might well have faced retrenchment.
Instead of subjecting them to that hardship, they were given the option of joining the new organisation.
Experience wise also, there would appear to be fair justification for requiring them to put in longer service in the new organisation before they are eligible for promotion to the higher grade.
The provision in Col.10 of Item 3 of Schedule to the Recruitment Rules 1969 is therefore upheld.
[979C E]
