Allowing the appeal by special leave, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
The combined reading of section 68 F (1 A) and section 68 F (1 C) makes it clear that keeping in view the strength of the vehicles filed in public interest by the competent authority under section 68 F (1 A), for the period intervening between the date of publication of the scheme and the date of publication of the approved or modified scheme, the authority should first examine the application for number of temporary permits made by the Corporation.
If the Corporation has made application for temporary permits covering all tho vacancies, the authority must grant permit to the Corporation to tho exclusion of any other applicant, as section 68 F(1) makes it obligatory upon the State Transport Authority or the Regional Transport Authority, as the case may be, to grant the same.
If the Corporation does not apply for all the permits but only for some, the inescapable conclusion will be that for tho remaining strength the Corporation has made no application for the temporary permits and section 68 F (1 C) of the Act squarely being attracted, the State Transport Authority or the Regional Transport Authority, as the case may be, will have to examine the application for temporary permits made by persons other than the Corporation and if they are found to be competent eligible and qualified they may have to be granted permits for the benefit of the largo travelling public.
That is why power to increase strength of fleet operating on the route is conferred under section 68 F (1 A) of the Act and has to be exercised in public interest meaning transport facility to travelling public.
In this case there were 7 vacancies for temporary permits.
The Corporation applied for only 3.
It was incumbent upon the State Transport Authority to consider the applications of the present appellants for the remaining four vacancies and grant four permits according to law.
[986A D] 2.
The expression "any person" in section 68 F (1 C) of the would comprehend any person to mean any one other than the Corporation.
[985A B]] Section 68 F (1 C) caters to such a situation where a scheme has been published and, therefore, the Corporation would be entitled to temporary permits till the approved scheme is published, yet if tho Corporation is unable to provide vehicles for the optimum strength fixed by the State Transport 982 Authority or the Regional Transport Authority, as the case may be, the concerned authority in exercise of power conferred specifically upon it by section 68 F (1 C) can grant temporary permits to persons other than the Corporation to operate vehicles on the route for which the scheme is published till modified or approved scheme is published.
[984C E] 3.
In interpreting the provisions of Chapter IV A of it is, undoubtedly, true that the Corporation enjoys a preferential treatment in the matter of obtaining permits the authority under the Act must not ever lose sight of the fact that the primary consideration must be the service available to the travelling public.
While interpreting the provision of the , undoubtedly, the competing claims between the Corporation and the other private operators may be examined with reference to the provisions of the Act.
But the overall consideration namely the service is for the benefit of the travelling public should never be overlooked for a moment.
[985F G]
