One of the petitioners, in a telegram to one of the Judges of this Court complained of insufferable, illegal solitary confinement.
He also complained that he was kept in iron fetters alongwith the other two petitioners.
By an order of this Court, the petitioners were directed to be set free from solitary confinement and brought before the Court.
When the prisoners were brought before the Court they alleged that, while in transit, violence had been used by the escort police on the person of one of the petitioners resulting in deep wounds on his person.
The Superintendent of Prisons who was present in the Court was directed to take special care of the prisoner after giving him proper medical treatment.
Allowing the petition ^ HELD: 1.
Article 21 would become dysfunctional unless the agencies of the law in the police and prison establishments have sympathy for the humanist creed of that Article.
The State must re educate the police and , F, inculcate a respect for the human person.
If any of the escort were found to have misconducted themselves they should be given condign punishment.
[999G, D, E] 2.
By keeping the prisoners in separate solitary rooms for long periods ranging from 8 to 11 months, putting cross bar fetters for several days on the flimsy grounds of loitering in the prison, behaving insolently and in and; uncivilised manner the prison authorities have acted in utter disregard of the mandate of this Court in Sunil Batra.
[1000D E] 3.
The Jail Superintendent 's version that he had given a hearing to the prisoners before punishing them cannot be believed.
Neither section 46 of the Prisons Act nor Rule 79 of the Rajasthan Prison Rules can be read in the absolutist expansionism, the Prison Authorities would like them to be read.
That would virtually mean that prisoners are not persons to be dealt with at the mercy of the prison echelons.
Articles 14, 19 and 21 operate within the prisons in the manner explained in Sunil Batra.
A separate Cell is not different from solitary confinement.
[1001, 1002G H] (i) If special restrictions of a punitive or harsh character have been imposed for convincing security reasons, it is necessary to comply with natural justice as indicated in Sunil Batra.
There must be an appeal from a prison authority to a judicial organ when such treatment is meted out.
[1003A] 996 (ii) Section 46 of the Prisons Act and Rules 1(f) and 79 of the Rajasthan; Prison Rules are valid subject to the directions given by this Court in Rakesh Kaushik.
[1003G] (iii) The Sessions Judges in the State of Rajasthan should remember the rulings of this Court in Sunil Batra 1 and 11 and Rakesh Kaushik and act in such manner that judicial authority over sentences and the conditions of their incarceration are not eroded by judicial in action.
[1004A] Sunil Batra vs Delhi Administration ; Sunil Batra v Delhi Administration ; , Rakesh Kaushik vs B. L. Vig, Superintendents Central jail, New Delhi ; applied.
