The respondent claimed that since there were mutual dealings between her and the company in liquidation an account should be taken in respect of such mutual dealings and only that amount should be payable or receivable by her which is due at the foot of such account.
She claimed that she was entitled to the benefit of the rule enacted in section 46 of the Provincial Insolvency Act.
The High Court upheld her contention.
Dismissing the special leave petition by the Official Liquidator ^ HELD: (1) In view of the provisions of section 529 of the the rule enacted in section 46 of the Provincial Insolvency Act with regard to debts provable by a creditor against the insolvent must equally apply in regard to debts provable against a company in winding up.
[350 F] (2) Although section 530 provides for preferential payments, that provision cannot in any way detract from full effect being given to section 529 which enacts that in the winding up of an insolvent company, the same rules shall prevail and be observed with regard to provable debts as are in force for the time being under the law of insolvency with respect to the estate of persons adjudged insolvent.
The only way in which sections 529 and 530 can be reconciled is by reading them together so as to provide that whenever any creditor seeks to prove his debt against the company in liquidation, the rule enacted in section 46 of the Provincial Insolvency Act should apply and only that amount which is ultimately found due from him at the foot of the account in respect of mutual dealings should be recoverable from him and not that the amount due from him should be recovered fully while the amount due to him from the company in liquidation should rank in payment after the preferential claims provided under section 530.[350H] Gore Brown on Companies, 43rd Ed.
at page 34 14.
National Westminster Bank Ltd vs Halesowen Presswork and Assemblies Ltd. [1972]1 All E. R. 641 at 659 and Re City Life Assurance Co. Ltd. at 457 referred to.
