Expressing displeasure over disregard of the decision of the Supreme Court by the State of Bihar, the Court ^ HELD: (1) The right to free legal services is clearly an essential ingredient of reasonable, fair and just procedure for a person accused of an offence and it is implicit in the guarantee of Article 21 and the State is under a constitutional mandate to provide a lawyer to an accused person if the circumstances of the case and the needs of justice so require, provided of course the accused person does not object to the provision of such lawyer.
The State should provide free legal aid to an accused person who is unable to secure legal services on account of indigence and whatever is necessary for this purpose has to be done by the State.
It cannot avoid its constitutional obligation to provide free legal services to a poor accused by pleading financial or administrative liability.
[412C D, F G] Hussainara Khatoon v State of Bihar [1979] 3 S.C.R. 532, reiterated.
Rhem vs Malcolm, ; Jackson vs Bishop , quoted with approval.
(2) The State is under a constitutional obligation to provide free legal services not only at the stage of trial but also at the stage when the accused is first produced before the magistrate as also when he is remanded from time to time.
[413C D] (3) But even this right to free legal services would be illusory for an indigent accused unless the magistrate or the Sessions Judge before whom he is produced informs him of such right.
It would make a mockery of legal aid if it were to be left to a poor ignorant and illiterate accused to ask for free legal services.
Legal aid would become merely a paper promise and it would fail of its purpose.
The magistrate or the sessions judge before whom the accused appears must be held to be under an obligation to inform the accused that if he is unable to engage the services of a lawyer on account of poverty or indigence, he is entitled to obtain free legal services at the cost of the State.
Unless he is not willing to take advantage, every other State in the country should make provision for grant of free legal services to an accused who is unable to engage a lawyer on account of reasons such as poverty, indigence or incommunicado situation.
The only qualification would be that the offence charged against the accused is such that on conviction it would result in a sentence of imprisonment and is of such a nature that the circumstances of the case and the needs of social justice require that he should be given free legal representation.
There may be cases involving offences such as economic offences or offences against law prohibiting prostitution or child abuse and the like, where social justice may require that free legal services need not be provided by the State.
[413D, E F, H, 414A B] 409 (4) The State and its police authorities should see to it that the constitutional, and legal requirement to produce an arrested person before a judicial magistrate within 24 hours of the arrest is scrupulously observed.
[414C D] (5) The provision inhibiting detention without remand is a very healthy provision which enables the magistrates to keep check over the police investigation and it is necessary that the magistrates should try to enforce this requirement and where it is found to be disobeyed come down heavily upon the police.[414F G]
