After dismissal by this Court of the petition impugning the order of his detention under section 3 of the the petitioner filed the present petition urging additional grounds which were not urged in the previous petition.
He alleged that (i) despite his request for the supply of all the documents relied upon by the detaining authority while passing the order of detention the respondent failed to do so; (ii) that many of the documents were either incomplete or had been wholly withheld and in particular 236 documents out of 460 documents purported to have been supplied to him were not supplied; (iii) that though his representation dated July 17, 1980 for revocation of the detention order was forwarded by the jailer to the Central Government it had not been disposed of and (iv) that lastly serving the grounds of detention in English which is a language not known to him, without supplying a translation in his mother tongue, was a breach of the constitutional imperative embodied in article 22(5) and that for these reasons the order of detention should be held void.
A preliminary objection was raised on behalf of the respondent State that the present petition was barred as constructive res judicata.
Overruling the preliminary objection, ^ HELD: In the present petition fresh additional grounds had been taken by the detenu to challenge the legality of his continued detention.
Therefore the subsequent writ petition is not barred as res judicata.
[359 B C] 1.
By a long line of decisions this Court has held that the application of the doctrine of constructive res judicata is confined to civil actions and civil proceedings.
This principle of public policy is entirely in applicable to illegal detentions and does not bar a subsequent petition for the writ of habeas corpus 353 under article 32 of the Constitution on fresh grounds which were not taken in the earlier petition for the same relief.
[359 A B] Ghulam Sarwar vs Union of India & Ors.
[1967] 2 S.C.R. 271, Daryao vs State of Uttar Pradesh A.I.R. 1961 SC.
1457=[1962] 1 S.C.R. 574, Niranjan Singh vs State of Madhya Pradesh ; and Calcutta Gas Co. (Proprietary) Ltd. vs State of West Bengal, A.I.R. 1965 S.C. 596 referred to. 2(a).
One of the constitutional imperatives embodied in Art 22(5) of the Constitution is that all the documents and materials relied upon by the detaining authority in passing the order of detention must be supplied to the detenu as soon as practicable to enable him to make an effective representation.
[360 G] In the instant case the materials and documents which were not supplied to the detenu were a part of the basic facts and materials which should have been supplied to him, ordinarily within 5 days of the order of detention and for exceptional reasons to be recorded, within 15 days of the commencement of the detention.
The respondent did not state that the documents which were not supplied were not relevant to the case of detenu.
[362 C] Smt.
Icchu Devi Choraria vs Union of India & Ors. ; applied.
(b) In the first petition no specific ground was taken by the detenu that documents covering 236 pages relied upon by the detaining authority were suppressed and not supplied to him.
He had now stated that he had come to know about the non supply of these documents from the judgment of the Gujarat High Court which was subsequent to the dismissal of his earlier petition.
This assertion has remained unchallenged.
[360 E F] (c) In matters touching the personal liberty of a person preventively detained, the constitutional imperative in article 22(5) is that any representation made by the detenu should be dealt with the utmost expedition which in this is has been honoured in breach.
[362 E] (d) Merely explaining the grounds of detention in the mother tongue of the detenu would not be sufficient compliance with the mandate of article 22(5) which requires that the grounds of detention must be communicated to the detenu.
"Communicate" is a strong word.
It means that sufficient knowledge of the basic facts constituting the grounds should be imparted effectively and fully to the detenu in writing in a language understood by him.
Its whole purpose is to enable him to make a purposeful and effective representation.
If the grounds are only verbally explained without giving them to him in writing in a language that he understands, its purpose is not served and the constitutional mandate is infringed.
[362G H] Haribandhu Das vs District Magistrate Cuttack & Anr. ; Smt Razia Umar Bakshi vs Union of India and Harikisan vs State of Maharashtra [1962] Supp. 2 S.C.R. 918 followed.
