Allowing the writ petition, the Court ^ HELD : (1) While considering the question of validity of conditions of detention courts must necessarily bear in mind the vital distinction between preventive detention and punitive detention.
Punitive detention is intended to inflict punishment on a person, who is found by the judicial process to have committed an offence, while preventive detention is not by way of punishment at all, but it is intended to pre empt a person from indulging in conduct injurious to the society.
[523 A B] (2) The power of preventive detention has been recognised as a necessary evil and is tolerated in a free society in the larger interest of security of the State and maintenance of public order.
It is a drastic power to detain a person without trial and in many countries it is not allowed to be exercised except in times of war or aggression.
The Indian Constitution does recognise the existence of this power, but it is hedged in by various safeguards set out in Articles 21 and 22.
Article 22 in clauses (4) to (7) deals specifically with safeguards against preventive detention and enjoins that any law of preventive detention or action by way of preventive detention taken under such law must be in conformity with the restrictions laid down by those clauses on pain of invalidation, Article 21 also lays down restrictions on the power of preventive detention.
[523 B D] Article 21 as interpreted in Maneka Gandhi 's case requires that no one shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except by procedure established by law and this procedure must be reasonable, fair and just and not arbitrary, whimsical or fanciful and it is for the Court to decide in the exercise of its constitutional power or judicial review whether the deprivation of life or personal liberty in a given case is by procedure, which is reasonable, fair and just or it is otherwise.
The law of preventive detention must, therefore, pass the test not only of Article 22 but also of Article 21.
But, despite these safeguards laid down by the Constitution and creatively evolved by the Courts.
the power of preventive detention is a frightful and awesome power with drastic consequences affecting personal liberty, which is the most cherished 517 and prized possession of man in a civilised society.
It is a power to be exercised with the greatest care and caution and the courts have to be ever vigilant to see that this power is not abused or misused, inasmuch as the preventive detention is qualitatively different from punitive detention and their purposes are different.
In case of punitive detention, the person has fullest opportunity to defend himself, while in case of preventive detention, the opportunity that he has for contesting the action of the Executive is very limited.
Therefore, the "restrictions placed on a person preventively detained must, consistently with the effectiveness of detention, be minimal".
[524A G] Maneka Gandhi vs Union of India, ; ; M.O. Hoscot vs State of Maharashtra, ; ; Hussainara Khatoon vs State of Bihar, ; ; Sunil Batra (I) vs Delhi Administration, ; ; Sunil Batra (II) vs Delhi Administration, ; , referred to.
Sampat Prakash vs State of Jammu and Kashmir, ; , followed.
The prisoner or detenu has all the fundamental rights and other legal rights available to a free person, save those which are incapable of enjoyment by reason of incarceration.
A prisoner or detenu is not stripped of his fundamental or other legal rights, save those which are inconsistent with his incarceration, and if any of these rights are violated, the Court will immediately spring into action and run to his rescue.
[525 B C, 526 G H, 527 A] Sunil Batra (I) vs Delhi Administration, ; ; Sunil Batra (II) vs Delhi Administration, ; , State of Maharashtra vs Prabhakar Sanzgire ; ; D. B. Patnaik vs State of Andhra Pradesh, ; , followed.
Eve Pall 's Case; , 41 Lawyers Edition 2nd 495; Charles Wolffs Case, 41 Lawyers Edition 2nd 935, quoted with approval.
(4) While arriving at the proper meaning and content of the right to life, the attempt of the court should always be to expand the reach and ambit of the fundamental right rather than to attenuate its meaning and content.
A constitutional provision must be construed, not in a narrow and constricted sense, but in a wide and liberal manner so as to anticipate and take account of changing conditions and purposes so that the constitutional provision does not get atrophied or fossilized but remains flexible enough to meet the newly emerging problems and challenges.
This principle applies with greater force in relation to a fundamental right enacted by the Constitution.
The fundamental right to life which is the most precious human right and which forms the ark of all other rights must therefore be interpreted in a broad and expansive spirit so as to invest it with significance and vitality which may endure for years to come and enhance the dignity of the individual and the worth of the human person.
[527 C D, 528 A C] Weems vs U.S. 54 Lawyers Edition 801, quoted with approval.
(5) The right to life enshrined in Article 21 cannot be restricted to mere animal existence.
It means something much more than just physical survival.
518 Every limb or faculty through which life is enjoyed is thus protected by Article 21 and a fortiorari, this would include the faculties of thinking and feeling.
Now deprivation which is inhibited by Article may be total or partially neither any limb or faculty can be totally destroyed nor can it be partially damaged.
Moreover it is every kind of deprivation that is hit by Article 21, whether such deprivation be permanent or temporary and, furthermore, deprivation is not an act which is complete once and for all: it is a continuing act and so long as it lasts, it must be in accordance with procedure established by law.
Therefore any act which damages or injures or interferes with the use of any limb or faculty of a person either permanently or even temporarily, would be within the inhibition of Article 21.
[528 D, G H, 529 A] Kharak Singh vs State of Uttar Pradesh, , followed.
Munn vs Illinois , referred to.
Sunil Batra vs Delhi Administration, ; , applied.
(6) The right to life includes the right to live with human dignity and all that goes along with it, namely, the bare necessaries of life such as adequate nutrition, clothing and shelter and facilities for reading, writing and expressing oneself in diverse forms, freely moving about and mixing and commingling with fellow human beings.
The magnitude and content of the components of this right would depend upon the extent of the economic development of the country, but it must, in any view of the matter, include the right to the basic necessities of life and also the right to carry on such functions and activities as constitute the bare minimum expression of the human self.
Every act which offends against or impairs human dignity would constitute deprivation pro tanto of this right to live and it would have to be in accordance with reasonable, fair and just procedure established by law which stands the test of other fundamental rights.
Therefore, any form of torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment would be offensive to human dignity and constitute an inroad into this right to live and it would, on this view, be prohibited by Article 21 unless it is in accordance with procedure prescribed by law, but no law which authorises and no procedure which leads to such torture or cruelty, inhuman or degrading treatment can ever stand the test of reasonableness and non arbitrariness: it would plainly be unconstitutional and void as being violative of Article 14 and 21.
[529 B F] (7) There is implicit in Article 21 the right to protection against torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment which is enunciated in Article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and guaranteed by Article 7 of the international Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
This right to live which is comprehended within the broad connotation of the right to life can concededly be abridged according to procedure established by law and therefore, when a person is lawfully imprisoned, this right to live is bound to suffer attenuation to the extent to which it is incapable of enjoyment by reason of incarceration.
The prisoner or detenu obviously cannot move about freely by going outside the prison walls nor can be socialise at his free will with persons outside the jail.
But, as part of the right to live with human dignity and therefore, as a necessary component of the right to life, he would be entitled to have interviews with the members of his family and friends and no prison regulation or procedure laid down by prison regulation regulating the right to have interviews with the members of the family and 519 friends can be upheld as constitutionally valid under Article 14 and 21, unless it is reasonable, fair and just.
Considered from the point of view also of the right to personal liberty enshrined in Article 21, the right to have interviews with members of the family and friends is clearly part of personal liberty guaranteed under that Article.
The expression "personal liberty" occurring in Article 21 is of the widest amplitude and it covers a variety of rights which go to constitute the personal liberty of a man and it also includes rights which "have been raised to the status of distinct Fundamental Rights and given additional protection under Article 19".
Therefore, personal liberty would include the right to socialise with members of the family and friends subject, of course, to any valid prison regulations and under Articles 14 and 21, such prison regulations must be reasonable and non arbitrary.
If any prison regulation or procedure laid down by it regulating the right to have interviews with members of the family and friends is arbitrary or unreasonable, it would be liable to be struck down as invalid as being violative of Articles 14 and 21.
[530 B E] Maneka Gandhi vs Union of India, ; , applied.
(8) Sub clause (ii) of clause 3(b) of the Conditions of Detention Order is violative of Articles 14 and 21 in so far as it permits only one interview in a month to a detenu.
When an under trial prisoner is granted the facility of interviews with relatives and friends twice in a week under Rule 559A and a convicted prisoner is permitted to have interviews with his relatives and friends, once in a week under Rule 550, sub clause (ii) of clause 3(b) of the Conditions of Detention Order, which restricts the interview only to one in a month in case of a detenu, is unreasonable and arbitrary, particularly when a detenu stands on a highest pedestal than an under trial prisoner or a convict.
A detenu must be permitted to have at least two interviews in a week with relatives and friends and it should be possible for relative or friend to have interview with the detenu at any reasonable hour on obtaining permission from the Superintendent of the Jail and it should not be necessary to seek the permission of the District Magistrate, Delhi, as the latter procedure would be cumbrous and unnecessary from the point of view of security and hence unreasonable.
Even independently of Rules 550 and 559A, of the Punjab Manual for the Superintendence and Management of Jails, the present norm of two interviews in a week for prisoners furnishes a reasonable and non arbitrary criterion.
[530 F H, 531 A B] Sampath Prakash vs State of Jammu and Kashmir, ; , applied.
(9) Sub clause (i) of clause 3(b) of the Conditions of Detention Order regulating the right of a detenu to have interview with a legal adviser of his choice is violative of Article 14 and 21 and therefore unconstitutional and void, It would be quite reasonable if a detenu were to be entitled to have interview with his legal adviser at any reasonable hour during the day after taking appointment from the Superintendent of the Jail, which appointment should be given by the Superintendent without any avoidable delay.
The interview need not necessarily take place in the presence of a nominated officer of Customs/ Central Excise/Enforcement but if the presence of such officer can be conveniently secured at the time of the interview without involving any postponement of the interview, than such officer and if his presence cannot be so secured, 520 then any other Jail official may, if thought necessary, watch the interview but in a month to a detenu.
When an under trial prisoner is granted the facility [532C F] (10) The right of a detenu to consult a legal adviser of his choice for any purpose not necessarily limited to defence in a criminal proceeding but also for securing release from preventive detention or filling a writ petition or prosecuting any claim or proceeding, civil or criminal is obviously included in the right to live with human dignity and is also part of personal liberty and the detenu cannot be deprived of this right nor can this right of the detenu be interfered with except in accordance with reasonable, fair and just procedure established by a valid law.
[531C E]
