The appellants as defendants in a suit for declaration of title to certain building sites sought to resist the respondents ' claim, arising by purchase from a purchaser in a sale in execution of a mortgage decree passed on a mortgage deed of 1918, by a counter claim based on a purchase of the same lands made in 1920 by their pre decessor in interest from one of the mortgagors against whom was then pending a suit for maintenance and for declaration of a charge on the land in suit.
That suit was decreed in 1921 and the lands were purchased by the decreeholder in execution of her decree in 1928.
The mortgagor had been adjudged an insolvent in 1926 and the Official Receiver in whom his estate vested was not made a party to the execution proceeding.
Suit to enforce the mortgage deed of 1918 was brought in 1933 impleading the Official Receiver and the purchaser in execution of the maintenance and charge decree but not the appellants.
In execution of the decree passed in this suit, the lands in suit were sold to a third party in 1936 and in 1938 the respondent 's father purchased them.
The respondent did not specifically raise the question of lis pendens in his pleading nor was an issue framed on the point, but he raised the question at the very commencement of the trial in his deposition, proved relevant documents which were admitted into evidence without any objection from the appellants who filed their own documents, cross examined the respondent and invited the court to hold that the suit for maintenance and a charge and the connected proceedings evidenced by these documents were collusive in order to avoid the operation of section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act.
The District Judge held that the appellants ' title acquired by the purchase of 1920 was extinguished by the sale held in execution of the charge decree by the operation of section 52 of the Transfer of Property 59 452 Act and decreed the suit and his decision was affirmed by the High Court in appeal.
Hold, that the decisions of the courts below were correct and must be affirmed.
That in the facts and circumstances of the case the omission of the respondent to specifically raise the question of lis pendens in his pleading did not take the appellants by surprise and was a mere irregularity which resulted in no prejudice to them.
Rani Chandra Kunwar vs Chaudhri Narpat Singh ([1906] L.R. 34 I.A. 27), applied.
Siddik Mahomed Shah vs Mt. Saran and Others (A.I.R. , explained and held inapplicable.
That section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act did not prevent the vesting of title in a transferee in a sale pendente lite but only made it subject to the rights of other parties as decided in the suit and subsequent insolvency of the transferor could not, therefore, vest any title in the Official Receiver or make the title of the execution purchaser liable to attack on the ground that the Receiver was not made a party to the execution proceeding.
That even assuming that title could not wholly pass by a transfer pendento lite and some interest would still subsist in the transferor to vest in the Receiver, the lands in suit having been sold in execution of a charge decree, the sale would at the most be not binding on him and he could, if he so chose, move to set it aside; but the transferee pendente lite or his representative could not be allowed to make his non joinder a ground for attacking the sale.
Wood vs Surr ([1854) ; , applied.
Inamullah Khan vs Shambhu Dayal (A.I.R. 1931 All. 159), Subbaiah vs Ramasami Goundan (I.L.R. and Kala Chand Banerjee vs Jagannath Marwari ([1927] L.P. 54 I.A. 190), referred to.
That no question of limitation or adverse possession really arose in the case.
It was well settled that a claim of adverse possession could not affect the right of a prior mortgagee to bring the properties to sale and adverse possession against the purchaser under that sale could not commence prior to the date of sale.
Held further, that there was a fundamental distinction bet ween a collusive and a fraudulent proceeding in that while the former was the result of an understanding between the parties, both the claim and the contest being fictitious, and the purpose to confound third parties, in the latter the contest was real, though the claim was untrue, and the purpose to injure the defendant by a verdict of the court obtained by practising fraud in it; that an admission was a mere piece of evidence and could not be conclusive except by way of estoppel when it had been acted 453 upon to his detriment by the person to whom it was made, the weight to be attached to it depending on the circumstances of each case, and the onus of proving that it was not true could not shift to the maker of it unless it was so clear and unambiguous as to be conclusive in absence of any explanation from him.
Slatterie vs Pooley, ([1840] ; and Rani Chandra Kunwari vs Choudhri Narpat Singh ([1906] L.R. 34 I.A. 27), referred to.
That the maxim that 'a person could not approbate and repro bate ' had its origin in the doctrine of election and was confined to reliefs arising out of one and the same transaction and against the parties to it.
Where, however, there was no question of election, as the relief claimed was one and the same, although based on different and inconsistent grounds, the maxim had no application.
Verschures Creameries Ltd. vs Hull and Netherlands Steamship Company Ltd. ([1921] 2 K.B. 608), considered and distinguished.
