Dismissing the State appeal on certificate, the Court ^ HELD: (1) The acquisition of land for the Food Corporation of India is not in accordance with law for the reason that compliance with the provisions of Chapter VII of the Land Acquisition Act had not been made.
[717 A B] (2) The Food Corporation of India is a Company within the meaning of the term appearing in clause (e) of section 3 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894.
Section 3 (e) mentions in unmistakable terms that a company incorporated by an Indian law would be a "Company" for the purposes of the Land Acquisition Act.
The Corporation was admittedly created by section 3 of the Food Corporation Act, 1964.
Sub section (2) of section 3 of the Food Corporation Act, 1964 is an Indian Law and clothes the Corporation with the attributes of a company.
[715A E] (3) A Government department has to be an organisation which is not only completely controlled and financed by the Government but has also no identity of its own.
The money earned by such a department goes to the exchequer of the Government and losses incurred by the department are losses of the Government.
The Corporation, on the other hand, is an autonomous body capable of acquiring, holding and disposing of property and having the power to contract.
It may also sue or be sued by its own name and the Government does not figure in any litigation to which it is a party.
It is true that its original share capital is provided by the Central Government and that 11 out of the 12 members of its Board of Directors are appointed by the Central Government but then these factors may at the most lead to the conclusion that the Corporation is an agency or instrumentality of the Central Government.
[715E H] Even the conclusion, however, that the Corporation is an agency or instrumentality of the Central Government does not lead to the further inference that the Corporation is a Government department.
The reason is that the Food Corporation Act has given the Corporation an individuality apart from that of the Government.
In any case the Corporation cannot be divested of its character as a "Company" within the meaning of the definition in clause (e) of section 3 of the Land Acquisition Act, for it completely fulfils the requirements of that clause.
[716G H, 717A B] Ramana Dayaram Shetty vs The International Authority of India and Ors., , applied.
