The two appellants who were father and son alongwith another son, who was acquitted were charged with the offence of committing the murder of the deceased and of causing injuries to his two brothers all of whom were residing in a chawl belonging to the first appellant.
The prosecution alleged that on the fateful day the appellants demanded payment of rent from the deceased and refusal to make immediate payment infuriated the second appellant who inflicted two kirpan blows on him.
When the deceased started running to the room of his brothers he was pursued and further kirpan blows were inflicted on him.
His brothers were also attacked by the three accused.
After the incident all the accused ran away from the place leaving their bicycles behind.
The deceased succumbed to his injuries in the hospital and one of his brothers was admitted as an indoor patient.
The three accused were tried by the Addl.
Sessions Judge.
As there were material contradictions in the 'eye witnesses ' account of the sequence of events, the exact places where the blows were struck, and the role played by each accused and the seizure of four bicycles by the police at the scene being inconsistent with the prosecution case that three persons, the accused were involved the Sessions Judge held the evidence to be untrustworthy and being of opinion that it was unsafe and hazardous to convict the accused on such testimony he gave them the benefit of doubt and acquitted them.
No appeal was filed at first because the State Government saw no case on the merits for an appeal.
However, in a revision petition filed by one of the brothers of the deceased the High Court declared that the case was a fit case where the State Government should file an appeal.
Thereafter, the State Government filed an appeal, in the High Court and prayed for condonation of the delay in filing the appeal.
The High Court condoned the delay considered the appeal on its merits, and allowed it against the two appellants.
The appeal against the acquittal of the third accused was dismissed.
Allowing the appeal to this Court: ^ HELD: 1(i) There was no sufficient cause for the State not filing the appeal within time, and the High Court erred in condoning the delay.
[512 F H] 510 (ii) A party is entitled to wait until the last day of limitation for filing an appeal.
But when it allows limitation to expire and pleads sufficient cause for not filing the appeal earlier, the sufficient cause must establish that because of some event or circumstance arising before limitation expired it was not possible to file the appeal within time.
No event or circumstance arising after the expiry of limitation can constitute such sufficient cause.
There may be events or circumstances subsequent to the expiry of limitation which may further delay the filing of the appeal.
But that the limitation has been allowed to expire without the appeal being filed must be traced to a cause arising within the period of limitation.
[512 G] 2(i) The High Court erred in interfering with the judgment of the trial court.
[515 D] (ii) The approach to be adopted by the High Court when exercising its appellate powers in a case of appeal against an order of acquittal has been defined in a long line of cases.
As long ago as 1934, the Privy Council declared that the High Court must give proper weight and consideration to "such matters as (1) the view of the trial judge as to the credibility of the witnesses; (2) the presumption of innocence in favour of the accused, a presumption certainly not weakened by the fact that he has been acquitted at his trial; (3) the right of the accused to the benefit of any doubt; and (4) the slowness of an appellate court in disturbing a finding of fact arrived at by a Judge who had the advantage of seeing the witnesses".
The approach has been endorsed by this Court repeatedly and in a very recent decision it has been held that if the main grounds on which the Court below has based its order acquitting the accused, are reasonable and plausible, and cannot be entirely and effectively dislodged or demolished, the High Court should not disturb the acquittal.
[514D F; H Warren Ducane Smith vs The King A.I.R. 1934 P.C.227 & Ganesh Bhavan Patel & Anr.
vs State of Maharashtra ; , referred to.
(iii) The High Court after specifically referring to the aforesaid legal position, overlooked the limitations imposed on it and embarked on a course not warranted by law.
It took into particular regard a few considerations which seemed to it to assume importance and has concentrated on some of the material only, omitting to consider in the process that the integrality of the evidence alone can ensure whether the accused are guilty.
[515A, C] In the instant case the High Court referred to the recovery of a blood stained slipper and a diary from the scene of the offence, and inferred that they belonged to the first appellant.
This connection has not been properly established.
The papers found in the diary do not necessarily show that the diary belonged to him.
Nor is there sufficient proof that the slipper is his.
[515 B] 3 The trial court wrote a careful judgment, exhaustively considering all the evidence and on painstaking analysis reached conclusion which are preeminently reasonable and support the order of acquittal.
[513 B]
