The prosecution case against the six accused (Respondents) was that prior to the incident in question, there was an altercation between the two deceased on one side and the six accused on the other over trespass of cattle of the accused persons on the land of the deceased, which damaged his cotton crop.
On the day of the incident when P.W. 2, P.W. 3 and the two deceased were going by a foot path, the six accused suddenly emerged out of a field and fired.
The two deceased fell dead, while P.W. 2 and 3 ran and escaped unhurt.
P.W. 2 reached the bus stand, picked up his motor cycle parked at a shop and drove to the nearest police station to lodge the F.I.R.
The Additional Sessions Judge found that one of the accused had a strong motive to murder one of the deceased because of an old feud and that on account of this ill will, some of the accused had a strong motive in joining hands with the others to murder the deceased, but that no motive could be established for murdering the second deceased.
He also found that the fact that the F.I.R. was lodged by P.W. 2 with the utmost promptitude furnished valuable corroboration of his evidence and also disbelieved the evidence of the police Sub Inspector (P.W. 13).
In the result he convicted all the six accused under section 302 read with section 149 I.P.C. for murder of one of the deceased and sentenced them to imprisonment.
In the case of first accused however, he was sentenced to death for the murder of one of the deceased.
All the accused appealed against their conviction and sentence to the High Court which allowed the appeal and rejected the reference.
It rejected the evidence of the eye witnesses, P.W. 2 and P.W. 3 on the ground that these witnesses were closely related to the first deceased who was the principal target of the accused and that it had not been satisfactory established by the prosecution that the other five accused had any motive to commit the murders in question.
It found that the prosecution story was highly unnatural and that the presence of the two eye witnesses alongwith the deceased persons was un 616 likely.
It further held there was material inconsistency in their testimony, as to when the first deceased and P.W. 2 had left the hamlet, and that the investigation of the case conducted by the Sub Inspector (P.W. 13) did not inspire confidence.
In the appeal by the State to this Court it was contended on behalf of the State that the reasoning of the High Court was manifestly unsound, if not wholly perverse.
The fact that the F.I.R. was lodged by P.W. 2 with utmost promptitude and all the material facts including the names of the accused and of the witnesses having been mentioned therein, indicated that there was no time to concoct a false story.
On behalf of the respondents it was submitted that the acquittal could not be disturbed, as the reasons given by the High Court could not be called perverse.
^ HELD : 1(i) The acquittal of respondent Nos. 1 and 2 are set aside and they are convicted under section 302 read with section 34 Indian Penal Code for the murder of the first deceased and sentenced to imprisonment for life.
The benefit of doubt to the rest of the accused (respondents) and their acquittal on all the counts maintained.
[636 C D] (ii) Sufficient assurance of the testimony of P.W. 2 and P.W. 3 was avail able from the circumstantial evidence regarding the participation of respondents Wasson Singh and Mukhtar Singh in the murder of deceased Hazara Singh.
The evidence of the eye witnesses therefore, could safely be acted upon for convicting these respondents for the said murder.
[635 C D] 2.
The reasons given by the High Court for holding that P.W. 2 was not an eye witness of these two murders are utterly unsustainable.
The reason that P.W. 2 had succeeded in escaping unhurt, or that there are discrepancies in the statements of P.W. 2 and P.W. 3 as to whether they had gone with the deceased on the very day of occurrence or a day earlier was no ground for the conclusion that P.W. 2 was not in the company of the deceased or near about the scene of occurrence when the two deceased were shot dead.
[626 F G] 3.
Discrepancies in regard to collateral or subsidiary facts or matters of detail occur even in the statements of truthful witnesses, particularly when they are examined to depose to events which happened long before their examination.
Such discrepancies are hardly a ground to reject the evidence of the witnesses when there is general agreement and consistency in regard to the substratum of the prosecution case.
[626H 627A] In the instant case the occurrence took place on August 4, 1973, while P.W. 2 and P.W. 3 were examined at the trial on December 27, 1974 i.e. seventeen months after the incident.
The trial court has rightly observed that P.W. 2 was never cross examined by the defence regarding his whereabouts and those of the deceased on the previous night.
The mere fact that P.W. 2 did not make any purchase at Amarkot could hardly be a reason to hold that his being in the company of the deceased at the material time was improbable.
[626G, 627B] 4.
P.W. 3 is the brother and P.W. 2 relation of the deceased.
All three were living together in the same hamlet in the fields.
It is in the evidence of 617 these witnesses that the other accused are partymen of respondent No. 1.
It is further in evidence that sometime before the occurrence both the deceased and P.W. 2 were arrested and handcuffed by a police Sub Inspector on the allegation that they were indulging in smuggling and would be liquidated.
It was, therefore, not improbable that this trio consisting of first deceased, P.W. 2 and P.W. 3 were as usual moving about or carrying on their activities together.
Moreover the deceased must have known that Respondent No. 1 who was inimically disposed towards him was at large on bail.
This was an added reason for this troika to move about for their security, if not for anything else, in the company of each other.
[627C F] 5.
(i) The High Court has not all dealt with the First Information Report or the promptitude with which it was made.
[628D] (ii) The towering circumstance which lends assurance to the claim of P.W. 2 that he was an eye witness of the occurrence is that the First Information Report was lodged by him at the Police Station so promptly that he had practically no time to spin out a false story.
The reason employed by the High Court for disbelieving the version of P.W. 2 regarding his owning and going on a motor cycle to the Police Station was manifestly unsound.
The Sub Inspector P.W. 13 was not questioned in cross examination as to whether or not P.W. 2 had come to the Police Station on a motor cycle.
He was, however, questioned as to what transport he had used for going from the Police Station to the scene of murders.
The witness replied that he went on a motor cycle upto Amarkot and from there went on foot to the scene of occurrence.
This explanation of P.W. 2 regarding the kacha path from Amarkot to the scene of occurrence, being non motorable on the day of occurrence, receives inferential support from the fact appearing in the evidence of P.W. 13 that he had to cover the distance from Adda Amarkot to the place of occurrence, on foot.
[627H, 629E, 628G 629A] 6.
The conduct of the Investigation Officer (P.W. 13) indicates that he was not favourably disposed to the deceased and P.W. 2.
A suggestion was also put to P.W. 13 by the Public Prosecutor that he had been unfair in the investigation of the case and tried to favour the 3rd and 4th respondent.
The High Court found that the note in the zimini was a fraudulent insertion.
This being the case, Sub Inspector (P.W. 13) would be least disposed to join hands with P.W. 2 informant in preparing the First Information Report, after deliberation with P.W. 2 at the spot.
[629F H] 7.
The opinion of the medical witness P.W. 1 corroborates the version of P.W. 2 in as much as the latter has testified that the murders took place at about 3.30 p.m.
This means that the statement of P.W. 2 in the F.I.R. was made without undue delay, and, as such, furnished very valuable corroboration of his testimony at the trial in all material particulars.
[630B C] 8.
(i) Both P.W. 2 and P.W. 3 are related to the deceased, and as such are interested witnesses.
Their antecedents, also, are of a questionable nature.
But their antecedents or mere interestedness was not a valid ground to reject their evidence.
All that was necessary for the Court was to scrutinise their evidence with more than ordinary care and circumspection with reference to the part or role assigned to each of the accused.
An effort should have been made to sift the grain from the chaff; to accept what appeared to be true and to reject the 618 rest.
The High Court did not adopt this methodology in appreciating their evidence.
Instead it took a shortcut to disposal and rejected their evidence whole sale against all the accused for reasons which are manifestly untenable.
[630E G] (ii) Excepting for immaterial discrepancies the evidence of P.W. 2 and P.W. 3 was consistent and their presence at the time and place of murders was probable.
Even so, as a matter of abundant caution it will be safe to act on their interested evidence to the extent to which some assurance is coming forth from surrounding circumstances or other evidence.
[630H 631A] 9.
The prosecution has proved that the respondent No. 2 had also a motive to participate in the murder of the second deceased.
This lends assurance to the testimony of P.W. 2 and P.W. 3 and strengthens the inference of guilt against the said accused also.
P.W. 2 's consistent testimony corroborated by the F.I.R. was sufficient to establish this fact beyond doubt.
[631H 632A] 10.
It had been clearly proved that two fired cartridges were picked up from the scene of crime and sealed into parcels which were later deposited with seals intact in the Police Station.
On the memo it is mentioned that these fired cartridges were of 303 bore rifle.
[632H] 11.
There was substance in the observation of the trial Judge that the investigation was biased in favour of the accused.
If that was so, the failure of P.W. 13 to join with him respectables of the locality was by itself no ground for ruling out the evidence of the discovery of the rifle, altogether.
The partiality of P.W. 13 towards the defence, rather assures the genuineness of the discovery.
He was least disposed to 'collaborate ' or cooperate with the relations of the deceased to procure this rifle from some other source and then foist it on respondent Mukhtar Singh.
The omission on the part of this Investigating Officer to join with him some independent persons or respectables of the locality to witness the recovery devalues that evidence but does not render it inadmissible.
[634D F, H] 12.
The circumstance of the recovery of the rifle (exhibit P. 7) and the opinion of the Ballistic Expert that the empty cartridge (C1) had been fired through the rifle though feeble it might be was relevant and furnished a further pointer to the participation of Mukhtar Singh in the commission of Hazara Singh 's murder by rifle fire.
[635B] 13.
Although the investigation betrays a tilt in favour of the accused, and P.W. 13 made a fraudulent insertion in the zamini to help Joginder Singh accused, it cannot be said that the version of P.W. 13, that when he went to the scene of murders at 5.30 p.m. he found Joginder Singh irrigating his nearby fields at a distance of about 100 yards therefrom and he interrogated him there and then but did not think it necessary to arrest him is necessarily false.
The absence of motive and the presence of Joginder Singh near the scene of crime shortly after the murders, engaged in normal agricultural activities does cast a doubt about his participation in the commission of these murders.
[635 F G] 14.
P.W. 2 and P.W. 3 have stated that they started running away from the spot, immediately after deceased Hazara Singh was shot dead.
The surrounding circumstances, natural probabilities and the normal course of human conduct 619 also suggest the same inference, that immediately on seeing Hazara Singh being shot down, these witnesses who were following him ran fast for their lives.
Had they tarried for a while at the scene of the murder, it would have been too late for them to escape unhurt.
In such a situation, when they were being pursued by persons armed with fire arms, they could if at all they turned and looked behind have only a fleeting glimpse in the distance of the assailants of Resham Singh deceased.
That is why P.W.2 is not consistent in his statements as to which of the accused had fired at him when he was running away for his life.
Moreover it has not been established that any of the six accused had any motive, whatever to murder Resham Singh deceased.
[635H 636C]
