Allowing the appeal by certificate, the Court ^ HELD: The tests which provide sufficient guidelines to determine on the facts of each case whether an endowment is of a private or of a public nature are: (1) Where the origin of the endowment cannot be ascertained, the question whether the user of the temple by members of the public is as of right; (2) The fact that the control and management vests either in a large body of persons or in the members of the public and the founder does not retain any control over the management.
Allied to this may be a circumstance where the evidence shows that there is provision for a scheme to be framed by associating the members of the public at large; (3) Where, however, a document is available to prove the nature and origin of the endowment and the recitals of the document show that the control and management of the temple is retained with the founder or his descendants, and that extensive properties are dedicated for the purpose of the maintenance of the temple belonging to the founder himself, this will be a conclusive proof to show that the endowment was of a private nature; (4) Where the evidence shows that the founder of the endowment did not make any stipulation for offerings or contributions to be made by members of the public to the temple, this would be an important intrinsic circumstance to indicate the private nature of the endowment.
[833 A E] Deoki Nandan vs Murlidhar, ; ; Mahant Ram Saroop Dasji vs S.P. Sahi, Special Officer in Charge of the Hindu Religious Trusts & Ors., [1959] 2 Supp.
SCR 583; Narayan Bhagwantrao Gosavi Balajiwale vs Gopal Vinayak Gosavi & Ors., ; ; Bihar State Board Religious Trust, Patna vs Mahant Sri Biseshwar Das, , Dhaneshwarbuwa Guru Purshottambuwa Owner of Shri Vithal Rukhamai Sansthan vs The Charity Commissioner, State of Bombay, ; ; Gurpur Guni Venkataraya Narashima Prabhu & Ors.
vs B.G. Achia, Asistant Commissioner, Hindu Endowment Mangalore & Anr., ; , followed.
In the instant case: (i) exhibit A, an ancient document executed as for back as February 18, 1895, the authenticity and the genuineness of which is beyond question, clearly and conclusively show that the endowment was of a private nature and the intention of the founder was merely to instal a family deity in the temple.
(ii) The fact that the temple was of a massive structure of about 25 yards in height, by itself, divorced from other things, could not prove that the temple was a public one.
(iii) The Shebaits or the Marfatdars were appointed by the founders of the endowment and the entire management and control of the temple was retained by the family.
(iv) The fact that bhogs 827 were offered during the day which was in consonance with the rules observed by the public is not of much consequence because bhogs are offered even in private temples.
(v) Clause 15 merely provides that if in future the family becomes extinct and no fit person could be found then any of the Baisnab Sampraday or any reputed Hindu of the village could take action, namely, to perform the work of the deity.
This was a contingent provision and here also the founders did not confer the duty of performing all the work on the members of the public but they chose or selected only a particular person belonging to a particular community which also shows that even if the family was to become extinct, the private nature of the endowment was not to be changed.
Indeed if the intention was to instal the idol in the temple by way of a public endowment, clause 14 would have clearly provided that in case the family become extinct the members of the public or of the brotherhood or the Government could have taken over the management.
On the other hand, the interpretation of the various clauses of the documents clearly shows that sufficient care has been taken by the Pani family to see that the dedication to the family deity is not changed even if the family becomes extinct.
[833 H, 834 A, 838 G H, 839 C, E H, 840 A B]
