The Mines and Minerals (Regulation & Development) Act, 1957 (Central Act) was enacted in the public interest to enable the Union to take under its control the regulation of mines and the development of minerals.
Exercising its power under this Act, the Central Government declared by a notification that black granite was a minor mineral.
Exercising power vested in it by section 15 of the Act, the State Government made the Tamil Nadu Minor Mineral Concession Rules, 1959.
Rule 8 of the Rules prescribes the procedure for lease of quarries to private persons.
By rule 8 C, introduced in 1977, leases for quarrying black granite in favour of private persons were banned.
Sub rule (2) of this rule enacts that the State Government themselves may engage in quarrying black granite or grant leases for quarrying black granite in favour of any corporation wholly owned by the State Government.
Several applications for the grant of fresh leases as well as for the renewal of leases for quarrying black granite belonging to the State Government were submitted to the State Government, some prior to the introduction of rule 8C and some after the rule came into force.
The State Government considered all the applications and rejected all of them in view of rule 8C.
The respondents filed writ petition questioning the vires of Rule 8 C on various grounds.
The High Court struck down Rule 8 C on the ground that it exceeded the rule making power given to the State Government and held that it was not open to the appellant Government to keep the applications pending for a long time and then to dispose them of on the basis of a rule which had come into force later.
As a result all the applications were disposed of without reference to rule 8 C.
The appellant contended that: (I) The approach of the High Court was vitiated by its failure to notice the crucial circumstance that the minerals belonged to the Government, (II) The respondents had no vested or indefeasible right to obtain a lease or a renewal to quarry the minerals, (III) There were good reasons for banning the grant of lease to quarry black granite to private parties and (IV) The Government could not be compelled to grant leases which would result in the destruction of the mineral resources of the country.
On behalf of the respondent it was submitted that (I) the question of ownership of the minerals was irrelevant, (II) It was not open to the appellant 743 to exercise its subordinate legislative function in a manner to benefit itself as owner of the minerals, nor was it open to the appellant to create monopoly by such means, (III) There was violation of articles 301 and 303 of the Constitution, (IV) Rule 8 C had no application to renewals and (V) That in any event it would not have the effect of affecting applications made more than 60 days before it came into force.
Accepting the appeals, it was ^ HELD: Rule 8 C was made in bonafide exercise of the rule making power of the Appellant Government and not in its misuse to advance its own self interest.
Making a rule which is perfectly in order is not to be considered a misuse of the rule making power, if it advances the interest of State, which really means the people of the State.
Rivers, forests, minerals and as such other resources constitute a nation 's natural wealth.
These resources are not to be frittered away and exhausted by any one generation.
Every generation owes a duty to all succeeding generations to develop & conserve the natural resources of the nation in the best possible way.
It is in the interest of mankind.
It is in the interest of the Nation.
It is recognised by Parliament.
Parliament has declared that it is expedient in the public interest that the Union should take under its control the regulation of mines and the development of minerals.
[751C D, 753G H] 2.
The Public interest which induced Parliament to make the declaration contained in S.2 of the Mines & Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act, 1957 has naturally to be the paramount consideration in all matters concerning the regulation of Mines & Minerals.
Parliament 's Policy is clearly discernible from the provisions of the Act.
It is the conservation and the prudent and discriminating exploitation of minerals, with a view to secure maximum benefit to the community.
There are clear sign posts to lead and guide the subordinate legislating authority in the matter of the making of rules.
[751G H] 3.
The other provisions of the Act, particularly sections 4A, 17 and 18, indicate that the rule making authority under S.15 has not exceeded its powers in banning leases for carrying black granite in favour of private parties and in stipulating that the State Government themselves may engage in quarrying black granite or grant leases for quarrying black granite in favour of any corporation wholly owned by the State Government.
To view such a rule made by the Subordinate legislating body as a rule made to benefit itself merely because the State Government happens to be the subordinate legislating body is, but, to take too narrow a view of the functions of that body.
[751H, 752A B] H. C. Narayanappa & Ors.
vs State of Mysore & Ors.
; @ 745, 752 753 referred to.
Whenever there is a switch over from 'private sector ' to 'public sector ' it does not necessarily follow that a change of policy requiring express legislative sanction is involved.
It depends on the subject and the statute.
But if a decision is taken to ban private mining of a single minor mineral for the purpose of conserving it, such a ban, if it is otherwise within the bounds of the authority given to the Government by the Statute, cannot be said to involve any change of policy.
The policy of the Act remains the same and it is, the conservation and the prudent and discriminating exploitation of 744 minerals, with a view to secure maximum benefit to the community.
Exploitation of minerals by the private and/or the public sector is contemplated.
If in the pursuit of the avowed policy of the Act, it is thought exploitation by the public sector is best and wisest in the case of a particular mineral and, in consequence, the authority competent to make the subordinate legislation makes a rule banning private exploitation of such mineral, which was hitherto permitted.
There is no change of policy merely because that was previously permitted is no longer permitted.
[756A D] Municipal Corporation of the City of Toronto vs Virgo , Attorney General for Ontario vs Attorney General for the Dominion and the Distillers and Brewers Association, , State of Uttar Pradesh and Others vs Hindustan Aluminium Corporation Ltd. and Ors., ; , G. K. Krishnan etc.
vs The State of Tamil Nadu and Anr. etc.
[1975] 2 SCR 715 @ 721, Commonwealth of Australia vs Bank of New South Wales referred to.
The restrictions, freedom from which is guaranteed by article 301 would be such restrictions as directly and immediately restrict or impede the free flow or movement of trade.
The Act and the rules properly made thereunder are, therefore, outside the purview of article 301.
Even otherwise article 302 which enables Parliament, by law, to impose such restrictions on the freedom of trade, commerce or intercourse between one State and another or within any part of the territory of India as may be required in the public interest also furnishes an answer to the claim based on the alleged contravention of article 301.
[757F H, 758A B] 7.
The Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act is a law enacted by Parliament and declared by Parliament to be expedient in the public interest.
Rule 8 C has been made by the appellant Govt.
by notification in the official Gazette, pursuant to the power conferred upon it by sec.
15 of the Act.
A statutory rule, while ever subordinate to the parent statute, is, otherwise, to be treated as part of the statute and as effective. "Rules made under the Statute must be treated for all purposes of construction or obligation exactly as if they were in the Act and are to be of the same effect as if contained in the act and are to be judicially noticed for all purposes of construction or obligation.
[758B G] Atiabari Tea Co. Ltd. vs State of Assam & Ors. ; The Automobile Transport Rajasthan Ltd., vs State of Rajasthan & Ors.
[1963] 1 SCR 491 and State of U.P. & Ors.
vs Babu Ram Upadhya ; , referred to.
Rule 9 makes it clear that a renewal is not to be obtained automatically, for the mere asking.
The applicant for the renewal has, particularly, to satisfy the Government that the renewal is in the interests of mineral development and that the lease amount is reasonable in the circumstances of the case.
These conditions have to be fulfilled in addition to whatever criteria is applicable at the time of the grant of lease in the first instance, suitably adapted, of course, to grant of renewal.
Not to apply the criteria applicable in the first instance may lead to absurd results.
Therefore rule 8 C is attracted in considering applications for renewal of leases also.
[759A D] 9.
While the applications should be dealt with within a reasonable time, it cannot on that account be said that the right to have an application disposed 745 of in a reasonable time clothes an applicant for a lease with a right to have the application disposed of on the basis of the rules in force at the time of the making of the application.
No one has a vested right to the grant or renewal of a lease and none can claim a vested right to have an application for the grant or renewal of a lease dealt with in a particular way, by applying particular provisions.
In the absence of any vested rights in any one, an application for a lease has necessarily to be dealt with according to the rules in force on the date of the disposal of the application despite the fact that there is a long delay since the making of the application.
[759G H, 760A] 10.
The language of Rule 8 C is clear that it can not have any application to lands in which the right to minerals belongs to the applicants themselves.
In the case of lands in which the right to minerals belongs to private owners and those owners seek permission to quarry black granite the applications will have to be dealt with under the relevant rules in Sec.
III of the Tamil Nadu Minor Mineral concession Rules.
Rule 8 C does not impose a general ban on quarrying black granite but only imposes a bar on the grant of leases for quarrying black granite.
[760D F]
