The petitioners in their writ petitions to this Court alleged that they were carrying on small scale industries for the manufacture of resin and turpentine oil and that they applied to the Government for allotment of resin for their industries but the Government referring to their policy decision of March 20, 1978 refused to make any allotment, and that they purchased raw material from the open market and managed to run their industries.
They further alleged that while they were refused allotment of supply of raw materials, the State, respondent No. I made allotments to respondent nos.
4 to 16 n although most of them were not even formally registered at the time of making the impugned orders of allotment and that they were consequently adversely discriminated against, while respondent nos.
4 to 16 were favoured and as such the impugned orders of allotment were liable to be struck down " violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
The State, respondent No. 1 contested the writ petition, denied the material allegations of the petitioners and alleged that the allocations were made in conformity with the State Industrial Policy decision of securing the balanced economic and regional development of the State that there was a preponderance of industries in the Jammu Region, and that the industries of the petitioners as well as respondent nos.
4 to 16 were also functioning in that region.
Allotments of resin were made districtwise, 110 applications were received and considered and allotment was made to respondents nos.
4 to 16.
On the question whether the orders of the 1st respondent allotting quotas of resin to respondent nos.
4 to 16 were arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of The Constitution.
^ HELD : 1(i) Respondent No. 1 has not explained as to how and on what basis if any, the allotments were made by the impugned orders in favour of the new allottees respondent nos.
1 to 16 whose industries were located in the Jammu region.
[847 C] (ii) Although the State Government has taken reliance on the State Industrial Policy decision, it does not appear to have followed it in practice, except in the cases of five respondents.
No reasonable basis had been adopted in making the allotments in favour of the new allottees and denying the allotments to the petitioners.
[84913 F] 842 2.
The rule of equality does not mean mathematical equality.
It permits of practical inequalities.
What is needed is that the selection of quota seekers as in the instant case should have a rational relation lo the object sought lo be achieved in the industrial policy decision of the State.
If the selection or differentiation is arbitrary and lacks a rational basis it offends Article 14.
[849 D] 3.
"Equality before the Law" or "equal protection of the laws` ' within the meaning of Article 14 of the Constitution of India means absence of any arbitrary discrimination by the law or in their administration.
No undue favour to one or hostile discrimination to another should be shown.
A classification is reasonable when it is not an arbitrary selection but rests on differences pertinent to the subject in respect of which the classification is made.
The classification permissible must be based on some real and substantial distinction, a just and reasonable relation to the objects sought to be attained and cannot be made arbitrary and without any substantial basis.
[848 H 849 A] State of West Bengal vs Anwar Ali, [19521 SCR 284 referred to.
