Section 32(iv) of the Payment of Bonus Act provides that nothing in the Act shall apply to employees employed by an establishment engaged in any industry carried on by or under the authority of any department of the Central Government or State Government or a local authority.
The Delhi Development Authority, a statutory body created under the Delhi Development Act, 1957 for the development of Delhi according to plan, paid bonus to its employees for a period of ten years upto the year 1973 74, but later discontinued payment of bonus on the advice of the Ministry of law.
The employees ' petition impugning the action of the Authority in stop ping the payment of bonus was allowed by the High Court.
On the question whether the Delhi Development Authority is a "local authority" and whether the provisions of the Payment of Bonus Act are attracted: Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: The Delhi Development Authority is endowed with all the usual attributes and characteristics of a 'local authority ' and therefore the provisions of the Payment of Bonus Act are not attracted.
[865 A] The expression 'local authority ' is not defined in the Payment of Bonus Act.
The General Clauses Act defines it to mean a municipal committee or other authority legally entitled to or entrusted by the Government with the control or management of a municipal or local fund.
It is not a sound rule of interpretation to import the definition of an expression in one Act into another.
The definition of 'Local Fund ' in the Fundamental Rules, Treasury Code and elsewhere cannot be imported into the definition of Local Authority in the General Clauses Act and thus into the Delhi Development Act.
An authority, in order to be a local authority, must be of like nature and character as a municipal committee etc.
possessing among others many, if not all, of the distinctive attributes and characteristics of a municipal committee.
It must possess one essential feature, namely, that it is legally entitled to or entrusted by the Government with the control and management of a municipal or local fund.
[857 B H] The distinctive attributes and characteristics of a local authority are: (i) It must have separate legal existence as a corporate body; (ii) it must not be a mere governmental agency but a legally independent entity; (iii) it must function in a defined area and must ordinarily be elected wholly or partly, 855 directly or indirectly by the inhabitants of the area; (iv) it must enjoy a certain degree of autonomy, which, though not complete, must be appreciable; (v) the statute must entrust the authority with such governmental functions and duties as are usually entrusted to a municipal body for providing such amenities, as health and education services, water and sewerage, town planning and development, roads, markets, transportation etc.
to the inhabitants; (vi) it must have power to raise funds in the furtherance of its activities and the fulfillment of the projects entrusted to it by levying takes, rates, charges, fees etc.
all of which may be in addition to the moneys provided by Government.
What is essential is that the control and management of the fund must vest in the authority.
Municipal Corporation of Delhi vs Birla Cotton, Spinning Weaving Mills Delhi & Anr. ; @ 288 and Valjibhai Muljibhai Soneji and Anr.
vs The State of Bombay (Now Gujarat) & Ors. , referred to.
The Delhi Development Authority is a body corporate.
It consists of a chairman, vice chairman and a certain number of official members and non official members who are representatives of the Municipal Corporation Delhi to be elected by the Councillors and the aldermen of the Municipal Corporation and three representatives of the Metropolitan Council to be elected by that Council.
The object with which the Authority is established is "to promote and secure the development of Delhi according to plan" in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
[859 D F] The Authority is required to maintain its own Fund which was not a Consolidated Fund or a separate Development Fund but is the Fund of the Development Authority.
To this Fund are to be credited all the moneys received from the Central Government by way of grants, loans, advances or otherwise; all moneys received by way of loans of debentures; all fees and charges received by the Authority, all moneys received from the disposal of lands, buildings and other properties, all moneys received by way of rents and profits or in any other manner.
The fund is required to be applied towards meeting the expenses incurred by the Authority in the administration of the Act and for no other purposes.
The Act empowers the Authority to impose penalties on persons for undertaking or carrying out development in contravention of the master plan or without permission approval or sanction required to be given l? by the Authority.
[860 E G] An equally important feature with which the Authority is clothed is its power to make regulations a power which is analogous to the power given to municipalities to frame bye laws.
[862 G] The salient features of the Act show that the Delhi Development Authority is constituted for the specific purpose of planned development of Delhi which is a governmental function ordinarily entrusted to municipal bodies.
It has an element of popular representation though some of the members are indirectly elected.
It enjoys a considerable degree of autonomy within the bounds prescribed by the Act.
The fact that some supervision is exercised by the Central Government does not detract from the autonomy because the supervision exercised is the usual supervisory power which every State Government exercises over municipalities, District Boards etc.
[863 A D] The term "taxation" used with reference to the power of a local authority to raise funds is to be understood not in any fine and narrow sense to include 856 only compulsory exactions but in a broad generic sense to include fees levied essentially for services rendered.
Today the distinction between a tax and a fee his withered away both being compulsory exactions of money by a public authority.
The crucial test is to see whether the public authority is authorised by statute to make a compulsory extension of money and not to see whether the money so exacted is to be utilised for specific or general purposes.
[863 G H] There is no valid reason to hold that the betterment charge which the Authority can impose upon an owner of a property in respect of the increase in the value of the property is a fee and not a tax.
The charge is not levied on the basis of the increase in the value of property consequent on the development of the area.
In other words it is a charge on the accrued capital gain which may bear no proportion whatsoever to the cost of development.
[864 E] The fact that the Delhi Development Act refers in several sections to "local authority concerned" meaning thereby the ordinary local authority (as for example the Delhi Municipal Corporation) functioning in the area discharging a multiplicity of civic functions as distinguished from the Delhi Development Authority, which performs one of the several functions that a local authority performs, is no ground for holding that The Delhi Development Authority is not a local authority.
The Authority is endowed with all the usual attributes and characteristics of a local authority.
[864 H] Nor does the fact that other Municipal Acts provide for the reconstitution of a dissolved or superseeded municipality while the Delhi Development Act does not provide for such reconstitution of the Authority after it fulfills its assigned functions make it any the less a local authority.
By the very nature of the work entrusted to it its life is transient; when the work is accomplished and there is no need for its continued existence it is dissolved.
It is by what it is during its life and not by what its shape would be after it has performed its assigned functions that it can be determined whether the authority is a local authority as defined in the General Clauses Act [865 B D]
