To implement the recommendations of a one man Pay Commission, the State Government issued the Andhra Pradesh Revised Scales of Pay Rules 1969 providing for the revision of pay and creation of selection grade posts.
The selection grade scale was fixed by adding three increments to the maximum of the revised scale of pay.
While implementing the pay scales, the Government realised that a senior holding a permanent post in one category but holding a; post in the not higher grade on promotion would draw less pay in the higher post than a junior in the lower category who was given the selection grade.
To avoid the anomalous situation thus created the Government by an executive order direct ed that the pay of an employee placed in selection grade shall be so fixed as not to exceed the pay of his senior working in the higher post on promotion.
This executive instruction was struck down by the High Court as being violative of Articles 14 and 16 and also on the ground that the executive instruction could not prevail over Fundamental Rule 22 (a) (ii).
The Government thereupon introduced Rule 5(2) in the Rules with retrospective effect from the date of the original order.
In D. Krishnamurthy & Ors vs State of Andhra Pradesh & Anr.
this rule was struck down by the High Court as being violative of Articles 14 and 16.
No appeal was, however, preferred from the judgment of the High Court striking down the rule.
Instead of following a uniform policy in revising the pay of all employees in compliance with the direction of the High Court, the Government re fixed the pay of some of the employees holding selection grade posts but declined to do so in the case of others on the ground that the re fixation would be done only in the case of employees who had secured such directions.
In the appeals by the Government to this Court it was contended that it was wrong to suggest that since no appeal had been preferred against the judgment of the High Court in D. Krusgbanurthy 's case all the judgments of the High Court involving a similar question had become final become D. Krishnamurthy 's case related to an altogether different category of employees of the State Government.
931 Dismissing the appeals, ^ HELD: 1.
When the High Court issues a writ, direction or order under article 226 of the Constitution, it is not open to the State Government to implement the decision with regard to some and deny relief to others, although they belong to the same class of persons, and are equally governed by the principles laid down.
The State Government is expected to adopt a uniform policy In regard to all its employees.
[936 C D] 2.
Replacement of an executive instruction by the State Government by a rule framed under article 309 of the Constitution, for the fixation of pay of a person promoted to the Selection Grade at a stage lower than the minimum of the scales of pay of such Selection Grade so as not to exceed the pay of his seniors working in the higher posts on promotion, does not cure the constitutional ice inherent in the Government action as the provision is violative of articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
[935 G H] 3.
The judgment of the High Court, by which sub r.
(2) of r. 5 of the Andhra Pradesh Revised Scales of Pay Rules, 1969 having been struck down as offending articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution and as being not in conformity with FR 22(a)(ii) not having been appealed from, had attained a finality and the re fixation of pay, if any, had to be done as if sub r.
(2) of r. 5 never existed [937 B] 4.
It is not open to the Government to question the correctness of the judgment of the High Court when it had attained finality, particularly when in compliance with the directions, it had re fixed the pay of some of the employees in the Selection Grade posts, on the pretext that the right of appeal was not lost in the case of others in respect of whom no such direction has been issued.
At any rate, the point not having been taken before the High Court, could not be allowed to be raised for the first time under article 136 of the Constitution.
[936 H]
