The appellant was the legally married wife of the respondent.
As he willfully neglected her, she filed an application before the Magistrate for maintenance under Section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973.
The Magistrate accepted the allegation of the appellant that she had been neglected by the respondent without reasonable or probable cause and awarded maintenance at Rs. 100/ per month for the appellant and the minor child.
The High Court held that clause (b) of the explanation to Section 125(1) of the Code had no application to the facts of the case and that so far as the appellant was concerned, she was not entitled to any maintenance.
It however affirmed the order of the Magistrate fixing Rs. 40/ per month as maintenance for her minor son.
In the appeal, it was contended that the view taken by the High Court is legally erroneous and is based on wrong interpretation of clause (b) of the explanation to Section 125(1) of the Code.
Accepting the Appeal, (Per Fazal Ali & Vardarajan, JJ.) ^ HELD: 1.
In the instant case Section 127 does not apply at all because the respondent has not filed any application for cancellation of the maintenance on the grounds mentioned in Section 127(3)(b) of the 1973 Code but this case is squarely covered by Clause (b) of the Explanation to section 125(i) of that Code as a result of which the appellant in the eye of law continues to be the wife of the respondent, despite the decree for dissolution of marriage.
[925 H, 926 A B] 2.
It is clear that the 1898 Code by virtue of section 488 provided a summary remedy for awarding maintenance to neglected wives irrespective of the caste, creed, community or religion to which they belonged.
Sections 488 and 489 were the corresponding provisions of the 1898 Code which were couched almost in the same language as sections 125 and 127 of the 1973 Code having some important additions that have been made under the 1973 Code.
A provision like clause (b) of the Explanation to section 125(1) of the 1973 Code was conspicuously absent in section 488 of the old Code and has been added by the 1973 Code.
[914 H, 915 A, D, 917 C D] 911 Nanak Chand vs Shri Chandra Kishore Agarwala & Ors. ; , Ram Singh vs State & Anr.
AIR 1963 All.
355, Nalini Ranjan Chakravarty vs Smt.
Kiran Rani Chakravarty AIR 1965 Pat.
442, Mahabir Agarwalla vs Gita Roy , referred to.
The Mohomedan Law on the subject was that where a woman governed by the Mohomedan Law was awarded maintenance, the same would cease from the date of divorce given by the husband and the completion of the period of Iddat.
[917 G H] In re Shekhanmian AIR 1930 Bombay 178, Syed Said vs Meera Bee , Mohamed Rahimullah & Anr.
AIR 1947 Madras 416, Aahimunnissa & Ors.
vs Mohd. Ismail AIR , Din Mohmmad 's V.I.L.R. 1883 226, referred to.
Although a Mohomedan wife had a right to be awarded maintenance by the Magistrate under section 488 of the old Code, the said right ceased to exist if she was divorced by her husband and had observed the period of Iddat.
This was the undoubted position of law under the 1898 Code as amended by the 1955 Amending Act.
[920 A B] 5.
Clause (b) has made a distinct departure from the earlier Code in that it has widened the definition of wife and, to some extent, over ruled the personal law of the parties so far as proceedings for maintenance under Section 125 are concerned.
Under Clause (b), the wife continued to be a wife within the meaning of the provisions of the Code even though she has been divorced by her husband or has otherwise obtained a divorce and has not remarried.
It follows, therefore, that the divorce resulting from the aforesaid dissolution of the marriage is also a legal divorce under the Mohomedan Law by virtue of the statute (1939 Act).
[920 E F, 921 B] 6.
Under the Mohomedan Law the commonest form of divorce is a unilateral pronouncement of divorce of the wife by the husband according to the various forms recognised by the law.
A divorce given unilaterally by the husband is especially peculiar to Mohomedan Law.
In no other law has the husband got a unilateral right to divorce his wife by a simple declaration because other laws, viz., the Hindu Law or the , contemplate only a dissolution of marriage on certain grounds brought about by one of the spouses in a court of law.
[921 C D] 7.
A wife thus had a statutory right to obtain divorce from the husband through the court on proof of the grounds mentioned in the Act.
The Act provided for the wife an independent remedy which could be resorted to by her without being subjected to a pronouncement of divorce by the husband.
It is, therefore, in the background of this Act that the words 'has obtained a divorce from her husband ' in clause (b) of the Explanation have to be construed.
Thus the High Court in considering the effect of these words seems to have over looked the dominant object of the statutory remedy that was made available to the wife under the Act of 1939 by which the wife could get a decree for dissolution of marriage on the grounds mentioned in the 1939 Act by petitioning the civil court without any overt act on the part of the husband in divorcing her.
The High Court also failed to consider the legal consequences flowing from the 912 decree passed by the Court dissolving the marriage, viz., a legal divorce under the Mohomedan law.
[922 D F] 8.
The interpretation put by the High Court on the second limb of clause (b) is not correct.
This seems to be borne out from the provisions of Mohomedan law itself.
It would appear that under the Mohomedan law there are three distinct modes in which a Muslim marriage can be dissolved and the relationship of the husband and wife terminated so as to result in an irrevocable divorce.
[922 F G] 9.
It is, therefore, manifest that clause (b) of Explanation to section 125 envisages all the three modes, whether a wife is divorced unilaterally by the husband or whether she obtains divorce under the mode numbers 2 and 3, she continues to be a wife for the purpose of getting maintenance under section 125 of the 1973 Code.
In these circumstances the High Court was not at all justified in taking the two separate clauses 'who has been divorced ' and 'had obtained a divorce from her husband ' conjunctively so as to indicate a divorce proceeding from the husband and the husband alone and in not treating a dissolution of marriage under the 1939 Act as a legal divorce.
[924 B D] 10.
A clear distinction has been made between dissolution of marriage brought about by the husband in exercising his unilateral right to divorce and the act of the wife in obtaining a decree for dissolution of the marriage from a civil court under the Act of 1939.
[925 E F] 11.
The two limbs of clause (b) of the Explanation to section 125(1) have separate and different legal incidents one is reflected in clause (b) of sub Section (3) of section 127 and the other in clause (c) of sub section (3) of section 127.
[925 G H] (Per A. D. Koshal, J. concurring) 1.
The word 'divorce ' is not defined in the Code of Criminal Procedure and may legitimately be regarded as having been used in clause (b) of sub section 1 of Section 125 in the dictionary sense.
As ordinarily understood, 'divorce ' is nothing more nor less than another name for dissolution of marriage, whether the same result from the act of parties or is a consequence of proceedings at law.
It would be wrong to regard the two terms as not be synonymous with each other, unless the legislature makes a direction to the contrary.
[927A, C D] 2.
According to Section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, a full fledged wife is entitled to maintenance.
By reason of clause (b) even a divorced wife has that right provided that she has not re married.
If that clause envisaged only divorce by voluntary action of the husband, the second limb of the clause which makes the definition of 'wife ' inclusive of a woman who has 'obtained a divorce from the husband ' would be rendered otiose.
The word obtained may well be used in the sense of 'procured with effort ' and would certainly describe correctly a situation where something is achieved by a person through his exertion in spite of opposition from others.
[928 E, F G] 3.
Divorce by the Act of the husband, is not recognised by any system of law except that applicable to Muslims.
Members of the other main communities inhabiting India, i.e. Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains, Christians, etc.
have perforce to go to courts in order to obtain divorce.
If clause (b) was intended to 913 embrace only cases of divorce brought about by the Act of the husband, its applicability would be limited, by and large, only to Muslims, which per se appears to be an absurd proposition.
[929 C D] 4.
The expression 'a woman who has obtained a divorce from her husband ' has therefore to be interpreted as including a wife who has been granted a decree of dissolution of marriage by the Court.
[929 E] Deacock vs Deacock referred to.
