The two deceased were the two younger half brothers of the first respondent.
A day before the day of the murder of the two deceased, the brothers had divided the family properties and started living separately.
P.W. 3, the wife of one of the deceased, in the F.I.R. given to the police, stated that on the day of the occurrence when the two deceased and she went to the bagichi for milking the cattle, the first respondent and his sons surrounded the two deceased in the court yard, the first respondent dealt a blow on the head of her husband with a gandasi while the others gave lathi blow on the second deceased.
Both of them succumbed to the injuries.
It was also stated in the F.I.R. that P.W. 4, the sister of the deceased, was with her at the time of the occurrence and that when they screamed, the assailants asked them to keep quiet on pain of death to them.
The assailants, it was alleged, thereafter dragged the two dead bodies and burnt them in the nearby heap of cow dung cakes after pouring kerosene on the heap.
The defence of the two accused was alibi.
All the accused, who were charged of offences under section 302 read with section 34 of the Penal Code were sentenced; the first respondent to death and the others to imprisonment for life.
On appeal, the High Court set aside the conviction and sentences and acquitted all of them.
Allowing the State 's appeal, ^ HELD : 1.
When an accused pleads alibi, the burden of proof under section 103 of the Evidence Act is on the accused.
The plea of all the accused that they were elsewhere at the time of the offence is not true.
[4 G, 5 C] 2.
The guilt of the two respondents had been established beyond all reasonable doubt.
The High Court rejected the evidence of P.W. 10 on the ground that he had not stated in the statement before the police that in the partition of the family properties among the brothers, there was a hitch.
The prosecution is not bound to prove motive of any offence in a criminal case, for motive is known only to the perpetrators of the crime and may not be known to others.
If the motive is proved by the prosecution, the Court has to consider it and see whether it is adequate.
[11E, 6 B C] 2 In the instant case the motive proved is apparently inadequate, although it might be possible.
[6 C] 3.
The High Court had taken a wrong view in rejecting the evidence of P.Ws. 3 and 4 on the ground that they were close relations of the deceased; that it was highly improbable that P.W. 3 who was in advance stage of pregnancy would go to the place of occurrence.
[8F; 9F G] 4.
Although both the witnesses P.Ws. 3 and 4 were close relations of the deceased, their evidence could not be rejected solely on that ground.
They were also related to the respondents and there is nothing on record to show that they were inimically disposed towards the respondents to falsely implicate them in the murder.
Secondly, it was a pure conjecture of the High Court when it said that panchas and sarpanchas and other respectables of the village took an opportunity to implicate the respondents.
It was also a conjecture on the part of the High Court to say that the deceased were murdered by unknown culprits and that the respondents were falsely implicated by the village respectables.
The High Court found as a fact that the respondents and the deceased slept in the bagichi during nights to keep watch over the cattle.
Had the murder been perpetrated by unknown persons, the respondents would have intervened and informed the neighbours.
[8F 9B] 5.
The fact that P.W. 3 did not mention in the F.I.R. that she had informed some persons of the village before the lodging of the F.I.R. and that for this reason her statement could not be relied on is not correct.
The F.I.R. need not contain all details of the occurrence nor does the omission to mention the name of persons whom she informed in the village detract from the credibility of the report.
The omission is a mere omission of details and not a contradiction.
[9 C] 6.
The High Court was not right in disbelieving the evidence of P.W. 4 on the ground that had she been present at the scene of occurrence, she would have out of love for her real brothers, intervened and tried to save them.
There is nothing unnatural if she had out of a sense of self preservation at the threat of the assailant refrained from attempting to save the two deceased from the murder.
P.W. 3 must have been dazed at the brutal murder of her husband and brother in law.
In such a situation she could not be expected to mention all the details, in the F.I.R. and therefore, the High Court was not right in rejecting the evidence of P.W. 10 solely on the ground that no mention of the extra judicial confession of Respondent No. 1 had been made in the F.I.R. [9H 10B; 10D E] 7.
In view of the fact that the conviction and sentence were passed by the Session Judge in July, 1974 and the High Court passed the order of acquittal in 1975, the extreme penalty of death given to the first respondent is not called for now; ends of justice will be met if all the respondents are sentenced to imprisonment for life.
[11 G]
