During the construction of a stadium called the Yeshwant Stadium, which was being looked after by the respondents, two accidents occurred resulting in the death of seven persons and injuries to eight persons.
Pending a departmental inquiry in the said connection, an order of suspension was passed by the Municipal Commissioner on the 23rd of September, 1974 which was confirmed by the Corporation by its order of the same date.
According to the respondents the later order was not communicated to them.
Pursuant to a criminal complaint filed before it, the police filed a charge sheet under section 304 A Penal Code against the respondents on the 25th of September, 1976.
In view of the charge sheet submitted by the police another order of suspension was passed by the Municipal Commissioner on 13 1 1977 with effect from 8 10 76.
The respondents filed an appeal to departmental appellate authority which was dismissed on the 20th of July, 1977.
Thereafter the respondents filed a writ petition in the High Court which allowed the petition taking the view that under the rules and byelaws of the City of Nagpur Corporation Act, 1948, as amended upto date, the competent authority to pass orders of suspension against the respondents was the Corporation itself and not the Chief Executive Officer.
The High Court quashed the orders of suspension and directed the reinstatement of the respondents and payment of their full salary to them.
Hence the appeal by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1:1.
Clause (b) of Section 59(3) of the City of Nagpur Corporation Act, 1948 in express terms authorises and clothes the Municipal Commissioner with the power to exercise supervision and control over the acts of Municipal Officers and servants and hence he is fully competent to suspend the Municipal Officers and servants, pending a departmental inquiry.
[24 H 25A: 2.
The term "control" is of a very wide connotation and amplitude and includes a large variety of powers which are incidental or consequential to achieve the powers vested in the authority concerned.
Clause (b) of the City of Nagpur Corporation Act is preceded by the Words "vests in the commissioner".
When the words "control" and "vests" are read together they are strong terms 23 which convey an absolute control in the authority in order to effectuate the policy underlying the rules and makes the authority concerned the sole custodian of the servants and officers of the Municipal Corporation.
[28 E, 25 A B] State of West Bengal vs Nripendra Nath Bagchi, ; ; High Court of Andhra Pradesh and Ors.
vs V.V.S. Krishnamurthy and Ors., , followed.
Whether or not the departmental inquiry pending against its servants, if he is acquitted in the criminal case, would have to continue is a matter to be decided by the department after considering the nature of the findings given by the criminal court.
Normally where the accused is acquitted honourably and completely exonerated of the charges it would not be expedient to continue a departmental inquiry on the very same charges or grounds or evidence, but the fact remains that merely because the accused is acquitted, the power of the authority concerned to continue the departmental inquiry is not taken away nor is its direction in any way fettered.
However, whether it is really worthwhile to continue the departmental inquiry in the event of the acquittal after the lapse of number of years since the departmental inquiry has started is a relevant factor to be considered.
[27 C E] Observation: Criminal cases should be disposed off as quickly as possible so as to protect the accused from unnecessary harassment.
[27 A]
