Selection of candidates to be admitted to M.B.B.S. course in the Medical College of the State of Jammu & Kashmir was made by a Selection Committee on the basis of (a) merit in qualifying examination (35 marks) (b) an objective test (35 marks) and (c) a viva voce test (30 marks).
The seats were distributed besides the examination base was determined by a distribution of the seats into three distinct divisions namely, (i) 60% on the basis of open merit; (ii) 20% on the basis of reservation for scheduled castes and other reserved categories, one of which was broadly described as "socially and educationally backward classes" which included candidates from (a) areas adjoining actual line of control and (b) areas known as "bad pockets", including Ladhak and (iii) 20% were reserved as seats to be filled "on the basis of inter se merit to ensure rectification of imbalance in the admission for various parts of the State, if any, so as to give equitable and uniform treatment to those parts".
In Nishi Maghu vs State of Jammu and Kashmir, ; , the Supreme Court held that the selections made under the third category were invalid, inasmuch as the classification made for rectification of regional imbalance without identifying the areas suffering from imbalance was vague.
The State Government, therefore, published Notification No. 41 G.R. of 1980 dated 24th September, 1980 purporting to identify certain villages as socially and educationally backward for applying the principle of "rectification of imbalance in different parts of the States".
and reduced the distribution of seats in the Medical Colleges of the State under this category from 18 to 17% under this category.
This order is challenged by the petitioner, an unsuccessful candidate in the selection made for admission to M.B.B.S. course for the year 1980 81.
35 Allowing the petitions, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
The classification attempted by the State Government by its order dated 24th September, 1980 suffers from the vice of arbitrariness and is, therefore, invalid.
There was no intelligible data before the Court for sustaining the classification.
No doubt the State Government had acted in its own wisdom, but the material to which that wisdom was applied was not disclosed at all.
The fact by itself that some hundreds of villages had been brought within the classification is of no assistance whatever.
That a comprehensive understanding of regional imbalances from the Anand Committee report and the Sikri Commission report had not been possible yet affords no justification for an arbitrary classification.
The State failed to bring the case within Article 15(4) of the Constitution.
[39 G; 40 D] State of U.P. vs Pradip Tandon, ; applied.
There is need to revise the marks ratio for the viva voce test because of the very real risk future selections would face on this score.
The Government would also do well to ensure that Selection Committees take care to devote sufficient time to the oral interview of individual candidates having regard to the several relevant considerations which must enter into their judgment respecting each candidate.[41 D & G] A. Peeriakaruppan, etc.
vs State of Tamil Nadu and Ors., [1971] 2 S.C.R. 430; Nishi Maghu vs State of Jammu and Kashmir, ; ; Ajay Hasia vs Khalid Mujib, ; , referred to.
The selection cannot be said to be vitiated on the ground that one of the members, Shri Kundal, left after some time and therefore the composition of the Interview Committee varied from time to time, since three out of four members remained present throughout the proceedings and a proportionately small number only of the candidates was interviewed when Shri Kundal was present.
[42 D E] 2: 3.
The appointment of a Government official as a member of the Selection Committee is not obnoxious to the law.
There is no principle of law disqualifying a Government official from participating on the Interview Committee merely because he is a Government official.
It cannot be said that a Government official cannot be a person of high integrity, calibre and qualifications.
The constitution of a Committee lies in the wisdom of the State Government and it is expected men suitably qualified in every respect will be appointed to discharge the functions of the Committee.
So long as the State Government acts bona fide it cannot be said that the presence of a Government official on the Selection Committee vitiates its constitution.
[44H, 45 A B] 2: 4.
Selection of a number of candidates, in the present case, cannot be said to have been made because of favouritism on account of relationship or friendship with members of the Selection Committee or because they were related to important and influential persons in the State.
Besides being sketchy and extremely vague, such allegations have been made for the first time in the rejoinder affidavit and there has been no reasonable opportunity to the respondents to reply to them.[42 F] 36 3.
The grant of admission to respondents Nos. 7 to 12, in the instant case, is in order, inasmuch as the relevant qualifying examination was held late and the announcement of the results was delayed.
The State Government correctly permitted the candidature of these applicants to be considered for inclusion in a common list drawn up to cover candidates for admission to either of the Government Medical Colleges, at Srinagar and at Jammu.
Even according to petitioner those respondents have an excellent record and if they had applied in time for admission in the Government College at Srinagar they would certainly have been admitted on the basis of their merit.
[42G H] 4.
A competitive entrance examination is permissible in law in addition to the qualifying examination.
In regard to the sufficiency of the objective test, the absence of a prescribed formal curriculum does not vitiate the objective test.
[44 E] 5.
A reading of the regulations framed by the Indian Medical Council under section 33 read with section 19 A of the makes it clear that the reservation permissible need not necessarily be confined to Scheduled castes and scheduled tribes.
[44 E]
