Government of India, Ministry of Works & Housing and Urban Development Notification No. 3/12/65 PII(IX) dated 1st April, 1966, requiring a licence to make or possess the explosive substances Possession without such a licence, of the explosive substances is unauthorised.
Penal Code, section 120B Criminal conspiracy Nature of proof.
Fakhruddin, the owner of the shop, known as M. F. Maniyar & Sons, Sholapur, along with his three sons, was tried for offences under section 120B of the Penal Code, section 5 of the Explosive Substances Act, section 3 read with section 25 of the Arms Act and section 6(1)(a) of the Poisons Act.
All the four were convicted and sentenced by the Sessions Judge, Sholapur, to sentences of different durations under these Acts and also to fine.
The substantive sentences were directed to run concurrently.
The appeals before the High Court having failed the appellants have come in appeal by special leave to this Court.
Dismissing the appeals, the Court while remitting the sentences of fine and reducing the sentences of imprisonment to the periods already undergone by the three living appellants. ^ HELD:1 :1.
In order to bring home the offence under section 5 of the Explosive Substances Act, the prosecution has to prove: (i) that the substance in question is explosive substance; (ii) that the accused makes or knowingly has in his possession or under his control any explosive substance; and (iii) that he does so under such circumstances as to give rise to a reasonable suspicion that he is not doing so for a lawful object.
[75D G] 1: 2.
The burden of proof of the ingredients of section 5 of the Explosive Substances Act, is on the prosecution.
The moment prosecution has discharged that burden, it shifts to the accused to show that he was making or possessing the explosive substance for a lawful object, if he takes that plea.
[75F G] 2.
On a consideration of the evidence of the Explosive Inspector, and other evidence, the substances in question which were recovered from the appe 69 llants were "explosive substances" within the definition of that expression in section 2 of the Explosive Substances Act.
[76F G] 3: 1.
The factum of the recovery of the said articles from the possession of appellant No. 1 and also the evidence that his three sons, appellants 2 to 4, who were managing and running the shop of M. F. Maniyar and Sons from which the incriminating substances were seized clearly show that all of them were guilty.
[76 G H, 77A] 3: 2.
The several substances seized, not being minute or small in quantity, make it clear that the appellants were in "conscious possession" of the substances seized within the meaning of section 5 of the Explosive Substances Act.
[77A B] 3: 3.
The possession of the explosive substances by the appellants were without any authority since the appellants had no licence or authority to make or possess the explosive substances as required by the Government of India.
Ministry of Works & Housing and Urban, notification dated 1st April, 1966.
The licence possessed by them is dated 31 3 1956 which was not in pursuance and in conformity of the said Government notification.
[77G H] 3: 4.
The knowledge that the particular substance is an explosive substance depends on different circumstances and varies from person to person.
Unlike an ignorant man or a child coming across an explosive substance who picks it up out of curiosity not knowing that it is an explosive substance, a person of experience may immediately know that it is an explosive substance.
In the instant case, as the appellant had been dealing with the substance in question for long time, they certainly knew or at least they shall be presumed to have known what those substances were and for what purpose they were used.
The said presumption is further fortified from the fact that a half K.G. of blasting powder/ potassium cyanide was sold to the decoy witness by the appellants.
[78E F, G] 4.
For an offence under section 120B of the Penal Code the prosecution need not necessarily prove that the perpetraters expressly agreed to do or cause to be done the illegal act: the agreement may be proved by necessary implication.
In this case, the fact that the appellants were possessing and selling explosive substances without a valid licence for a pretty long time leads to the inference that they agreed to do and/or cause to be done the said illegal act, for, without such an agreement the act could not have been done for such a long time.[79G H, 80A]
