Allowing the appeals, the Court ^ HELD: 1: 1.
Article 22 (5) of the Constitution enjoins a duty on the authority making the order of detention to afford the detenu the earliest opportunity of making a representation against the order.
The right and obligation to make and to consider the representation at the earliest opportunity is a constitutional imperative which cannot be curtailed or abridged.
[140 E] 1: 2.
If the Parliament or the State Legislature making the law providing for preventive detention devises a circumlocutory procedure for considering the representation or if the inter departmental consultative procedures are such that delay becomes inevitable, the law and the procedures will contravene the constitutional mandate.
It is essential that any law providing for preventive detention and any authority obliged to make order for preventive detention should adopt procedures calculated towards expeditious consideration of representations made by detenus.
It will be no answer to a demand for liberty to say that administrative red tape makes delay inevitable.
The constitutional mandate brooks no unreasonable delay in the consideration of a representation.
[140 G, 141A] 1: 4.
The right of detenu to have his representation considered "at the earliest opportunity" and the obligation of the detaining authority to consider the representation "at the earliest opportunity" are not a right and an obligation flowing from either the Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling Activities, 1974 or the National Security Act or, for that matter any other Parliamentary or State law providing for preventive detention.
They are a right and an obligation created by the very Constitution which breathes life into the Parliamentary or State law.
[140 D] Jayanarayan Sukul vs State of West Bengal, ; ; Narendra Purshotam Umrao etc.
vs B.B. Gujral and Ors.,[1979] 2 SCR 315; V.J. Jain vs Pradhan, ; ; Smt.
Ichhu Devi Choraria vs Union of India and Ors.; ; ; Ramachandra A. Kamat vs Union of India and Ors. ; ; Frances Coralie Mullin vs W. C. Khambra and Ors. ; , referred to.
