In the State of Uttar Pradesh, sugarcane was produced by the sugar mills through the 'hydraulic process ' and by the power crushers through the 'open pan process '.
Both the mills as also the crushers drew their raw material, namely sugarcane from sugarcane growers.
In order to facilitate production by the sugar mills, most of which were controlled by the State, reserved area of the fields growing sugarcane was fixed through out the State.
With a view to removing nation wide shortage of sugar, enhancing sugar production and achieving an equitable distribution of the commodity so as to make it available to consumers at reasonable rates, the Cane Commissioner in exercise of the powers conferred under clause (8) of the Sugarcane (Control) Order, 1966 issued a notification dated 9th October, 1980 which directed that no power crusher other than vertical power crushers manufacturing gur or rab from sugarcane grown on their own fields or a Khandsari unit or any agent of such owner in the reserved area of a mill could be worked until December 1, 1980.
The petitioners who were owners of power crushers of Khandsari units and had taken out regular licences under the Uttar Pradesh Khandsari Sugar Manufacturers Licensing Order 1967, assailed the notification which limited the ban to work power crushers for a period of one month and a half i.e. from October 9. 1980 to December 1, 1980 in writ petitions to this Court.
They contended: (1) The notification, as also the Control Order under which it was passed are violative of Article 19(1)(g) and the restrictions contained therein do not contain the quality of reasonableness.
(2) Clause 8 of the Control Order under which the notification had been issued suffers from the vice of excessive delegation of powers and is, therefore, violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
The Notification seeks to establish a monopoly in favour of the sugar mills at the cost of the petitioners, and must be struck down as being violative of Article 14.
(3) There is no rational nexus between the prohibition contained in the Notification preventing the crushers of petitioners from working them and the object sought to be achieved by it.
(4) Clause 8 of the Control Order does not contemplate a complete prohibition of the production of an article but envisages only a regulation of the period of hours of working.
(5) The Notification violates the principles of natural justice inasmuch as it was passed without hearing the petitioners whose rights were curtailed as they were put completely out of production.
(6) The impugned Notification by imposing a prohibition against the working of the power crushers amounts to a partial revocation of the licences granted to the petitioners under clause 3 of the 93 Licensing Order and is, therefore violative of clause 11.
(7) The impugned Notification goes against the very spirit and object of the Act of 1955 and in fact, frustrates the equal distribution and production of sugar which was the objective of the Notification.
On behalf of the respondent State it was submitted that: (1) An order passed under clause 8 of the Control Order is of a legislative character and therefore the question of the application of the principles of natural justice, does not arise.
(2) The notification does not violate Article 14 or Article 19 because it is in public interest and aimed at maintaining and securing proper and equitable distribution of sugar.
(3) The Notification is justified by the fact that the recovery of sugar from sugarcane in case of Khandsari units run by power crushers is between 4 to 6 per cent whereas in the case of sugar factories it ranges between 9 1/2 to 11 1/2 per cent, so that utilisation of sugarcane in the case of mills is double of that of the power crusher.
(4) The Khandsari produced by the crushers has got a very narrow sphere of consumption as it is used mostly by halwais or villagers, whereas sugar produced by the sugar mills is consumed in far larger quantities by the public.
The action taken in order to protect national interest and distribution of sugar to the entire country on rational basis cannot be said to be an unreasonable restriction.
(5) There is a marked difference between the quality of Khandsari and that of sugar produced by the mills in their character, specification, etc.
(6) The question of natural justice does not arise because the crusher owners were fully aware of the situation and had also knowledge of the considerations which prevailed with the Government in stopping crushers for a short period in order to boost production by the sugar mills and fix support price for the sugarcane supplied to the mills.
(7) Clause 8 of the Control Order uses the words period or working hours ' which are wide enough to embrace within their ambit a fixed period of time covering more than a day as also hours of work on any working day.
Dismissing the writ petitions and appeals, ^ HELD: The impugned Notification cannot be said to contain the quality of unreasonableness but is per se fair and reasonable.
In so far as the word 'vertical ' used in the Notification is concerned, it must be struck down as being violative of Article 14.
This, however, does not render the entire Notification void because the word 'vertical ' is clearly severable from the other portions of the Notification.
All that has to be done is to read the Notification void because the word 'vertical ' as a result of which the exemptions from the ban will include all owners of power crushers whether vertical or horizontal which manufacture Gur or rab from sugarcane grown on their fields.
As the Notification has already spent its force, if any order is passed in future, the Government will see that such an invidious discrimination is not repeated.
[134F; 124H 125B] 1(i) Where a citizen complains of the violation of fundamental rights contained in any of sub clauses (a) to (g) of Article 19 the onus is on the State to prove or justify that the restraint or restrictions imposed on the fundamental rights under clauses 2 to 6 of the Article are reasonable.
[104 C] Saghir Ahmed vs The State of U.P. and Ors.
; and Mohammed Faruk vs State of Madhya Pradesh and Ors.
94 (ii) Fundamental rights enshrined in Part III of the Constitution are neither absolute nor unlimited but are subject to reasonable restrictions which may be imposed by the State in public interest under clauses 2 to 6 of Article 19.
What are reasonable restrictions would naturally depend on the nature and circumstances of the case, the character of the statute, the object which it seeks to serve, the existing circumstances, the extent of the evil sought to be remedied as also the nature of restraint or restriction placed on the rights of the citizen.
No hard or fast rule of universal application can be laid down, but if the restriction imposed appear to be consistent with the Directive Principles of State Policy they would have to be upheld as the same would be in public interest and manifestly reasonable.
[105D E, G] (iii) Restrictions may be partial, complete, permanent or temporary but they must bear a close nexus with the object in the interest of which they are imposed.
Sometimes even a complete prohibition of the fundamental right to trade may be upheld if the commodity in which the trade is carried on is essential to the life of the community and the said restriction has been imposed for limited period in order to achieve the goal.
Freezing of stocks of food grains in order to secure equitable distribution and availability on fair prices have been held to be a reasonable restriction.
[105 106A, C] Narendra Kumar and Ors.
vs The Union of India and Ors. ; , M/s. Diwan Sugar and General Mills (P) Ltd. and Ors.
vs The Union of India, [1959] 2 Supp. S.C.R.123 and The State of Rajsthan vs Nath Mal and Mitha Mal, ; referred to.
(iv) In determining the reasonableness of restrictions imposed by law in the field of industry, trade or commerce, the mere fact that some of the persons engaged in a particular trade may incur loss due to the imposition of restrictions will not render them unreasonable because it is manifest that trade and industry pass through periods of prosperity and adversity on account of economic, social or political factors.
In a free economy, controls have to be introduced to ensure availability of consumer goods, like food stuffs, cloth or the like at a fair price and the fixation of such a price cannot be said to be an unreasonable restriction.
[107 A B] (v) Where restrictions are imposed on a citizen carrying on a trade or commerce in an essential commodity, the aspect of controlled economy and fair and equitable distribution to the consumer at a reasonable price leaving an appreciable margin of profit to the producer is undoubtedly a consideration which does not make the restriction unreasonable.
[107 C] State of Madras vs V.G. Row, ; , Mineral Development Ltd. vs The State of Bihar and Anr.
, , Collector of Customs, Madras vs Nathella Sampathu Chetty and Anr.
[1962]3 S.C.R. 786 and M/s. Diwan Sugar and General Mills (P.) Ltd. and Ors.
vs U.O.I. [1959] 2 Supp.
S.C.R. 123 referred to.
(vi) A restriction on the right of a trader dealing in essential commodities, or fixation of prices aimed at bringing about distribution of essential commodities keeping the consumers interests as the prime consideration cannot be regarded as unreasonable.
[110 C] In the instant case, the Petitioners by rushing to Court the moment the Notification was issued, deprived the State as also themselves of the actual con 95 sequences of the notification and the prejudice which it really may have caused.
They did not at all show any patience in waiting for a while to find out if the experiment functioned successfully and in the long run paid good dividends.
As the petitioners obtained stay orders the experiment died a natural death and the Notification remained ineffective.
[111D E] Prag Ice and Oil Mills and Anr.
vs Union of India; , , referred to.
(vii) In the case of essential commodities like sugar the question of the economic production and distribution thereof must enter the verdict of the Court in deciding the reasonableness of the restrictions.
In such cases even if the margin of profit left to the procedure is slashed that would not make the restriction unreasonable.
The reason is that such a trade or commerce is subject to rise and fall in prices and other diverse factors, and if any measure is taken to strike a just balance between the danger sought to be averted and the temporary deprivation of the right of a citizen to carry on his trade, it will have to be upheld as reasonable restriction.
[112 G 113A] Shree Meenakshi Mills Ltd. vs U.O.I. [1974] 2 S.C.R. 398 and Saraswati Industrial Syndicate Ltd. vs U.O.I.[1975] 1 S.C.R. 956 referred to.
(viii) The restriction imposed by the Notification in stopping the crushers for the period 10th October to 1st December, 1980 is in public interest and bears a reasonable nexus to the object which is sought to be achieved, namely, to reduce shortage of sugar and ensure a more equitable distribution of this commodity.
Taking an overall picture of the history of sugar production it cannot be said that the stoppage of sugar crushers for a short period is more excessive than the situation demanded.
Madhya Bharat Cotton Association Ltd. vs Union of India and Anr.
A.I.R. 1954 S.C. 634 referred to.
2(i) The Control Order has been passed under the authority of section 3 of the Act of 1955 which has been held to be constitutionally valid and not in any way discriminatory so as to attract Article 14.
The Control Order itself contains sufficient guidelines, checks and balances to prevent any misuse or abuse of the power.
The Central Government under clause 8 on whom the power is conferred is undoubtedly a very high authority who must be presumed to act in a just and reasonable manner.
[119 E F] Chinta Lingam and Ors.
vs Government of India and Ors.
; and V.C. Shukla vs State (Delhi Admn.), ; (ii) There was no question of creating any monopoly to benefit the mills.
A very large majority of the mills were controlled by the State or co operative societies and only a small fraction of them were working in the private sector.
In view of the low working cost of the crushers they sought to outcompete the mills and deprive them of the requisite amount of sugarcane which they should have got.
It was not only just but also essential to boost the production of the factories so that while sugar may be produced on a large scale and sugarcane may not be wasted which would have been the case if most of the sugarcane went 96 to the crusher.
The recovery of sugarcane juice by the mills is double that by the crushers and if the latter were allowed to operate the wastage would have been almost 50 per cent which could have been avoided if sugarcane was allowed to be utilised by the mills.
[121 E G] (iii) If in the larger public interest it becomes necessary to compel the sugarcane growers to supply sugarcane to the mills at a particular rate in order to meet a national crisis, no person can be heard to say that his rights are taken away in an unjust or discriminatory fashion.
Personal or individual interests must yield to the larger interests of community.
This was the philosophy behind the passing of the Act of 1955.
[123 F G] 3.
It has not been proved that there is any real distinction between a vertical and a horizontal power crusher.
Both are regarded as falling in the same class.
The Notification by exempting vertical power crushers and prohibiting horizontal power crushers is clearly discriminatory and the discrimination is not justified by any rational nexus between the prohibition and the object sought to be achieved.
[124 G] 4.
(i) Clause 8 used the words 'period or hours to be worked '.
A plain reading of this expression reveals that the words 'period ' and 'hours ' have been used to connote to different aspects.
Clause 8 contemplates regulation of working of the sugar by two separate methods (1) Where only hours of work per day are to be regulated or fixed, and (2) the word 'period ' which has nothing to do with the hours to be worked but it refers to another category of regulation, namely, whether a crusher is to run or not for a particular period of time.
[125 D E] In the instant case, the Notification has resorted to the first category, viz. the 'period ' of the working of the crushers, that is about one and a half month, and has not at all touched or impinged upon the working hours of the crushers.
If, however, the notification had fixed certain hours of the day during which only the crushers could work, then the Notification would have resorted to the alternative mode of regulation, which obviously has not been done.
The impugned Notification is, therefore, wholly consistent with the provisions contained in clause 8 of the Control Order.
[125 G 126A] 5.
(i) Two prominent features exclude the rules of natural justice in the instant case.
Section 3 of the Act of 1955 under which the Control Order was passed really covers an emergent situation so as to meet a national crisis, involving the availability or distribution of any essential commodity which may make it necessary to restrict or control the business carried on by a citizen.
There was an acute shortage of sugar which was not made available to consumers at reasonable rates and the situation caused serious dissatisfaction among the people.
Nothing short of immediate and emergent measures taken to solve this crisis would have eased out the situation.
If hearing was to be given to so may owners of power crushers, it would have completely defeated and frustrated the very object not only of the Notification but also of the Act of 1955 and created complications which may have resulted in a further deterioration of an already serious situation.
If the rules of natural justice were not applied in such an emergent case, the petitioners cannot be heard to complain.
Afterall, the Notification directed stoppage of operation only for a very short period and the petitioners would have had an opportunity of recouping their loss after they were allowed to function because the proportion of consumption of Khandsari Sugar was limited.
97 The petitioners were, therefore, not seriously prejudiced but have rushed to this Court rather prematurely.
[128 B C; F 129 A] Mohinder Singh Gill and Anr.
vs The Chief Election Commissioner, New Delhi and Ors. , Maneka Gandhi vs U.O.I. [1978] 2 S.C.R. 621, S.L. Kapoor vs Jagmohan; , and Prag Ice and Oil Mills and Anr.
vs U.O.I. ; , referred to.
(ii) The impugned Notification is a legislative measure.
The rules of natural justice therefore stand completely excluded and no question of hearing arises.
The passing of the notification was a trial and error method adopted to deal with a very serious problem.
[129 G H, 130 F] Chairman, Board of Mining Examination and Anr.
vs Ramjee; , , Joseph Beauhernais vs People of the State of Illinois, ; at 930 and Bates vs Lord Hailsham of St. Marylebone and Ors. ; at 1378 referred to.
A revocation of licence means that the licence has not been suspended but cancelled for all times to come entailing civil consequences and complete abolition of the right for the exercise of which the licence was granted.
A temporary suspension of the working of the crushers owned by the petitioners cannot amount to a revocation, either complete or partial.
The proviso to sub clause (2) of clause 11 of the Control Order does not at all envisage a partial or periodical revocation of a licence.
The proviso comes into play only if a licence is revoked or cancelled once for all.
The proviso is wholly inapplicable to the facts of the instant case.
[132 C D] State of Maharashtra vs Mumbai Upnagar Gramodyog Sangh, ; 7.
The Notification ex facie cannot be said to have been passed without due care and deliberation.
The impugned Notification having been passed under section 3 of the Act it fulfils all the conditions contained therein, viz. it is expedient for maintaining or increasing the supply of an essential commodity, namely sugar which is included in clause (e) of the section 3 of the Act of 1955 and it regulates the supply and distribution of the essential commodities of the trade and commerce.
Neither the Control Order nor the impugned Notification is against the tenor and spirit of section 3.
It is manifestly clear from the circumstances disclosed that it is in pursuance of the aim and object for which section 3 was enshrined in the Act of 1955 that the Control Order and the Notification were promulgated.
[133E; H 134 C] 8.
In case Government decides to impose a ban in future on the power crushers or other units, a bare minimum hearing not to all the owners of Khandsari units but to only one representative of the Association representing them, and getting their views, would help the Government in formulating its policy.
Even if an emergent situation arises, a representation against the proposed action may be called for from such Association and considered after giving the shortest possible notice.
[135A B] 9.
Whenever any steps for banning production is taken, the Government has to evolve some procedure to detect the defaulters and ensure compliance of the baning order.
[136 C] 98
