Order XXI Rules 95 and 96 of the Code of Civil Procedure enable a purchaser of immovable property in a Court sale, to apply for delivery of possession.
Rule 95 provides for actual physical possession and rule 96 provides for symbolic possession.
A purchaser will be entitled to physical possession of the property purchased if the property sold is in the occupation of the judgment debtor, of some person on behalf of the judgment debtor or some person claiming under a title created by the judgment debtor subsequent to the attachment of the property.
If the property sold is in the possession of a tenant or other person entitled to occupy the same, symbolic possession is to be made over to the purchaser under Rule 96.
The first respondent was an auction purchaser of property, of which the three appellants were tenants occupying different portions.
The property was mortgaged by its owner with a Bank.
As the amount due was not paid, the Bank instituted a suit for its recovery.
A decree was passed by consent of the parties which provided that if the amount was not paid within two years, the Bank could enforce the decree by sale of the property.
After the compromise decree was passed, the owner leased out different portions of the property to the appellants.
As the owner failed to make payment of the decreetal dues, the property was sold by Court auction and the first respondent, whose bid was the highest, was declared to be the purchaser of the premises, and the sale in his favour was confirmed.
The first respondent/auction purchaser filed an application under Order XXI, Rules 95 and 96 read with Section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure in the High Court, for delivery of vacant physical possession of the entire property and prayed that if it was not possible to grant vacant physical possession of any part of the property, symbolic possession of that part may be granted.
This application was contested by the three appellants/tenants.
A Single Judge of the High Court holding that the tenancies in favour of the appellants having been created after the institution of the suit by the Bank and after the passing of the compromise decree in the said suit, and the said tenancies would have no effect on the rights acquired by the auction purchaser in view of Section 52 of the , and relying on the Division Bench Judgments of the Bombay High Court in Ramdas Popat Patil vs Fakira Patil and Ors.
AIR 1959 Bom 19 and of the Gujarat High Court in Jagjiwandas a Firm vs 175 Lakhiram Haridasmal and Ors.
AIR 1968 Guj 193 passed an order for delivery of physical possession of the portions in the respective occupation of the appellants.
In appeal it was contended that the Full Bench decision of the Bombay High Court in Anaji Thamaji Patil vs Ragho Bhivraj Patil and Anr.
AIR 1973 Bom 75, over ruled the Bombay Division Bench decision and doubted the correctness of the Gujarat decision, but the Division Bench of the High Court dismissed the appeal accepting the contention put forward on behalf of the respondent purchaser that the decision of this Court in M/s Supreme General Films Exchange Ltd. vs His Highness Maharaja Sir Brijnath ; concluded the controversy.
In the appeal to this Court, it was contend on behalf of the appellants that: (1) Section 52 of the has no application to the facts and circumstances of this case as the conditions laid down therein for its applicability are not satisfied.
(ii) The right that the mortgagee had was only to put the property to sale in the event of the mortgagor failing to pay the decreetal amount in terms of the provisions of the compromise decree, and this right cannot be said to be a right to immovable property directly and specifically in question in the suit.
(iii) Section 65A of the should be read alongwith Section 52 and both these sections have been incorporated with the object of preserving the interest of the mortgagee by making suitable provisions so that the security of the mortgagee might not in any way be affected by any act done by the mortgagor after the creation of the mortgage and also after the institution of any suit for enforcement of the mortgage.
(iv) Section 52 makes provisions for the parties to the suit or proceeding and can have no application to any auction purchaser who is not a party to the suit or proceeding and who only acquires his right after the sale in execution of the decree has been confirmed.
(v) The right of the third party auction purchaser to get physical possession of the property purchased at the auction sale was not considered by the Supreme Court in M/s Supreme General Films Exchange Ltd. vs His Highness Maharaja Sir Brijnath Singhji Deo of Maihar and Ors.
and Jayaram Mudaliar vs Ayya Swami and Ors.
AIR (vi) Order XXI, Rule 95 and Rule 96 of the Code of Civil Procedure provides that the rights of an auction purchaser are governed by the provisions contained therein and that the auction purchaser cannot claim physical possession of the portions in the occupation of the appellants even though they might have been inducted as tenants after the compromise decree in the suit had been passed.
On behalf of the first respondent auction purchaser it was submitted that (1) as the tenants were inducted not only after the institution of the suit for enforcement of the mortgage but also after the compromise decree that has been passed therein, Section 52 of the must be held to be applicable 176 and it must be held that the tenancies were illegal and were created in breach of these provisions.
S.(2) 65A the does not in any way control section 52.
S 65A makes provisions with regard to the powers of the mortgagor to grant leases of the mortgaged property after the creation of the mortgage but before the institution of suit, while section 32 makes provisions for cases of transfer or otherwise dealing with any property after the institution of a suit or proceeding and section 52 imposes a complete ban on the transfer of any kind or dealing with immovable property except with the authority of the Court during the pendency of the suit or proceeding so that the rights of any part may not be affected when any decree or order is passed.
Section 58 of the provides that a mortgage is a transfer of an interest in specific immovable property for the purpose of securing the payment of money advanced or to be advanced by way of loan.
In a suit for the enforcement of a mortgage, the right to immovable property is directly and specifically in question and after the decree for sale is passed, the mortgagor loses even his right to redeem the property.
The tenancies in the instant case having been created long after the compromise decree, are illegal and void and in contravention of section 52 of the Act.
The decisions of this Court in M/s Supreme General Films Exchange Ltd. Manager Mahto and Ors.
and Jayaram Mudaliar conclude the question involved in the appeal.
On the question whether the 1st Respondent as auction purchaser in an application under Or.
XXI, rules 95 and 96, of the Code of Civil Procedure is entitled to recover actual physical possession of the portions in the occupation of the appellants as lessees, the lease in respect of which were created after the decree in the mortgage suit by consent between the parties had been passed.
Allowing the appeal ^ HELD 1.
The Judgment and Order passed by the High Court directing physical possession of the portions in the occupation of the appellants to be made over to the auction purchaser Respondent No. 1 is set aside.
Symbolic possession of the portions in occupation of the appellants to be made over to the auction purchaser respondent.
[194 D] 2.
In the case of M/s Supreme General Films Exchange Ltd., the validity of the lease had been questioned by the mortgagee decree holder in a suit for declaration.
The claim was not for possession by a third party auction purchaser in a proceeding, under rules 95 and 96 of order XXI of the Code of Civil Procedure and the merits of such an application and the scope and effect of the said provisions of the Code did not come up for consideration.
In Mangru Matho and Ors.
vs Shri Thakur Taraknath Tarakeshwar Math and Ors.
a suit was instituted by the mortgagee auction purchaser for recovery of possession of mortgaged property sold in execution of the mortgage decree and purchased by the mortgagee himself and the decision rested mainly on the basis that the lease was not granted by the mortgagor in the usual course of business.
This case was also not concerned with an application by an outsider auction purchaser for physical possession of the property purchased by him in an application made under order XXI Rules 95 and 96 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
These two decisions do not therefore conclude the question involved in the present appeal.[190 A B, 191 H 192 C] 177 3.
The auction purchaser derives his right to obtain possession only after the sale in his favour has become absolute and sale certificate has been obtained by him.
The mode and manner of obtaining such possession are regulated by Rules 95 and 96 of the Code of Civil Procedure.[193 F] In the instant case a third party auction purchaser is seeking recovery of the physical possession of the property purchased by him at the auction from the appellants who are in possession of different portions of the said premises as tenants of the said portions.
The auction purchaser was not the mortgagee and he was no party to the suit in which the compromise decree was passed.
The auction purchaser in view of the provisions contained in Rule 95 which regulate the rights of the auction purchaser to obtain physical possession of the property, is not entitled to the recover the physical possession of the portions in the occupation of the appellants as tenants.
The appellants are not the judgment debtors.
They are not in occupation of the property on behalf of the judgment debt or.
They are also not claiming to be in occupation under a title created by the judgment debtors subsequent to any attachment of the property.
There is no question of any attachment in the case.
The appellants are in the occupation of their respective portions as tenants and they claim to occupy the same as such.
The auction purchaser must therefore be held to be entitled to only symbolic possession in terms of the provisions contained in Or XXI rule 96 in respect of the portions in occupation of the appellants.
[192 H 193 A, 193 H 194 A, C]
