All the three respondents (respondents nos.
1 and 2 partners and respondent No. 3, the firm) were prosecuted for the alleged contravention of section 18A, in that when asked by the Drugs Inspector to disclose the name, address and other particulars of the person from whom a certain drug was acquired by them, they gave a fictitious address and that, therefore, they were liable to be convicted under section 18(a) (ii) read with section 18(c) of the Act.
The Metropolitan Magistrate convicted respondent No. 1 (the partner incharge of the business of the firm) and respondent No. 3 (the firm) but acquitted respondent No. 2 on the ground that it was respondent No. 1 who was incharge of the firm and sentenced them variously.
The High Court summarily dismissed the State 's appeal against the acquittal of respondent No. 2 and of all the respondents under section 18A. Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: Violation of the provisions of section 18A remained unestablished and the defence version remained unrebutted.
[202E] The Assistant Commissioner, Food and Drug Administration Bombay, North Circle, deposed that the particulars given by the respondents as to the person from whom the drugs were purported to have been acquired were verified by an Inspector who in his report stated that the name and address given by the respondents were fictitious; but the Inspector has not been examined nor was his report proved.
The defence version, therefore, remained unrebutted.
[202 D E] The second respondent was not liable to be convicted merely because he had the right to participate in the business of the firm under the terms of the partnership deed.
The term "person incharge" referred to in section 34 must mean that the person should be in overall control of the day to day business of the firm.
A person may be a party to the policy being followed by a firm and yet not be incharge of its business or a person may be incharge of a business but not in overall charge or may be incharge or only some part of the business.
In short, a partner of a firm is liable to be convicted for an offence if he was in 201 charge of and was responsible to the firm for the conduct of its business or if it is proved that the offence was committed with the consent or connivance of or was attributable to any neglect on the part of the partner concerned.
[204A B] G.L. Gupta vs D.N. Mehta ; applied.
In the instant case respondent No. 2 was not in overall control of the business.
It was respondent No. 1, who was in that position.
[204 C]
