The respondent filed a suit at Indore on 24 2 1975 against the appellant claiming damages to the tune of Rs. 26,000/ on account of the alleged nondelivery of certain goods.
Summons in the suit was sent to the registered office of the company in Calcutta and was served on Sri Navlakha on 17 3 1975 asking the company to appear at Indore on 25 3 1975.
Since the company did not appear in the Court on that date, eventually, the exparte decree was passed on 22 4 1975.
The appellant company came to know about the ex parte decree for the first time when its constituted attorney Sri Jhunjhunwala received a notice from the respondent by registered post demanding the decretal dues.
Thereupon Sri N. section Pareek, the Works Secretary of the company who is in charge of the legal matters was sent to Indore to ascertain as to how the ex parte decree came to be passed.
Pareek learnt that the summons was purported to have been served on Navalakha on 17 3 75.
Navalakha did not bring the fact of the receipt of summons by him to the knowledge of any responsible officer of the company.
He was neither secretary nor a Director nor any other principal officer of the company authorised to receive summons in the suit.
The company remained in dark and learnt for the first time on 29 7 75 about the passing of the ex parte decree.
The Trial Court allowed the application but the High Court in revision under section 115 of C.P.C. restored the ex parte order.
Hence the appeal by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1.Rule 2 of Order XXIX of C.P.C. is not an exhaustive provision providing for all modes of service on the Company in the sense as to what is meant by service of summons on the Secretary, Director or Principal Officer.
Service on managing agents who are a corporation is valid under clause (a) of Rule 2 of Order XXIX C.P.C., since a Principal Officer in clause (a) of Rule 2 has been held to include managing agents and it can under this rule, be on a juristic person.
[1031 D E] Jute and Guuny Brokers Ltd. & Anr.
vs Union of India and Ors.
[1961] 3 SCR p. 20; followed.
2.Sending a summon to a corporation by post addressed to it at its registered office may be a good mode of service either by itself, or preferably, by way of an additional mode of service.
But leaving the summons at the registered office of the corporation if it is literally interpreted to say that the summons can be left anywhere uncared for in the registered office of the company.
then it will lead to anomalous and absurd results.
It has to be read in the background of provision contained in Order 5 Rule 17 of the Code.
In other 1029 words, if the serving peon or bailiff is not able to serve the summons on the Secretary or any Director or any other Principal Officer of the Corporation because either he refuses to sign the summons or is not to be found by the serving person even after due diligence then he can leave the summons at the registered office of the company and make a report to that effect.
In the instant case nothing of the kind was done.
It was also not the case of the respondent in its rejoinder filed in the Miscellaneous case that the service of the summons was effected in accordance with the first part of clause (b) of Rule 2 of Order 29 of the Code.
[1032 B D] 3.
Nowhere in the rejoinder a stand was taken by the respondents that the summons was duly served on the company because it was left at the registered office of the company.
The company had no knowledge of the ex parte decree, even otherwise, before 29 7 75.
Hence the application under O.I.X Rule 13 of C.P.C. has been correctly allowed.
[1033 C D]
