When the appellants wanted to irrigate the land they were prevented from doing so by the deceased as a result of which the 1st appellant who is now dead gave a bhala blow to the deceased.
The other appellants were supposed to have been armed with lathis but they did not cause any injuries either to the witnesses or to the deceased.
The Sessions Judge convicted the 1st appellant under section 304 Part I of the Indian Penal Code and sentenced him to undergo imprisonment for life and the other appellants under section 326/149 of the Indian Penal Code and sentenced them to undergo 3 years ' rigorous imprisonment but affirmed the acquittal of the individual charges under sections 323 and 325 I.P.C. The High Court while convicting the appellant under sections 325/149 of the I.P.C. has given no finding regarding the common object of the unlawful assembly.
Accepting the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: In the instant case, there is neither any evidence nor any finding that any of the ingredients of section 149 have been established by the prosecution.
Even on the prosecution case itself the occurrence took place as a result of an irrigation dispute and the appellants were merely acting under a bona fide claim or belief that they had the right to irrigate the land.
There is no overt act attributed to any of the appellants in regard to the deceased and the mere fact that the appellants were armed with lathis by itself would not prove that they shared the common object with which the deceased was inspired.
[292 G H] 2.
Before the High Court upheld the conviction of the appellants under sections 326/149 I.P.C. it should have recorded a clear finding as to what was the object of the unlawful assembly and if so whether the object was to commit murder, grievous hurt or simple hurt.
[293 A] 3.
Whenever the High Court convicts any person or persons of an offence with the aid of section 149 a clear finding regarding the common object of the assembly must be given and the evidence discussed must 292 show not only the nature of the common object but also that the object was unlawful.
Before recording a conviction under section 149 of the I.P.C. the essential ingredients of section 141 of the I.P.C. must be established.
[293 D]
