Upto November 30, 1973, there were two competing entries in the First Schedule to the U. P. Sales Tax Act, 1948, so far as the item "hypodermic clinical syringes" is concerned, namely, Entry 39 which ran: "Glass wares other than hurricane lantern chimneys, optical lenses and bottles" and Entry 44 which ran: "Hospital equipment and apparatus" and for an item falling under the former the rate of tax was 10% while under the latter the rate of tax was 4% and for an unclassified item the rate was 3 1/2% From December 1, 1973 onwards Entry 44 was deleted and, therefore, if the clinical syringes did not fall within entry 39 it became an unclassified item under section 3A(2A) of the U.P. Sales Tax Act, 1948 and the rate of tax was 7%.
In view of this position that obtained for the relevant periods during the assessment year 1973 74 the appellant assessee had claimed before the assessing authorities that its turnover in respect of syringes for the period up to November 30, 1973 was liable to tax at 3 1/2%, as an unclassified item or in the alternative at 4% as "hospital equipment" under Entry 44 and its turnover for the period from December 1, 1973 to March 31, 1974 was liable to be taxed at 7% as an unclassified item.
But, negativing its contentions the entire turnover was held to be taxable at the rate of 10% on the basis that clinical syringes fell within the expression "glass ware" occurring in Entry 39 and hence the appeal by special leave on the question whether hypodermic clinical syringes could be regarded as glass ware.
Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
The assessee 's turnover up to November 30, 1973 will fall under Entry 44 dealing with "hospital equipment" and the same would be taxable at the rate of 4% and its turnover from December 1, 1974 will be taxable at the rate of 7% as an unclassified item.
[298 H] 2: 1.
It is well settled that in interpreting items in statutes like the Excise Tax Acts or Sales Tax Acts, whose primary object is to raise revenue and for which purpose they classify diverse products, articles and substances resort should be had not to the scientific and technical meaning of the terms or expressions used but to their popular meaning, that is to say, the meaning attached to them by those dealing in them.
If any term or expression has been defined in the enactment then it must be understood in the sense in which it is defined 295 but in the absence of any definition being given in the enactment the meaning of the term in common parlance or commercial parlance has to be adopted.
[297 C D] Ramavatar Budhiaprasad etc.
vs Assistant Sales Tax Officer, Akola, and Commissioner of Sales Tax, Madhya Pradesh vs Jaswant Singh Charan Singh, ; , followed.
2 : 2.
The clinical syringes which the assessee manufactures and sells cannot be considered as "glass ware" falling within Entry 39 of the First Schedule of the Act.
(a) In commercial sense, glass ware would never comprise articles like clinical syringes, thermometers, lactometers, and the like which have specialised significance and utility: (b) in popular or commercial parlance a general merchant dealing in "glass ware" does not ordinarily deal in articles like clinical syringes, thermometers etc.
which articles though made of glass, are normally available in medical stores or with the manufacturers thereof like the assessee; (c) it is equally unlikely that consumer would ask for such articles from a glass ware shop.
Further in popular sense when one talks of glass ware such specialised articles like clinical syringes do not come up to one 's mind.
[298 E F] State of Orissa vs Janta Medical Stores, 37 STC 33, approved.
Commissioner of Sales Tax vs S.S.R. Syringes and Thermometers, 1973 Law Diary 178, overruled.
