The appellant, a starving youth was given shelter by a kindly couple by engaging him as a domestic servant.
The reward of that kindness was the murder of the lady of the house and her three year old son and causing serious injury to her five year old son.
The appellant was, therefore, charged and convicted under sections 302 and 307 of the Penal Code and sentenced under section 307 to imprisonment and to death under section 302.
The High Court confirmed the death sentence and hence the appeal after obtaining special leave of the Court.
Maintaining the conviction under sections 302 and 307 I.P.C. and the sentence under the latter section, but modifying the death sentence under section 302 to one of life imprisonment, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
Altering the sentence of the appellant to imprisonment for life for the offence under section 302 of the Penal Code, while maintaining the sentence under section 307 Penal Code the two sentences to run concurrently will meet the ends of justice, in the instant case, under the following circumstances: [267A B] (a) He was just about 21 years of age on the date of the offence and, very probably, a sudden impulse of sex or theft made him momentarily insensible.
(b) The evidence of Sunil shows that immediately after the crime, he was found sitting in the chowk of the house crying bitterly.(c) Having achieved his purpose, he did not even try to run away, which he could easily have done since his injuries were not of such a nature as to incapacitate him from fleeing from an inevitable arrest.
(d) Though he was not insane at the time of the offence in the sense that he did not know the nature and consequences of what he was doing, still he was somewhat unhinged.
He was kept in a mental hospital from July 19, 1973 to February 2, 1975 where he had shown aggressive symptoms and once even attacked another patient.
(e) The basic evidence in this case is of a child of five who answered many vital questions with a nod of the head, one way 260 or the other.
The extreme sentence cannot seek its main support from evidence of this kind which, even if true, is not safe enough to act upon for putting out a life.
(f) Non availability of the useful data on the question of sentence which the trial court proposed to pass due to the trial Judge 's failure to ask the appellant what he had to say on the question of sentence and (g) the appellant has been in jail for ten long years and probably would have earned by now the right to be released, after taking into account the remissions admissible to him, were he sentenced to life imprisonment.
[265 E H, 266A, C D, G] 2.
The Trial Judge had a safe expedient in section 235(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, which he needlessly denied to himself on technical consideration that by reason of section 484(2) (a) of the Code section 235 (2) did not apply to trials which were pending on the date when the new Code came into force.
The Trial Judge ought to have questioned the appellant on the sentence, whether the letter of section 235(2) governed the matter or not.
That would have furnished to the court useful data on the question of sentence which it proposed to pass.
In any case, the trial would not have been invalidated if the court were to apply the provisions of section 235 which were introduced into the Code, ex debito justiciae.
[266 D F] 3.
A witness who, by reason of his immature understanding was not administered oath and who was privileged, by reason of his years, not to make his answers in an intelligible and coherent manner is unsafe to be trusted whole sale.
Children, in the first place, mix up what they see with what they like to imagine to have seen and besides, a little tutoring is inevitable in their case in order to lend coherence and consistency to their disputed thoughts which tend to stray.
[266 A B, C] But, in the instant case, there are unimpeachable and the most eloquent matters on the record which lend an unfailing assurance that Sunil is a witness of truth, not a witness of imagination as most children of that age are.
[263H,264A] 4.
An assessment of the following corroborative evidence, in the instant case, clearly indicate that it was the appellant who committed the murder of Geeta and her son Anil and caused injuries to Sunil: (a) the presence of the appellant proved by quite a large number of injuries during the incident; (b) his conduct in not raising hue and cry at least after the robbers had made good their escape, if any at the time of the killing of the mistress of the house, but little while later, he quietly walked to a neighbour and trotted out the story that a few Badmashes intruded into the house and killed Geeta and her son; (c) the pattern of the crime, that is, Anil was sleeping alongside his mother receiving an injury and getting killed while the mother was assaulted and Sunil being assaulted in order that he should not be left alive to identify the culprit, whom Sunil could easily identify as he was a household servant engaged mainly to look after the two boys: (d) the nature of injuries which were found on the person of the appellant are typically of the kind which a woman in distress would cause while defending herself, and cannot be by a Badmash but would otherwise deal with him if indeed the Badmash wanted to put the appellant out of harm 's way; (e) the weapons with which Geeta was defending herself at different stages of her life saving fight with the appellant were snatched by the appellant and he hit her with those weapons, that is how similar injuries were found on the person of the deceased and the appellant by the same two weapons.
[264 A H, 265 B C] 261
