Sub section (3) of section 3 of the , provides that when an order of detention is made under subsection (2) by an officer mentioned therein, he shall forthwith report the fact to the State Government together with the grounds on which the order has been made . and no such order. shall remain in force for more then twelve days after the making thereof unless in the meantime it has been approved by the State Government.
Under section 7(1) "when a person is detained in pursuance of a detention order, the authority making the order shall . communicate to him the grounds on which the order has been made, and shall afford him the earliest opportunity of making a representation against the order to the appropriate Government".
The petitioners were arrested on 27th January 1956 in pursu anoe of the orders of detention passed under section 3(2) of the , by the District Magistrate who sent his report the next day to the State Government which approved of the same on 3rd February 1956.
Meantime, the grounds on which the orders of detention were made were formulated by the District Magistrate who furnished the same to the petitioners on 31st January 1966 under section 7 of the Act.
A copy of these grounds was sent to the State Government on 6th February 1956.
The petitioners challenged the validity of the detention and contended, inter alia, that as the expression "grounds on which the order has been made" occurring in section 3(3) is word for word, the same as in section 7 of the Act, it must have the same meaning and as the copy of the grounds referred to in section 7 had not been sent along with the report under section 3(3) to the State Government before it had approved of the orders of detention there was a violation of the procedure prescribed by the statute and consequently the detention became illegal.
It was found that the report sent by the District Magistrate set out not merely the fact of the making of the order of detention but also the materials on which he had made the order.
Held, that the failure on the part of the District Magistrate to 645 send along with his report under section 3(3) the very grounds which he subsequently furnished the detenu under section 7, is not a breach of the requirements of that sub section and that it was sufficiently complied with when he reported the materials on which he made the order.
The scope and intendment of the expression " the grounds on which the order has been made" in sections 3(3) and 7 of the Act are quite different and it is not essential that the grounds which are furnished to the detenu must have been before the State Government before it approves of the order.
