The assessee respondent filed his Wealth Tax returns for the assessment years 1964 65 and 1965 66 on March 18, 1971, while he was required by section D 14(1) of the Act to file the return for the assessment year 1964 65 on or before June 30, 1964 and the return for the assessment year 1965 66 on or before June 30, 1965.
The Wealth Tax officer completed the assessment for the said years on March 22, 1971 and also commenced proceedings for levying penalty under section 18(1) (a) of the Act for the late submission of returns.
The Wealth Tax officer levied the penalties for different periods at different rates, as provided by the 1964 and 1969 Amendments.
treating the failure to file the return in time as a "continuing offence".
The orders levying penalties were upheld in appeal by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, Amritsar Bench, Amritsar.
A consolidated reference made by the Tribunal at the instance of the assessee was answered by the High Court of Punjab in favour of the assessee after rejecting the contention of the department that the default or failure to file the return in time was a continuing default and that the penalty had to be computed for the period prior to April 1, 1965 in accordance with section 18 as it stood prior to its amendment by the Wealth tax (Amendment) Act, 1964, for the period between April 1, 1965 to March 31, 1969 in accordance with section 18 of the Act as amended by the Wealth tax (Amendment) Act, 1964 and for the period between April 1, 1969 to March 18, 1971 (on which date the returns were filed) in accordance with section 18 of the Act as amended by the Finance Act, 1969.
Aggrieved by the decision of the High Court, the Department has filed these appeals under Article 136 of the Constitution.
G Dismissing the appeals, the Court ^ HELD 1:1.
Where the default complained of is one falling under section 18(1) (a) of the Wealth Tax Act, the penalty has to be computed m accordance with the law in force on the last day on which the return in question had to be filed.
Neither the amendment made in 1964 nor the amendment made in 1969 has retrospective effect.
[434 C D] 420 1:2.
Section 18 of the Wealth Tax Act does not require the assessee to file a return during every month after the last day to file it is over.
Non performance of any of the acts mentioned in section 18(1) (a) of the Act gives rise to a single default and to a single penalty, the measure of which, however, is geared up to the time lag between the last date on which the return has to be filed and the date on which it is filed.
The default, if any committed is committed on the last date allowed to file the return.
The default cannot be one committed every month thereafter.
[433 G H, 434 A] 1:3.
The words "for every month during which the default continued" indicate only the multiplier to be adopted in determining the quantum of penalty and do not have the effect of making the default in question a continuing one.
Nor do they make the amended provisions modifying the penalty applicable to earlier defaults in the absence of necessary provisions in the amending Acts.
The principle underlying section 6 of the General Clauses Act is clearly applicable to these cases.
[434 B C] 2:1.
A liability in law ordinarily arises out of an act of commission or an act of omission.
When a person does an act which law prohibits him from doing it and attaches a penalty for doing it, he is stated to have committed an act of commission which amounts to a wrong in the eye of law.
Similarly when a person omits to do an act which is required by law to be performed by him and attaches a penalty for such omission, he is said to have committed an act of omission which is also a wrong in the eye of law.
Ordinarily a wrongful act or failure to perform an act required by law to be done becomes a completed act of commission or of omission, as the case may be, as soon as the wrongful act is committed in the former case and when the time prescribed by law to perform an act expires in the latter case and the liability arising therefore gets fastened as soon as the act of commission or of omission is completed.
The extent of that liability is ordinarily measured according to the law in force at the time of such completion.
In the case of acts amounting to crimes the punishment to be imposed cannot be enhanced at all under our Constitution by any subsequent legislation by reason of Article 20(I) of the Constitution which declares that no person shall be subjected to a penalty greater than that which might have been inflicted under the law in force at the time of the commission of the offence.
In other cases, however, even though the liability may be enhanced it can only be a subsequent law (of course subject to the Constitution which either by express words or by necessary implication provides for such enhancement.
[429 G H, 430 A D] 2:2.
The distinctive nature of a continuing wrong is that the law that is violated makes the wrongdoer continuously liable for penalty.
A wrong or default which is complete but whose effect may continue to be felt even after its completion is, however, not a continuing wrong or default.
[430 D E] 2:3.
The court should not be eager to hold that an act or omission is a continuing wrong or default unless there are words in the statute concerned which make out that such was the intention of the legislature.
In the instant case when ever the question of levying penalty arises what has to be first considered is whether the assessee has failed without reasonable cause to file the return as re 421 quired by law and if it is held that he has failed to do so then penalty has to be levied in accordance with the measure provided in the Act.
When the default is the filing of a delayed return the penalty may be correlated to the time lag between the last day for filing it without penalty and the day on which it is filed and the quantum of tax or wealth involved in the case for purposes of determining the quantum of penalty but the default however is only one which takes place on the expiry of the last day for filing the return without penalty and not a continuing one.
The default in question does not, however, give rise to a fresh cause of action every day.
[430 E H] 2:4.
Where the wrong complained of is the omission to perform a positive duty requiring a person to do a certain act the test to determine whether such a wrong is a continuing one is whether the duty in question is one which requires him to continue to do that act.
Breach or a covenant to keep the premises in good repair, breach of a continuing guarantee obstruction to a right of way, obstruction to the right of a person to the unobstructed flow of water, refusal by a man to maintain his wife and children whom he is bound to maintain under law and the carrying on of mining operations or the running of a factory without complying with the measures intended for the safety and well being of workmen may be illustrations of continuing breaches or wrongs giving rise to civil or criminal liability, as the case may be, de die in diem.
[433 A D] Hole vs Chard Union, , quoted with approval.
State vs A. Bhiwandiwalla, A. I. R. ; The State vs Kunja Behari Chandra and Ors.
A.I.R. 1954 Patna 371, approved, Balkrishna Savalram Pujari and Ors.
vs Shree Dayaneshwar Maharaj Sansthan and Ors., [1959] Supp. 2 S.C.R. 476, referred to.
