The selection for the posts of Tehsildars in the State of U.P. was to be made by promotion from amongst various sources such as Naib Tehsildars, Peshkars of the Kumaon Division, Kanungos, Kanungo Inspectors or Instructors and Sadar Kanungos as per the procedure laid down in rules known as Uttar Pradesh Adheenasth Rajaswa Karyakari (Tehsildar) Sewa Niyamavali, 1966.
The procedure for selection is regulated by Rule 9 and under sub section (6) of this Rule a select list will be drawn in order of merit separately for substantive vacancies and temporary vacancies and officials will be offered officiating or temporary vacancies in the order in which their names have been arranged in the "select list" as and when the vacancies occur during the course of the year.
This "select list" will hold good only for one year or until such time a review is made at the following selections.
Subsequently, the State Government made the Uttar Pradesh Promotion by Selection in Consultation with Public Service Commission (Procedure) Rules, 1970, which governed various services, to be more specific 29 Uttar Pradesh services including the services of Tehsildars.
The purpose of these rules was to standardise the procedure for promotion and make it uniform in respect of such services.
The procedure laid down in the 1970 Rules for promotion as Tehsildars was not substantially different from that laid down in the Tehsildars Rules, 1966.
By a Notification No. 4214/196.
Appointment, 3 dated 4th July, 1972 two new rules were introduced, namely, Rules 7A and 7B, in the 1970 Rules.
As per these newly added rules candidates in the Select List made under the 1966 Rules were to be appointed against substantive vacancies in preference to any candidates selected in accordance with the provisions of the 1970 Rules and unless the candidates in the list were exhausted, other eligible candidates were not to be considered for promotion so that their chances of promotion would be deferred to an undated future.
461 The respondent who started his service as Kanungo in 1949, was promoted as Naib Tehsildar and in 1962 he was confirmed as such.
In 1963, he was appointed as Tehsildar in an officiating capacity.
In accordance with the ]966 Rules the Uttar Pradesh, Public Service Commission selected 148 persons for substantive appointment as Tehsildars and their names were shown in a list known as List A.
The Commission also selected 300 other persons for temporary or officiating appointment as Tehsildars during the coming years and their names figured in what was called List B.
The respondent was, however, not selected and his name could not be included in either of the aforesaid two lists because he had an adverse entry forming part of the remarks recorded on his work and conduct and had also been shown down below at serial 557 in the seniority list of Naib Tehsildars in the year 1966.
Though the adverse entry was expunged in the year 1969 and his seniority was also re fixed at serial number 216 on 6th October, 1970, since there was no selection after 1966, his name could not be included in either of the two lists even thereafter.
The respondent challenged the vires of Rules 7A and 7B by filing a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution in the High Court of Allahabad.
That petition was allowed in part and Rules 7A and 7B were declared ultra vires Articles 14 and 1 6 of the Constitution, in the impugned judgment.
Hence the appeal by special leave by the State.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: 1:1.
Rules 7A and 7B of the Uttar Pradesh Promotion by Selection in Consultation with Public Service Commission (Procedure) Rules, 1970, are ultra vires Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
[466 E, 473 A B] 1:2.
The grievance of the respondent, namely, that he had a fundamental right of being considered for promotion when others similarly situated were so and that if he was not considered in a situation like that, he was discriminated against and was denied equality of opportunity is not only factually correct but well founded.
[467 B C] 2:1.
It is true that the rules regulating the conditions of service are within the executive power of the State or its legislative power under the proviso to Articles 309 of the Constitution, but even so, such rules have to be reasonable, fair and not grossly unjust if they are to survive the test of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
A rule, which contemplates that unless the list of 300 persons is exhausted no other person can be selected obviously, is unjust and it deprives other persons in the same situation of the opportunity of being considered for promotion.
[470 F H] 2:2.
The classification in this case cannot be said to be a reasonable classification based on the intelligible differentia having a nexus to the object sought to be achieved.
The only basis of grouping the 300 persons in one category is that they were included in the select list of 1966 and that they were officiating.
The respondent, in the instant case, could not be selected in the selection of 1966 on account of an adverse entry which was subsequently expunged.
His position in the seniority list was also corrected but because no selection took place after 1966.
The respondent could not be included in the list for no fault of his.
If there held 462 been a section and the list had been revised every year, as is the requirement of the rules, the respondent, and like him many others, would have been included in the list.
For example, some candidates who had not completed seven years could not be eligible for promotion and could not be included in the Select List of 1966 but after a lapse of time they became eligible and they might have been selected if selection had taken place.
But, the door for promotion had been foreclosed for the respondent and many others like him by Rules 7A and 7B for no fault of theirs.
The objection taken by the Public Service Commission and the letter of the Secretary or the Board of Revenue addressed to the Government indicating that it would take about 24 years to absorb 300 persons included in List B and, therefore, recommending that the list may not be enforced would point out unmistakably that the selection was unnecessarily postponed only to accommodate the 300 persons included in the Select List of 1966.
There is no rational basis for such a departure from the ordinary operation of the 1970 Rules which envisaged the preparation of a new list every year and for singing out one particular list for according preferential treatment to others in the similar situations [469 B F, 470 A C] State of Jammu and Kashmir vs Triloki Nath Khosa and others ; ; Ramesh Prasad Singh vs State of Bihar and others; , and Ganga Ram and others vs Union of India and others, , applied.
Reserve Bank of India vs C.S. Rajappan Nair and others, I.L.R. 1977 Kerala 398, approved.
In a case where the vires of certain rules were challenged as being violative of the Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution, only State is a necessary party.
The other persons likely to be affected by the declaration of the rules as ultra vires are only proper parties.
[471 E F] 4.
A party cannot be permitted to take up a new plea in the appeal for the first time before this Court which was not taken before the High Court in writ petition.
[472 E F] General Manager, South Central Railway, Secundrabad an Anr.
vs A.V.R. Siddhanti and Ors., ; , followed.
B. Gopalaiah vs Government of Andhra Pradesh, A.I.R. and J.S. Sachdev and Ors.
vs Reserve Bank of India and Anr., I.L.R. (1973) II Delhi 392, approved.
