An award of an Industrial Tribunal is intended to have a long term of operation, and can be reopened under section 19(6) of the Industrial Disputes Act XIV of 1947 only when there has been a material change in the circumstances on which it was based.
To hold otherwise would be to defeat the two basic objects which all industrial legislations have in view, namely, to ensure to the workmen, a fair return for their labour and to prevent disputes between the employers and employees, so that production might not be affected and the interests of the society might not suffer.
That although the rule of res judicata as enacted by section 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure does not in terms apply to such an award, its underlying principle which is founded on sound public policy and is of universal application must apply.
The Army & Navy Stores Ltd., Bombay vs Their Workmen, ([1951] and Ford Motor Co. of India Ltd. vs Their Workmen, ([1951] , approved and applied.
Sheoparson Singh vs Bamnandan Prasad Singh, ([1916] L.R. 43 I.A. 91), referred to.
Consequently, where, as in the instant case, the Union of the employees of a certain section of the appellant Company served a notice on the Company under section 19(6) of the Act terminating a previous award which had applied to its members the scales of pay and dearness allowance fixed by the Bengal Chamber of Commerce with slight modifications, and demanded that the more favourable Scale of pay adopted by the Mercantile Tribunal in its award might be applied to them, and the Tribunal appointed to adjudicate the dispute, held that, there having been no change in the circumstances in which the previous award had been made, the same was binding between the parties and could not be modified, but the Appel 102 782 late Tribunal in appeal held otherwise and brushed aside the previous award, held that the order of the Appellate Tribunal was erroneous in law and as such liable to be set aside.
Hold further, that the reason for the grant of a bonus being that the workers should be allowed to share in the prosperity to which they have contributed, unless the profits for a particular year were adequate for a payment of bonus to all the workers of the Company in all its sections, no claim for it could at all arise either in law or equity.
Karam Chand Thappar & Bros. ' Workmen vs The Company ([1953] L.A.C. 152), referred to.
That an order passed by the Tribunal refusing reinstatement would be appealable under section 7(1)(a) of the Industrial Disputes (Appellate Tribunal) Act of 1960 if it involved a substantial question of law and it was not necessary to decide in the present case whether the decision of the Appellate Tribunal that an appeal lay to it under that section was final and not open to question in a civil court, as the correctness of that decision was challenged not collaterally or in an independent proceeding but in an appeal under article 136 of the Constitution and it was open to the Supreme Court in such an appeal to consider the legality or otherwise of the orders passed either by the Tribunal or by the Appellate Tribunal in appeal.
Pankaj Kumar Ganguli vs The Bank of India, ([1966] 60 C.W.N. 602) and Upper Ganges Valley Electric Employees Union vs Upper Ganges Valley Electricity Supply Co. Ltd. and another, (A.I.R. 1956 All. 491), distinguished.
That the omission to draw up a formal charge sheet against a workman could not vitiate an order of dismissal if he was aware of the charge framed against him and had an opportunity of offering his explanation.
