A news item published in the Blitz weekly of which the respondent was the Editor, stated that the appellant enticed a female detenu who alongwith him, was detained in the Central Jail under the Maintenance of Internal Security Act and that she had conceived through him and that on getting released on parole she had the pregnancy terminated.
It was further stated that a confidential enquiry conducted by a senior officer of the Home Department revealed that it was the appellant who was responsible for the detenu 's pregnancy.
On release from jail the appellant lodged a criminal complaint against the respondent.
Before the Magistrate the respondent prayed that the report of the Enquiry Officer be sent for.
But the report could not be obtained because the State Government claimed privilege in respect of that report.
When the Magistrate proceeded to record the plea of the accused under section 251 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the respondent requested that his plea be recorded only after the enquiry report was produced; but the Magistrate rejected the request.
The respondent thereupon filed a revision before the High Court for setting aside the order of the Magistrate.
Waiving privilege the State Government produced a copy of the enquiry report before the High Court.
A single Judge of the High Court quashed the proceedings on the view that the respondent 's case clearly fell within the ambit of the ninth exception to section 499, I.P.C. because, according to him, the publication had been made honestly in the belief of its truth and also upon reasonable ground for such belief, after the exercise of such means to verify its truth as would be taken by a man of ordinary prudence under like circumstances.
On the question whether the High Court was right in quashing the order of the Magistrate, remanding the case to the Magistrate.
628 (Per majority: Chinnappa Reddy and A.P. Sen JJ Baharul Islam J dissenting) ^ HELD: The order passed by the High Court should be set aside.
The Magistrate should record the plea of the accused under section 251 Cr.
P.C. and thereafter proceed with the trial according to law.
(Per Chinnappa Reddy, J.) To attract the ninth exception to section 499, I.P.C. the imputations must be shown to have been made (1) in good faith and (2) for the protection of the person making it or of any other person or for the public good.
The insistence of the section is upon the exercise of due care and attention.
The standard of care and attention must depend on the circumstances of an individual case, the nature of imputation, the need and the opportunity for verification and so on.
In every case it is a question of fact to be decided on its particular facts and circumstances.
[631 A B] Harbhajan Singh vs State of Punjab, @ 244, Chaman Lal vs The State of Punjab ; @ 916 and 918.
Several questions may arise for consideration depending on the stand taken by the accused at the trial and how the complainant proposed to demolish the defence.
In the instant case the stage for deciding these questions had not arrived yet.
Answers to such questions, even before the plea of the accused was recorded, could only be a priori conclusions.
[632 H] The respondent 's prayer before the High Court was to quash the Magistrate 's order and not to quash the complaint itself as the High Court has done.
But that was only a technical defect which need not be taken seriously in an appeal under Article 136 of the Constitution where the Court is concerned with substantial justice and not with shadow puppetry.
[630 G] (Per A.P. Sen J.) The order of the High Court quashing the prosecution under section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure is wholly perverse and had resulted in manifest miscarriage of justice.
The High Court has pre judged the whole issue without a trial of the accused persons.
The matter was at the state of recording the pleas of the accused under section 251 Cr.
P.C. The circumstances brought out clearly showed that the respondent was prima facie guilty of defamation punishable under section 500 of the Indian Penal Code unless covered by one of the exceptions of section 499 Indian Penal Code.
[635 E F] The burden to prove that his case would come within the ninth exception to section 499, namely, that the imputation was in good faith and was for the protection of the interests of the person making it or of any other person or for the public good was on the respondent.
All that the respondent prayed for was that the Magistrate should not proceed to record his plea under section 251 Cr.
P.C. without perusing the enquiry report.
There was no application for quashing the prosecution itself.
C] 629 The enquiry report in respect of which the Government claimed privilege had by itself no evidentiary value.
The contents of that report could not be made use of unless the facts were proved by evidence aliunde.
The report being per se defamatory, it was for the accused to plead the ninth exception in defence and discharge the burden of proving good faith which implies the exercise of due care and caution and to show that the attack on the character of the appellant was for the public good.
[637 E; G; H] Sukro Mahto vs Basdeo Kumar Mahto and Anr.
[1971] Supp.
SCR 329 at 332, Harbhajan Singh vs State of Punjab ; , Chaman Lal vs State of Punjab ; , referred to.
The High Court appears to be labouring under an impression that journalists enjoyed some kind of special privilege.
Journalists are in no better position than any other person.
Even the truth of an allegation does not permit a justification under the first exception unless it is proved to be in the public good.
The question whether or not it was for public good is a question of fact like any other relevant fact in issue.
If they make assertions of facts as opposed to comments on them, they must either justify these assertions or in the limited cases specified in the ninth exception, show that the attack on the character of another was for the public good or that it was made in good faith.
[638 G H] Dr. N.B. Khare vs M.R. Masani and Ors., ILR 1943 Nag.
347, Arnold vs King Emperor at 169, referred to.
(Per Baharul Islam J.) The Court did not commit any error in quashing the appellant 's complaint.
[646 E] The High Court 's judgment justifies the factual submission of the respondents that their application was under section 482 as well as under sections 397 and 401 of Cr.
P.C. and that they claimed and canvassed the protection under the ninth exception to section 499, I.P.C. The omission in the prayer portion of a petition, particularly in a criminal case, is not fatal.
The High Court, in its revisional jurisdiction, can always grant suitable relief justified by law as well as facts and circumstances of a particular case.
[641 H; 642 D] The definition of "good faith" which is couched in negative terms indicates that lack of good faith has been made a part of the offence which the prosecution has to establish beyond reasonable doubt.
On the other hand, proof by the accused of the report to be an authentic document is enough.
It would create a doubt in the mind of the Court as to the lack of "good faith" on the part of the accused.
[644 F G] If on a complaint made by a citizen alleging laxity in the observance of jail rules, if the report submitted by a high Government official on the basis of an enquiry conducted by him was for public good and if the respondents had reasons to believe its contents to the true, they will be protected under the ninth exception even if the burden of proof of good faith is on the accused.
Good faith need not be proved beyond reasonable doubt.
[645 B] The report of the enquiry officer was exhaustive, reasoned and was based on evidence.
The report leads one to believe the imputations.
If that be so, it 630 cannot be said that the respondents published the report or its summary without due care and attention.
This establishes good faith under the ninth exception to section 499.
Therefore, the publication obviously was for public good.
[646 B C] In the instant case even if the findings of the report be proved to be false, the respondents would be protected.
Sending back the case to the Magistrate would be an exercise in futility and abuse of the process of the criminal court as the High Court has pointed out.
[646 D E]
