The income derived by the Bar Council of Maharashtra from securities (interest) and other income by way of enrollment fees during the accounting periods relevant to the assessment years 1962 63,1963 64,1964 65 was subjected to tax by the Income Tax Officer.
Since the Central Government had accorded approval to the assessee for the purpose of section 10(23A) during the pendency of the appeal before the Tribunal by a notification dated August 5, 1966 with effect from December 28,1961, the Tribunal held that the assessee Council was entitled to exemption under section 10(23A) in respect of its income by way of enrollment fees.
The Tribunal remanded the case back to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and directed him to dispose of the case by examining the question as to the purpose for which the securities were held by the assessee Council.
It observed that if the said securities were held for educational purpose or for any other charitable purpose then the exemption under section 11 would be admissible to the extent available under the law.
The High Court, on a reference made at the instance of the assessee Council, answered the question: "Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the assessee Council could be taken to be a body intended to advance any object of general public utility falling within section 2(15) for purposes of section 11 of the Act ?" in favour of the assessee and hence the appeals by Revenue after obtaining special leave from the Court.
Dismissing the appeals, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
Having regard to the Preamble of the and the nature of the various obligatory functions including the one under clause (d) enjoined upon every State Bar Council under section 6(1) of the , it is clear that the primary or dominant purpose of an institution like the assessee Council is the advancement of the object of general public utility within the meaning of section 2(15) of the Income Tax Act, 1961 and as such the income from securities held by the assessee Council would be exempt from any tax liability under section 11 of the Income Tax Act, 1961.
[551 E G] 543 2.
If the primary or dominant purpose of a trust or institution was charitable any other object which by itself might not be charitable but which was merely ancillary or incidental to the primary or dominant purpose would not prevent the trust or institution from being a valid charity.
The restrictive words "not involving the carrying on any activity for profit" in section 2(15) of the Income Tax Act, 1961, qualify "object" and not the advancement or accomplishment thereof.
In other words, the true meaning of the restrictive words is that when the purpose of a trust or institution was the advancement of an object of general public utility it was that object of general public utility and not its accomplishment or carrying out which must not involve the carrying on of any activity for profit.
Here, admittedly, the State Bar Councils are not indulging in any activity for profit and hence the question of applying the restrictive words in s.2(15) does not arise.
[547 C F, 548 G H] Commissioner of Income Tax, Madras vs Andhra Chamber of Commerce, ; Additional Commissioner of Income Tax, Gujarat vs Surat Art Silk Cloth Manufacturers Association, , reiterated.
