On the death of his father which took place on September 29, 1964 the respondent filed a statement of account under the of the estate passing on the death of the deceased.
The estate duty payable in respect of the estate in question was determined at Rs. 3,37,543.40 by the Assistant Controller of Estate Duty, Allahabad, by his order dated November 30, 1970.
When the appeal filed against the said order was still pending, the respondent made an application under section 52(1) of the Act on February 16, 1971 to the Central Board of Direct Taxes offering one of the items of property passing on the death of the deceased, namely, premises No. 1, Phaphamau Road, Allahabad, whose principal value had been determined at Rs. 2,53,625 in part payment of the balance of estate duty which was still payable by him under the order of assessment.
The said offer was not accepted by the Central Board of Direct Taxes but the appellant herein wrote to the respondent stating that the respondent could pay the arrears of estate duty payable by him in monthly instalments of Rs. 10,000 each beginning from October 29, 1971 subject to payment of interest @ 9% per annum on the arrears outstanding.
Thereupon the respondent filed a writ petition before the High Court of Allahabad requesting the High Court to issue a writ in the nature of mandamus to the Union of India to consider the application made by him under section 52(1) on its merits, to negotiate and settle the price of the property offered by him in settlement of part of duty payable by him and to give credit to the extent of the price so determined under the Act.
The High Court held that if the accountable person exercised the option to pay the estate duty by transferring property, the Central Government could not refuse to accept the offer and insist upon payment by another mode when there was agreement about the price between it and the accountable person.
The High Court, however, held that it was not necessary to decide the question whether it was open to the Central Government to refuse the offer of property on a ground other than the price as the impugned order had not disclosed any reason at all for rejecting the offer.
Accordingly, the High Court directed the respondents before it to dispose of the application afresh in accordance with law.
Hence the appeal after obtaining special leave of the Court.
Affirming the High Court directions, the Court 577 ^ HELD :1:1.
What section 52(1) of the does is to set forth one more mode in which estate duty may be recovered.
It is a provision made specially for the recovery of estate duty.
It enables the Government to recover the duty in accordance with that mode.
The other statutory modes prescribed under section 51 and specified in the Rules are those where recourse by the accountable obliges the Revenue to accept the payment made in any of those modes and to treat it, by compulsion of statute, as satisfaction of the dues.
The peculiarity of the mode provided under section 52(1) is that while recourse to it by the accountable person does not automatically imply satisfaction of the dues, there is the duty cast on the Revenue to consider the application by the accountable person offering an item of property as a mode for satisfying the dues.
The Government must consider the application on its merits and in the exercise of sound administrative judgment.
[587 F H, 588 A] 1:2.
Ordinarily in every contract for the purchase of property there are two stages.
(i) In the first stage, there is complete freedom to the parties to decide whether one should enter into negotiations with the other at all and in that regard the law takes no account of the reason of any party for not choosing to entertain the proposal for sale made by the other however arbitrary, illogical or irrelevant the reason may be.
(ii) The second stage follows the entertaining of the proposal and the actual negotiations between the parties which may or may not fructify in a contract.
Section 52(1) is concerned with the first stage, and differs in this from the complete freedom to entertain the proposal in that the proposal made under section 52(1) by the accountable person must be considered by the Central Government and any decision taken by it on that question must proceed on considerations which are relevant and bonafide.
The price of the property is, however, left to be determined by agreement in the event of the Government deciding to accept the offer made by the accountable person.
This forms part of the second stage.
[588 A D] 1:3.
The is a fiscal statute principally intended to levy and collect estate duty which when collected has to be disbursed in accordance with of the Constitution.
It is not a law providing for acquisition of a property forming part of the estate of the deceased.
Section 52 is in the nature of an enabling provision which authorises the Central Government to accept a property in lieu of estate duty payable subject to the conditions mentioned in it.
It is true that even enabling words in a statute which confer a discretionary power may have to be interpreted as compulsory where they amount to words clearly intended to effectuate a legal right.
But ordinarily such words are permissive only.
C D] In the instant case, the very fact that there is a need for an agreement upon the price of the property between the Central Government and the accountable person makes the power of the Central Government under section 52(1) of the Act discretionary and permissive.
Any other meaning may lead to impractical and incongruous result.
[586 D E] 1:4.
On a plain construction of section 52 of the Act the Central Government may at its discretion either accept the property offered under section 52 or may not if the circumstances so warrant.
The accountable person cannot claim 578 that the Central Government is bound to accept such property.
The power of the Central Government under section 52 is purely administrative and discretionary.
Therefore, the said power should be exercised subject to the same limitations which govern all such administrative and discretionary powers.
The Central Government or the authority which is competent to take a decision should exercise its discretion bonafide and in good faith by addressing itself to the matter before it and should not allow itself to be influenced by extraneous and irrelevant considerations.
The question should not be disposed of in an arbitrary or capricious way.
In this case, the Court can only ask the authority concerned to exercise the discretion vested in it but it cannot be asked to exercise it in a particular way.
[587 A B, D F] Chella Rama Bhupal Reddy vs Central Board of Direct Taxes and Anr., Andhra Pradesh, approved.
In the instant case, the High Court was right in holding that it had not been shown that the competent authority had properly exercised its discretion.
The Board proceeded on the assumption that its discretion was unfettered even by considerations relevant to administrative law and did not probe into the question of the availability of liquid cash in the hands of the respondent to pay tee estate duty and the averment of the respondent that the entire liquid cash had been invested in business.
[588 E, H, 589 A]
