Respondent Tea Company took on lease land N.C. Tezalpatty No. 1 from the then Government.
The lease was to be exploited for cultivation and raising tea garden, and was subject to conditions set out therein and generally to Assam Land and Revenue Regulation and the rules made thereunder.
The respondent company sought permission from the appellant to cut 7,000 cubic feet of timber from Grant N.C. Tezalpatty No. 1 for utilising the same for building of staff and labourers ' house as per clause 2 of Part IV of the lease dated 27 9 1932 and Rule 37 of the Assam Land and Revenue Regulations.
Since the timber was required by the company for use in Partabghur and Dekorai tea estates which were outside Tezalpatty No. 1.
the appellant demanded full royalty on timber cut, felled and removed.
The company paid an amount of Rs. 7069.37 Paise under protest and later filed a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution in the Assam High Court, praying for refund of the amount and for a mandamus directing the appellant for issuing permits without insisting on payment of royalty whenever timber was to be cut from the leased area for the purposes connected with the exploitation of the grant.
The preliminary objection raised by the appellant that since the right claimed by the respondent flowed from the contract of lease such contractual right can only be enforced in civil court and therefore cannot be gone into under Article 226 was rejected by the Assam High Court.
On merits, the High Court further held that as the grant of N.C. Tezalpatty No. 1 was in favour of the respondent, the company was entitled to cut, fell and remove timber from that grant area for its use covered either by the same area or in other tea gardens which are outside the grant.
The High Court made the rule nisi absolute and hence the appeal by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
The Writ Petition on the allegation of infringement of fundamental right under Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution, at the instance of respondent company alone was not maintainable for the reasons that: (a) a juristic person such as a corporation is not entitled to any of the freedoms guaranteed by Article 19 and here the respondent is a company incorporated under the Companies Act; (b) Article 19(1)(g) guaranteed the fundamental freedom to a 663 citizen and the respondent being a company is not a citizen and (c) the shareholders of a company alone can complain of infringement of their fundamental rights.
[669 E H, 670 A C] Tata Engineering and Locomotive Co. vs State of Bihar, ; , State Trading Corporation of India Ltd. vs The Commercial Tax Officer, Vishakhapatnam, [1964] 4 S.C.R. 99 and Benuott Coleman and Co. and other vs Union of India and others; , , followed.
2:1.It is undoubtedly true that the High Court can entertain in its extraordinary jurisdiction a petition to issue any of the prerogative writs for any other purpose.
But such writ can be issued where there is executive action unsupported by law or even in respect of a Corporation where there is a denial of equality before law or equal protection of law.
The Corporation can also file a writ petition for enforcement of a right under a statute.
Here, the relief claimed by the respondent was referable to nothing else but the terms of lease, namely, clause 2 Part IV.
The fact that this term is a mere reproduction of proviso to Rule 37 of Assam Land and Revenue Local Rate Regulation but that by itself is not sufficient to contend that what the respondent was doing was enforcing a statutory provision.
The validity of regulations is not challenged.
Therefore, the demand for royalty is supported by law.
[670 C F] 2:2.
Ordinarily, where a breach of contract is complained of, a party complaining of such breach may sue for specific performance of the contract, if the contract is capable of being specifically performed, or the party may sue for damages.
Such a suit would ordinarily be cognizable by the Civil Court.
The High Court in its extraordinary jurisdiction would not ordinarily entertain a petition either for specific performance or for recovering damages.
A right to relief flowing from a contract has to be claimed in a civil court where a suit for specific performance of contract or for damages could be filed.
Here, this was a suit for refund of a royalty alleged to be unauthorisedly recovered and that could hardly be entertained in exercise of the writ jurisdiction of the High Court.
[670 F G, 671 A G, 672 A] Har Shankar and Ors.
vs The Deputy Excise and Taxation Commissioner and ors.
; , , applied.
Woodcrafts Assam vs Chief Conservator of Forests, Assam, AIR 1971 Assam p. 92, approved.
Upon a true construction of clause 2 Part IV of indenture of lease, the respondent company was not entitled to remove timber without payment of royalty.
The specific provision is that the grant is for a purpose of cultivation and raising tea garden and that from the area covered by the grant, if timber is felled for purpose connected with the grant itself, namely, cultivation and raising tea garden in that area, then alone the benefit of removal of timber without payment of royalty can be availed of.
[673 G H., 674 A] 3:2.
In order to obtain relief, namely to cut and remove timber from lease area for purpose connected with exploitation, of the grant the company must show that the timber is being felled and cut from an area covered by the lease in 664 which clause 2 finds its place and that such timber is being removed for a purpose connected with the exploitation of grant.
To be more specific, following facts will have to be proved for obtaining relief: (i) the area covered by the grant; (ii) felling of the trees from the area covered by the grant; (iii) use to which the felled timber was to be put to; (iv) such use will have to be one connected with the exploitation of the grant and (v) meaning of the exploitation of the grant, when controverted these aspects will have to be proved by relevance.
And that was the situation when return was filed by the present appellant in the High Court.
[672 G H, 673 A D]
