The respondent was a Range Forest Officer on a monthly salary of Rs. 515.
In a search conducted by an officer of the Anti Corruption Bureau, Rs. 26 thousand odd in cash, savings bank accounts in the names of himself, his wife and children, national savings certificates, postal saving certificates, gold and silver ornaments, sale deeds of certain properties in the name of his wife, sister in law and brother in law aggregating in all to over Rs. 79 thousand were discovered from his house.
On the allegation that he was found in possession of assets disproportionate to his known sources of income he was charged with offence punishable under section 5(2) read with section 5(1)(e) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947.
The respondent pleaded that he led a frugal life and that secondly much of the property found in his house belonged to his father in law.
He added that his father in law was a pairokar of a Zamindar in the area, that two sisters of his father in law were the kept mistresses of the Zamindar, and the Zamindar gave large amounts of cash and presents most of which were passed on to his father in law.
At the time of his death, his father in law entrusted his minor daughter and son to his care and instructed that his property should be divided among his three children equally and that therefore he was holding the property merely as a custodian.
Rejecting the plea of the respondent a Special Judge convicted and sentenced him under section 5(2) read with section 5(1)(e) of the Act.
On appeal a single Judge of the High Court acquitted him holding that the prosecution had failed to discharge the burden of disproving all possible sources of the respondent 's income, that it was not possible to exclude the probability that the property found in his possession could be the property left by his father in law, and that mere possession of assets disproportionate to his known sources of income would not be sufficient to bring home the guilt under section 5(1)(e) unless the prosecution further excluded all possible sources of income.
The High Court was also of the view that the changes brought about by the Anti 676 Corruption Laws (Amendment) Act, 1964 had the effect of limiting the presumption of guilt arising under section 4(1) of the Act to an offence of criminal misconduct specified in section 5(1)(a) and (b) and not to that in section 5(1)(e).
^ HELD: The construction placed by the High Court on section 5(1)(e) was wrong in that it overlooked the fact that, by the use of the words "for which the public servant cannot satisfactorily acquit", a burden is cast on the accused.
[680 B] Section 5(3) which now stood deleted, did not create an offence separate from the one created by section 5(1) but only raised a presumption of criminal misconduct if he or any person on his behalf was in possession of pecuniary resources or property disproportionate to his known sources of income which he could not satisfactorily account.
Once the prosecution proves this fact the burden shifts on to the accused to prove the source of acquisition of such assets.
[681 F G] The expression "known sources of income" in the context of the section means "sources known to the prosecution".
Secondly, the onus placed on the accused under the section was not to prove his innocence beyond reasonable doubt but only to establish a preponderance of probability.
To eradicate the widespread corruption in public services the legislature dispensed with the rule of evidence under section 5(3) and made possession by a public servant of assets disproportionate to his income as one of the species of offences of criminal misconduct by inserting clause (e) in section 5(1).
[682 A C] The meaning to be assigned to the expression "known sources of income" occurring in section 5(1)(e) must be the same as was given to that expression in section 5(3) before its repeal, that is, "sources known to the prosecution".
So also the same meaning must be given to the words "for which a public servant is unable to satisfactorily account" occurring in section 5(1)(e).
When clause (e) uses the words "if the public servant is unable to satisfactorily account" it is implied that the burden is on such public servant to account for the sources for the acquisition of assets disproportionate to his income.
The High Court was, therefore, in error in holding that a public servant charged for having in his possession assets disproportionate to his income for which he cannot satisfactorily account could not be convicted of an offence under section 5(2) read with section 5(1)(e) unless the prosecution disproves all possible sources of income.
[682 D F] Sajjan Singh vs State of Punjab ; and V.D. Jhagan vs State of U.P. ; , referred to.
The expression "burden of proof" has two distinct meanings: (1) the legal burden, that is, the burden of establishing the guilt and (2) the evidential burden, that is, the burden of leading evidence.
Notwithstanding the general rule that the burden of proof lies exclusively upon the prosecution, in the case of certain offences, the burden of proving a particular fact in issue may be laid by law upon the accused.
This burden is not so onerous as that which lies on the prosecution and is discharged by proof of a balance of probabilities.
To substantiate the charge of criminal misconduct under section 5(2) read with section 5(1)(e) the prosecution must prove (1) that the accused was a public servant; (2) the nature and extent of the pecuniary resources or property in his possession, (3) his known sources of income, i.e. known to the prosecution; (4) that such 677 sources or property were disproportionate to his known sources of income.
Once these are established, the offence of criminal misconduct under section 5(1)(e) would be complete.
The burden then shifts to the accused to substantially account for possession by him of assets disproportionate to his income.
The extent and nature of burden of proof resting upon the public servant cannot be higher than establishing his case by a preponderance of probability.
[683 A E] In the instant case the High Court has placed an impossible burden on the prosecution to disprove all possible sources of income which were within the special knowledge of the accused.
The prosecution cannot in the nature of things be expected to know the affairs of a public servant found in possession of resources or property disproportionate to his known sources of income that is his salary, because these are matters specially within his knowledge, within the meaning of section 106 of the Evidence Act.
The phrase "burden of proof" in section 106 of Evidence Act is clearly used in the secondary sense, namely the duty of introducing evidence.
The nature and extent of the burden cast on the accused is well settled.
The accused is not bound to prove his innocence beyond all reasonable doubt.
All that he need do is to bring out a preponderance of probability.
[684 B] On the proved circumstances there was a preponderance of probability that the property found in the respondent 's house could be the property left by his father in law.
There is overwhelming evidence on record that the respondent 's father in law was a man of affluent circumstances, being a paiorkar of a Zamindar and that he had amassed considerable wealth, more so because his two sisters were the kept mistresses of the Zamindar.
On the death of the Zamindar his father in law stayed with the respondent.
Also, the respondent 's father had a liquor shop besides forest contracts.
The evidence led in the case was sufficient to create a doubt whether the respondent was in possession of assets disproportionate to his known sources of income.
On the other hand there is preponderance of probability that the property in his possession belonged not to him, but to his father in law.
[684 D H]
