The parties were married in 1942 and there was a child of the marriage.
In 1947 the appellant left for England on business and on his return to India discovered that this wife (respondent) bad been having amorous correspondence with one M, and taxed her with having developed intimacy with him.
She was unable to give any answer and went to her father 's place on May 24, 1947, on the pretext of the marriage of her cousin which was to take place in June.
On July 15, 1947, the appellant sent a notice to the respondent through his solicitor in which after mentioning the fact that she had, left against his wishes stated that he did not desire to keep her any ' longer under his care and protection, and desired her to send the minor son to him.
On July 4, 1951, the appellant instituted the suit for divorce under section 3(1)(d) of the Bombay Hindu Divorce Act, 1947, on the ground that the respondent had been in desertion ever since May 24, 1947, without reasonable cause and without his consent and against his will for a period of over four years.
The respondent 's case that it was the appellant who by his treatment of her after his return from England had made her life unbearable and compelled her to leave her marital home against her wishes, 'was not proved but there was evidence that after the solicitor 's notice dated July 15, 1947, was received by the respondent, attempts were made by her father and his relations to bring about reconciliation between the parties but they failed owing to the attitude of the appellant.
The question was whether the respondent had been in desertion, entitling the appellant to have a decree for divorce.
Held that, on the facts, though the initial fault lay with the respondent, her leaving her marital home was not actuated by any animus to desert her husband but as the result of her sense of guilt, and as subsequently she was willing to come back but could not do, so owing to the attitude of the appellant, there was no proof that she deserted him, much less that she bad harbored that animus for the statutory period, and the appellant 's case must fail.
The essential conditions for the offence of desertion, so far as the deserting spouse is concerned, are (i) the factum of separation and (ii) the intention to bring cohabitation permanently to an end 839 (animus deserendi); and as regards the deserted spouse the elements are (i) the absence of consent and (ii) absence of conduct giving reasonable cause to the spouse leaving the matrimonial home to form the necessary intention aforesaid.
Desertion is a matter of inference to be drawn from the facts and circumstances of each case and those facts have to be viewed as to the purpose which is revealed by those facts or by conduct and expression of intention, both anterior and subsequent to the actual act of separation.
In a suit for divorce on the ground of desertion the burden is on the plaintiff to prove that the deserting spouse has been in desertion throughout the statutory period of four years.
Thomas vs Thomas ([1924] P. 194), Bowron vs Bowron ([1925] P. 187), Pratt vs Pratt ([1939] A.C. 417) and Lang vs Lang ([1965] A.C. 402), referred to.
Quaere, whether the statutory period of four years specified in section 3(1)(d) should immediately precede the institution of the suit for divorce.
