The appellant and the deceased were collaterals.
On the death of his brother, the deceased was looking after the affairs of his brother 's wife and children.
Some while before on the day of occurrence, the deceased attended the marriage of his brother 's daughter.
The prosecution case against the appellant was that he nursed a grievance against the deceased that it was he who induced his sister in law not to invite him, (the appellant) and his brothers to the marriage and incensed by such insult he wanted to teach the deceased a lesson.
After the marriage, armed with a gandhala (a common agricultural implement with a flat, rectangular iron strip with three sides blunt, embedded in a wooden handle which is used for digging holes) the appellant and his brothers emerged suddenly and in a joint assault the appellant struck a blow on the head of the deceased with the blunt side of the gandhala.
The Sessions Judge held that the appellant struck the blow on the head with intent to cause such bodily injury as was sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death and that, therefore, he was guilty of culpable homicide amounting to murder punishable under section 302 I.P.C. Affirming the conviction and sentence the High Court was of the view that there was no specific and positive evidence as to the motive for the murder but that it was more probable that the accused had joined the marriage and that "something happened on the spur of the movement", which resulted in the infliction of the injury leading to the death of the deceased.
In appeal it was contended that the offence amounted to culpable homicide not amounting to murder punishable under section 304 part II I.P.C. because all that could be attributed to the appellant was knowledge that a blow struck on the head with the blunt side of the gandhala would cause an injury, which was likely to cause death but that in any event when he struck the blow he could not be attributed with intention to cause death.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: The appellant having been found to have struck the deceased with the blunt side of the gandhala in the heat of the moment without premeditation 840 and in a sudden fight all the requirements of Exception 4 to section 300 are met.
Having held that it was more probable that the appellant had also attended the marriage but that something had happened on the spur of the moment resulting in the infliction of the injury and eventual death of the deceased the High Court erred in applying clause.
Thirdly of section 300.
Giving a solitary blow on a vital part of the body resulting in death cannot always necessarily reduce the offence to culpable homicide not amounting to murder punishable under section 304 part II of the Code.
If a man deliberately struck another on the head with a heavy log or an iron rod or a lathi so as to cause a fracture of the skull, in the absence of any circumstances negativing the presumption, he must be deemed to have intended to cause death or such bodily injury as is sufficient to cause death.
The intention must be gathered from the kind of weapon used, the part of the body hit, the amount of force employed and the circumstances attendant upon death.
[843 B C] Under clause Thirdly of section 300 culpable homicide is murder if the act which causes death is done with intention of causing a bodily injury and that injury is sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death i.e. the injury found was one that was intended to be inflicted.
[844 F G] Virsa Singh vs State of Punjab ; at 1503 applied.
Gudur Dusadh vs State of Bihar , Chahat Khan vs State of Haryana, A.I.R. 1972 S.C. 2574, Chamru Budhwa vs State of Madhya Pradesh, A.I.R. 1954 section C. 652, Willie (Williams) Slaney vs State Of Madhya Pradesh ; , Harjinder Singh (alias Jinda) vs Delhi Admn. ; & Lakshman Kalu Nikalje vs State of Maharashtra ; referred to.
In the instant case the genesis of the quarrel was not known.
The prosecution alleged that the appellant and his brothers had a grouse against the deceased and that they went to the marriage armed with weapons to teach the deceased a lesson.
The defence version, on the other hand, was that they were invited to the marriage.
In a controversy of such a nature the prosecution should have examined the sister in law of the deceased who was a material witness to ascertain the truth, failure to do which made the prosecution case infirm.
[847 B C] Secondly when the appellant struck a blow with blunt side of the gandhala it could not be said that he intended to cause such bodily injury as was sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death.
If a man is hit with the blunt side on the head with sufficient force it is bound to cause death.
The fact that the gandhala was used with sufficient force was not by itself sufficient to raise an inference that the appellant intended to cause such bodily injury as was sufficient to cause death.
He could only be attributed with the knowledge that it was likely to cause an injury which was likely to cause death.
Therefore, the case does not fall within clause Thirdly of section 300 I.P.C [845 E H]
