During the course of the assessment proceedings of the assessee firm for the assessment year 1967 68, the Income Tax officer noticed cash credits of Rs. 9,250 each in the names of five sons of the Managing Partner, in the books of the assessee.
The Income Tax officer found that these creditors, who were minors, had no independent source of income.
The assessee contended before the ITO that the five creditors had voluntarily disclosed the credits under section 24 of the Finance (No. and that the disclosures were accepted by the Commissioner.
The ITO rejected the contention of the assessee and held that the cash credits in question were unexplained cash credits, that they represented the income of the assessee from undisclosed source, and accordingly made an addition of Rs. 46,250.
The appellate Assistant Commissioner held that the acceptance of the voluntary disclosures under section 24(3) of the Act and the payment of tax thereon precluded the Department from disputing the fact that the income belonged to the creditors, and, as the same income could not be taxed twice once in the hands of the creditors and again in the hands of the assessee, set aside the order of the ITO.
The Tribunal disagreed with the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and upheld the order of the ITO.
Hence the reference at the instance of the assessee under section 257 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 .
Answering the reference against the assessee, the Court ^ HELD: Per Sen, J. 1.
Section 24 of the Finance (No. cannot be construed as conferring any benefit, concession or immunity on any person other than the person making the declaration under the provisions of the Act.
The scheme of the Act makes it abundantly clear that it was to protect only those who preferred to disclose the income they themselves had earned in The past and which they had failed to disclose at the proper time.
The scheme only permitted the bringing 850 forward of income to tax; it did not require investigation of the claim of the declarant.
The Act granted immunity only to the declarant and not to other persons to whom the income really belonged.
[859 G H, 860 A] 2.
The legal fiction created by sub section
(3) of section 24 of the Finance (No. by virtue of which the amount declared by the declarant had to be charged to income tax "as if such amount were the total income of the declarant", was limited in scope and it cannot be invoked in assessment proceedings relating to any person other than the person making the declaration, and did not take away the power vested in the ITO under section 68 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 to reject the ' explanation of an assessee for a cash credit on the ground that the explanation was not satisfactory in the case of such other person.
[861 F G] 3.
The finality under sub section
(8) of section 24 of the Act was to the order of the Central Board of Revenue under sub section
(6) thereof and not to the assessment of tax made on the basis of a declaration made by the creditors under the scheme.
There was, therefore, nothing to prevent an investigation into the true nature and source of the cash credits.
[861 B, D] 4.
The acceptance of voluntary disclosures under s 24 of the Act and the payment of tax thereon by the creditors could not, in law, justify the deletion of the amount of Rs. 46,250 as it represented the assessee 's income from undisclosed sources.
In a case of this description, there was no question of double taxation which was a situation of assessee 's own making in getting false declarations made in the names of the creditors with a view to avoid higher slab of taxation.
once it was found that the income declared by the creditors did not belong to them, there was nothing to prevent the same being taxed in the hands of the assessee to which it actually belonged.
[861 H, 862 A B, 863 C] Manilal Gafoorbhai Shah vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Gujarat; Badri Prasad & Sons vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Allahabad; Pioneer Trading Syndicate vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Lucknow, Bench Allahabad) and Additional Commissioner of Income Tax vs Samarathmal Santoshchand, Madhya Pradesh, approved.
Rattan Lal & Ors vs Income Tax officer, Delhi; Shakuntala Devi & Ors vs C.I.T, Delhi and Mohd. Ahsan Wani vs C.I.T., Jammu & Kashmir, overruled.
The declaration made under sub section
(2) of s.24 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 had to relate to income actually earned by the assessee.
It did not require any investigation into the correctness of the declarations or any determination of the amounts belonging to the declarant.
The mere charge to tax on the amounts under the Voluntary Disclosure Scheme could not have the effect of converting the money from the deductions from the books of the assessee into the income of The declarants if it did not belong to it.
It was, therefore, open to the Income Tax officer to investigate into the source of the cash credit amounting to Rs. 46,250 standing in the books of the assessee in the names of the sons of the Managing Partner.
[859 C D, 860 F G] 851 1.
The making of an assessment against a declarant on his disclosure of statement under section 24 of the Finance (No. cannot deprive Income Tax officer of jurisdiction to assess the same receipt in the hands of another person if, in a properly constituted assessment proceeding under the Income Tax Act, the receipt can be regarded as the taxable income of such other person.
[852 G H, 853 A] 2.
The liability imposed under section 24 of the Finance (No. is identifiable with the income tax liability under the Income Tax Act.
The scheme for voluntary disclosure of income and its taxation is only another mode provided by law for imposing income tax and recovering it.
Consequently the general principles which apply to assessments made under the Income Tax Act would, except for provision to the contrary, be applicable to assessments made under section 24 of the Finance (No. Accordingly when the assessment to income tax is made under the latter enactment, it will be governed by the general principle that a finding recorded therein governs only the particular person assessed.
[852 B D] 3.
The finality enacted by sub.s.
(8) of section 24 of the Finance (No. attaches to the assessment of the declarant only.
It cannot in law operate in favour of or against any other person.
The jurisdiction of an Income Tax officer when making an assessment is concerned primarily with the issue whether the receipt under consideration constitutes the income of the assessee before him.
Any finding reached by the Income Tax officer touching a person not the assessee in the process of determining that issue cannot be regarded as an operative finding in favour of or against such person.
The only exception of this rule centers on the limited class, and for the limited purpose, defined by the Supreme Court in Income Tax Officer, A Ward, Sitapur vs Murlidhar Bhagwan Das, at 346.
[852 D F] Ahmed Ibrahim section Dhoraji vs The Commissioner of Wealth Tax Gujarat, [1981] 3 SCR p. 402 and Income Tax Officer, A Ward, Sitapur vs Murlidhar Bhagwan Das, at 346, applied.
