In February 1965, Bungalow No. 16 D, Beli Road (now 26 B.K. Banerjee Road), Allahabad was allotted to the appellant.
On an application made in April 1975 the prescribed authority allowed, on 24th May, 1976, the application directing the release of the bungalow to the landlord.
On appeal the appellate authority by its order dated 25th March, 1977 modified the order by releasing only a portion of the building and by permitting the appellant to continue in the remaining portion with a direction to the prescribed authority to divide the bungalow accordingly.
The said order dated 25th March, 1977 became final, since the writ petition challenging the said order was dismissed.
On the death of the landlord the appellant filed a fresh application before the prescribed authority not to proceed with the partition scheme.
Since the prescribed authority refused to take note of this subsequent event, the issue has come up before this Court by way of special leave.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
The order dated 25th March, 1977 of the appellate authority releasing a portion of the premises in favour of the third respondent and leaving the remaining portion in the tenancy of the appellant acquired finality when the proceedings taken against it by the appellant failed.
The prescribed authority was bound to give effect to that final order and was not acting outside its jurisdiction or contrary to law.
[79 C D] 2.
It is true that subsequent events must be taken into account by a statutory authority or court when considering proceeding arising out of a landlord 's petition for ejectment of a tenant on the ground of the landlord 's personal need.
But in the present case the order for release of a portion of the accommodation acquired finality before the death of the landlord and the controversy concluded by it could not be reopened now.
[79 E F] 3.
The present appeal being limited to the question which arose before the prescribed authority on the application of the appellant after the proceedings for release had acquired finality, it is not open even to the Supreme Court, to reopen the proceeding for release.
[79 G H] 78
