Condition 8 of the licence to run liquor vends in various parts of Punjab during the financial year 1965 66 laid down: (i) the licensee shall lift each month the proportionate quota for the month fixed for his vends or deposit still head duty realisable thereof (ii) Any deficiency in the amount of still head duty realisable from the lifting of the full proportionate quota due to the short lifting of the quota by the licensee or non deposit of the still head duty may be realised from the amount of security deposited by the licensee at the time of grant of licence; (iii) the resultant deficiency in the amount of security shall be made good by the licensee within seven days of such adjustment and (iv) if there is short lifting of proportionate quota or short deposit of still head duty continues for two consecutive months or the licensee fails to make up the deficiency in the amount of security within the prescribed period of seven days, his licence may be cancelled in addition to the recovery of still head duty.
Respondent Ajudhia Nath who was granted the necessary licences under the relevant provisions of the Punjab Excise Act and the Rules framed thereunder, was unable to lift the minimum quota of country liquor and also failed to deposit the still head duty which became payable by him under condition No. 8.
On an application made by him claiming relief in the matter of payment of sums which had fallen due, such relief was granted to him in part by the Excise and Taxation Commissioner, Punjab, on the ground that the liquor trade was badly affected by reason of the movement of population in the border area of Punjab on account of the hostilities which broke out between India and Pakistan in the month of September 1965.
Not satisfied with the relief so granted Ajudhia Nath filed two petitions under Article 226 of the Constitution before the High Court of Punjab and Haryana claiming, inter alia, that still head duty was an excise duty which could be levied only on manufacture of goods and which he was not liable to pay by reason of the admitted fact he was not a manufacturer of Liquor and that he was not given the opportunity of being heard in the matter covered by the applications claiming relief.
The petitions were allowed and the Letters Patent Appeals preferred by the State were dismissed.
Hence the appeals by special leave.
687 Allowing the appeals, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
The demand for the short fall in still head duty was based on the terms of a binding contract and it sought to enforce the liabilities arising out of mutually agreed conditions of auction.
Such a demand could not be equated with a notice requiring the liquor vendor to show cause why his licence should not be cancelled.
Although an opportunity of being heard has to be given to a liquor vendor when his licence is sought to be cancelled, the same principle of natural justice does not come into play when the demand is merely for payment of a sum becoming due under the conditions subject to which the licence was granted.
[691 G H, 692A, E F] Har Shankar and others vs The Dy.
Excise & Taxation Commissioner and others ; Shyam Lal vs State of Punjab, AIR 1976 SC 2045; State of Punjab vs Mulkh Raj and Co., AIR 1977 SC 1550 and The State of Punjab vs Balbir Singh and others, AIR 1977 SC 1717, followed.
A combined reading of Entry 51 of List II of Schedule VII to the Constitution of India and section 31 of the Punjab Excise Act no doubt makes it clear that a duty of excise on alcoholic liquors meant for human consumption cannot be recovered from a person unless any one of the three clauses of section 31 covers his business activities.
[693 C D, 694A] 2: 2.
Still head duty is not a duty of excise in view of the dicta laid down by the Supreme Court to the effect that the short fall in still head duty represents nothing but sums recoverable from the licensees under a contract which was entered into by them with their eyes open and that they cannot be allowed to have the best of both the words by exploiting the contract so long as it suits them and by repudiating it if and when it does not work to their advantage.
[694 B C] Har Shankar and others vs The Dy.
Excise & Taxation Commissioner and others, ; State of Punjab vs Balbir Singh and others, AIR 1977 SC 1717, applied.
Condition No. 8 of the licence does not involve the imposition of a duty of excise but makes provision only for recovery of sums becoming due under a contract.
The licensees are not connected in any manner whatsoever with the manufacture of alcoholic liquor and there was, therefore, no question at all of levying a duty of excise on their operations which were confined merely to the sale of liquor manufactured by others and which, therefore, commenced only after the process of manufacture was completely over.
[696 E G] M/s.
Bhajan Lal Saran Singh & Co. vs State of Punjab and others, 1967 Current Law Journal (Punjab and Haryana) 460; State of M.P. vs Firm Goppulal, ; ; Excise Commissioner, U.P., Allahabad and others vs Ram Kumar and others, , distinguished. 3: 1.
On the facts of this case still head duty cannot be regarded as a tax of some other kind nor can the question whether it does amount to such a tax 688 (for levying which the State lacks authority) be allowed to be raised since it was never raised at any earlier stage and its consideration is bound to work prejudice to the cause of the appellants.
Further there is no impediment in the way of the demand being regarded as the enforcement of an obligation arising under the contracts which the licensees had entered into and exploited so long as the same worked to their advantage and which were fully permissible under sub section (3) of section 34 of the Punjab Excise Act.
[696 H, 697 A B] 3: 2. Clause (b) of sub section (3) of section 34 of the Punjab Excise Act allows impositions of conditions on grant of the licences in addition to the payment of the licence fees which is a matter covered by clause (a).
Condition No. 8 is, therefore, fully enforceable and there is no reason why still head duty should be regarded as a tax of any kind whatsoever.
[697 D E]
