The appellant company could not work its Mills to full capa city owing to short supply of sugar cane and got the permission of the Government to sell its machinery but continued crushing cane under a lease from the purchaser.
The workmen 's Union in order to frustrate the transaction resolved to go on strike and communicated its resolution to the company.
There wag correspondence between the parties in course of which the company offered to pay to the workmen 25 per cent.
of the profits of the sale on condition that the strike notice must immediately be withdrawn.
The workmen did not fulfill the condition and made certain counter proposals.
The company insisted that the condition must first be fulfilled before the counter proposals could be considered and renewed its offer.
Although the workmen did not actually go on strike, they did not withdraw the strike notice, and did not co operate with the management in the dismantling and delivery of the machinery to the pur chaser, with the result that the company lost heavily.
On the expiry of the lease and closure of the industry, the services of the workmen were duty terminated by the company on March 21, 1951.
The workmen thereafter, claimed the share of profits on the basis of the offer made by the company in the correspondence and the dispute was referred to the Industrial Tribunal for adjudication by the U.P. Government by a notification under section 3 of the U.P. Industrial Disputes Act of 1947.
The Tribunal held that the company was bound by the offer it had made and awarded a sum of Rs. 45,000 to the workmen as representing their share of the profits.
On appeal the award of the Industrial Tribunal was affirmed by the Labour Appellate Tribunal.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant company that the notification was ultra vires, and the reference and the award void in consequence and that there having been no concluded agreement between the parties, it was not bound to pay.
Held, that the definition of an industrial dispute contained in section 2(k) of the Industrial Disputes Act XIV of 1947 and adopted by the U.P. Industrial Disputes Act XXVIII of 1947 contemplated the 873 existence of an industry and a subsisting relationship of employer and employee between the parties and, therefore, there could be no industrial dispute within the meaning of those Acts where the industry had been closed, and the closure was real and bona fide, if the dispute arose on such closure, or thereafter, if that could be conceived.
Section 3 of the U.P. Industrial Disputes Act of 1947 only required that there must be an industrial dispute before the Government could make a reference under that section arid, consequently, in the instant ease where the claim in dispute had arisen, if at all, prior to the closing of the industry, the Government was fully competent to issue the notification.
Indian Metal and Metallurgical Corporation vs Industrial Tribunal, Madras (A.I.R. and E. N. Padmanabha Ayyar vs The State of Madras ([1954] , approved.
Messrs Burn and Co. Ltd., Calcutta vs Their Workmen, (Civil Appeal No. 325 of 1955, decided on October 11, 1956), referred to.
In the instant case, however, as the findings of the Tribunal were inconsistent and conflicting, the court examined the correspondence and held that it did not establish that there was a concluded agreement between the parties whereby the workmen could be entitled to any share of the profits and, consequently, the award made by the Labour Appellate Tribunal must be sot aside.
Nor was the award sustainable as one for compensation for termination of the services of workmen on closure of the industry as such discharge was different from discharge on retrenchment, which implied the continuance of the industry and discharge only of the surplusage, and the workmen were not entitled either under the law as it stood on the day of their discharge or even on merits to any compensation.
Employees of Messrs India Reconstruction Corporation Limited, Calcutta vs Messrs India Reconstruction Corporation Limited, Calcutta ([1953] L.A.C. 563) and Messrs Benett Coleman & Company Ltd. vs Their Employees, ([1954] L.A.C. 24), distinguished and disapproved.
