Rule 5 of Order XV C.P.C. was re enacted by the U.P. Act 1976 and it provided that the defendant shall deposit the entire amount of rent due from him together with interest at or before the first hearing of the suit for eviction and also continue to deposit the monthly amount regularly and that on failure to do so, his defence was liable to be struck off.
Another rule provided that before striking off the defence, the Court may consider any representation made in that behalf.
The respondent filed a suit against the appellant for ejectment and recovery of arrears of rent.
The appellant filed written statement and resisted the suit.
The appellant during the pendency of the suit committed default in depositing the rent regularly and the respondent filed application under Rule 5 Order XV C.P.C. for striking off the appellant 's defence.
The appellant attempted to show that he had been depositing the rent as required by law.
The trial court accepted the application and held that the appellant had failed to make any representation permitted by him under sub rule (2) of Rule 5 of Order XV within time.
The trial court accordingly struck off the defence and the High Court affirmed the order of the trial court on the ground that where no representation was made or if made was filed beyond time, the Court was bound to strike off the defence and enjoyed no discretion in the matter.
Allowing the Special Leave Petition, ^ HELD: An order under sub rule (1) striking off the defence is in the nature of a penalty.
A serious responsibility rests on the court in the matter and the power is not to be exercised mechanically.
There is a reserve of discretion vested in the court entitling it not to strike off the defence if on the facts and circumstances already existing on the record, it finds good reason for not doing so.
It will always be a matter for the judgment of the court to decide whether on the material before it, notwithstanding the absence of a representation under sub rule (2), the defence should or should not be struck off.
The word "may" in sub rule (1) merely vests power in the court to strike off the defence.
It does not oblige it to do so in every case of default.
[128 C D] 125 Puran Chand vs Pravin Gupta, Civil Revision No. 356 of 1978 decided on October 30, 1980 All.
H.C. overruled.
