Rule 5 (1) of the Andhra Pradesh Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1963 classifies the Civil Services of the State into (a) State Services, and (b) Subordinate Services.
The Andhra Pradesh Police Service is one of the State services.
Rule 2 of the Andhra Pradesh Police Service Rules, 1966 framed under Article 309 of the Constitution sets out three categories of officers constituting the State Service, namely; category l composed of commandants, Andhra Pradesh Special Police; category II which includes Deputy Superintendents of police and Assistant Commissioners of Police other than in category III and category III comprising Deputy Superintendents of Police in various capacities including Assistant Commandants, Andhra Pradesh Special Police.
Rule 3 lays down the method and conditions for appointment to posts in the different categories.
Appointment as Deputy Superintendent of Police in category II is made by (a) direct recruitment, or (b) recruitment by transfer from Andhra Pradesh Police Subordinate Service, or (c) appointment from category III of this service with the concurrence of the Public Service Commission provided that the number of such appointments does not exceed two in a calendar year.
Under Rule 3 (d), "the seniority of the Deputy Superintendents of Police, category II appointed from the posts of Deputy Superintendents of the Police, category III shall be fixed in that category giving them credit for their entire service in the post of the Deputy Superintendents of Police.
" Rule 3 (d) thus gives a Deputy Superintendent of Police appointed to category II from category III the benefit of past service in the State Service for the purpose of seniority as against the Subordinate Service appointed Deputy Superintendent of Police in category II by promotion or a new recruit appointed to the same post directly.
Some of the Deputy Superintendents of Police in category II who were either recruited directly or "recruited by transfer" to the said posts before the 1966 Andhra Pradesh Police Service Rules came into force challenged the validity of the vires of Rules 3 (d) on the ground that the appointment of a Deputy Superintendent of Police from category III to category II is really by way of promotion and validly the seniority in category II of an officer so promoted can be reckoned only from the date of his appointment to that category II.
The writ petition was dismissed by learned Single Judge.
In appeal the Division Bench of the High 70 Court held Rule 3 (d) invalid, taking the view that category III personnel are not equivalent to category II personnel and that the former attains the same status only on appointment to category II.
Hence this appeal by respondent No. 3 in the writ petition who is a Deputy Superintendent of Police appointed from category III to category II under the 1966 rules.
Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
Rule 3 (d) of the Andhra Pradesh Police Service Rules, 1966 is valid.
There is nothing arbitrary or absurd in what Rule 3(d) prescribes as regards the credit regarding the length of the past service for which credit is to be given for the purpose of seniority.
Whether or not some credit should be given for past service in such circumstances is a matter of policy resting with Government.
That being so, in the absence of anything arbitrary or absurd in the provision, the Court cannot examine the matter and come to its own conclusion about what should be the length of past service in which credit should be given.
[75G 76B] Tamil Nadu Education Department Ministerial and General Subordinate Service Association vs State of Tamil Nadu and another.
; , followed.
There is no basis to support a claim of superiority for category II in the facts of the case.
Rule 3 (a) itself which has not been challenged, treats appointment from category III as distinct from either direct recruitment or promotion.
There is no dispute on the following points: (i) categories II and III carry equal pay; (ii) qualifications for direct recruits to both categories are the same; (iii) promotion to either category is from the post of Inspector of Police which is a Subordinate Service and the Inspectors of Police in their respective branches from whom promotions to the two categories are made also enjoy the same scale of pay.
The mere fact that there are some differences regarding the duties of the Deputy Superintendents of Police of category II and category III and their promotional avenues do not alter the position.
[76E, 74D, 73C G]
