The Bombay Town Planning Act, 1954 (which was made applicable to the State of Gujarat) provides for the compulsory acquisition of land and payment of compensation for the land so acquired for the development or re development or improvement of the entire area within the jurisdiction of a local authority such as a municipal corporation or a municipality.
The Town Planning Scheme prepared under the Act may make provision for laying out new streets or roads, allotment or reservation of land for roads, open spaces and such other matters not inconsistent with the objects of the Act.
Before proceeding to acquire any land for town planning purposes, a local authority, by resolution, must declare its intention to make a town planning scheme and publish it in the manner prescribed.
The draft scheme may contain proposals such as to form a re constituted plot by the alteration of the boundaries of an original plot, to form a reconstituted plot by the transfer, wholly or partly, of the adjoining land, to allot a plot to any owner dispossessed of a land in furtherance of the scheme.
Any person affected by the scheme may communicate to the local authority concerned any objection relating to such scheme.
The scheme is then forwarded to the State Government for the requisite sanction.
The scheme of the Act envisages the appointment of a Town Planning Officer and constitution of a Board of Appeal.
It is the duty of the Town Planning Officer to draw up a final scheme in accordance with the draft scheme.
When the final scheme comes into force all lands required by the local authority shall vest absolutely in that authority free from all encumbrances and all rights in the original plots which have been reconstituted shall determine and the reconstituted plots shall become subject to the rights settled by the Town Planning Officer.
Section 64 (1) enumerates the sums payable or spent and the expenses incurred by the local authority which are to be included in the costs of a town planning scheme.
Under section 65 increment means the amount by which at the date of the declaration of intention to make a scheme the market value of a final plot calculated on the basis as if the improvement contemplated in the scheme had stood completed on that date.
Provision is made in section 67 to make adjust 82 ment between the rights to compensation for loss of land suffered by the owner and the liability to make contribution to the finance of the scheme.
Compensation payable to any owner for loss of lands has to be determined on the basis of the market value of the land at the date on which the declaration of intention to make a scheme was made.
Section 69 contemplates that the owner of any property or right which is injuriously affected by the making of a town planning scheme shall be entitled to obtain compensation from the local authority or from any person bona fide or partly from such person as the Town Planning Officer may in each case determine.
Section 32 enumerates duties of the Town Planning Officer and section 33 provides that except in matters arising out of clauses (v), (vi), (vii), (ix), (x) and (xiii) of section 32 (1) every decision of the Town Planning Officer shall be final and conclusive and binding on all persons.
An appeal from the decision of the Town Planning Officer under the six clauses mentioned in section 33 lies to the Board of Appeal.
The Surat Municipal Corporation declared its intention to make a town planning scheme under section 22 of the Bombay Town Planning Act, 1954.
The draft scheme published included an area of 1.37 lac square meters of which the appellant was the lessee.
Dissatisfied with the compensation awarded to him by the Town Planning Officer the apportionment of the compensation between the lessor and lessee and the propriety of reserving such a large area of land for the scheme the appellant preferred an appeal under section 34 read with section 32 (1) of the Act to the Board of Appeal.
The Board rejected the appeal as being not maintainable on the ground that the Act did not provide an appeal from a decision of the Town Planning Officer on matters dealt with by him in the impugned order.
Agreeing with the Board of Appeal the High Court dismissed the appellant 's writ petition.
In the appeal to this court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that the Town Planning Officer 's decision was appealable under clause (viii) or clause (xiii) of section 32(1) because he has a duty to calculate the increment to accrue in respect of each plot included in the final scheme in accordance with the provision of section 65.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: The High Court was right in holding that the decision of the Town Planning Officer determining the amount of compensation in the appellant 's case was not appealable.
[96 F] The decision of the Town Planning Officer is final and conclusive in all matters referred to in the various clauses of section 32 (1) except those mentioned in clauses (v), (vii), (viii), (ix), (x) and (xiii).
[94 E] The increment referred to in section 65 is the difference in the market value of the same final plot with the improvements and without the improvements on 83 the date of the declaration of intention to make a scheme.
The value of the original plot does not arise for consideration under clause (viii).
Form B referred to in clause (v) of rule 17 of the Bombay Town Planning Rules, 1955 makes it clear that the increment is the difference in value of the same final plot in its developed and undeveloped condition.
This form keeps the valuation of the original plot distinct from that of the final plot.
The appellant 's case cannot fall under clause (viii) of section 32.
[94 G 99 B] What is contemplated by section 69 is that the property or right which is injuriously affected by the making of a town planning scheme is a property or right other than that acquired for the purposes of the scheme.
The property or right affected remains with the owner who is entitled to compensation for such injurious affection.
When under the Act a plot of land is taken for the purposes of a town planning scheme it cannot be said that land itself is injuriously affected.
[95 C E] There is no compelling reason for restructuring clause (xiii) suggested by the appellant.
Taking acquisition of land to mean "injurious affection" of the land acquired would be inconsistent with the entire scheme of the Act.
[95 F] In determining the amount of compensation awarded for land acquired under the Land Acquisition Act, that Act requires the Court to take into consideration the damage sustained by the "person interested" by reason of the acquisition injuriously affecting his other property.
" A "person interested" means a person claiming an interest in compensation to be made on account of the acquisition of land under the Land Acquisition Act and the damage is for injurious affection of some property other than the land acquired.
There is nothing in the Act to suggest that the generally accepted meaning of the expressions "injurious affection" used in the Land Acquisition Act should be construed differently in this Act.
[95 G 96 B] The owner of an original plot who is not provided with a plot in the final scheme gets his right to compensation from section 71.
The principle for determining the compensation is the same whether an owner of land is given a reconstituted plot or not.
Compensation is payable on the basis of the market value of the plot at the date of declaration of the intention to make a scheme.
In the appellant 's case it would be the value of the original plot and not the final plot.
In determining the difference under section 32 (1) (iii) the Town Planning Officer has to find out the market value of each of the original plots at the date of the declaration of intention to make a scheme.
The Act contains necessary provisions for estimating the compensation payable to an owner of land who has not been given a reconstituted plot.
[96 C E]
