In the elections to the State Assembly in 1977 the appellant was declared elected.
The election petitioner, who was one of the defeated candidates, alleged in his petition that the appellant had filed a false return of the expenses and thereby committed corrupt practice within the contemplation of section 123(6) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
Accepting the allegation the High Court set aside his election.
Allowing the appeal.
^ HELD: (1) The High Court has not made any attempt to determine whether there was any legal and acceptable evidence to prove corrupt practice alleged against the appellant.
It is well settled that a charge under section 123 of the Act must be proved by clear and cogent evidence as a charge for a criminal offence.
It is not open to the Court to hold that a charge of corrupt practice is proved merely on a preponderance of probabilities but it must be satisfied that there is evidence to prove the charge beyond a reasonable doubt.
[635 B D] K.M. Mani vs P.J. Antony & ors. ; referred to.
(i) In the instant case the petitioner himself had no personal knowledge as to the actual expenses in hiring taxies and his source of information was based on what others said.
The evidence led by the petitioner falls far short of the standards required by law.
[636 D, 637E] (ii) The petitioner claimed that he maintained a diary of the electioneering.
Yet he did not produce it in Court from which a natural presumption arises that if he had produced the diary it would have gone against his case.
[637 G H] (2) Corrupt practice being in the nature of a fraud, it is not permissible to plead one kind of fraud or one kind of corrupt practice and prove another though they may be inter connected.
The High Court has rightly found that the petitioner pleaded that it was the appellant who had held a feast at which he invited his voters and exhorted them to vote for him.
But the evidence shows that the appellant had not held the feast but it was hosted by one of his agents at which the appellant was present and, therefore, it could not be proved that the feast was held at the instance of the appellant.
[638 G 639A]
