The suit land belonged to one Naidu who donated it to Bhoodan Yagna in 1953 through unregistered deeds.
Later the Madras Bhoodan Yagna Act 1958 came into force and this Act of 1958 was further amended by Bhoodan (Amendment) Act 1964.
The said land was allotted to the respondents under the Act who claimed to have been in possession of the land since before the donation.
Naidu sold the suit lands to the appellants by a registered sale deed.
The appellants filed the suit for declaration of their title to, and possession of, the said land and pleaded that (i) as the donation of the land by Naidu was not by any registered deed, no title could be passed to the Bhoodan Board and subsequently to the respondents and (ii) Naidu validly transferred title of the lands to them.
The respondents pleaded that (i) the land vested in the Bhoodan Board under the Bhoodan Act and (ii) Naidu had no saleable interest thereto which he could transfer to the appellants by the deed of sale.
The trial court decreed the appellant 's suit which was upheld by the first appellate court.
The respondents preferred second appeal before the High Court which reversed the decree of the courts below and dismissed the plaintiff 's suit.
On appeal, it was argued by the appellants that the donation was invalid for want of registered deed and the provisions of the Bhoodan (Amendment) Act do not have retrospective effect.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
The object of the Bhoodan Yagna Act is "to facilitate the donation of lands for the Bhoodan Yagna initiated by Shri Acharya Vinoba Bhave and the transfer and settlement of such land for the benefit of poor landless persons or for community purposes and to provide in Gramdan villages for the vesting of lands in, and the management of those lands by the Sarvodaya Panchayat in the State of Madras." [176 H, 177 A B] 2.
Section 11 clearly shows that intention of the Legislature was to bring in to the purview of the Bhoodan Act lands donated by any person before the commencement of the Bhoodan Act.
The law ingrained in section 11 is merely declaratory in express terms of the already existing law under the Bhoodan Act of 1958.
[177 E F, 182 B] 175 3.
Clause (b) of section 11 of the Bhoodan (Amendment) Act puts a bar on the maintenance of a suit or other proceedings in any Court for the declaration of title to, or recovery of possession of, any land donated for the Bhoodan Yagna on the ground that the transfer (donation) was not in accordance with the provisions of the Transfer of Property Act or Indian Registration Act.
Clause (c) to section 11 goes one step further and lays down that even if a decree has already been passed in such a suit, no court shall execute a decree in a suit referred to in clause (b).
[181 G H, 182 A B] 4.
Section 24 of the Act leaves no doubt that the provisions of the Bhoodan Act had retrospective effect and intended to include donations of land by any person to the Bhoodan Yagna made before the commencement of the Bhoodan Act, and such donations were also exempted from the relevant provisions of the Transfer of Property Act and the Indian Registration Act with retrospective effective.
[180 B C]
