The appellant assessee constructed a warehouse and let out different portions under different tenancies commencing on different dates.
Later on a new lease was entered into between the assessee and her tenant for letting out of the entire warehouse and the assessee started receiving rent at the rate of Rs. 34,797/ per month in respect of the entire warehouse from 1st April, 1968.
In the course of assessment of the assessee for the assessment years 1969 70 and 1970 71 the question arose as to how the "annual value" of the warehouse should be determined for the purpose of chargeability to income tax under the head "income from house property".
The assessee claimed before the Income.
Tax officer that on a proper construction of sub section (I) of section 23, it was not the actual rent received by her from the warehouse that was material for determining the annual value of the warehouse but the hypothetical amount for which the warehouse might reasonably be expected to be let from year to year, and since the Delhi Rent Control Act 1958 was applicable in the area in which the warehouse was situate, the warehouse could not reasonably be expected to be let from year to year at a rent exceeding the standard rent determinable under the provisions of that Act.
The Income Tax officer rejected this claim and took the view that the actual rent received by the assessee provided the most accurate and satisfactory measure of the amount for which the warehouse might reasonably be expected to let from year to year and the annual value of the warehouse must therefore be taken to be the actual rent received by the assessee and he accordingly assessed the assessee to tax on the basis of the actual rent.
The assessee 's appeals for each of the two assessment years to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner were unsuccessful.
The Income Tax Tribunal took the same view on further appeals by the assessee and held relying on the decision of this Court in M. M. Chawla vs J. section Sethi that in the absence of fixation of standard rent, the agreed rent which is legally recoverable and not tainted by fraud, relationship or any other consideration must be taken to be the standard rent and hence the actual rent received by the assessee was rightly taken as the annual value of the warehouse.
310 The assessee 's applications to the Tribunal as well as to the High Court for the making of a reference under section 256 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 were also dismissed.
Allowing the appeals to this Court, ^ HELD: 1.
The annual value of the building according to the definition given in sub section (l) of section 23 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 is the standard rent determinable under the provisions of the Rent Act and not the actual rent received by the landlord from the tenant.
[316 H 317 A] 2.
In Dewan Daulat Rai Kapoor etc.
vs New Delhi Municipal Committee ; a decision of this Court given on the interpretation of the , definition of 'annual value ' in the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act 1957 and the Punjab Municipal Act 1911 for the purpose of levy of house tax, it was held that even if the standard rent of a building has not been fixed by the Controller under section 9 of the Rent Act, the landlord cannot reasonably expect to receive from a hypothetical tenant anything more than the standard rent determinable under the provisions of the Rent Act and this would be equally so whether the building has been let out to a tenant who has lost his right to apply for fixation of standard rent by reason of expiration of the period of limitation prescribed by section 12 of the Rent Act or the building is self occupied by the owner, and that the standard rent determinable under the provisions of the Rent Act and not the actual rent received by the landlord would constitute the correct measure of the annual value of the building.
[314 H, 316 A C] 3.
This decision though given on the interpretation of the definition of 'annual value ' in the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act 1957 and the Punjab Municipal Act 1911 for the purpose of levy of house tax, would be equally applicable in interpreting the definition of 'annual value ' in sub section (I) of section 23 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 because these definitions are in identical terms and it is impossible to distinguish the definition of 'annual value ' in sub section (1) of section 23 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 from the definition of that term in the Municipal Corporation Act 1957, and the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911.
In the instant case the annual value of the warehouse for the purpose of chargeability to income tax for the assessment years 1969 70 and 1970 71 would have to be determined on the basis of the standard rents of different portions of the warehouse determinable under clause (b) of sub section (2) and paragraph (b) of sub clause (2) of clause (B) of sub section (I) of section 6 of the Rent Act.
[319 C]
