The appellant applied for admission to the M.D. (Paediatrics) Course for the academic year 1979 80.
He had passed his M.B.B.S. Examination in December, 1976.
There were other students who had applied for admission along with the appellant.
Some of them had passed their M.B.B.S. Examination prior to December 1976 and had secured higher marks than the appellant.
The number of seats being limited, admissions were given according to merit and four students who had secured the highest number of marks were given preference to others regardless of the year in which they had passed their M.B.B.S. Examination.
The appellant filed a writ petition in the High Court challenging the E decision of the college by which he was denied admission.
The petition was dismissed summarily by a Division Bench on the ground that the relief of mandamus could not be granted since the appellant had.
failed to establish that any of his legal rights was violated.
In the appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that: (a) For many years in the past candidates who had passed the D.C.H. Examination were preferred for admission to the M.D. Course but that the University suddenly discontinued that practice, as a result of which he had to compete with others who had passed their M.B.B.S. Examination, and (b) the ratio 1:1 between teachers and students was relaxed from time to time by the University and that the appellant was discriminated against by the arbitrary refusal of the authorities to relax the ratio in his favour.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: The appellant has failed to make out a case of injury to any of his legal rights.
Because of interim orders passed by this Court directing the College and the University to admit the appellant to M.D. Course in Paediatrics, the College cancelled the appellant 's admission to the D.C.H. Course.
If the appellant has passed the M.D. Examination, he should be declared to have passed it like any other student.
He should not be subjected to any disadvantage for the 284 reason that he was not entitled initially to be admitted to the M.D. Course in Paediatrics.
If he has failed he should be permitted to take the examination again (or again and again) in accordance with the rules of the University.
Since the result of the other students, who had appeared for the M.D. Examination along with the appellant, was declared in February, 1981 the appellant 's result to be declared forthwith.
[287 B F] (a) There was no rule at any time requiring that an applicant seeking admission to the M.D. Course in Paediatrics had to pass his D.C.H. Examination.
That such a practice was recognised over many years or that such was the understanding of all concerned has been denied on behalf of the College.
Besides discontinuance of a mere practice cannot sustain a charge of injury to legal rights.
The practice had not ripened into a rule and the University was under no obligation to admit only those who had passed their D.C.H. Examination.
The appellant therefore cannot make a grievance of a change in the practice for admission to the M.D. Course.
[285 G 286 B] In the instant case no one was admitted to the M.D. Course who had secured lesser marks than the appellant.
He was sixth in order of merit and there were only four seats available.
[286 E] (b) If there is a power to relax the ratio, that power must be exercised reasonably and fairly.
It cannot be exercised arbitrarily to favour some students and to disfavour some others.
[286 G] In the instant case this point of discrimination was not taken in the writ petition filed in the High Court, not argued in the High Court, and not even mentioned in the Special Leave Petition.
The question as to whether the authorities have the power to relax the ratio and the further question as to whether that power has been exercised arbitrarily raise new points into which it is difficult to enquire for the first time.
This plea cannot therefore be entertained.
[286 H 287 A]
