Under the present system of criminal justice an accused person resolutely minded to delay the day of reckoning, may quite conveniently and comfortably do so, if he can but afford the cost involved, by journeying back and forth between the court of first instance and the superior Courts at frequent interlocutory stages, by filing applications to quash investigations, complaints and charges on all imaginable grounds.
Delay is a known defence tactic.
All this is not to say that the responsibility for delaying criminal trials should always be laid at the door of the rich and the reluctant accused.
Delays caused by tardiness, indifference and somnolence or the deliberate inactivity of prosecuting agencies are not uncommon or unknown.
As a result of the delaying tactics of prosecuting agencies an accused person may be seriously jeopardised in the conduct of his defence.
In such a situation it may be possible to infer infringement of the right to life and liberty guaranteed by Article 21 of the Constitution.
Denial of a speedy trial may lead to an inference of prejudice and denial of justice.
Hussainara Khatoon vs State of Bihar, [ 1979] 3 SCR 169, referred to.
In deciding whether there has been denial of the right to speedy trial, the court is entitled to take into consideration whether the defendant himself was responsible for a part of the delay.
whether he was prejudiced in the preparation of his defence by reason of the delay and whether the delay was unintentionally caused by reason of overcrowding of the Court 's docket or under staffing of prosecutors and so forth.
Though in India the right of speedy trial is not an expressly guaranteed constitutional right it is implicit in the right to fair trial which is a part of the right to life and liberty guaranteed by Article of the Constitution.
While a speedy trial is an implied ingredient of a fair trial the converse is not necessarily true.
A delayed trial is not necessarily an unfair trial.
The question whether conviction should be quashed on grounds of delayed trial depends upon the facts and circumstances of a case.
If it is shown to the 300 satisfaction of the Court that the accused had been prejudiced in the conduct of his defence and thus had been denied adequate opportunity to defend himself the conviction would have to be set aside.
There would, on the contrary, be no justification to quash a conviction on the ground of delayed trial unless it is shown that there are circumstances entitling the court to raise a presumption that the accused had been prejudiced.
[304 B C] In the instant case in a surprise raid on the house of the respondent, Central Excise officers discovered a large quantity of gold bars with foreign markings concealed in the false bottom of a steel almirah, the keys of which were found with him.
On a charge for offences under section 120B I.P.C. read with section 135 Customs Act and rule 126P(2)(ii) and (iv) of the Defence of India Rules 1962, the Additional Chief Presidency Magistrate convicted the respondent and variously sentenced him under different counts with imprisonment and fine.
On appeal the High Court acquitted him. ^ HELD: Although it is settled law that circumstantial evidence must be of a conclusive nature and circumstances must not be capable of a duality of explanations, the Court is not bound to accept any exaggerated, capricious or ridiculous explanation which may suggest itself to a highly imaginative mind.
The three circumstances established in the instant case were: (1) presence of the respondent in the flat at the time of the raid by Central Excise officers and recovery of gold slabs with foreign markings from the steel almirah: (2) recovery from his person of a bunch of eight keys which fitted the almirah and (3) recovery of a bunch of three keys from his person, one of which fitted the lock hanging from the inside handle of the door of the flat.
The explanation fancied by the High Court that the steel almirah in the flat was not shown to have been specially made and that the keys of a similar almirah could well fit it and that perhaps was how the keys recovered from the respondent did fit the almirah in the flat, was a wholly unreasonable explanation in the circumstances of the case.
This was not the plea of the respondent, nor did he make any such suggestion to the prosecution witnesses.
[306 FG & CD] Notwithstanding the fact that the case is based on circumstantial evidence and this is an appeal against acquittal and that this Court is exercising extraordinary but exceptional jurisdiction under Article 136 of the Constitution, interference with the judgment of the High Court in the instant case is imperative hesitation to do which would lead to miscarriage of justice.
[307 C] The respondent being himself responsible for a fair part of the delay, could not complain that there was violation of his fundamental right to life and liberty guaranteed under Article 21; nor has he shown how he was prejudiced in the conduct of his defence by reason of the delay.
[307 E] Nor again would the fact that there was a long lapse of time since the commission of the offence or that the respondent was preventively detained for over two years be of any avail to him because the offence was one which jeopardised the country s economy.
It is impossible to take a casual or light view of 301 such an offence.
It is only where the offence is of a trivial nature as for example, a simple assault or theft of a trilling amount that the Court might hesitate to send the accused back to jail after a long lapse of time; but the nature of the offence and the stakes involved in this case do not merit any sympathy being shown to the respondent.
[307 G H]
