One Smt.
Ram Kali, widow of Tikam Singh, was the land holder of the agricultural lands in dispute situated in villages Agaota and Khaiya Khera in District Bulandshahr (U.P.).
On June 14, 1915 Smt.
Ram Kali, who was a Sirdar and a "disabled person" falling within section 157(1) of the U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950, executed a registered deed of lease fora period of five years in favour of Uttam Singh and Murli Singh (the predecessors in title of the respondents) but before the expiry of the period of five years she died in August, 1945 and Dan Sahai, who was also "disabled person" within the meaning of section 157(1) of the Act, (her husband 's real brother and predecessors in title of the appellants) inherited her interest.
After the expiry of the period of registered lease Uttam Singh and Murli Singh continued to hold the lands as tenants from year to year under Dan Sahai.
In consolidation proceedings a question arose, whether Uttam Singh and Murli Singh, who were lessees (adhivasis) under Smt.
Ram Kali and Dan Sahai acquired the status of Sirdars, being entitled to be treated so under section 240B of the Act or they remained Asamis of the plots in dispute.
The Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court, relying on the earlier view taken by its Full Bench in Smt.
Maya vs Raja Dulaji and others , decided the appeals in favour of the respondents by holding that they were not Asamis but had become Sirdars.
Hence the appeals by certificate by successors in title of Ram Kali and Dan Sahai.
Allowing the appeals, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
On true construction of section 21(1)(h) of the U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act the benefit thereof would be available to the land holder on the date of vesting, if the same land holder or his predecessor existing on the material dates was a person or persons belonging to one or more clauses mentioned in section 157(1) of the Act.
[378 C D] Since, in the instant case, which falls under sub clause (a) of clause (h) on the date of actual letting Smt.
Ram Kali was a "disabled person" and since on the next material date, namely, April 9,1946 Dan Sahai (successor in interest of Smt.
Ram Kali) was also a disabled person, the land holder on the date of vesting who incidentally happened to be Dan Sahai would be entitled to the benefit of section 21(1)(h) and the respondents (successors of Uttam Singh and 369 Murli Singh) would remain Asamis and cannot be said to have become Sirdars within the meaning of section 240B of the U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950.
[378 E F] 2.
Section 21(1)(h) of the U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950 provides that every person occupying or holding land in any one of the capacities mentioned in clause (h) on the date immediately preceding 1 7 1952 shall be deemed to be an Asami thereof notwithstanding anything contained in the Act, if the land holder or if there are more than one all of them were "disabled persons" within the meaning of section 157(1) both on the date of letting as well as on April 9, 1946 where the letting has taken place prior to April 9, 1946 or were disabled persons on the date of letting if the letting has occurred after April 9, 1946.
[373 A B] 3:1.
It is true that clause (h) contains the phrase "where the land holder or if there are more than one land holder all of them were person or persons belonging" to any one or more than one of the clauses mentioned in section 157(1) of the Act.
Under section 3(26) of the Act, the definition of "landholder" as given in the U.P. Tenancy Act, 1939 has been adopted since the expression is not defined in the Act.
The expression "land holder" who obviously is a possessor of interest in land under section 3(11) of the U.P. Tenancy Act, 1939 means a person to whom rent is payable, and under section 3(1), ibid.
by legal fiction it shall include his predecessor in interest as also successor in interest to whom the rent was or is payable.
It is such definition that will have to be read in the U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act wherever that expression occurs.
Therefore the expression "land holder" occurring in section 21(1)(h) of the Act must mean a person to whom rent is payable and by fiction would include his predecessor in interest.
Read in this light there would be no question of adding the words predecessor in interest of the land holder in section 21(1)(h) as that would be implicit in the term "land holder" on account of deeming provision of section 3(1) read with section 3(11) of the U.P. Tenancy Act, 1939.
[375 G H, 376 A, D F] 3:2.
Section 157(1) of the U P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act permits leases by disabled persons and provides that a Bhumidar or on an Asami holding land in lieu of maintenance allowance under section 11, who is a disabled person falling under any of the clauses (a) to (g), may let the whole or any part of his holding, "provided that in the case of a holding held jointly by more persons than one, but one or more of them but not all are subject to the disabilities mentioned in clauses (a) to (g), the person or persons may let out his or their share in the holding".
Having regard to the proviso under which even in the case of a joint holding a lease of his share by a disabled land holder is permissible and the same is liable to be separated by a partition, the expression "all of them" must refer to all such land holders who were disabled land holders on the material dates.
When under the proviso to section 157(1) a lease of his share by a disabled land holder in joint holding (held along with a non disabled person) is expressly permitted and under section 157(2) the Court has to determine such share of the disabled lessor and partition the same on an application being made in that behalf, it cannot be said that the Legislature intended to deprive the protection of section 21(1)(h) to such disabled land holder simply because on the date immediately preceding the date of vesting such land holder comes to hold the 370 land jointly with some other non disabled land holder.
On true construction of the crucial phrase occurring in clause (h) it is not possible to read into the provision the additional requirement, namely, that the identity of the land holder or land holders must remain unchanged up to the date of vesting.
[376 G H, 377 A, B D, G H] Further the scheme of the U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act is different from the Agra Tenancy Act, 1926 and U.P. Tenancy Act, 1939.
In each of the two provisions of these two Acts express words have been used conferring personal rights on the individuals concerned which is not the case with section 21(1)(h) of the Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act.
[378 B C] Smt.
Maya vs Raja Dulaji and Ors.
[1 over ruled.
Dwarika Singh vs Dy.
Director of Consolidation All W.C. 213 1981 All.
L.J. 484 approved.
