The respondent had an overdraft account with the Erattupetta Branch of the Kottayam orient Bank Ltd. at the foot of which he owed a sum of over Rs. 3000/ to the Bank.
The said Bank which was a 'Banking Company ' as defined in the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, was amalgamated with the appellant Bank with effect from June 17, 1961.
The appellant Bank filed a suit (O,S, 28 of 1963) in the Sub Court, Meenachil, against the respondent for recovery of the amount due from him in the overdraft Account with the Kottayam orient Bank, the right to recover which had come to be vested in the appellant as a result of the scheme of amalgamation.
The suit was decreed in favour of the appellant but when it took out execution proceedings in the Sub Court, Kottayam, the respondent filed an application under section 8 of the Kerala Agriculturists ' Debt Relief Act claiming that being an agriculturist within the meaning of that Act, he was entitled to the benefit of its provisions including those relating to the scaling down of debts.
The learned Subordinate Judge dismissed the application holding: (i) that the respondent was not entitled to the benefit of the provisions regarding scaling down of the debt because the debt, having been once owed by him to the Kottayam orient Bank Ltd. which was a Banking Company as defined in the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, was outside the purview of section S of the Act which provided for the scaling down of debts owed by agriculturists; and (ii) that he was only entitled to the benefit of the proviso to section 2(4) (l) of the Act under which the amount could be repaid in eight half yearly instalments The Revision Application preferred by the respondent was referred to the Full Bench of the High Court.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant Bank that the debt owed to it by the respondent was excluded from the operation of the Act by reason of section 2 (4) (a) (ii) and section 2 (4) (1) of the Act.
By its judgment dated February 1, 1978 the High Court rejected that contention, allowed the Revision Application and held that the respondent was entitled to all the relevant benefits of the Act, including the benefit of scaling down of the debt and hence the appeal by special leave.
339 Dismissing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1:1.
The appellant Bank will not be entitled to the benefit of the exclusion contained in section 2 (4) (a) (ii) of the Kerala Agriculturists ' Debt Relief Act, 1970 in view of clause (B) of the proviso to the section and the respondent 's claim to the benefits of the Act will remain unaffected by that provision.
[345H, 346 A] 1: 2.
The respondent is admittedly an agriculturist and he owes a sum of money to the appellant Bank under a decree passed in its favour by the Sub Court, Meenachil, in O.S. No. 28 of 1963.
The liability which the respondent owes to the appellant Bank is, therefore a "debt" within the meaning of section 2 (4) of the Act.
[344 F G] However, since the appellant Bank, namely, the State Bank of Travancore, .
is a subsidiary bank within the meaning of section 2 (k) of the and also as contemplated by sub clause (ii) of clause (a) of section 2(4) of the Act, the decretal amount payable by the respondent to the appellant Bank will not be a debt within the meaning of section 2(4) of the Act.
[345 C D] 1: 3.
By reason of clause (B) of the proviso to section 2 (4) (a) (ii) of the Act, which proviso is in the nature of an exception to the exceptions contained in the said section the amount payable to a subsidiary bank is not to be regarded as a debt within the meaning of the Act, only if the right of the subsidiary bank to recover the amount did not arise by reason of any transfer effected by operation of law subsequent to July 1, 1957.
Here, the notification containing the scheme of amalgamation was published on May 16.
Thus, the right of the appellant Bank, though is a subsidiary Bank, to recover the amount from the respondent arose by reason of a transfer effected by operation of law, namely, the scheme of amalgamation, which came into effect after July 1, 1957.
[345 D E, G] 2: l.
The State Bank of Travancore, is not a 'company ' properly so called.
It is a subsidiary bank.
It was established by the Central Government in accordance with The Act of 1959 and is not a 'company and, therefore not a banking company.
Therefore, the decretal debt which the respondent is liable to pay to the appellant is not owed to a "banking company".
It was indeed not owed to any "banking company" at all on July 14, 1970 being the date on which the Act came into force.
[346 G H, 347 A] 3: 1.
The exclusion provided for in clause (I) of section 2 (4) of the Act can be availed of, if the debt is due to a banking company at the time of the commencement of the Act.
[352 D E] 3: 2.
The object of the Act is to relieve agricultural indebtedness.
In order to achieve that object, the legislature conferred certain benefits on agricultural debtors but, while doing so, it excluded a class of debts from the operation of the Act, namely, debts of the description mentioned in clauses (a) to (n) of section 2 (4).
One class of debts taken out from the operation of the Act is debts owed to banking companies, as specified in clause (1).
The reason for this exception being that, unlike money lenders who 340 exploit needy agriculturists and impose upon them harsh and onerous terms while granting loans to them, representative institutions, like banks and banking companies, are governed be their rules and regulations which do not change from debtor to debtor and which, if anything, are intended to benefit the weaker sections of society.
[348 A C] 3: 3.
Relief to agricultural debtors who have suffered the oppression of private money lenders, has to be the guiding star which must illumine and inform the interpretation of the beneficient provisions of the Act.
When clause (1) speaks of a debt due "before the commencement" of the Act to a banking company, it does undoubtedly mean what it says, namely, that the debt must have been due to a banking company before the commencement of the Act.
But it means something more: that the debt must also be due to a banking company at the commencement of the Act.
Reading into the clause the word "at" which is not there, is the only rational manner by which meaning and content could be given to it, so as to further the object of the Act.
[349 B E] Further clause (I) speaks of a debt due before the commencement of the Act, what it truly means to convey is not that the debt should have been due to a banking company at some point of time before the commencement of the Act, but that it must be a debt which was incurred from a banking company before the commencement of the Act.
[349 E F] Thus, the application of clause (I) is subject to these conditions: (i) The debt must have been incurred from a banking company; (ii) the debt must have been so incurred before the commencement of the Act; and (iii) the debt must be due to a banking company on the date of the commencement of the Act.
These are cumulative conditions and unless each one of them is satisfied, clause (I) will not be attracted and the exclusion provided for therein will not be available as an answer to the relief sought by the debtor in terms of the Act.
[349G H, 350 A] 3: 4.
Section 2 (4) which defines a "debt" had to provide that debt means a liability due from or incurred by an agriculturist "on or before the commencement" of the Act.
It could not be that liabilities incurred before the commencement of the Act would be "debts" even though they are not due on the date of commencement of the Act.
The words "on or before the commencement" of the Act are used in the context of liabilities "due from or incurred" by an agrieculturist.
For similar reasons, clause (j) had to use the expression "at the commencement" of the Act, the subject matter of that clause being debts due to widows.
The benefit of the exclusion provided for in clause (j) could only be given to widows to whom debts were due "at the commencement" of the Act.
The legislature could not have given that benefit in respect of debts which were due before but not at the commencement of the Act.
Thus, the language used in the two provisions is suited to the particular subject matter with which those provisions deal and is apposite to the context in which that language is used.
[350 C F] 3:5.
The object of the Act being to confer certain benefits on agricultural debtors, the legislature would be under an obligation, while excepting a certain category of debts from the operation of the Act, to make a classification which will answer the test of article 14.
Debts incurred from banking companies and 341 due to such companies at the commencement of the Act would fall into a separate and distinct class, the classification bearing a nexus with the object of the Act.
If debts incurred from private money lenders are brought within the terms of clause (I) on the theory that the right to recover the debt had passed on to a banking company sometime before the commencement of the Act, the clause would be unconstitutional for the reason that it accords a different treatment to a category of debts without a valid basis and without the classification having a nexus with the object of the Act.
[350G H, 357A B] State of Rajasthan vs Mukanchand ; ; Fatehchand Himmatlal vs State of Maharashtra, ; , applied.
