The appellant company manufactured various process chemicals required for the Textile Industry.
The process chemicals so manufactured by them are substances known as emulsifiers and wetting out agents and they fall within the scope of tariff item 15AA of the first schedule to the Central Excise and Salt Act 1944.
The appellant purchased 164500 kgs.
Of organic surface active agents from the "Industrial General Products Pvt. Ltd.".
The organic surface active agents sold to the appellant by the Industrial General Products Pvt.
Ltd. had not been subjected to the levy of excise duty in as much as the said supplier company was eligible for exemption from payment of Excise Duty on account of the fact that the goods were manufactured by it without the aid of power.
Emulsifiers/wetting out agents etc.
intended for use in any industrial process were exempted from the levy of duty under entry 15AA, by a notification dated 20.1.1968 issued by the Government of India, subject to the condition that if in respect of surface active agents used in the manufacture of such emulsifiers, wetting out agents, softners and other like preparations the appropriate amount of the duty of excise or the additional duty under section 2A of the Indian Tariff Act 1934 (32 of 1934), has already been paid or where such surface active agents are purchased from the open market on or after the 20th day of January, 1968.
F It is common ground that the organic surface active agents used by the appellant as raw material for the manufacture of emulsifiers/wetting out agents were purchased by it subsequent to the 20th day of January, 1968.
The Central Excise authorities originally treated the manufactured product, namely the emulsifiers etc.
as exempt from levy of duty by virtue of the Notification dated January 20, 1968.
But, subsequently by a notice dt.
August 6, 1974 issued by the superintendent of Central Excise, the appellant was directed to show cause why an amount of Rs. 1, 21,709.57 should not be recovered from the appellant by way of excise duty in respect of the period August 1973 to February 1974 on the ground that the said amount represented escaped duty in respect of the emulsifiers/wetting out agents manufactured by the appellant during the aforesaid period.
The appellant in reply contended that it was entitled to the benefit of exemption from levy of duty in respect of the manufactured products under the notification dated 20.1.1968.
This contention was rejected by the Assistant 622 Collector and his order was confirmed by the appellate collector of central excise.
A revision petition filed by the appellant before the respondents (union of India) was rejected by order dated August 3.
1978 wherein the Central Government took the view that "purchases made from a particular manufacturer, the production from whose factory is exempt from payment of duty, being manufactured without the aid of power, cannot be treated at par with purchases made from the open market".
In the appeal filed by special leave, it was contended that the condition that the surface active agents should have been purchased from the 'open market ' on or after the 20th day of January 1968 was fully satisfied in the present case, and hence the appellant was entitled to the benefit of the exemption granted by the Notification.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
The appellant Company is entitled to the benefit of the exemption granted by the Notification dated January 20, 1968 in respect of the emulsifiers, wetting out agents, softners etc.
manufactured by the Company for use during the relevant period (August 1973 to February 1974).
[628 G] 2.
In determining the eligibility of a person for the benefit of the exemption conferred by the Notification on the basis of the fulfillment of the second of the aforementioned conditions, it is wholly irrelevant to enquire whether duty of excise had already been paid in respect of the surface active agents purchased and utilised as raw material for the manufacture of the emulsifiers/wetting out agents.
[627 A B] 3.
Having due regard to the context in which the expression 'open market" has been used in the Notification, it would be wholly wrong to understand the said expression "open market" as connoting only a market yard, bazar or a shopping complex where goods are offered for sale.
Industrial Chemicals (which have to be ordinarily purchased in bulk for use as raw material in the manufacture of secondary products) are not commodities that are usually exposed for sale in bazars and shops.
Such bulk purchases of chemicals etc., are effected by placing orders with the concerned manufacturing units.
[627 E G] 4.
If the transactions of sale and purchase are effected under conditions enabling every person desirous of purchasing the goods in question to place orders with such manufacturing unit and obtain supplies, they will constitute Purchases "from the open market".
[627 G H, 628 A] Inland Revenue Commissioners vs Clay, referred to.
In the present case, it was open to every person desirous of purchasing the surface active agents to place orders with the manufacturing company, namely MIS Industrial General Products Private Limited, and obtain the supply on payment of the price at the prevailing rate.
The sales by the said Company were not to a limited class only.
Hence, the purchases of the surface active agents effected by the appellant from M/s Industrial General Products Private Limited have to 623 be treated as purchases made "from the open market".
The denial to the appellant of the benefit of the exemption provided for by the Notification was, therefore, clearly illegal.
[628 D F]
