The appellants, who were manufacturers of medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol challenged the constitutional validity in their writ petitions under article 226 of the Constitution of the provisions of sections 12A, 12B, 14(e) and (f ), 56A and section 68A of the Kerala Abkari Act, 1967 (Act No. X of 1967) and Rules 13 and 16 of the Kerala Rectified Spirit Rules, 1973 and rr.
5, 6 and 7 of the Kerala Spiritious Preparations Rules, 1969 on the ground that the State Legislature had no power to enact a law relating to medicinal and toilet preparations as the topic of the legislation was within the exclusive domain of Parliament under Entry 84, List I of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution and also on the ground that they were violative of article 19(1) (g) read with article 301 of the Constitution.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition holding that there was no conflict between the impugned provisions and the Central law, i.e., the or the Medicinal and Toilet Preparations (Excise Duties) Rules, 1956 framed thereunder as they dealt with different subjects.
The High Court further held that the impugned provisions do not offend against article 19(1) (g) or article 301 of the Constitution.
In the appeal and the special leave petition to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellants (t) The State Legislature had no legislative competence 520 to enact the impugned provisions because the field was occupied by the provisions of The (The Central Act) and the Medicinal and Toilet Preparations (Excise Duties) Rules, 1956 (the Central Rules), and alternatively, the impugned provisions are violative of the fundamental right guaranteed in article 19(1) (g) of the Constitution.
(2) "Drugs and Pharmaceuticals" having been declared by Parliament under section 2 of the Industries Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 to be a scheduled industry, being item 22 of the First Schedule thereof, the power of the State Legislature to make a law in respect of medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol was taken away.
(3) The provisions made in section 14(e) of the Act for the collection of supervisory charges was clearly invalid in as much as (a) they are in conflict with r. 45 of the Central Rules, and (b) they could not be sustained as a fee as there was no quid pro quo.
(4) Rule 13 of the Kerala Rectified Spirit Rules, 1972, providing for the levy of excise duty as excess wastage of alcohol in the manufacture of medicinal and toilet preparations cannot be supported in terms of the charging provision contained in section 17 of the Act.
(S) The power to restrict the quantity of ayurvedic asavas and arishtas in which alcohol is self generated in the process of manufacture having regard to the total requirement of such medicinal preparations for consumption or use in the State is an unreasonable restriction on The fundamental right to carry on trade or business guaranteed under An.
19(1) (g) and was also violative of article 301 as there was demand for such medicinal preparations not only in The Slate but throughout the country.
Dismissing The Appeal and Special Leave Petition, ^ HELD: (l) The Central and State Acts operate in two separate and distinct fields and are not in conflict with each other.
While the main purpose of the impugned Act is to consolidate the law relating to manufacture, sale and possession of intoxicating liquors and intoxicating drugs, a subject which falls under Entry 8 of List II of the Seventh Schedule, the main object of the Central Act is lo provide for the levy and collection of duties of excise on medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol falling under Entry 84 List I. [536 G F] 2(i).
The enactment of the by Parliament under Entry 84, List I of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution, or the framing of the Medicinal and Toilet Preparations (Excise Duties) Rules, 1956 by the Central Government in exercise of their rule making power under section 19 of the Act, for the purpose of levying duties of excise on medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol etc., do not pre vent the State Legislature from making a law under Entry 8, List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution with respect to 'intoxicating liquors ' or a law under Entry 51 List II for levying excise duties on alcoholic requirements for human consumption.
[528 C D] (ii) It is the charging section which gives the true index to the real character of a tax.
The nature of the machinery by which the tax is to be assessed is not of assistance, except in so far as it may throw light on the general character of the tax.
The charging section in section 3 of the Central Act clearly shows that it does not seek to levy a duty of excise on alcohol liquor for human consumption falling within Entry 51 List II of the Seventh Schedule, but to levy a duty of 521 excise on medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol etc.
The topic of legislation under Entry 84, List I of the Seventh Schedule is 'duties of excise on medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol etc.
The Central Act must in pith and substance, be attributed to Entry 84, List.
[532 C E] (iii) The Central and the State Legislations operate on two different and distinct fields.
The Central Rules, to some extent, trench upon the field reserved to the State Legislature, but that is merely incidental to the main purpose, that is, to levy duties of excise on medicinal and toilet preparation containing alcohol.
Some of the impugned provisions may be almost similar to some of the provisions of the Central Rules, but that does not imply that the State Legislature had no competence to enact the provisions.
The State Legislation is confined to 'intoxicating liquor ', that is, to ensure proper utilisation of rectified spirit in the manufacture of medicinal and toilet preparations and, therefore, within the powers granted to the State Legislature under Entry 8, List II.
It further seeks to regulate the manufacture of bona fide medicinal preparations and prevent misuse of rectified spirit in the manufacture of spurious medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol capable of being used as ordinary alcoholic beverages.
[532 F 533 A] (iv) The enumeration of 'intoxicating liqour ' in Entry 8, List II, confers exclusive power to the State to legislate in respect of medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol.
[533 B] (v) In matters of seeming conflict or encroachment of jurisdictions, what is more important is the true nature and character of the legislation.
A necessary corollary of the doctrine of pith and substance is that once it is found that in pith and substance the impugned Act is a law on a permitted field, any incidental encroachment on a forbidden field does not affect the competence of the legislature to enact the law.
[534 B C] Prafulla Kumar Mukherjee and Ors.
vs Bank of Commerce Ltd. Khulna A.I.R. 1947 PC 60 at 65 and State of Bombay vs F. N. Balsara ; at 694 5 referred to.
(vi) There can be no doubt that the impugned Act is relatable to Entry 8, List II of the Seventh Schedule.
[536 A] (vii) When the frame work of the two enactments is examined, it would be apparent that the Central and the State Legislature operate in two different and distinct fields.
In the matter of making rules or detailed provisions to achieve the object and purpose of a legislation, there may be some provisions seemingly overlapping or encroaching upon the forbidden field, but that does not warrant the striking down of the impugned Act as ultra vires the State Legislature.
[536 G 537 A] Hyderabad Chemical and Pharmaceutical Works Ltd. vs State of Andhra Pradesh and Ors.
; distinguished.
(viii) No citizen has any fundamental right guaranteed under article 19(1) (g) of the Constitution to carry on trade in any noxious and dangerous goods like intoxicating drugs or intoxicating liquors, The power to legislate with regard to intoxicating liqour carries with it the power to regulate the manufacture, sale and possession of medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol, not for the 522 purpose of interfering with the right of citizens in the matter of consumption or use for bonafide medicinal and toilet preparations, but for preventing intoxicating liquors from being passed on under the guise of medicinal and toilet 'preparations.
It was within the competence of the State Legislature to prevent the noxious use of such preparations i.e. their use as a substitute for alcoholic beverages.
[537B D] In the instant case the provisions have been enacted to ensure that rectified spirit is not misused under the pretext of being used for medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol.
Such regulation is a necessary concomitant of the police power of the State to regulate such trade or business which is inherently dangerous to public health.
[537 E] (ix) All that the provisions of sections 12A and 12B ordain is that the Commissioner "shall have due regard to the total requirement of such medicinal preparations for consumption or use in the State".
The Commissioner has, therefore, only to take into account the total requirements within the State as an element which should enter the assessment and no more.
As a necessary corollary, it follows that in fixing the quantity of medicinal and toilet preparations to which alcohol is added or in which it is self generated, normally the Commissioner shall have regard to larger requirements of the manufacture, if the manufactured product has a market outside the State.
The restrictions imposed by section 12B as to the alcoholic content of medicinal and toilet preparations and the requirement that they shall not be manufactured except and in accordance with the terms and conditions of a licence granted by him, are nothing but reasonable restrictions within the meaning of article 19(6).
The impugned provisions, therefore, cannot be struck down as offending article 19(1) (g) of the Constitution.
[538 E 539 B] 3.
The State Act, in pith and substance, is not a legislation under Entry 24, List 11 and, therefore, the question does not arise.
[539 E 539 B] 4(i) (a) The provision contained in section 14(e) of the Act is clearly relatable to the State 's power to make a law under Entry read with Entry 51(a), List II of the Seventh Schedule.
section 14(e) of the Act is valid in so far as it provides that the Commissioner may prescribe the size and nature of the establishment for such supervision and the cost of establishment and other incidental charges in connection with such supervision to be realised from the licensee.
There is no warrant for the submission that the framing of such an incidental provision like r. 45(1) of the Central Rules takes away the State 's power to recover supervisory charges from the licensee.
[540 B C] (b) 'Fees ' are the amounts paid for a privilege and are not an obligation.
Fees are distinguished from taxes in that the chief purpose of a tax is to raise funds for the support of the Government or for a public purpose, while a fee may be charged for the privilege or benefit conferred, or service rendered or to meet the expenses connected therewith.
Thus, fees are nothing but payment for some special privilege granted or service rendered.
Taxes and taxation are, therefore, distinguishable from various other contributions, charges, or burdens paid or imposed for particular purposes and under particular powers or functions of the Government.
It is now increasingly realised that merely because the collections for the services rendered or grant of a privilege or licence, are taken to the Consolidated Fund of the State and are not separately appropriated towards the expenditure for rendering the service is not by itself decisive.
It is also increasingly realised that the element of quid pro quo stricto sensu is not 523 always a sine qua non of a fee.
It is needless to stress that the element of quid A pro quo is not necessarily absent in every tax, [541 G 542 D] Mahant Shri Jagannath Ramanuj Das vs The State of Orissa ; , Ratilal Panachand Gandhi vs The State of Bombay [1954] SCR 1055, Constitutional Law of India by H.M. Seervai, 2nd Edn.
Vol. 2, p. 1252, para 22.39 & Kewal Krishan Puri & Anr.
vs State of Punjab & Ors.
at 1230 referred to.
(ii) In the case of a manufacturer of medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol in a bonded manufactory, the imposition of the cost of establishment under section 14(e) of the Act calculated in accordance with the nature and extent of that establishment could not be said to be an imposition of a duty of excise, but is a price for his franchise to carry on the business.
[543 D E] (iii) No one has a fundamental right to the supply of rectified spirit which is an intoxicating liquor.
It is upto the State to control and regulate its supply from a distillery or a spirit warehouse in the State under and in accordance with the terms and conditions of a licence or permit its import from outside by grant of a privilege and charge a fee for the same.
A fee may be charged for the privilege or benefit conferred, or service rendered, or to meet the expenses connected therewith.
A fee may be levied to meet the cost of supervision and may be something more.
It is in consideration for the privilege, licence or service.
The State is undoubtedly entitled to levy excise duty on the rectified spirit issued from a distillery under section 17(f) of the Act read with r. 13 of the Kerala Rectified Spirit Rules, 1972 but it refrained from making any such levy by reason of rule 21 of the Central Rules and has, therefore, by proviso tc) rule 8 allowed a manufacturer of medicinal and toilet preparations to draw rectified spirit from a distillery without payment of duty.
It is thus a privilege conferred on the licensee.
To claim the privilege he must comply with the conditions prescribed If one of the conditions is the payment of cost of establishment under section 14(e) of the Act read with rule 16(4) of the Central Rules, the manufacturer of such preparations must necessarily bear the burden s the licensee gets services in return in lieu of such payment.
[543 G 544 C] 5.
Rule 13(2) is nothing but a corollary of rule 13(1).
On a combined reading of section 17(f) and rule 8 read with the proviso thereof, no duty is chargeable on alcohol actually used in the manufacture of medicinal and toilet preparations.
The Government realised that some margin for wastage should be allowed and, therefore, inserted the proviso to rule 13(2), which provides that the Government may, in consultation with the Drugs Controller and the Chemical Examiner, by notification in the Gazette, permit allowance for wastage occurring during the manufacture.
Beyond the permissible limit, the State has the right to levy a duty on excess wastage of alcohol, i.e. on alcohol not accounted for.
[548 D F] 6.
The restriction imposed by section 12A of the Act as to the quantity of medicinal preparations to be manufactured relate not only to preparations to which alcohol is added but also to medicinal preparations in which alcohol is self generated.
There can be no doubt that ayurvedic asavas and aristhas which are capable of being misused as alcoholic beverage and come within the purview of the definition of 'liquor ' contained in section 3(10) of the Act being liquid containing alcohol.
The contention that Note to rule 3(1) is an unreasonable restriction on the freedom of trade guaranteed under.
Article 19(1) (g) of the Constitution has no substance.
[549 B D] 524
