Under the deed of settlement (exhibit 2A) dated May 22,1930, the appellant landlady acquired a life interest in certain agricultural lands under dispute and the reversion remainder was in her children.
During her lifetime she was entitled to enjoy the income of the property but she could not dispose of the property by will, gift or sale.
She was also under a disability to encumber the estate though she had the right of carrying on the "vahivat" (management).
By virtue of the provisions of section 32 of the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1948, providing that on April 1, 1957 styled as tillers ' day, a tenant of Agricultural land covered by the said Act would be the owner of the land held by him, if other conditions specified therein are fulfilled, the respondents made five separate applications on August 27, 1962 against the appellant before the Agricultural Lands Tribunal, Raver under section 32G for determining the price of the land held by each of them as tenant.
The appellant contested the right of the tenant to purchase the land, inter alia contending that under the deed of settlement she acquired a right only to usufruct of land involved in the dispute and she being a limited owner and the settlement imposing certain disability on her precluding her from dealing with the property which would indicate that she could not have leased out the land thereby creating an encumbrance which would be impermissible under the deed of settlement and consequently the tenant of each piece of land could not be said to be lawfully cultivating the land so as to a become the deemed tenant under section 4 of the Tenancy Act.
The respondents not being tenants within the meaning of the Tenancy Act could not have become the owner of the land on the tillers ' day.
Alternatively it was contended that the minor children of the appellant, she being a limited owner had acquired a vested right in the land and, therefore, as they were minors the date of compulsory purchase would be postponed under section 32F ousting the jurisdiction of the tribunal to determine the price under section 32G.
The Tribunal allowed 608 the applications and negatived the appellant 's contentions.
All the five appeals preferred by the appellant were allowed by the Collector of Jalgaon.
The revision petitions filed by the tenants under section 76 of the Tenancy Act before the Maharashtra Revenue Tribunal were allowed holding that even though the landlady in these cases was a limited owner the instrument settling the property on the landlady did not preclude her from leasing the land and the lease was accordingly valid under section 4, the tenant would be a deemed tenant within the meaning of the Tenancy Act and such deemed tenant would become the owner of the land held by him on the tillers ' day.
The appellant approached the High Court under Article 227 of the Constitution.
While rejecting the special civil applications the High Court remanded the case to the Collector to give an opportunity to the appellant to agitate the contention about the quantum of price as it was not dealt with by the Collector on merits.
The appellant having obtained a certificate under Article 133(1) (a) and (b) of the Constitution preferred these five appeals.
Dismissing the appeals, the Court, ^ HELD: 1.
On a plain reading of the deed and the admitted position that the appellant had leased the land to each of the respondents and in view of the requirements of section 4 of the Tenancy Act, 1948, it is clear that the respondents would be deemed tenants under that section.
[616 E F] 1 :1.
Section 4 comprehends within its sweep any person lawfully cultivating any land belonging to another person.
If land belongs to one person and another is lawfully cultivating it, unless such person falls under any of the excepted categories; he would acquire the status of a deemed tenant.
The excepted categories are: (a) a member of the owner 's family, or (b) a servant on wages, payable in cash or kind but not in crop share or a hired labourer cultivating the land under the personal supervision of the owner or any member of the owner 's family, or (c) a mortgagee in possession.
It would thus appear that if the land belonging to one person is being lawfully cultivated by another person and that such other person is not a member of the owner 's family or a servant on wages payable in cash or kind but not in crop share or a hired labourer or a mortgagee in possession then such cultivator lawfully cultivating the land would be deemed to be a tenant.
The legal fiction of clothing a lawful cultivator of land belonging to other person has widened the traditional concept of expression "tenant" which would normally imply contractual relationship.
[615 E H, 616A] 1:2.
Under the deed of settlement appellant was given a life estate.
She was the owner of the land during her life time with a limitation that she could not will, gift or sell the property or encumber the same.
In view of these four limitations she is undoubtedly a limited owner.
But this limited owner holding the life estate has been given the right to administer the estate after she attained majority.
Administration of the estate would normally include leasing of the property except where a specific condition is prescribed precluding the administrator from leasing the property.
There is no such limiting or restrictive condition prohibiting the appellant in the course of her management from leasing the land.
The appellant beneficiary being a woman, the settlors must have thought that she may not be able to personally carry on agricultural operations and therefore when the settlors authorised her, on attaining majority, to administer the estate 609 it would per se in the absence of a limiting or restricting condition to the countrary enable her to lease the land.
Thus, if the appellant as beneficiary after attaining majority took over the administration and as part of the administration leased the land, the person so inducted by her on the land would be lawfully cultivating the land belonging to the appellant and being not in any of the excepted categories would be deemed to be a tenant.[616 B E] Dahyalal and Ors.
vs Rasul Mohammed Abdul Rahim, ; , followed.
Upon a pure literal construction of deed coupled with intendment of the settlement, the appellants ' interest in the property was a vested interest during the life lime with a right to take over management on attaining majority and to deal with the property in her own way, and the children had only contingent interest during the period.
The property would devolve on the heirs named in the deed and the devolution would take place on her death.
Section 13 of the Transfer of Property Act makes this position clear since none of her children to whom the remainder was given was in existence at the time of transfer.
Even if transfer is in favour of unborn person, at the date of transfer to be valid there has to be a prior interest created by the very transfer.
This prior interest though limited would not be contingent but vested interest.
In fact the interest of future born children would be contingent till the death of the appellant.
The deed of settlement cannot be construed as a transfer in favour of unborn person, yet it settles property on trust and the unborn children, under trust, may be beneficiaries but they can claim interest only after the death of the appellant and no interest in her life time.
Under the deed of settlement an interest is created in favour of the children of the appellant and the interest would take effect on the happening of specified uncertain event uncertain as to time namely, the death of the appellant the interest of the children would be contingent.
It is nothing short of spes successionis [618 D H, 619 A] Rajes Kanta Roy vs Santi Debi, ; , discussed and distinguished.
The right to administer the property conferred on the appellant on her attaining majority inheres the right to lease the property.
If it be so, it is futile to contend that restraint on the right to encumber would preclude her from leasing the land.
The right to manage or administer an immovable property such as agricultural land as a prudent man, comprehends the right to lease, save where the contrary intention is indicated.
It is equally well recognised that a limited owner or a life estate holder in agricultural land, unless a clear intention to the contrary is expressed, would be entitled to lease the land during his or her life time.
Reading the deed of settlement as a whole no such contrary intention could be found.
[620 B D]
