The appellant assessee sold his house in Ernakulam on 25th of December, 1965 to his daughter in law and five of his children for the same price of Rs. 16,500 at which he purchased in the year 1958.
The assessment of the assessee for the assessment year 1966 67 for which the relevant accounting year was the calendar year 1965 was thereafter completed in the normal course and in this assessment, no amount was included by way of capital gains in respect of the transfer of the house, since the house was sold by the assessee at the same price at which it was purchased and no capital gains accrued or arose to him as a result of the transfer.
On 4th April 1968, however, the Income Tax officer issued a notice under section 148 of the Act seeking to reopen the assessment of the assessee for the assessment year 1966 67 and requiring the assessee to submit a return of income within thirty days of the service of the notice, without stating what was the income alleged to have escaped assessment.
However, by his subsequent letter dated 4th March, 1969, the Income Tax officer stated that he proposed to fix the fair market value of the house sold by the assessee at Rs, 65,000 as against the consideration of Rs. 16,500 for which the house was sold and assess the difference of Rs. 48,500 as capital gains in the hands of the assessee.
The objections raised by the assessee were overruled and an order of reassessment was passed by the Income Tax officer including the sum of Rs. 48,500 as capital gains and bringing it to tax under sub section (2) of section 52, taking the view that this sub section did not require as a condition precedent that there should be under statement of consideration in respect of the transfer and it was enough to attract the applicability of the sub section if the fair market value of the property as on the date of the transfer exceeded the full value of the consideration declared by the assessee by an amount of not less than 15% of the value so declared.
The assessee thereupon filed a writ petition in Kerala High Court challenging the validity of the order of re assessment insofar as it brought a sum of Rs. 48,500 to tax relying on sub section (2) of section 52 of the the Income Tax Act, 1961.
The writ petition was allowed, but in appeal the Full Bench by a majority judgment agreed with the views of the Income Tax officer and dismissed the writ petition.
Hence the assessee 's appeal by certificate.
630 Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1: 1.
Sub section (2) of section 52 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 can be invoked only where the consideration for the transfer has been understated by the assessee or in other words, the consideration actually received by the assessee is more than what is declared or disclosed by him.
Sub section (2) has no application in case of an honest and bonafide transaction where the consideration received by the assessee has been correctly declared or disclosed by him and there is no concealment or suppression of the consideration.
[657 B, C D] 1: 2.
The burden of proving an understatement or concealment is on the Revenue, which may be discharged by it by establishing facts and circumstances from which a reasonable inference can be drawn that the assessee has not correctly declared or disclosed the consideration received by him and there is understatement or concealment of the consideration in respect of the transfer.[657 B C] 1: 3.
Sub section (4), in the instant case, had no application and the Income Tax officer could have no reason to believe that any part of the income of the assessee had escaped assessment so as to justify the issue of a notice under section 148.
It was a common ground between the parties and that was a finding of fact reached by the Revenue Authorities that the transfer of the property by the assessee was a perfectly honest and bonafide transaction where the full value of the consideration received by the assessee was correctly disclosed at the figure of Rs. 16,500.
The order of re assessment made by the Income Tax officer pursuant to the notice issued under section 148 was accordingly without jurisdiction.
[657 D G] 2: 1.
The task of interpretation of the statutory enactment is not a mechanical task.
It is more than mere reading of mathematical formula because few words possess the precision of mathematical symbols.
It is an attempt to discover the intent of the legislature from the language used by it and it must always be remembered that language is at best an imperfect instrument for the expression of human thoughts and it would be idle to expect every statutory provision to be "drafted with divine prescience and perfect clarity".
Courts, therefore, must eschew literalness in the interpretation of a statutory provision and construe the language having regard to the object and purpose which the legislature had in view in enacting that provision and in the context and the setting in which it occurs.
[640 C D, F.G, 642 B C] 2: 2.
Where the plain literal interpretation of a statutory provision produces a manifestly absurd and unjust result which could never have been intended by the legislature, the Court may modify the language used by the legislature or even "do some violence" to it so as to achieve the obvious intention of the legislature and produce a rational construction.
The Court may also in such a case read into the statutory provision a condition which, though not expressed, is implicit as constituting the basic assumption underlying the statutory provision.
It is true that the consequences of a suggested construction cannot alter the meaning of a statutory provision but they can certainly help to fix its meaning.
631 Luke vs Revenue Commissioner, ; Headan 's case ; ; In re May Fair Property Company, LR [1898] 2 Ch.
Dn; Eastman Photographic Material Company vs Comptroller General of Patents, Designs and Trade Marks, , quoted with approval, 2:3.
The speeches made by the Members of the Legislature on the floor of the House when a Bill for enacting a statutory provision is being debated are inadmissible for the purpose of interpreting the statutory provision but the speech made by the Mover of the Bill explaining the reason for the introduction of the Bill can certainly be referred to for The purpose of ascertaining the mischief sought to be remedied by the legislation and the object and purpose for which the legislation is enacted.
[654 E G] Lok Shikshana Trust vs Commissioner af Income Tax, ; Indian Chamber of Commerce vs Commissioner of Income tax, ; Additional Commissioner of Income tax vs Surat Art Silk Cloth Manufacturers Association, , referred to.
Again it is undoubtedly true that the marginal note to a section cannot be referred to for the purpose of construing the section but it can certainly be relied upon as indicating the drift of the section or to show what the section dealing with.
It cannot control the interpretation of the words of a section particularly when the language of the section is clear and unambiguous but, being part of the statute, it prima facie furnishes some clue as to the meaning and purpose of the section.
[647 A B] Bushel vs Hammond, , quoted with approval.
Bengal Immunity Company Limited vs State of Bihar, , referred to.
The rule of construction by reference to contemporanea expositio is a well established rule for interpreting a statute by reference to the exposition it has received from contemporary authority, though it must give way where the language of the statute is plain and unambiguous.
[650 B C] Baleshwar Bagarti vs Bhagirathi Dass, I.L.R. 35 Calcutta 701, approved.
Deshbandhu Gupta and Co. vs Delhi Stock Exchange Association Ltd,. ; , referred to.
Having regard to the well recognised rule of interpretation, a fair and reasonable construction of section 52 sub section (2) would be to read into it a condition that it would apply only where the consideration for the transfer is understated or in other words, the assessee has actually received a larger consideration for the transfer than what is declared in the instrument of transfer and it would have no application in case of a bonafide transaction where the full value of the consideration for the transfer is correctly declared by the assessee.
[642 E F] 3.
Several considerations which lead to this conclusion are: 632 (a) The first consideration is the object and purpose of the enactment of section 52(2).
The speech made by the Finance Minister while moving the amendment introducing sub section (2) clearly states what were the circumstances in which such sub section (2) came to be passed, what was the mischief for which section 52 as it stood then did not provide and which was sought to be remedied by the enactment of sub section (2) and why the enactment of that sub section was found necessary.
The object and purpose of sub section (2), as explicated from the speech of the Finance Minister, was not to strike at honest and bonafide transactions where the consideration for the transfer was correctly disclosed by the assessee but to bring within the net of taxation those transactions where the consideration in respect of the transfer was shown at a lesser figure than that actually received by the assessee, so that they do not escape The chargeable tax on capital gain by understatement of the consideration.
This was real object and purpose of the enactment of sub section (2) and the interpretation of this sub section must fall in line with the advancement of that object and purpose.[642 F, 646 B. F] (b) Further the marginal note to section 52 as it now stands, was originally a marginal note only to what is presently sub section (1) and significantly enough, this marginal note remained unchanged even after the introduction of sub section (2) suggesting clearly that it was meant by Parliament to apply to both sub sections of section 52 and it must therefore be taken as indicating That, like sub section(l), sub section (2) is also intended to deal with cases where there is under statement of The consideration in respect of the transfer.
[647 C D] (c) The placement of sub section (2) in section 52 does indicate in some small measure that Parliament intended that sub section to apply only to cases where the consideration in respect of the transfer is under stated by the assessee.
If Parliament intended sub section (2) to cover all cases where the condition of 15% difference is satisfied, irrespective of whether there is under statement of consideration or not, it is reasonable to assume that Parliament would have enacted that provision as a separate section and rot pitch forked it into section 52 with a total stranger under an inappropriate marginal note.
Moreover there is inherent evidence in sub section (2) which suggests that the thrust of that sub section is directed against cases of under statement of consideration.
The crucial and important words in sub section (2) are: "the full value of the consideration declared by the assessee".
The word 'declared ' is very eloquent and revealing.
It clearly indicates that the focus of sub section (2) is on the consideration declared or disclosed by the assessee as distinguished from the consideration actually received by him and it contemplates a case where the consideration received by the assessee in respect of the transfer is not truly declared or disclosed by him but is shown at a different figure.
[647 D G, 648 A B] (d) The two circulars issued by the Central Board of Direct Taxes dated 7th July, 1964 and 14th January, 1974 are not only binding on the Tax Department in administering or executing the provision enacted in sub section (2), but are in nature of contemporenea expositio, furnishing legitimate aid in the construction of sub section (2).
It is clear from these two circulars that the Central Board of Direct Taxes, which is the highest authority entrusted with the execution of the provisions of the Act understood sub section (2) as limited to 633 cases where the consideration for the transfer has been under stated by the assessee.
These two circulars are legally binding on the Revenue and this legally binding character attaches to the two circulars even if they be found not in accordance with the correct interpretation of sub section (2) and they depart or deviate from such construction.
[650 A, F G] Navnitlal C. Jhaveri vs KK, Sen, 56 I.T.R. SC 198: Ellerman Lines Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, West Bengal, , followed.
1 4: 1, It is a well settled rule of law that the onus of establishing that the conditions of taxability are fulfilled is always on the Revenue.
To throw the burden of showing that there is no understatement of the consideration, on the assessee would be to cast an almost impossible burden upon him to establish the negative, namely that he did not receive any consideration beyond that declared by him.
[653 F H, 654 A] 4: 2.
If the Revenue seeks to bring a case within sub section (2), it must show not only that the fair market value of the capital asset as on the date of the transfer exceeds the full value of the consideration declared by the assessee by not less than 15% of the value so declared, but also that the consideration has been under stated and the assessee has actually received more than what is declared by him.
There are two distinct conditions which have to be satisfied before sub section (2) can be invoked by the Revenue and the burden of showing that these two conditions are satisfied rests on the Revenue.
It is for the Revenue to show that each of these two conditions is satisfied and the Revenue cannot claim to have discharged this burden which lies upon it, by merely establishing that the fair market value of the capital asset as on the date of the transfer exceeds by 15% or more the full value of the consideration declared in respect of the transfer and the first condition is therefore satisfied.
The Revenue must go further and prove that the second condition is also satisfied.
Merely by showing that the first condition is satisfied, the Revenue cannot ask the Court to presume that the second condition too is fulfilled, because even in case where the first condition of 15% difference is satisfied, the transaction may be a perfectly honest and bonafide transaction and there may be no understatement of the consideration.
The fulfillment of the second condition has therefore to be established independently of the first condition and merely because the first condition is satisfied, no inference can necessarily follow that the second condition is also fulfilled.
Each condition has got to be viewed and established independently before subsection (2) can be invoked and the burden of doing so is clearly on the Revenue.
[653 B F] 4:3.
The object of imposing the condition of difference of 15% or more between the fair market value of the capital asset and the consideration declared in respect of the transfer clearly is to save the assessee from the rigour of subsection (2) in marginal cases where difference in subjective valuation by different individuals may result in an apparent disparity between the fair market value and the declared consideration.
This condition of 15% or more difference is merely intended to be a safeguard against undue hardship which would be occasioned to the assessee if the inflexible rule of the thumb enacted in sub section (2) were applied in marginal case and it has nothing to do with the question of burden of proof, for the burden of establishing that there is understatement of the concide 534 ration in respect of The transfer always rests on the Revenue.
The postulate underlying sub section (2) is that the difference between one honest valuation and another may range upto 15% and that constitutes the class of marginal cases which are taken out of the purview of sub section (2) in order to avoid hardship to the assessee.
[654 B C, F H] 4: 4.
Once it is established by the Revenue that the consideration for the transfer has been under stated, sub section (2) is immediately attracted, subject of course to the fulfillment of the condition of 15% or more difference, and the Revenue is then not required to show what is the precise extent of the understatement or in other words, what is the consideration actually received by the asseesee.
That would in most cases be difficult, if not impossible, to show and hence sub section (2) relieves the Revenue of all burden of proof regarding the extent of under statement or concealment and provides a statutory measure of the consideration received in respect of the transfer.
It does not create any fictional receipt.
It does not deem as receipt something which is not in fact received.
It merely provides a statutory best judgment assessment of the consideration actually received by the assessee and brings to tax capital gains OD the footing that the fair market value of the capital asset represents the actual consideration received by the assessee as against the consideration untruly declared or disclosed by him.
This approach in construction of sub section (2) falls in line with the scheme of the provisions relating to tax on capital gains.
[665A E] 4: 5.
Section 52 is not a charging section but is a computation section.
It has to be read alongwith section 48 which provides the mode of computation and under which the starting point of computation is "the full value of the consideration received or accruing .
What in fact never accrued or was never received cannot be computed as capital gains under section 41.
Therefore sub section (2) cannot be construed as bringing within the computation of capital gains an amount which, by no stretch of imagination, can be said to have accrued to the assessee or been received by him.
[655 E F] 4: 6.
This construction of sub section (2) also marches in step with the Gift Tax Act, 1958.
If a capital asset is transferred for a consideration below its market value, the difference between the market value and the full value of the P consideration received in respect of the transfer would amount to a gift liable to tax under the Gift Tax Act, 1958.
Since the Income Tax Act, 1961 and the Gift Tax Act, 1958 are parts of an integrated scheme of taxation the same amount which is chargeable as gift could not be intended to be charged also as capital gains.
[656 A C] 4: 7.
Besides, under Entry 82 in List I of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution which deals with "Taxes on income" and under which the Income Tax Act, 1961 has been enacted, Parliament cannot "choose to tax as income an item which in no rational sense can be regarded as a citizen 's income or even receipt.
Sub section (2) would, therefore, on the construction of the Revenue, go outside the legislative power of Parliament, and it would Dot be possible to justify it even as an incidental or ancillary provision or a provision intended to prevent evasion of tax.
[656 E F] 635 4: 8.
Sub section (2) would also be violative of the fundamental right of the assessee under Article 9(1) (f) which fundamental right was in existence at the time when sub section (2) came to be enacted since on the construction canvassed on behalf of the Revenue, the effect of sub section (2) would be to penalize the assessee for transferring his capital asset for a consideration lesser by 15% or more than the fair market value and that would constitute unreasonable restriction on the fundamental right of the assessee to dispose of his capital asset at the price of his choice.
The Court must obviously prefer a construction which renders the statutory provision constitutionally valid rather than that which makes it void.
[656 F H, 657 A]
