Respondent No. 1 who was the landlord and had let out the petition premises to respondent No. 2, served a notice (dated July 28, 1962) terminating her tenancy and filed an ejectment suit.
A decree for ejectment was passed (in 1966) and the appeal of respondent No. 2 was dismissed (in 1972).
The landlord took out execution of the decree.
Obstructionist notice served on the petitioners who were sub tenants of respondent No. 2 was made absolute in favour of the landlord.
The pensioners ' appeal was dismissed.
Dismissing the petitioners ' suits against the landlord for a declaration that they were lawful sub tenants /licensee entitled to the protection of the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947 and for an injunction restraining the landlord from executing the decree for ejectment the trial Court held that they were not entitled to the benefit of the Act as lawful sub tenants or as deemed tenants or as protected licensees.
The petitioners appeals were dismissed on the ground that having been inducted into the premises after 1960 they were not entitled to be regarded as lawful sub tenants.
In the Special Leave Petitions to this Court it was contended that the petitioners: (1) must be regarded as licensees entitled to the benefit of section 14(2) read with section 15 A(1) of the Act: and (2) having been in occupation since 1943 and having in 1960 merely restricted their occupation to the portions occupied by them, they were lawful sub tenants since 1943, and, therefore, by virtue of section 14(1) they must be regarded as tenants on the determination of respondent No. 2 's tenancy.
Dismissing the Special Leave Petitions: ^ HELD: 1.
An agreement for licence can subsist and continue only so long as the licensor continues to enjoy a right, title or interest in the premises.
On the termination of his right, title or interest in the premises, the agreement for licence comes to an end.
If the licensor is a tenant, the agreement for licence terminates with the tenancy.
No tenant is ordinarily competent to grant a licence beyond his tenancy.
On the termination of the licensor 's tenancy the licensee cases to be a licensee.
This loss of status is the point 713 from which sub section (2) of section 14 of the Act begins to operate and in consequence of its operation, the erstwhile licensee becomes a tenant of the landlord on the terms and conditions of the agreement.
[715 F H] In the instant case respondent No. 2 ceased to be a tenant of any description long before February 1, 1973.
The contractual tenancy came to an end when the notice to quit took effect and the statutory tenancy terminated when the decree for ejectment was passed thereafter.
When she had ceased to be tenant, the agreement for licence stood automatically terminated by reason of which the petitioners cannot claim to be licensees on February 1, 1973.
[715 H 716 B] 2.
The benefit of section 14(1) can be claimed by a sub tenant to whom the premises had been lawfully sub let before the commencement of the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control (Amendment) Ordinance, 1959.
[716 E] In the instant case the sub tenancy has been found to commence from 1962 and not earlier.
The benefit of sub section (1) of section 14 cannot be available, and there can be no right to continue in possession.
[716 F] Madhusudan A Mahale vs P.M. Gidh and others, held inapplicable.
