The Bombay Provincial Municipal Corporations Act, 1949 came into operation in the city of Poona on 15th of February, 1950.
Section 127(2) thereof authorised the Corporation to impose octroi and other taxes, while section 149 prescribed the procedure to be allowed in levying taxes.
In the year 1957, the Corporation in order to boost industrial development and to encourage the industrialists to establish industries in the city, decided to give certain concession in the nature of exemption from octroi duty.
Pursuant to this objective the Corporation made rule 62 B in Chapter VIII to the Schedule of the said Act in 1957, which envisaged the creation of an "Industrial Estate or Area", by which was meant the area which the Corporation may from time to demarcate as the area in which industries can be suitably located in the interest of industrialisation of the city.
Under this rule no levy of octroi was to be made for a period of twelve years.
Later on, the Corporation framed extensive new octroi Rules under their resolution dated 7th of August, 1962.
Rule 5(8) of the new Rules provided for exemption in respect of levy of octroi.
The Corporation had been levying octroi on the materials received by the appellants.
The appellants sought exemption under rule S(8).
The Corporation rejected their claim for exemption of octroi on the ground that exemption can only be granted if the area within which the concern was situated was declared as industrial area and demarcated for the purpose.
Being aggrieved, the appellants filed petitions under Article 226 of tho Constitution in the High Court for the issue of a writ of Mandamus requiring the respondent Corporation to define and demarcate the area where their factories were situated as industrial area, within the meaning of rule 5(8), and to exempt them from payment of octroi.
During the pendency of these petitions rule 5(8) was repealed.
The appellants amended the writ petitions and further contended that (1) that the repeal of rule 5(8) was illegal and/or ultra vires and, therefore, rule S(8) still continues to be effective and (2) that in any event they were entitled to get the benefit of rule 62 B which had not been repealed.
The High Court repelled both the contentions and held that old rule 62B and the new rule 730 5(8) were repealed and that there was no legal flaw.
It however took the view that despite the repeal of Rule S(8) the appellant could still get the relief under rule 5(8) because if the proviso attached to the repealing rule the area in question was not demarcated as industrial estate or area for the purpose of rule S(8) and that it was solely in the discretion of the Corporation to demarcate an area as industrial estate.
It consequently dismissed the writ petitions.
In the appeals to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellants (I) that the disputed area had been included in the development plan under the Bombay Town Planning Act, 1954 before the promulgation of rule S(8) and had thus automatically become an industrial estate or area for the purposes of that rule.
(2) The Corporation had refused to grant exemption to the appellants on the arbitrary ground that the concern of the appellants was not a new one.
(3) There had been violation of Article 14 of the Constitution in as much as some industries in similar situations have been granted exemption while the appellants have been deprived of the benefit of rule S(8) and (4) While denying the benefit of rule S(8) the Corporation had taken into consideration extraneous or irrelevant considerations.
Dismissing the appeals ^ HELD: 1 (i) No area had been declared as industrial area under the Development plan before 1957 and in fact it was only after the enforcement of the development plan on 15th of August, 1966 that the disputed area became an industrial area under the Bombay Town Planning Act.
[735 C D] (ii) A bare perusal of rule 5(8) makes it apparent that for the purpose of the exemption from octroi, an industrial estate or area means the area which the Corporation may from time to time demarcate for the purpose of the rule as the area in which industries can be suitably located for the interest of industrialisation of the City.
Therefore, the demarcation made under the Town Planning Act will not be a demarcation for the purpose of rule S(8) and unless there is a demarcation as contemplated by rule S(8) the appellants cannot claim exemption from octroi.
The view taken by the High Court is fully warranted by rule S(8) of the octroi Rules.
[735 E G] 2.
The purpose of the Town Planning Act is to plan the town and to keep industrial areas away from the residential or commercial areas and that no industries could be set up in an area other than the industrial area declared in pursuance of the Act.
The purpose of demarcation as industrial estate or area under rule S(8) is for the giving of incentive and impetus to industries in a particular area.
[736 B C] 3.
An analysis of the preamble to the new octroi Rules makes it clear that rule 62 B relating to octroi was repealed by implication.
It is noteworthy that chapter VIII does not contain any rule relating to octroi, except rule 62 B which did not find a place in the preamble.
All rules relating to octroi and enacted under the 1901 and the 1925 Acts were also repealed without exemption.
Another pointer is available in the fact that octroi was made the subject matter of a new and comprehensive set of rules which not only dealt with the matters 731 covered by the rules contained in chapter VIII and specifically mentioned in the A preamble but also the one covered by rule 62 B, namely the matter of exemption of goods from octroi in areas considered suitable for industrialisation.
The promulgation of rule 5(8) as a part of an exhaustive set of new rules, has the effect of a repeal of rule 62 B by necessary implication, although not in express terms.
[737 D G] 4.
The considerations which have weighed with the Corporation for denying the benefit of exemption from octroi to the appellants cannot be said to be either irrelevant or extraneous.
These are within the ambit of rule S(8) of the octroi Rules.
[739 B]
