The respondent was the appellant 's wife.
In her petition under section 125(3) Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 for grant of maintenance, the Metropolitan Magistrate, upheld her allegation that the appellant was impotent and was incapable of having sexual relations with his wife.
But the Magistrate refused to grant maintenance to her on the ground that the husband 's impotence was not a just cause for her refusal to live with the husband.
Holding that impotence of the husband was a just ground for the wife to refuse to live with the husband, the High Court granted her maintenance.
In appeal to this Court while the husband contended that impotence was not a good ground for the wife 's refusal to live with him, the wife contended that the second proviso to section 125(3) 1973 Code enabled the wife to refuse to live with the husband if there was a suit ground for doing so and in this case the husband 's impotence was a just ground for such refusal.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: Proved impotence of the husband and his inability to discharge his marital obligations amount to both legal and mental cruelty make it a just ground for the wife to refuse to live with the husband.
The wife would be entitled to maintenance from him according to his means.
[710G 711A] The second proviso to section 125(3) of the 1973 Code was a proviso to section 488 of the 1898 Code which provides that it is incumbent on the Magistrate to consider the grounds of refusal and to make an order of maintenance, if he is satisfied that there is a just ground for the wife to refuse to live with the husband.
Decision of High Courts that section 488 of the 1898 Code had nothing to do with the ordinary conjugal rights were directly opposed.
to the very object of the section.
[703 D F] Bundoo vs Smt.
Mahrul , Emperor vs Daulat Raibhan & Anr., A.I.R. 1948 Nagpur 69, Arunachala vs Anandayammal, A.I.R. 1933 Mad. 668, Jaggavarapu Basawamma vs Japgavarapu Seeta Reddi, A.l.R, & Vedayudhan vs Sukmari overruled.
696 In the Matter of the Petition of Din Muhammad ILR [1883] 5 Allahabad 226 approved.
By an amendment made in 1949 the scope and ambit of the term "just ground" had been widened by adding a second proviso to section 488 of the 1898 Code.
The object of introducing this provision was to widen the scope and ambit of the term "just ground".
This provision is not exhaustive but purely illustrative and self explanatory and takes within its fold not only the two instances mentioned Therein but other circumstances also of a like nature which may be regarded by the Magistrate as a just ground by the wife for refusing to live with her husband.
In the present Code this provision has been incorporated as explanation to the second proviso to section 125(3).
[703 G 704 B] A perusal of this provision shows that it was meant to give a clear instance of circumstances which may be treated as a just ground for refusal of the wife to live with her husband.
By virtue of this provision, the proviso takes within its sweep all other circumstances similar to the contingencies contemplated in the Amending provision as also other instances of physical, mental or legal cruelty not excluding the impotence of the husband.
These circumstances clearly show that the grounds on which the wife refuses to live with her husband should be just and reasonable as contemplated by the proviso.
Similarly, where the wife has a reasonable apprehension arising from the conduct of the husband that she is likely to be physically harmed due to persistent demands of dowry from her husband 's parents or relations, such an apprehension also would be manifestly a reasonable justification for the wife 's refusal lo live with her husband.
[704 D F] Where a husband had contracted a married with another woman or kept a mistress, it was considered to be a just ground for the wife 's refusal to live with the husband Similarly where a wife refuses to live with an impotent husband who is unable to discharge his marital obligations that would be a just ground.
Moreover when impotence under the civil law is a good ground for granting divorce or for refusing restitution of conjugal rights there is no reason to hold that it would not be a just ground under section 125.
The concept of cruelty remains the same whether it is a civil case or a criminal case or a case under similar Acts.
The general principles governing acts constituting cruelty legal or mental ill treatment or indifference cannot vary from case to case, though the facts may be different.
[704 H 705 C, 709 C] It is well recognized that sex is the foundation of marriage and without a vigorous and harmonious sexual activity it would be impossible for any marriage to continue for long.
Abstinence from intercourse effecting ill health of the wife can be held to be cruelty.
[709 E, 710 F] Rita Nijhawan vs Balkishan Nijhawan, AIR 1973 Delhi 200, Bhikaji Maneckji vs Maneckji Mancherji, , Bai Appibai vs Khimji Cooverji, AIR 1936 Bom. 138, Gunni vs Babu Lal, AIR 1952 Madnya Bharat 131, Biro vs Behari Lal, AIR 1958 J & K. 47, Smt.
Panchoo vs Ram Prasad, AIR 1956 All. 41 and Dr.
Srikant Rangacharya Adya.
vs Smt.
Anuradha, AIR 1980 Karnataka 8, approved.
Sheldon vs Sheldon referred to.
