The petitioner was detained under section 3(2) of the .
The order of detention was passed by the District Magistrate on April 30, 1981, and the grounds of detention were served on The petitioner on May 1, 1981.
The State Government approved the order of detention on May 7, 1981, and referred the matter to the Advisory Board on May 19, 1981.
The petitioner submitted his representation against the detention on May 31, 1981 and a copy of the same was sent to the Advisory Board.
The Advisory Board by its report dated June 29, 1981 gave its opinion that there was sufficient ground for detention.
On receipt of the report, the State Government confirmed the detention and directed detention of the petitioner for a period of one year.
In the writ petition to this Court it was contended on behalf of the petitioner that the State Government did not consider the representation submitted by the petitioner and thereby violated Article 22 (S) of the Constitution.
Allowing the writ petition.
^ HELD: 1.
The law is well settled that in case of preventive detention of a citizen, the obligation of the appropriate Government is two fold: (i) to afford the detenu the opportunity to make a representation and to consider the representation which may result in the release of the detenu, and (ii) to constitute a Board and to communicate the representation of the detenu alongwith other materials to the Board lo enable it to form its opinion and to obtain such opinion.
The former is distinct from the latter.
As there is a two fold obligation of the appropriate government, so there is a two fold right in favour of the detenu to have his representation considered by the appropriate government and to have the representation once again considered by the Government in the light of the circumstances of the case considered by the Board for the purpose of giving its opinion.
[840 B D] In the instant case, the State Government did not discharge the first of the two fold obligation and waited till the receipt of the Advisory Board 's opinion.
There was an unexplained period of twenty four days of non consideration of the 837 representation.
This shows there was no independent consideration of the representation by the State Government on the contrary they deferred its consideration till they received the report of the Advisory Board.
This is clear non compliance of article 22 (S).
The order of detention is therefore, liable to be quashed.
[840E F] 2.
The normal rule of law is that when a person commits an offence or a number of offences, he should be prosecuted and punished in accordance with the normal appropriate criminal law; but if he is sought to be detained under any of the preventive detention laws as may often be necessary to prevent further commission of such offences, then the provisions of Article 22 (5) must be complied with.
This sub article provides that the detaining authority shall as soon as maybe communicate the grounds of detention and shall afford him the earliest opportunity of making a representation against the order The opportunity of making a representation is not for nothing.
The representation, if any, submitted by the detenu is meant for consideration by the Appropriate Authority with out any unreasonable delay as it involves the liberty of a citizen guaranteed by Article 19 of the Constitution [839 E 840 A] Narendra Purushotam Umrao etc.
vs B. B. Gujral and ors.
; , and Pankaj Kumar Chakraborty and ors.
vs State of West Bengal; , , referred to.
