Pursuant to the notice dated July 22, 1960, notifying that forest contracts will be settled by public auction, the appellant plaintiff attended the said auction on August 17, 1960 after having deposited the requisite earnest money of Rs. 1,000 and furnished the solvency certificate for the sum of Rs. 1.5 lakh.
At the time of auction, the details of the forest produce available in each coupe was announced.
In the said announcement the total number of trees of each species available in each coupe as also their girth etc were furnished and the bids were invited on the basis of the said information given to the intended bidders.
The appellant as the highest bidder in respect of two coupes, namely, Searmau Coupe C/2 "A" and "B" with a bid of Rs 69,000 for these two coupes.
Pursuant thereto, the appellant deposited on August 22,1960, Rs. 16,250 being the balance of the first instalment of Rs. 17,250, after adjustment of the earnest money in deposit.
On executing the requisite security bonds, the appellant was directed, on October 27, 1960, to proceed to the site and sign the "coupe boundary certificate", before the Range officer for getting possession of the two coupes.
When the appellant visited the two coupes and conducted a detailed inspection of the trees available for extraction, he found that the coupes did not contain the forest produce as announced at the time of the auction.
Inasmuch as the number of trees available for cutting in the two coupes were found to be very much short of the quantity and quality of the forest produce given out at the time of auction as being available in the two coupes, the appellant refused to sign the boundary certificate.
The forest authorities, on January 19,1961 served a notice calling upon the appellant to deposit the second and third instalments of the bid amount and threatening that in the event of default, the amount would be recovered as arrears of land revenue.
Subsequently a distraint notice was also issues under section 146 of the Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code by the Tehsildar.
On April 17,1961, the forest authorities issued a notice calling upon the appellant to show cause why the contract be not terminated and the two 895 coupes re auctioned at his risk.
Thereupon the appellant, after serving on the, respondent a due notice under section 80 Civil Procedure Code, filed a suit tor recovery of the amount deposited by way of first instalment plus damages arising out of the breach of contract.
The appellant also prayed for a permanent injunction restraining the State for taking coercive step to recover further instalments.
The Trial Court decreed the suit as prayed for.
In appeal by the respondent.
State the High Court set aside the decree on the ground that the appellant did not prove that the number of trees which were actually available for extraction in the two coupes, according to proper marking was less than the number of trees which was covered by the assurance given to the contractor at the time of the auction.
Allowing the appeal by certificate under Article 133 (1) (a) of the Constitution, the Court, ^ HELD: 1.
While condition number 3 in the Sale Notice (exhibit D/D) will operate to prevent the Contractor from claiming any damages or compensation from the State Government on the ground that the details of the quantity of the forest produce were subsequently found to be incorrect, it will not preclude him from repudiating the contract on its being found that there was substantial variance between the particulars furnished at the time of the auction regarding the quantity and quality of timber that will be available for extraction in the concerned coupes and the quantity etc.
Of tree growth actually found to be available on the site.
[902 D F] 2: 1.
It has been clearly established by the evidence in this case that a very substantial quantity of timber standing on the bank of Nalla had been marked for extraction and numbered and the auction sale had been held on the basis that the highest bidder would be entitled to fell and remove all those trees.
But by the time the coupes were allowed to be inspected by the auction purchaser, that area was declared to be "reserved", with the result that there was a complete prohibition against the felling of any timber therefrom.
This has substantially altered the very foundation of the contract and hence it was perfectly open to the plaintiff to repudiate the contract and claim a refund of the amount deposited by him as a part payment of the purchase price.
[902 F H] 2: 2.
The subject matter of the auction sale was the totality of the trees which were marked for cutting in the two coupes.
Since a substantial number of the marked trees was contained in the area which was subsequently declared as "reserved", it is inevitable that there was a corresponding diminution in the total quantity of timber which was announced as available for cutting at the time of the auction sale.
[903 A C] 2: 3.
The appellant has fully proved his claim for the refund of the amount paid by him by way of the first instalment of the sale price by examining himself as P.W. 2 and also through P.Ws. 3 to 6, all of whom had inspected the coupes subsequent to the auction sale.
The oral testimony given by them is further corroborated by the statements contained in exhibit P l, P 3, P 5, P 6 and P 8.
Further the sworn evidence of respondent 's own witnesses (D.W. 2 and D.W. 3) and the suppression of their two inspection reports from the court confirmed the right to repudiate the contract and ask for a refund.
[899 H, 900 A E] 896 2: 4.
That the criticism made by the High Court that the argument by the appellant plaintiff was the result of an after thought is wholly unjustified and erroneous is clear from a mere reference to exhibit P 1.
The correct factual position is that the plaintiff had categorically complained to the department that a substantial area containing the forest produce.
which had all been originally marked for sale, had been subsequently "reserved" with the result that the quantity of timber available for extraction had become substantially reduced.
[901D E, H, 902A]
