Estoppel by conduct and construction or pleadings in the absence of an application under order Xl C.P.C. Sale for legal necessity of joint Hindu family property "Kutumbarthe" explained.
Sheo Dularey Misra, in terms of a compromise decree dated 29th August, 1931 was declared the exclusive owner of a block of houses situated in Rae Bareli and also one half of 4 annas and 9 pies share in a Zamindari.
He died in 1951 leaving his widow, his son Parmeshwar Din Misra and grand sons Gajendra Narain and Sunil.
His entire property was then mutated in the name of his son Parmeshwar Din Misra both in the revenue records as well as in the registers maintained by the Rae Bareli Municipal Committee.
From then onwards, Parmeshwar Din Misra was in possession of the entire property left by his father and also acted as its exclusive manager.
He received compensation for some of the zamindari property, a part of which was also sold by him on 12th January, 1959 for a consideration of Rs. 800.
In the year 1960 and 1961, he constructed a one storey building on a plot of land in Khurshid Bagh, Lucknow, where he was employed and residing with his wife and children.
On 14th February, 1964, he sold the western portion of the block of houses purchased by his late father, to the appellant vide sale deed Exhibit A l.
In that sale deed he described himself, as "exclusive and complete owner" of the Rae Bareli property and claimed that he was "in possession and occupation thereof with powers of transfer of all kinds. ".
The necessity for the sale was thus described by him: "I am constructing a house in Mohalla Khurshed Bagh, City Lucknow, the lower portion whereof has already been constructed and for the construction of the upper portion whereof funds are required.
" On 17 9 1964 his mother (Plaintiff No. 1) and his two sons (Plaintiff Nos. 2 & 3) instituted a suit claiming the share in the said property and to have the 908 sale covered by Exhibit A l set aside on the ground that the transaction was not for any necessity of the family.
The trial court dismissed the suit holding: (i) all the three plaintiffs and defendant No. 2 formed a joint Hindu family of which defendant No. 2 was the karta and his two sons (Plaintiffs 2 & 3) acquired an interest by birth in the property left by their grand father; (ii) the Lucknow house was the property of the said joint Hindu family; (iii) the disputed sale was and act of good management and was in the circumstances for the benefit of the family and, therefore, for legal necessity; (iv) the vendee (appellant) was not entitled to any protection under section 41 of the Transfer of Property Act; and (v) it was the duty of defendant No. I to give the details of misrepresentation constituting estoppel in the written statement, which was not done so that the evidence on the point could not be looked into.
The first appeal before the District Judge failed.
But the High Court, accepting a second appeal cancelled sale deed Exhibit A l and passed a decree for possession of the disputed property in favour of the plaintiffs.
Hence the appeal after obtaining spccial leave.
Allowing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD :1 :1 The findings given by the first appellate court on the point of estoppel was eminently reasonable and the short ground on which the High Court turned the tables on the appellant was untenable.
That finding being a finding of fact and being based on good evidence, it was not open to the High Court to interfere with it in a second appeal.
[923 B C] 1: 2.
Proper foundation was laid for the plea of estoppel in the pleadings.
A combined reading of paragraphs 14 and 16 of the written statement gave sufficient notice to the plaintiffs of what case they had to meet.
The representation said to have been made by plaintiff No. 1 is set out in paragraph 14, while the plea that she was estopped from contesting the sale is taken in paragraph 16.
Undoubtedly, the written statement is inartistically drafted and leaves much to be desired, but then pleadings are not to be construed in a hypertechnical manner.
In fact, no objection to the lack of particulars was taken at the stage when issues were framed or later when statements of parties ' counsel were recorded on a subsequent occasion or during the course of arguments addressed to the trial court, the District Judge and the High Court, even though the issue of estoppel was hotly contested before all three of them.
All these circumstances unmistakably indicate that the case put forward by defendant No. 1 was throughout understood by the plaintiff to be that it was the belief induced in him by the representation of plaintiff No. I which made him accept the title of defendant No. 2 as being exclusive.
[923 C H] l: 3.
The declaration of plaintiff No. 1, in the presence of the appellant, that the property belonged to her son and that he was at liberty to deal with it as he liked, does not suffer from any ambiguity and makes it clear that she had nothing to do with the property.
[921 A B] 1: 4.
The onus of proof of the allegation that she was the owner of a half share in the property at the time of the sale was on her and she was duty bound to depose to facts which would make section 3 of the Hindu Women 's Right to Property Act, 1937 applicable to her case.
Her failure to depose to the existence thereof must result in a finding that she has failed to prove the issue.
[922 E F] 909 1: 5.
In view of the fact that on Shiv Dularey Misra 's death all his property was mutated in favour of his son to the exclusion of plaintiff No. I and was all along being dealt with by him as its sole and absolute owner without any objection whatsoever having been raised by her at any point of time to such conclusion or dealing leads to the presumption that plaintiff No. I had relinquished her share in favour r of her son either immediately after her husband s death or at any other point of time prior to the disputed sale.
In the above situation the appellant was fully justified in accepting her word on the point of ownership, the said section 3 notwithstanding.
[922 G H, 923 A] 2: 1.
That the disputed sale was for legal necessity is clear from the following: (a) The written statement of the appellant contains a definite plea in para 15 to the effect that if the disputed house is proved to be joint Hindu family property, its transfer was made by the karta for legal necessity so that it was binding on the family, (b) no objection by the plaintiffs was taken at any stage of the trial to any lack of particulars of the legal necessity in the plea so set up; (c) in the said para it was specifically asserted that the disputed house was sold by defendant No. 2, "for the purpose of building a more profitable and advantageous house at Lucknow with a view to dispose of a construction which was old and in perilous condition and which was of no present utility.
" The appellant was, therefore, had the right to let in evidence that putting up a second storey in 1) the Lucknow house constituted legal necessity.
Nor was any on objection taken at the evidence stage to such right; (d) the appellant was a total stranger to the family of the plaintiffs and in the very nature of things could not have had any personal knowledge referable to the actual manner in and the precise source from which either the Lucknow house or, for that matter, the Rae Bareli property was acquired, such manner and source being within the special knowledge of plaintiff No. 1 and her son, defendant No. 2, both of whom had stayed away from the witness box and had thus deprived the Court of the only real evidence which could throw light on the source of the consideration paid for the purchase of Lucknow house; (e) the salary of defendant No, 2 which was no more than Rs. 240 per mensem was too meagre to have sufficed for the maintenance of his family and any savings therefrom were out of question and (f) defendant No. 2 was not only the karta of the family and its sole adult male member at the time of the sale but was also the father of the only other two copartners for whom he must naturally be having great affection and whose interests he would surely protect and promote, rather than jeopardise, there being no allegation by the plaintiffs that he was a profligate or had other reason to act to their detriment.
[924 C H, 925 A E, G H, 926 A, D E, 927 B C] 2: 2.
The Lucknow house being the property of the joint Hindu family consisting of defendant No. 2 and his sons and the disputed sale being an act 'G of good management, the sale is "Kutumbarthe" and justified by legal necessity.
[927 C D] Nagindas Maneklal and others vs Mohomed Yusuf Mitchella, ILR (1922) 46 Bombay 312, approved and applied.
Hunoomanpersaud Pandey vs Mussumat Babooee Munraj Koonweree, (1856) 6 Moo.
I.A. 393, referred to. 910
