A notice was issued to the Sajjadanashin of the appellant institution stating that consequent on the coming into force of the Bombay Personal Inams Abolition Act 1952 exemption from payment of land revenue was extinguished in respect of the inam village and that he should hand over the village records to mamlatdar.
The appellent in a suit filed in the Civil Court claimed that the inam was held by a religious institution and that, therefore, the provisions of the 1952 Act had no application to it.
In replication the State claimed that under the provisions of the 1952 Act the State Government alone was competent to decide the question whether the grant was a personal or a religious inam and that the Civil Court had no jurisdiction to decide it.
Holding that it was a personal inam the Trial Court dismissed the appellant 's suit.
When the appellant 's appeal was pending before the High Court the Gujarat Devasthan Inams Abolition Act, 1969 was passed abolishing the inams held by religious charitable institutions as well.
On the question of jurisdiction to decide whether an inam was personal or religious the High Court held that it was the State Government and not the Civil Court which had exclusive jurisdiction in this respect.
In appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that unless the jurisdiction of the Civil Court is barred specifically or by necessary implication the Civil Court would have jurisdiction and that the finality contemplated by Explanation I to section 2 (1) (e) (which provides that if any question arises whether any grant is a personal inam such question shall be referred to the State Government and that the decision of the State Government shall be final) is only for the purposes of the 1952 Act and could not stand in the way of the Civil Court entertaining the suit.
883 Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
The finality of the decision of the Government as contemplated by Explanation I to section 2(1) (e) of the Act cannot exclude the jurisdiction of the Civil Court.
Except for the Explanation, there is no other provision in the Act touching upon the jurisdiction of the Civil Court.
[890 C D] 2.
In Dulabhai vs State of Madhya Pradesh, ; this Court held that where a statute gave finality to the orders of the special tribunal the .
Civil Court 's jurisdiction must be held to be excluded if there is adequate remedy to do what the Civil Courts would normally do in a suit.
Under the provisions of the 1952 Act it cannot be said that an adequate remedy is available to the plaintiffs on reference made to the Government.
[888 G.H] 3.
The second principle laid down in the above case is that where there is an express bar to the jurisdiction of the Court, an examination of the scheme of the Act to find out the adequacy or the sufficiency of the remedies provided there in may be relevant.
In the absence of any details in the enactment about the reference to be made to the Government, the procedure to be followed by the Government, and the opportunity to be afforded to the aggrieved party, it cannot be held that the expression "finality of the decision of the Government" used in the Explanation was meant to bar the jurisdiction of the Civil Court.
[890 F G] 4.
The High Court, however, erred in travelling beyond the provisions of the 1952 Act by referring to the provisions of the 1969 Act and coming to the conclusion that Explanation I to section 2(1) (e) of the 1952 Act and section 20 of the 1969 Act put beyond the pale of any doubt that the jurisdiction of the Civil Court had been taken away by the legislature to determine the question whether a particular Inam was a personal or devasthan inam.
The High Court was not justified in invoking the provisions of the 1969 Act while deciding a case under the 1952 Act.
[891 E G] 5.
An entry in the alienation register as to whether an inam is personal or religious cannot be said to be so sacrosanct that it cannot be changed.
Explanation 1 to section 2 (1) (e) of the 1952 Act indicates that the entry in the register is not an essential part of the definition of personal inam but is only descriptive.
If the Government decides a case contrary to the entry in the register of alienation the register shall be deemed to have been amended.
If an entry in the register would be deemed to have been automatically amended by the decision of the Government, there is no sanctity to such entry.
The explanation itself contemplates a change in view of the decision of the Government on the question.
An entry in the register is mainly intended to serve the purpose of realisation of land revenue.
[892 C D] 6.
Section 203 of the Bombay Land Revenue Code provides for an appeal to a superior officer from an order passed by the revenue officer.
This section cannot be said to completely bar the jurisdiction of the Civil Court because section 212 of the Code contemplates that whenever it is declared that a decision or order shall be final such expression shall be deemed to mean that no appeal lies from such decision or order.
If this is what finality meant under section 212 it cannot be said that the jurisdiction of the Civil Court is barred.
[893 A C] 884
