The Special Bearer Bonds (Immunities and Exemptions) ordinance, 1981 was promulgated on January 12,1981.
It was repealed and replaced by the .
The Act received the Presidential assent on March 27,1981.
Section 1(3) of the Act stated that the Act was deemed to have come into force on January 12, 1981.
The provisions of the ordinance and the Act were similar except section 4(2) of the Act which was worded slightly differently from the corresponding provision of The ordinance.
The Act provided for certain immunities to holders of Special Bearer Bonds, 1981, and for certain exemptions from direct taxes in relation to such Bonds and for matters connected therewith.
The object and purpose for which the Act was passed was to canalise for productive purposes black money, which had become a serious threat to the national economy and to provide for certain immunities and exemptions to render it possible for persons in possession of black money to invest the same in the said Bonds.
Section 3 of the Act provided for certain immunities to a person who had subscribed to or otherwise acquired Special Bearer Bonds.
Clause (a) protected such a person from being required to disclose for any purpose whatsoever the I nature and source of acquisition of the Special Bearer Bonds.
Clause (b) prohibited the commencement of any inquiry or investigate on against a person on the 948 ground of his having subscribed to or otherwise acquired the Special Bearer Bonds.
Clause (c) provided that the fact of subscription to or acquisition of Special Bearer Bonds shall not be taken into account and shall be inadmissible in evidence in any proceedings relating to any offence or the imposition of any penalty.
Sub section (2) of section (3) provided that the immunity granted under sub section (1) shall not be available in relation to prosecution for any offence punishable under Chapter 9 or Chapter 17 of the Indian Penal Code or the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1957 or other similar law.
Section 4 provided that without prejudice to the provisions of section 3 subscription to, or acquisition of Special Bearer Bonds by any person shall not be taken into account for the purpose of any proceedings under the Income tax Act, 1961, the or the and that no person who has subscribed to or has otherwise acquired the said Bonds shall be entitled to (a) claim any set off under the Income tax Act or to reopen any assessment or reassessment made under that Act on the ground that he has subscribed to or has otherwise acquired the said Bonds; (b) that any asset which is includible in his net wealth for any assessment year under the has been converted into such bonds, and (c) that any asset held by him represents the consideration received for the transfer of such Bonds.
In their writ petitions to this Court assailing the constitutional validity of the ordinance and the Act it was contended on behalf of the petitioners that: (I) since the ordinance had the effect of amending the tax laws it was outside the competence of the President under Article 123, that the subject matter of the ordinance was in the nature of a Money Bill which could be introduced only in the House of the People and passed according to the procedure provided in Articles 109 and 110, the President had no power under Article 123 to issue the ordinance by passing the special procedure provided in Articles 109 and 110 for the passing of a Money Bill and (2) that the provisions of the Act were violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
It was also contended: (a) that Special Bearer Bonds would fetch a much higher value in the black market than that originally subscribed and this would enable a larger amount of black money to be legalised into white than what was originally invested in subscription to special bearer bonds, (b) an abuse which special bearer bonds might lend themselves to was that if special bearer bonds are sold and the sale proceeds are utilised in meeting expenditure, the assessee would not be precluded by section 4 clause (c) from explaining the source of the expenditure to be the sale consideration of special bearer bonds and by resorting to this strategy, white money can be accumulated as capital while expenditure is met out of black money received by way of consideration for sale of special bearer bonds, (c) Section 4 clause (c) operates only in relation to a period before the date of maturity of special bearer bonds and after the date of maturity the holder of special bearer bonds can sell such bonds, and, without running any risk disclose the consideration received by him as his white money, because section 4 clause (c) being out of the way, he can account for the possession of such money by showing that he has received it as consideration for sale of special bearer bonds and so far as the purchaser is concerned.
if he has Paid the consideration out of his black money, he can claim 949 the immunity granted under section 3 sub section (1) and his black money would be converted into white, (d) the Act is unconstitutional as it offends against morality by according to dishonest assessees who have evaded payment of tax.
immunities and exemptions which are denied to honest tax payers.
Those who have broken the law and deprived the State of its legitimate dues are given benefits and concessions placing Them at an advantage over those who have observed the law and paid the taxes due from them and this is clearly immoral and unwarranted by the Constitution.
Dismissing the petitions, ^ HELD : [Per majority Chandrachud, C. J., Bhagwati, Fazal Ali & Amarendra Nath Sen, J.J.] [Gupta, J, dissenting] None of the provisions of The Special Bearer Bonds (Immunities and Exemption) Act, 1981 is violative of Article 14 and its constitutional validity must be upheld.
[989 B] l(i).
There is no substance in The contention that the President has no power under Article 123 to issue an ordinance amending or altering the tax laws and that the ordinance was outside the legislative power of the President under that Article.
[967 E] l(ii).
Under Article 123 legislative power is conferred on the President exercisable when both Houses of Parliament are not in session.
It is possible that when neither House of Parliament is in session, a situation may arise which needs to be dealt with immediately and for which there is no adequate provision in the existing law and emergent legislation may be necessary to enable the executive to cope with the situation.
Article 123, therefore, confers powers on the President to promulgate a law by issuing an ordinance to enable the executive to deal with the emergent situation which might well include a situation created by a law being declared void by a Court of law.
The legislative power conferred on the President under the Article is not a parallel power of legislation.
This power is the clearest indication that the President is invested with this legislative power only in order to enable the executive to tide over an emergent situation which may arise whilst The Houses of Parliament are not in session.
The conferment of such power may appear to be undemocratic but it is not so, because The executive is clearly answerable to the legislature and if the President, on the aid and advice of the executive, promulgates an ordinance in misuse or abuse of this power, the legislature can not only pass a resolution disapproving the ordinance but can also pass a vote of no confidence in the executive There is in the theory of Constitutional Law complete control of the legislature over the executive, because if the executive misbehaves or forfeits the confidence of the legislature, it can be thrown out by the legislature.
[954 E G, 965 G 966 B] 1(iii).
If parliament can by enacting legislation after or amend tax laws, equally can the President do so by issuing an ordinance under Article 123.
There have been numerous instances where the President has issued an ordinance replacing with retrospective effect a tax law declared void by the High Court or 950 this Court.
Even offences have been created by ordinance issued by the President under Article 123 and such offences committed during the life of the ordinance have been held to be punishable despite the expiry of the ordinance.
[967 B C] State of Punjab vs Mohar Singh ; , referred to.
Certain well established principles have been evolved by Courts as rules of guidance in discharge of their constitutional function of judicial review.
The first rule is that there is always a presumption in favour of the constitutionality of a statute and the burden is upon him who attacks it to show that there has been a clear transgression of the constitutional principles.
The presumption of constitutionality is indeed so strong that in order to sustain it, the Court may take into consideration matters of common knowledge, matters of common report, the history of the times and may assume every state of facts which can be conceived existing at the time of Legislation.
Another rule of equal importance is that laws relating to economic activities should be viewed with greater latitude than laws touching civil rights such as freedom of speech, religion etc.
The court should feel more inclined to give judicial deference to legislative judgment in the field of economic regulation than in other areas where fundamental human rights are involved.
[969 A G] Morey vs Dond, ; , referred to. 2(ii).
The court must always remember that "legislation is directed to practical problems, that the economic mechanism is highly sensitive and complex, that many problems are singular and contingent, that laws are not abstract propositions and do not relate to abstract units and are not to be measured by abstract symmetry" that exact wisdom and nice adoption of remedy are not f; always possible and that "judgment is largely a prophecy based on meagre and uninterpreted experience".
Every legislation particularly in economic matters is essentially empiric and it is based on experimentation or what one may call trial and error method and therefore it cannot provide for all possible situations or anticipate all possible abuses.
There may be crudities and inequities in complicated experimental economic legislation but on that account alone it cannot be struck down as invalid.
[970 C.D] Secretary of Agriculture vs Central Reig Refining Company, 94 Lawyers ' Edition 381.
referred to.
2(iii).
The court must adjudge the constitutionality of legislation by the generality of its provisions and not by its crudities or inequities or by the possibilities of abuse of any of its provision.
If any crudities, inequities or possibilities of abuse come to light, the legislature can always step in and enact suitable amendatory legislation.
That is the essence of pragmatic approach which must guide and inspire the legislature in dealing with complex economic issues.
[970 G H] 3(i).
It is clear that Article 14 does not forbid reasonable classification of persons, objects and transactions by the legislature for the purpose of attaining specific ends.
What is necessary in order to pass the test of permissible classification under Article 14 is that the classification must not be arbitrary, artificial or evasive but must be based on some real and substantial distinction bearing 951 a just and reasonable relation to the object sought to be achieved by the legislature.
3(ii).
The validity of a classification has to be judged with reference to the object of the legislation and if that is done, there can be no doubt that the classification made by the Act is rational and intelligible and the operation of the provisions of the Act is rightly confined to persons in possession of black money.
The Preamble of the Act makes it clear that the Act is intended to canalise for productive purposes black money which has become a serious threat to the national economy.
It is an undisputed fact that there is considerable amount of black money in circulation which is unaccounted or concealed and therefore outside the disclosed trading channels.
It is largely the product of black market transactions and evasion of tax.
The abundance of black money has in fact given rise to a parallel economy operating simultaneously and competing with the official economy.
This parallel economy has over the years grown in size and dimension and even on a conservative estimate, the amount of black money in circulation runs into some thousand crores.
The menace of black money has reached such staggering proportions that it is causing havoc to the economy of the country and poses a serious challenge to the fulfillment of objectives of distributive justice and setting up of an egalitarian society.
4(ii).
The first casualty of the evil of black money is the Revenue because it loses the tax which should otherwise have come to the exchequer.
The generation of black money through tax evasion throws a greater burden on the honest tax payer and leads to economic inequality and concentration of wealth in the hands of the unscrupulous few in the country.
It also leads to leakage of foreign exchange, making balance of payments rather distorted and unreal and tends to defeat the economic policies of the Government by making their implementation ineffective, particularly in the field of credit and investment.
Urgent measures were required to be adopted for preventing further generation of black money as also for unearthing existing black money so that it can be canalised for productive purposes with a view to effective economic and social planning.
4(iii).
The Government introduced several changes in the administrative set up of the tax department from time to time with a view to strengthening the administrative machinery for checking tax evasion.
The Government also amended section 37 of the Indian Income Tax Act, 1922 with a view to conferring power on the tax authorities to carry out searches and seizures and this power was elaborated and made more effectual under the Income Tax Act, 1961.
The Voluntary Disclosure Scheme of 1951 was made to facilitate the disclosure of suppressed income by affording certain immunities from penal provisions, Nearly a decade and a half later a second scheme of voluntary disclosure was introduced by section 68 of the Finance Act, 1965, popularly known as the sixty forty scheme which was a little more successful.
Closely following on the heels of this scheme came another under section 24 of the Finance (No. Scheme ' according to which tax was payable at rates applicable to the block of concealed income disclosed and not at a flat rate as under the sixty forty scheme.
Then came the Taxation Laws (Amendment and Miscellaneous Provisions) ordinance 1965 followed by an Act which provided for exemption from 952 tax in certain cases of undisclosed income invested in National Defence Gold Bonds 1980.
Later on, the Voluntary Disclosure of Income and Wealth ordinance 1975 which was followed by an Act introduced a scheme of voluntary disclosure of income and wealth and provided certain immunities and exemptions.
All these legal and administrative measures were introduced by the Government and did not have any appreciable effect with regard to the problem of black money which continued unabated 4 (iv).
All efforts to detect black money and to uncover it having failed and the problem of black money being an obstinate economic issue which was defying solution, the impugned legislation providing for issue of Special Bearer Bonds was enacted with a view to mopping up black money and bringing it out in the open, so that, instead of remaining concealed such money may become available for augmenting the resources of the State and being utilised for productive purposes so as to promote effective social and economic planning.
This was the object for which the Act was enacted and it is with reference to this object that it is to be determined whether any impermissible differentiation is made in the Act.
4 (v).
The whole object of the impugned Act is to induce those having black money to convert it into white money by making it available to the State for productive purposes, without granting in return any immunity in respect of such black money if it could be detected through the ordinary processes of taxation laws without taking into account the fact of purchase of Special Bearer Bonds.
4 (vi).
The acquisition or possession of Special Bearer Bonds would not therefore afford any protection to a public servant against a charge of corruption or to a person committing any offence against property.
Equally this immunity would not be available where what is sought to be enforced is a civil liability other than liability by way of tax.
The immunity granted in respect of subscription to or acquisition of Special Bearer Bonds is a severely restricted immunity and this is the bare minimum immunity necessary in order to induce holders of black money to bring it out in the open and invest it in Special Bearer Bonds 5.
Section 4(c) is calculated to act as a strong deterrent against negotiability of Special Bearer Bonds for disclosed or 'white ' money.
The immunily granted under the provisions of the Act, limited as it is, extends only to the person who is for the time being the holder of Special Bearer Bonds and the person who has transferred the Special Bearer Bonds for black money has no immunity at all and all the provisions of tax laws are available against him for determining his true income or wealth and therefore no one who has purchased Special Bearer Bonds with a view to earning security against discovery of unaccounted money in his hands would ordinarily barter away that security by again receiving black money for the Special Bearer Bonds.
Even if special bearer bonds are transferred against receipt of black money it will not have the effect of legalising more black money into white because the black money of the seller which had become white on his subscribing to or acquiring special bearer bonds would again be converted into black money and the black money paid by the 953 purchaser by way of consideration would become white by reason of being converted into special bearer bonds.
No assessee would ever admit that he incurred expenditure out of black money received as consideration for sale of special bearer bonds because it would be impossible for him to establish receipt of black money from the purchaser and if he is unable to do so, the amount of the expenditure, would by reason of section 69C of the Income tax Act, 1961 be deemed to be his concealed income liable to tax.
Even if it is assumed that in some rare and exceptional cases the assessee may be able to establish that he sold special bearer bonds against receipt of black money the purchaser would straight away run into difficulties because the evidence furnished by the assessee would in such a case clearly establish that the purchaser had black money and he paid it to the assessee by way of consideration and he would in that event be rendered liable to tax and penalty in respect of such black money.
Howsoever special bearer bonds may be transferred and for whatever consideration only a limited amount of black money namely The amount originally subscribed for the special bearer bonds or at the most the amount representing the face value of the special bearer bonds would be legalised into white money and the supposedly free negotiability of special bearer bonds would not have the effect of legalising more black money into while or encouraging further generation of black money.
When experience shows that the legislation as framed has proved inadequate to achieve its purpose of mitigating an evil or there are cracks and loopholes in it which are being taken advantage of by the resourcefulness and ingenuity of those minded to benefit themselves at the cost of the State or the others, the legislature can and most certainly would intervene and change The law.
But the law cannot be condemned as invalid on the ground That after a period of ten years it may lend itself to some possible abuse.
It is obvious that the Act makes a classification between holders of black money and the rest and provides for issue of special bearer bonds with a view to inducing persons belonging to the former class to invest their unaccounted money in purchase of special bearer bonds, so that such money which is today Lying idle outside the regular economy of the country is canalised into productive purposes.
The object of the Act being to unearth black money for being utilised for productive purposes with a view to effective social and economic planning, there has necessarily to be a classification between persons possessing black money and others and such classification cannot be regarded as arbitrary or irrational.
The validity of a classification has to be judged with reference to The object of the legislation and if that is done, there can be no doubt that the classification made by the Act is rational and intelligible and the operation of the provisions of the Act is rightly confined to persons in possession of black money.
The legislature had obviously only two alternatives: either to allow the black money to remain idle and unproductive or to induce those in possession 954 of it to bring it out in the open for being utilised for productive purposes.
The first alternative would have left no choice to the government but to resort to deficit financing or lo impose a heavy dose of taxation.
The former would have resulted in inflationary pressures affecting the vulnerable sections of the society while the latter would have increased the burden on the honest tax payer and perhaps led to greater tax evasion.
The legislature therefore decided to adopt the second alternative of coaxing persons in possession of black money to disclose it and make it available to the government for augmenting its resources for productive purposes and with that end in view enacted the Act providing for issue of special bearer bonds.
It would be outside the province of the court to consider if any particular immunity or exemption is necessary or not for the purpose of inducing disclosure of black money.
That would depend upon diverse Fiscal and economic considerations based on practical necessity and administrative expediency and would also involve a certain amount of experimentation on which the Court would be least fitted to pronounce.
The Court would not have the necessary competence and expertise to adjudicate upon such an economic issue.
The Court cannot possibly assess or evaluate what would be the impact of a particular immunity or exemption and whether it would serve the purpose in view or not.
There are so many imponderables that would enter into the determination that it would be wise for the court not to hazard an opinion where even economists may differ.
The court must while examining the constitutional validity of a legislation "be resilient, not rigid, forward looking, not static, liberal, not verbal" and the court must always bear in mind the constitutional proposition "that courts do not substitute their social and economic beliefs for the judgment of legislative bodies".
The court must defer to legislative judgment in matters relating to social and economic policies and must not interfere, unless the exercise of legislative judgment appears to be palpably arbitrary.
[ Per A.C. Gupta, J. dissenting ] 1.
The Special Bearer Bonds (Immunities and Exemptions) ordinance, 1981 and the are invalid on the ground that they infringe Article 14 of the Constitution.
[1002 A] 2 The Act puts a premium on dishonesty without even a justification of necessity that the situation in the country left no option.
[1000 H 1001 A] 3.
The basis on which the holders of Special Bearer Bonds have been classified to give certain advantage to one class and deny them to the other, has no rational nexus with the object of the Act.
[996 A] 4 (i).
Article 14 forbids class legislation but permits classification Permissible classification, it is well established, must satisfy two conditions viz. (i) li that The classification must be founded on an intelligible differential which distinguishes those that are grouped together from others and: (2) that the 955 differential must have a rational relation to the object sought to be achieved by A the Act.
[993 G 994 A] 4 (ii).
The differential that is the basis of classification and the object of the Act are distinct things, it is not enough that the differential should have a nexus with the object, but it should also be intelligible.
The presence of some characteristics in one class which are not found in another is the difference between the two classes, but a further requirement is that this differential must be intelligible.
If the basis of classification is on the face of it arbitrary in the sense that it is palpably unreasonable it is not possible to call the differential intelligible.
[997 B C] The State of West Bengal vs Anwar Ali Sarkar, ; ; E. P. Royappa vs State of Tamil Nadu and another; , and Maneka Gandhi vs Union of India, [1978] 2 SCR 621, referred to.
The preamble of the Act takes note of the fact that black money has become a serious threat to national economy and says that to make economic and social planning effective it is necessary to canalise this black money for productive purposes.
The Act however does not define black money.
[990 F] 6.
The immunities provided by the impugned Act are clearly for the benefit of those who have acquired the Bonds with black money.
Clauses (a), (b) and (c) of section 3(1) provide for these immunities "notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force".
None of These immunities is required by a person who has paid 'white ' money, that is, money that has been accounted for to acquire the Bonds.
To a person who has disclosed the source of acquisition of the Bonds, These immunities are of no use.
Section 4 makes it clear that the immunities conferred by the Act are of use only to those who have acquired the Bonds with unaccounted money.
[994 B D] 7.
The impugned Act denies to those who have acquired the bonds not with black money any relief under the Income tax Act or the or any benefit in any other way claimed on the ground that they are holders of Special Bearer Bonds, and the relief and the benefit denied to them have been made available to those who have acquired the Bonds with black money by ignoring the source of acquisition in their case.
[995 C D] 8.
The Act distinguishes between two classes of holders of Special Bearer Bonds; tax evaders and honest tax payers.
The object is to canalise black money for productive purposes to make economic and social planning effective.
If the exemptions and immunities conferred by the Act are sufficiently attractive to induce tax evader to acquire Special Bearer Bonds, they will remain as attractive even if all these benefits were granted to those who will pay white money for the Bonds.
Denial of these benefits to those who have acquired the Bonds with money which has been accounted for does not in any way further the object of canalisation of black money for productive purposes.
The discrimination in favour of black money therefore seems to be obvious.
[995 E F] 9.
Terms like 'reasonable ', 'just ' or 'fair ' derive their significance from the existing social conditions.
Expressions like a 'reasonable and fair price ' or 'fair 956 and equitable restitution ' means nothing, except in conjunction with the social conditions of the time.
That action is called 'reasonable ' which an informed, intelligent, just minded civilised Man could rationally favour.
[998 F G] Quaker City Cab Co. vs Commonwealth of Pennsylvania ; , referred to.
What is arbitrary and offends Article 14 cannot be called intelligible.
It is clear from the provisions of the Act that the advantage which the tax evaders derive from the immunities provided by the Act are not available to those who have acquired the Bonds with 'white money ' The Act promises anonymity and security for tax evaders.
No question can be asked as to the nature and source of acquisition or possession of the Bonds.
The Bonds can be transferred freely and passing of the Bonds from hand to hand is likely to operate as parallel currency and be used for any kind of transaction.
[999 F G] 11.
The Act discloses a scheme which enables tax evaders to convert black money into white after 10 years and in the meantime use the Bonds as parallel currency initiating a chain of black money investments.
There is no provision in the Act requiring that on maturity of the Bonds their holders would have to disclose their identity, which means that if after 10 years black money which had taken the shape of Special Bearer Bonds goes underground again and retain its colour, there is nothing to prevent it.
There is nothing in the scheme to halt generation of black money which threatens the national economy.
Some people by successful evasion manoeuvres are able to throw the burden of taxation off their own shoulders which means a greater burden on the honest tax payers and this leads to economic imbalance.
[1000 B D] 12.
Any law that rewards law breakers and tax dodgers is bound to invite criticism.
No law can be struck down only on the ground that it is unethical.
However, there cannot be and there never has been a complete separation of law and morality.
Historical and ideological differences concern the extent to which the norms of the social order are absorbed into the legal order.
The principle of reasonableness is an essential element of equality.
The concept of reasonableness does not exclude notions of morality and ethics.
It cannot be disputed that in the circumstances of a given case considerations of morality and ethics may have a bearing on the reasonableness of the law in question.
[1001 B D]
