One Ranendra died unmarried on November 16, 1952 leaving the alleged will (Exhibit 1) executed on November, 8, 1952.
Ranendra left behind him three brothers Jitendra Chandra Bose, Gopendra and Manindra plaintiff No. 1.
Manindra and Jogendra (Plaintiff No. 2) had been appointed executors of the will.
By the will Ranendra bequeathed one half of his properties to his nephew, Bhabesh, who was the son of his younger brother, Phanindra, who had predeceased him, and the remaining half to his younger brother Manindra for life, and after Manindra 's death to Bhabesh absolutely.
The executors of the will as aforesaid filed an application before the Subordinate Judge.
Alipore, for probate of a will executed by Ranendra.
Jitendra entered caveat and filed a written statement and contested application for probate.
During the pendency of the suit, Jitendra died and his heirs who were substituted, contested the suit.
The contentions were that Ranendra was not in a physical or mental condition to execute a will; he was in a semi conscious state of mind and had not the testamentary capacity to execute the alleged will and that the alleged will was brought into existence at the instance, and under the influence of the propounder Manindra; that the signatures of Ranendra on the will were not genuine.
The trial court found that the signatures of the testator and the attesting witnesses were genuine and that the provisions of the will was neither unfair nor unnatural.
But the trial court dismissed the suit and refused to grant probate of the will on the ground that there were certain "doubts and suspicions about the condition of the testator 's mind on 8 11 1952".
In appeal before the High Court, the decree of the trial court was set aside and the propounder was granted probate of the will.
Dismissing the appeal by certificate granted by the Calcutta High Court under Article 133(1)(b) of the Constitution, the Court, ^ HELD: 1.1.
The mode of proving a will does not ordinarily differ from that of proving any other document except to the special requirement of attestation prescribed in the case of a will by section 63 of the Successions Act.
[1191 D] 1:2.
The onus of proving the will is on the propounder and in the absence of suspicious circumstances surrounding the execution of the will, proof of test a 1189 mentary capacity and the signature of the testator as required by law is sufficient to discharge the onus.
Where, however, there are suspicious circumstances, the onus is on the propounder to explain them to the satisfaction of the court before the court accepts the will as genuine.
Even where circumstances give rise to doubts, it is for the propounder to satisfy the conscience of the court.
The suspicious circumstances may be as to the genuineness of the signatures of the testator, the condition of the testator 's mind, the dispositions made in the will being unnatural, improbable or unfair in the light of relevant circumstances, or there might be other indications in the will to show that the testator 's mind was not free.
In such a case the court would naturally expect that all legitimate suspicions should be completely removed before the document is accepted as the last will of the testator.
If the propounder himself takes the prominent part in the execution of the will which confers a substantial benefit on him, that is also a circumstance to be taken into account, and the propounder is required to remove the doubts by clear and satisfactory evidence.
If the propounder succeeds in removing the suspicious circumstances the court would grant probate, even if the will might be unnatural and might cut off wholly or in part near relations.
[1191 D H 1192 A] Shashi Kumar Banerjee & Ors.v.
Subodh Kumar Banerjee & Ors, A.I.R. 1964 S.C. 529; H. Venkatachala Iyengar vs B.N. Thimmajamma & Ors., [1959] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 426; Rani Purnima Devi and Another vs Kumar Khagendra Narayan Dev and Another, followed.
A circumstance would be "suspicious" when it is not normal or is not normally expected in a normal situation or is not expected of a normal person.
[1192 A B] 1:4.
A careful perusal of the eleven circumstance shows that they are by no means suspicious circumstances and stand self explained.
On the contrary the following circumstances lend strong support to the plaintiffs ' case of genuineness and valid execution of the will: (i) Gopendra one of the brothers, who has not been given anything under the will had filed a written statement stating that the "has no objection to the grant of probate inasmuch as the will is executed and attested according to law"; (ii) the disposition under the will is quite fair and there are no suspicious circumstances in it at all; (iii) as there were litigations between the two groups of the brothers, the will was the natural outcome to avoid further future litigation.
B C] Harmes and Anr vs Hinkson, , referred to.
