Clause 11 of the Punjab Foodgrains Dealers Licensing Price Control Order 1978 (as amended in 1980) empowers the licensing authority to cancel or suspend a licence if the licensee contravenes any of the terms and conditions of his licence or any provision of the order.
The first proviso to this clause enjoins on the authority to give to the licensee a reasonable opportunity of stating his case before cancelling or suspending his licence.
The second proviso provides that "the licensing authority may suspend a licence without giving a reasonable opportunity to the licensee of stating his case for a period not exceeding 90 days during the pendency or in contemplation of the proceedings for cancellation of his licence.
" The petitioners, whose licences had been suspended under clause 11, contended that the second proviso to clause 11(1) of the Order conferred on the licensing authority unguided, uncontrolled and arbitrary power to suspend a licence which infringed their fundamental right under Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution and that conferral of such unguided power offended Article 14 of the Constitution and (2) that the suspension of the licence was mala fide and motivated because it was passed on extraneous considerations namely, to prevent them from exporting wheat from the State to other parts of the country in the course of inter state trade and commerce.
Dismissing the petitions, ^ HELD: The power conferred on the licensing authority under the second proviso to clause 11(1) of the Order is not of an excessive nature and beyond what is required in the interest of general public.
The power of suspension conferred by the second proviso to clause 11 is by way of an interim measure, pending an enquiry as to whether there was any breach which must result in cancellation of the licence.
The power of suspension is a necessary concomitant of the power to grant a privilege or a licence.
32 So long as the dealers complied with the conditions of licence and the provisions of the Order they are free to carry on their trade or business in foodgrains.
If they commit a breach they must face the consequences that their licence may be cancelled or suspended and also face further consequence of suspension of their licence during the pendency or in contemplation of the proceedings for such cancellation if the breach is of such a nature that it must result in the cancellation of a licence.
The power of suspension conferred under the second proviso is an important step taken by the Government to subserve the object of the legislation and in is public interest.
Nor could it to be said that it does not satisfy the test of reasonableness.
[37 A G] Nor again could it be said that there is warrant for the submission that the second proviso confers upon the licensing authority unguided, uncontrolled and uncanalised power to suspend a licence.
It does not suffer from the vice of arbitrariness and is, therefore, not violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
[37 G] It cannot be said that licensing authority has an unrestrained power of suspension of licence because the suspension can only be for specified reasons which are spelt out in the second proviso.
The power of suspension is not exercisable unless there is a breach and the breach is of such a nature that it must entail cancellation of the licence.
The first proviso is in the nature of limitation on the power contained in clause 11(1) and the second proviso carves out an exception to the first proviso by dispensing with the requirement of affording a reasonable opportunity to the licensee in case of suspension of his licence during the pendency or in contemplation of the proceedings for cancellation.
The power of suspension during the pendency of an enquiry cannot be exercised unless there is contravention of any of the terms and conditions of the licence or any of the provisions of the Order.
Secondly, it provides for a reasonable safeguard in that it limits the period of suspension which would necessarily depend upon the nature of the breach which in no case can exceed 90 days.
Thirdly, as a check on improper exercise of power of suspension by the licensing authority an additional safeguard is provided by way of appeal to the Director of Food Supplies.
[38 E H] On the material on record there is nothing to show that the licensing authority acted with improper motives or was actuated with bias in directing the suspension of the licence held by the petitioners.
The affidavit filed by a partner of one of the petitioners does not fulfil the requirements of Order XIX rule 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure under which it is incumbent upon the deponent to disclose the nature and source of his knowledge with sufficient particularity.
The allegations in the writ petition are not sufficient to constitute an averment of mala fide so as to vitiate the orders of suspension.
The burden of establishing mala fides lies very heavily on the person who alleges it.
[39 E F]
