The appellants in the appeals were cultivating tenants in occupation of different parcels of land which were owned by the respondents.
The respondents purchased these lands from the erstwhile owner, who also executed a deed of assignment assigning the rent in arrears of the tenants for the periods 1958 59 and 1959 60.
The respondents filed eviction petitions against the appellants for eviction on the ground that they were in arrears of rent due and payable for the years 1958 59, 1959 60 and 1960 61, which were contested on diverse grounds.
The Revenue Divisional Officer over ruled all the contentions of the tenants and held that the tenants were in arrears of rent for the aforementioned three years and were liable to pay the same.
He further held that since the previous landlord assigned the arrears of rent for the two years, 1958 59 and 1959 60, the respondents were not only entitled to commence action for recovery of arrears of rent due and payable to the previous landlord but they were also entitled to evict the tenants for failure to pay the rent in arrears.
The tenants were directed to pay the arrears within six weeks, failing which they were to be evicted.
In the Civil Revision Petitions by the tenants the High Court directed that the rent found in arrears be deposited, which order was complied with.
The High Court found that the Revenue Divisional Officer was in error in passing a composite order, whereby he determined the amount of arrears and after specifying the time within which the amount of arrears should be paid up prescribed the consequences of failure namely that the tenants should be evicted: nevertheless held that the orders made by the Revenue Divisional Officer were not one for eviction and dismissed the revision petitions.
In the appeals to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellants that when the Revenue Divisional Officer grants time to the tenant to deposit the arrears of rent he cannot simultaneously pass an order of eviction which is to take effect future and such an order can be passed only after the default in making the deposit is committed.
On behalf of the respondents it was contended that the Revenue Divisional Officer has a discretion to grant time to the 147 defaulting tenant to repair the default, and therefore there would be nothing illegal in granting time and simultaneously providing for consequence of default.
Allowing the appeals ^ HELD: [By the Court] 1.
When the Revenue Divisional Officer allows time to a cultivating tenant for depositing the arrears of rent in pursuance of the provisions of clause (b) of sub section (4) of Section 3 of the Act, he cannot simultaneously pass a conditional order of eviction which is to take effect on a default to occur in future.
An order to evict can, in terms of the section, only be passed 'if the cultivating tenant fails to deposit the sum as directed '.
[160 E; 158 G 159 B] 2.
The orders of the Revenue Divisional Officer directing eviction, were passed in contravention of the express provision of clause (b) of sub section (4) of Section 3 of the Act and are therefore, without jurisdiction.
[160 F, C] 3.
The order of the Revenue 'Divisional Officer directing deposit of rent having been actually complied with about a couple of decades back it is no use remitting the case to him.
The ends of justice would be served if it is declared that the tenants are qualified for the protection envisaged by the Act against their eviction.
[160 G H, A B] [per D.A. Desai J.] 1.
Section 3 of the Act places an embargo on the eviction of a cultivating tenant and the protection extends to rendering a decree or order of a court for eviction nugatory.
An enabling provision in sub section (4)(a) of Section 3 enables the landlord to seek eviction of a cultivating tenant on grounds available to him under the Act.
[154 B] 2.
When an application for eviction is made, clause (b) of sub section (4) prescribes the procedure to be followed by the l Revenue Divisional Officer.
The officer has to, (i) give an opportunity both to the landlord and the cultivating tenant to make a representation, (ii) hold a summary enquiry into the matter to determine the rent in arrears.
After having determined the rent in arrears the Revenue Divisional Officer has to further enquire the relevant circumstances of the landlord and the cultivating tenant and the circumstances which have a bearing on the issues relatable to the need of the landlord for rent and the paying capacity of the tenant.
Thereafter the Revenue Divisional Officer has to decide what length of time has to be given to the tenant to deposit the rent found in arrears and at that stage the proceeding must stop.
It is something like a preliminary issue to be determined because after a finding is recorded that the tenant is in arrears and the amount of arrears is determined the Revenue Divisional Officer is under a statutory obligation to grant time to deposit arrears.
[154 C E] 3.
The section grants locus poenitentiae to a tenant who has committed default in payment of rent.
Granting of the time is not a concession dependent upon the sweet will of the Revenue Divisional Officer, it is a statutory obligation 148 cast on the Revenue Divisional Officer.
He has a discretion in determining the length of time and this discretion is to be exercised judicially based upon objective facts ascertained in the inquiry relatable to the circumstances of the landlord and the tenant.
[154 G] 4.
The proceedings before the Revenue Divisional Officer under section 3 of the Act are judicial proceedings.
The Revenue Divisional Officer is a Court a as provided in section 6(b) of the A ct and a revision petition lies to the High Court against his order.
[155 D] 5.
If the proceedings are judicial and there is a lis between the parties, the rival contentions have to be properly adjudicated upon the evidence placed before the Court.
Before the Revenue Divisional Officer can make an order for eviction of a cultivating tenant he has as a matter of statutory obligation to determine the issues which arise in the case under sub section (4)(b) of section 3, record a finding on each of them and make a speaking order.
The Revenue Divisional Officer has to grant time to the cultivating tenant to deposit the arrears found due by him and the length of time is to be relatable to the circumstances of the landlord and the cultivating tenant.
After determining the arrears and ascertaining the circumstances of the landlord and the tenant and fixing the length of time to pay the arrears the proceedings at that stage must stop.
This is implicit in sub section (4) (b) of section 3.
[155 E H] 6.
If a court in exercise of jurisdiction can grant time to do a thing, in the absence of a specific provision to the contrary curtailing, denying or withholding such jurisdiction, the jurisdiction to grant time would inhere in its ambit the jurisdiction to extend time initially fixed by it.
Passing a composite order would be acting in disregard of the jurisdiction in that while granting time simultaneously the court denies to itself the jurisdiction to extend time.
The principle of equity is that when some circumstances are to be taken into account for fixing a length of time within which a certain action is taken, the court retains to itself the jurisdiction to re examine the alteration or modification of circumstances which may necessitate extension of time.
If the Court by its own act denies itself the jurisdiction to do so, it would be denying to itself the jurisdiction which in the absence of a negative provision, it undoubtedly enjoys.
[157 D F] 7.
Conditional orders are in terrorem, so that dilatory litigants might put themselves in order and avoid delay, but they do not completely estop a court from taking note of events and circumstances which happen within the time fixed.
[157 G] 8.
The danger inherent in passing conditional orders is that it may result in taking away jurisdiction conferred on the court for just decision of the case The true purport of conditional order is that such orders merely create something like a guarantee or sanction for obedience of the court 's order but would not take away the court 's jurisdiction to act according to the mandate of the statute or on relevant equitable considerations if the statute does not deny such considerations.
[155 D E] Mahant Ram Das vs Ganga Das, ; , referred to.
149 [per Koshal & Misra JJ] 1.
Sub section (4) of section 3 gives the Revenue Divisional Officer power either to allow the application of the landlord or to dismiss it after he has held a summary enquiry into the matter.
If the application is allowed, an order of eviction has to be passed.
If it is dismissed the proceedings come to an end.
However, if the ground of eviction is non payment of rent, the Revenue Divisional Officer is clothed with power to allow the cultivating tenant to deposit the arrears and costs, as directed.
The power is discretionary and, while exercising the same, it is not incumbent or the Revenue Divisional Officer to grant time.
[164 E F] 2.
If the legislature intended to make it obligatory on the part of the Revenue Divisional Officer to fix a time for deposit of the arrears in all cases covered by clause (a) and clause (a) of sub section (2) there is no reason why it should have used the word 'may ' in relation to the grant of time.
Clause (b) of sub section (3) provides that "if the court finds that any sum is due it shall allow the cultivating tenant, just and reasonable time. " The difference in the language used by the legislature in clause (aa) of sub section (2) and in clause (b) of sub section (3) is significant and not without purpose.
The intention of the legislature appears to be that normally a defaulting tenant must seek the help of the court all by himself and that if he does so he must be protected but that a defaulting tenant who waits for payment of rent till he is sought to be evicted by the landlord is not necessarily entitled to the same protection.
[164 G 165 B] Circumstances may exist which may place him at par with a tenant covered by sub section (3) but then it may not necessarily be so.
That is why it is left to the discretion of the Revenue Divisional Officer to grant time to the cultivating tenant or to deny him that opportunity.
[165 C]
