Motibhai created two mortgages in respect of the same property in the years 1871 and 1893 in favour of one Nanaji who died somewhere between 1 890 and 1912 leaving behind his two sons Hari and Purushottam as his heirs and legal representatives.
They both sold the entire mortgagee rights and interest to one Ganpatram on 4th July, 1912, who in his turn sold the mortgagee rights in a part of the mortgaged property, namely, common latrine to one Vamanrao.
Ganpatram died and his son Chhotalal sold away his rights as a mortgagee in possession in respect of the rest of the properties which still remained with him, to Chhaganlal Keshavlal Mehta, the appellant defendant No. 1.
Mortgagor Motibhai also died leaving behind his son Chimanrai.
Chimanrai died leaving behind his widow Chhotiba and a daughter Taralaxmibai.
On September 12, 1950 Taralaxmibai sold her right, title and interest in the suit property to one Shantilal who later on conveyed his right, title and interest in the property to the respondent plaintiff Narandas Haribhai Patel.
During the life time of Chimanrai, Ganpatram, the mortgagee had sent a notice, Exhibit 77 dated 15th April, 1913 informing him that the mortgaged property was in a dilapidated condition and required repairs.
He further called upon Chimanrai to pay the amount already spent by him towards the repairs to get further repairs done or in the alternative pay up the mortgage amount and redeem the property.
Chimanrai, denied his responsibility.
After the death of Chimanrai Chhotalal gave a similar notices, Exhibits 68 and 78, dated 21st of September, 1933 and 6th October 1933 to Taralaxmibai daughter of Chimanrai and to Chhotiba, the widow to the same effect.
Both Chhotiba and Taralaxmibai denied their liabilities.
Narandas after the purchase of the mortgagor 's rights from Shantilal filed a suit for redemption impleading both the assignees of the mortgagee 's rights, namely, Chhaganlal Keshavlal Mehta, the appellant as defendant No. I and Vamanrao as defendant No. 2.
The suit was dismissed by the trial court on the ground that the plaintiff had no right to redeem In this view of the matter it was not necessary to decide other issues but the trial court recorded findings on other issues also including the issue of estoppel.
The appeal and the cross objection filed by the parties were 167 allowed by the Assistant Judge holding that plaintiff had purchased the equity of redemption and so he was entitled to redeem and that the suit was not barred by estoppel.
He however remanded the case for deciding the remaining issues.
On remand the Joint Civil Judge held that Chimanrai, his widow Chhotiba and his daughter Taralaxmibai relinquished their right, title and interest in the suit property and, therefore, Taralaxmibai had no subsisting interest or title to transfer to the plaintiff or his predecessor in interest.
He further held that the suit was barred by time and estoppel, and that defendant No. 1 had spent a substantial amount on repairs.
On these findings the suit was dismissed once again.
During the pendency of the appeal by the respondent, Vamanrao died in August, 1958.
His heirs were, however, not brought on the record.
The appeal was allowed as against defendant No. I but dismissed as abated against defendant No. 2 and it was held that the respondent was entitled to redeem the mortgaged property on payment of the mortgaged money as well as the expenditure incurred on repairs, and that the suit was neither barred by time nor by estoppel.
On further appeal to the High Court a learned single Judge reversed the Judgment and decree of the lower appellate Court and dismissed the suit.
The respondent plaintiff took up the matter in the letters patent appeal and the appellant defendant No. 1 also filed a cross objection.
A Division Bench of the High Court allowed the appeal and decreed the suit reversing the finding of the learned Single Judge that the respondent plaintiff had no right to sue.
The Division Bench, however, granted a certificate of fitness of appeal to the Supreme Court.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
Under section 60 of the Transfer of Property Act, a co mortgagor cannot be permitted to redeem his own share of the mortgaged property only on payment of proportionate part of the amount remaining due.
In other words, the integrity of the mortgage cannot be broken.
[173 G] 2.
It is, however, a well recognised principle that even if all the mortgagees are not before the court in a suit filed by the mortgagor for redemption of the property, but the mortgagor is prepared to pay the entire amount due at the foot of the mortgage to such mortgagees as are before the court and gives up his right under the mortgage as against those mortgagees who are not before the court, The court can pass a decree for redemption directing that the entire mortgage amount should be paid to the mortgagees who are actually before the court.
[174 D F] Motilal Yadav vs Samal Bechar , approved.
If one of the defendants in a suit dies and his heirs are not brought on record, the suit certainly would abate as against that party.
The suit, however, G could not abate as against the other surviving defendants.
A question may arise whether the suit is maintainable against the surviving defendants.
In the instant case, the Suit abated as against defendant No. 2 in respect of the common latrine.
But the suit may proceed against the surviving appellant defendant No. 1 if the respondent plaintiff is prepared to pay the entire mortgage consideration.
[174 F G] 3:2.
A person may be a necessary party in a suit but he may not be a necessary party in the appeal.
[175 A] 168 4:1.
To bring the case within the scope of estoppel as defined in section 115 of the Evidence Act: (i) there must be a representation by a person or his authorised agent to another in any form a declaration, act or omission; (ii) the representation must have been of the existence of a fact and not of promises de futuro or intention which might or might not be enforceable in contract: (iii) the representation must have been meant to be relied upon; (iv) there must have been belief on the part of the other party in its truth; (v) there must have been action on the faith of that declaration, act or omission, that is lo say, the declaration, act or omission must have actually caused another to act on the faith of it, and to alter his former position to his prejudice or detriment; (vi) the mis representation or conduct or omission must have been the proximate cause of leading the other party to act to his prejudice; (vii) the person claiming the benefit of an estoppel must show that he was not aware of the true state of things.
If he was aware of the real state of affair or had means of knowledge, there can be no estoppel; (viii) only the person to whom representation was made or for whom it was designed can avail himself of it.
A person is entitled to plead estoppel in his own individual character and not as a representative of his assignee.
[176 C F] 4:2.
The difference between an admission and estoppel is a marked one.
Admissions being declarations against an interest are good evidence but they are not conclusive and a party is always at liberty to withdraw admissions by proving that they are either mistaken or untrue.
But estoppel creates an absolute bar.
Estoppel deals with questions of facts and not of rights.
A man is not estopped from asserting a right which he had said he would not assert It is also a well known principle that there can be no estoppel against a statute.
[175G, H 176 B] 4:3.
In the instant case (i) the ingredients of section 115 of the Evidence Act have not been fulfilled.
No representation was made to defendant No. 1, therefore, estoppel cannot be pleaded; (ii) the representation was not regarding a fact but regarding a right of which defendant No. I or his predecessor in interest had full knowledge or could have known if he had cared to know lt is difficult to say that defendant No. ] has moved his position on account of the representation made by The mortgagor or his heirs or assignees, [176 G H]
