The appellant as the proprietor of Nada un Jagir sued to establish his title to chil (pine) trees standing on lands within the Jagir but belonging to the respondents, on the ground that the trees belonged to him as ala malik (superior landlords and not to the respondents who were only adna maliks (inferior landlords).
The Jagir originally formed part of the territory belonging to the rulers of Kangra who were Sovereigns entitled to the chil trees.
In 1827.
28 Maharaja Ranjit Singh conquered the territory and granted Nadaun as Jagir to Raja Jodhbir Chand who was the illegitimate son of Raja Sansar Chand, the last independent ruler of Kangra.
In 1846 as a result of the first Sikh War the territory came under the dominion of the British,.
who granted a Sanad in favour of Raja Jodhbir Chand in recognition of his services.
After the second Sikh War, the British granted a fresh Sanad in respect of the Jagir of Nadaun in 1848.
Subsequent to the grant, there were settlements in 1892 93 (O 'Brien 's Settlement), 1899 1900 (Anderson 's Settlement) and 1910 1915 (Settlement of Messrs Middleton and Shuttleworth), and there were some entries in the Wajib ul arz supporting the title of the Raja to the chil trees.
The appellant who is a direct lineal descendant of Raja Jodhbir Chand claimed title to the trees, firstly, as the representative of the independent Kangra rulers, secondly, on the basis of the grant given by the British Government and, thirdly,on the strength of the entries in the Wajib ul arz.
Held:(1) The Sovereign right of the independent Kangra rulers Lo chil trees passed by conquest to the Sikh rulers and subsequently to the British; Raja Jodhbir Chand was only a Jagirdar under the Sikhs and the British, and the appellant could not therefore lay claim to the chil trees on the basis of the Sovereign right of the in.
dependent rulers.
(2)The grant of 1848 on its true construction was primarily an assignment of land revenue and whatever other rights might have been included, the right to all chil trees on the proprietary and cultivated lands of the respondents was not within the grant.
890 It is well settled that the general rule is that grants made by the Sovereign are to be construed most favourably for the Sovereign; but if the intention is obvious, a fair and liberal interpretation must be given to the grant to enable it to take effect, and the operative part, if plainly expressed, must take effect notwithstanding qualifications in the recitals.
In cases where the grant is for valuable consideration it is construed in favour of the grantee, for the honour of the Sovereign, and where two constructions are possible, one valid and the other void, that which is valid ought to be preferred, for, the honour of the Sovereign ought to be more regarded than the Sovereign 's profit.
(3)Wajib ul arz or village administration paper is a record of existing rights not expressly provided for by law and of customs and usage regarding the rights and liabilities in the estate, and though under section 44 of the Punjab Land Revenue Act, 1887, it is presumed to be true, it is not to be used for the creation of new rights and liabilities.
Entries in the wajib ul arz with regard to the right of the Raja in respect of chil trees standing on the cultivated and proprietary lands of the adna maliks, did not show any existing custom or usage, of the village, the right being a Sovereign right, and the appellant could not rely on the said entries as evidence of a grant or surrender or relinquishment of a Sovereign right by Government in his favour.
The expressions "ala malik" and "adna malik" explained in the context of the Settlement reports relating to Nadaun Jagir.
Venkata Narasimha Appa Bow Bahadur vs Rajah Narayya Appa Bow Bahadur ([1879] L.R. 7 I.A. 38), Dakas Khan vs Ghulam Kasim Khan (A.I.R. and Gurbakhsh Singh vs Mst.
Partapo ([1921] I.L.R. , referred to.
