In the insolvency proceedings half the property of one Allabaksh was sold by the official Receiver to Moola Narayanaswamy in 1939 and the other half to Narasimhulu in 1945.
Subsequently Narasimhulu transferred his interest in the property in favour of the daughter of Moola Naraynaswamy for a consideration of Rs. 4,000 under Exh.
A 1 dated May 10, 1948.
One Nagappa obtained a simple money decree against Moola Narayanaswamy in O.S. 26/1952 on the file of Sub Judge Anantapur and in execution thereof, he attached and bright to sale in court auction two houses including the house purchased by the daughter of Moola Nalayanaswamy.
In the said court auction, Nagappa purchased the two houses for a sum of Rs. 2050 and in enforcement of the sale certificate, he obtained delivery of possession of the two houses.
Since the application No. E.A. 90/58 filed by the daughter of Narayanaswamy in the Executing Court under order XXI, Rule 100 C.P.C. asserting her independent right was dismissed, she filed a suit to set aside the said summary order and for recovery of possession of the property which is described in her plaint 'C ' Schedule as falling to her share arising out of a partition effected in 1952.
During the pendency of the suit, Nagappa sold the northern half of the property in favour of Mahboob Saheb, the appellant herein, on March 21, 1961 and later, the southern half of the property to N. Subbarayan Chowdhary, respondent No. 1 herein, on June 19, 1961.
Nagappa contested the suit on the ground that Narasimhulu was all along acting as a benamidar for Narayanaswamy, when he purchased the half share in court auction in 1944 45 and again transferred the said share in favour of Narayanaswamy 's daughter benami for Narayanaswamy and as such the sale by the court in his favour was valid.
The Trial Court disbelieved the plea of benami taken by Nagappa, found that the plaintiff was the owner of a half share in her own right, and that there was no partition by metes and bounds of the entire property brought to sale, by court auction.
The Trial Court, therefore, set aside the summary order passed in E.A. 90/58 in E.P. 7/56 in OS.
26/52 of the Sub Judge, Anantapur and a preliminary decree for partition of the 'B ' Scheduled property by metes and bounds into the equal shares and for allotment and delivery of one such share to the plaintiff.
239 Nagappa 's appeal before the District Court (A.S. 173/66) was dismissed and A the objections of the plaintiff were allowed, and accepting the plea of partition the District Court granted a decree for recovery of possession of the plaint 'C ' Schedule.
In further second appeals, the High Court dismissed Nagappa 's appeal on the plea of benami but reversed the findings of the District Court as to the question of partition pleaded by the plaintiff.
Allowing The appeal of the 8th defendant (Respondent No. I herein) the High Court held that it was a case where a partition of the property should be effected between the plaintiff on the one hand and the appellant and respondent No. 1 herein on the other.
Hence the appeal by special leave by 7th defendant Mahboob Saheb.
Allowing the appeal and leaving the question relating to the rights inter se as between appellant and respondent No. 1 open, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
It was not open to the High Court to reappreciate the evidence and substitute its own conclusions in place of those entered by the lower court, while exercising the jurisdiction conferred by section 100 C.P.C.
The finding entered by the Additional District Judge that a partition had taken place between the plaintiff and the other legal heirs of Narayanaswamy in 1952, and as a result thereof the southern portion of the 'B ' Schedule property (plaint 'C ' Schedule property) had been allotted to the plaintiff 's share was based on a detailed consideration of the legal evidence available on the record.
The relevant portions of the evidence having a bearing on the plea of partition make it clear that the finding entered by the Additional District Judge cannot be said to be unreasonable or perverse.
No question of law whatever was agitated before the High Court.
In the circumstances, there was no justification for the High Court to interfere with the finding of fact entered by the Additional District Judge.
[244F; E, G H ]
