The petitioners are certain under trials in the State of Bihar.
In the Writ Petitions filed by them under Article 32 of the Constitution they complained that after their arrest, whilst under police custody they were blinded by the members of the police force, acting not in their private capacity but as police officials and their fundamental right to life guaranteed under Article 21 was therefore, violated and for this violation the State is liable to pay compensation to them.
On an application made by the petitioners, several documents including C.I.D. Reports submitted by Shri L.V. Singh, D.I.G., C.I.D, (Anti Dacoity) on December 9,1980 and other dates were called for by the Court.
The State raised an objection to the production of these documents on the ground that they are protected from disclosure under sections 162 to 172 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and that the petitioners are not entitled to see them or to make any use of them in the present proceedings.
Overruling the State objection and directing the Registry to supply copies of these documents produced before the Court, to the petitioner 's advocate and the advocate appearing as amicus curiae, the Court ^ HELD: 1:1.
The reports submitted by Shri L.V. Singh setting forth the results of his investigation cannot be shut out from being produced and considered in evidence either under section 162 or 172 of the Criminal Procedure Code, even if they refer to any statements made before him and his associates during investigation, provided they are otherwise relevant under the provisions of the Indian Evidence Act.
In a writ petition against the State Government where the complaint is that the police officials of the State Government blinded the petitioners at the time of arrest or whilst in custody, the State Government cannot resist production of a report in regard to the truth or otherwise of the complaint, made by a highly placed officer pursuant to the direction issued by the State Government.
[163 B D] 1:2.
All the other reports covered by Items 2 to 5 of the Court 's order dated 16th February, 1981 are equally relevant and must, therefore, be produced and taken on record in the writ petition.
[164 B C] 146 2:1.
The procedure to be followed in a writ petition under Article 32 of the Constitution is prescribed under order XXXV of the Supreme Court Rules, 1966, and sub rule (9) of Rule 10 lays down that at the hearing of the rule nisi if the court is of the opinion that an opportunity be given to the parties to establish their respective cases by leading further evidence, the court may take such evidence or cause such evidence to be taken in such manner as it may deem fit and proper and obviously the reception of such evidence will be governed by the provisions of the Indian Evidence Act.
It is obvious, therefore, that even a statement made before a police officer during investigation can be produced and used in evidence in a writ petition under Article 32 of the Constitution provided it is relevant under the Indian Evidence Act and neither section 162 nor section 172 can be urged as a bar against its production or use.
[153 C E] 3:1.
When the Court trying the writ petition proceeds to inquire into the issue whether the petitioners were blinded by police officials at the time of arrest or whilst in police custody, it does so, not for the purpose of adjudicating upon the guilt of any particular officer with a view to punishing him but for the purpose of deciding whether the fundamental right of the petitioners under Article 21 has been violated and the State is liable to pay compensation to them for such violation.
The nature and object of the inquiry is altogether different from that in a criminal case and any decision arrived at in the writ petition on this issue cannot have any relevance much less any binding effect, in criminal proceeding which may be taken against a particular police officer.
[160 G H, 161 A B] 4.
The pendency of a criminal proceeding cannot be urged as a bar against the Court trying a civil proceeding or a writ petition where a similar issue is involved.
The two are entirely distinct and separate proceedings and neither is a bar against the other.
It may be that in a given case, if the investigation is still proceeding, the Court may defer the inquiry before it until the investigation is completed or if the Court considers it necessary in the interests of Justice, it may postpone its inquiry even after the prosecution following upon the investigation is terminated, but that is a matter entirely for the exercise of the discretion of the Court and there is no bar precluding the Court from proceeding with the inquiry before it merely because the investigation or prosecution is pending.
[161 D E] 5.
The fact in issue in the inquiry before the Court in the present writ petition is whether the petitioners were blinded by the members of the police force at the time of the arrest or whilst in police custody.
The several reports called for by the Court clearly relate to the issue as to how, in what manner and by whom the twenty four undertrial prisoners were blinded, for that is the matter which Shri L.V. Singh was directed by the State Government to investigate.
If that be so, the State cannot resist the production of these reports and their use as evidence in the present proceeding.
These reports are clearly relevant under section 35 of the Indian Evidence Act since they relate to a fact in issue and are made by a public servant in the discharge of his official duty.
A D] P.C.P. Reddiar vs section Perumal, ; ; Kanwar Lal Gupta vs Amar Nath Chawla, ; ; followed.
Jagdat vs Sheopal, A.I.R. 1927 Oudh 323; Chandulal vs Pushkar Rai, A.I.R. 1952 Nagpur 271; Lionell Edwards Limited vs State of West Bengal, A.I.R, , quoted with approval.
147 6.
Section 4 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 makes it clear that the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code are applicable where an offence under the Indian Penal Code or under any other law is being investigated, inquired into tried or otherwise dealt with.
[151 B C] 7.
Section 162 bars the use of any statement made before a police officer in the course of an investigation under Chapter XII, whether recorded in a police diary or otherwise, but, by the express terms of the Section, this bar is applicable only where such statement is sought to be used "at any inquiry or trial in respect of any offence under investigation at the time when such statement was made.
" If the statement made before the police officer in the course of an investigation under chapter XII is sought to be used in any proceeding other than an inquiry or trial or even at an inquiry or trial but in respect of an offence other than that which was under investigation at the time when such statement was made, the bar of section 162 would not be attracted.
[152 A C] 7:2.
Section 162 has been enacted for benefit of the accused and to protect him against overzealous police officers and untruthful witnesses.
But, this protection is unnecessary in any proceeding other than an inquiry or trial in respect of the offence under investigation and hence the bar created by the section is a limited bar.
It has no application in a civil proceeding or in a proceeding under Article 32 or 226 of the Constitution and a statement made before a police officer in the course of investigation can be used as evidence in such proceeding, provided it is otherwise relevant under the Indian Evidence Act.
[152 D, H, 153 A B] Tehsildar Singh and Another vs The State of Uttar Pradesh, [1959] Supp. 2 S.C.R. 875 at 890, applied.
Emperor vs Aftab Mohd. Khan, A.I.R. 1940 All. 291; Baliram Tikaram Maratha vs Emperor, A.I.R. 1945 Nagpur 1; Malakalaya Surya Rao vs Janakamma, A.I.R. 1964 A.P. 198; approved.
Sub section (2) of section 172 of the Criminal Procedure Code empowers the criminal court holding an inquiry or trial of a case to send for the police diary of the case and the criminal court can use such diary, not as evidence in the case, but to aid it in such inquiry or trial.
But, by reason of sub section (3) of section 172, merely because the case diary is referred to by the criminal court, neither the accused nor his agents are entitled to call for such diary nor are they entitled to see it.
If however the case diary is used by the police officer who has made it to refresh his memory or if the criminal court uses it for the purpose of contradicting such police officer in the inquiry or trial, the provisions of section 161 or section 145, as the case may be of the Indian Evidence Act would apply and the accused would be entitled to see the particular entry in the case diary which has been referred to for either of these purposes and so much of the diary as in the opinion of the Court is necessary to a full understanding of the particular entry so used.
[156 C D] Queen Empress vs Mannu, [1897] 19 All. 390, quoted with approval.
State of Bihar vs J.A.C. Saldhana, ; , referred to.
The bar against production and use of case diary enacted in section 172 is intended to operate only in an inquiry or trial for an offence and even this 148 bar is a limited bar, because in an inquiry or trial, the bar does not operate if the case diary is used by the police officer for refreshing his memory or the criminal court uses it for the purpose of contradicting such police officer.
This bar can obviously have no application where a case diary is sought to be produced and used in evidence in a civil proceeding or in a proceeding under Article 32 or 226 of the Constitution and particularly when the party calling for the case diary is neither an accused nor his agent in respect of the offence to which the case diary relates.
The present writ petition which has been filed under Article 32 of the Constitution to enforce the fundamental right guaranteed under Article 21 is neither an "inquiry" nor a "trial" for an offence nor is this court hearing the writ petition a criminal court nor are the petitioners, accused or their agents so far as the offences arising out of their blinding are concerned.
Therefore, even if the reports submitted by Shri L.V. Singh as a result of his investigation could be said to form part of "case diary" their production and use in the present writ petition under Article 32 of the Constitution cannot be said to be barred under section 172 of the Criminal Procedure Code.
[156 D G, 157 A B] 9:1.
It would not be right to extend the prohibition of section 172 to cases not falling strictly within the terms of the section, by appealing to what may be regarded as the principle or spirit of the section.
In fact to do so would be inconsistent with the constitutional commitment of the Supreme Court to the rule of law.
Either production and use of case diary in a proceeding is barred under the terms of section 172 or it is not, it cannot be said to be barred on an extended or analogical application of the principle supposed to be underlying that section, if it is not covered by its express terms.
In order that truth may emerge from the clash between contesting parties under the adversary system, it is necessary that all facts relevant to the inquiry must be brought before the Court and no relevant fact must be shut out, for otherwise the Court may get a distorted or incomplete picture of the facts and that might result in mis carriage of justice.
It is imperative to the proper functioning of the judicial process and satisfactory and certain ascertainment of truth that all relevant facts must be made available to the Court.
But the law may, in exceptional cases, in order to protect more weighty and compelling competing interests, provide that a particular piece of evidence, though relevant, shall not be liable to be produced or called in evidence.
Such exceptions are to be found, inter alia, in sections 122, 123 124, 126 and 129 of the Indian Evidence Act and sections 162 and 172 of the Criminal Procedure Code But being exceptions to the legitimate demand for reception of all relevant evidence in the interest of justice, they must be strictly interpreted and not expansively construed, "for they are in derogation of the search for truth".
[157 E H, 158 A C] United States vs Nixon, ; 41 Lawyers Edition (2nd series) 1039, quoted with approval.
The Court did not express any opinion regarding the two interesting questions, (i) whether an investigation carried out by a superior officer by virtue of a direction given to him by the State Government under section 3 of the Indian is an investigation under Chapter XII so as to attract the applicability of section 172 to a diary maintained by him in the course of such investigation and (ii) whether the report made by such officer as a result of the investigation carried out by him forms part of case diary within the meaning of section 172 of the Criminal Procedure Code.
[155 D G] 149
