Section 1(2) of the Constitution (Fortyfourth Amendment) Act 1978 provides that "It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act.
" Section 3 of the Act substituted a new clause (4) for the existing sub clause (4) of Article 22.
By a notification the Central Government had brought into force all the sections of the Fortyfourth Amendment Act except section 3.
In the meantime the Government of India issued the National Security ordinance 2 of 1980 which later became the .
The petitioner was detained under the provisions of the ordinance on the ground that he was in dulging in activities prejudicial to public order.
In his petition under Article 32 of the Constitution the petitioner contended that the power to issue an ordinance is an executive power, not legislative power, and therefore the ordinance is not law. ^ HELD: [per Chandrachud, C.J., Bhagwati & Desai, JJ.] [Gupta and Tulzapurkar, JJ dissented on the question of bringing into force section 3 read with section 1(2) of the Fortyfourth Amendment Act.
Gupta J. dissented on the question whether ordinance is law].
273 The power of the President to issue an ordinance under Article 123 of the Constitution is a legislative and not an executive power.
From a conspectus of the provisions of the Constitution it is clear that the Constituent Assembly was of the view that the President 's power to legislate by issuing an ordinance is as necessary for the peace and good government of the country as the Parliament 's power to legislate by passing laws.
The mechanics of the Presidents legislative power was devised evidently in order to take care of urgent situations which cannot brook delay.
The Parliamentary process of legislation is comparatively tardy and can conceivably be time consuming.
It is true that it is not easy to accept with equanimity the proposition that the executive can indulge in legislative activity but the Constitution is what it says and not what one would like it to be.
The Constituent Assembly indubitably thought, despite the strong and adverse impact which the Governor General 's ordinance making power had produced on the Indian community in the pre independence era, that it was necessary to equip the President with legislative powers in urgent situations.
[290 E G] R.C. Cooper vs Union of India, [I 9701 3 SCR 530, 559, referred to.
The contention that the word 'law ' in Article 21 must construed to mean a law made by the legislature only and cannot include an ordinance, contradicts directly the express provisions of Articles 123 (2) and 367 (2) of the Constitution.
Besides, if an ordinance is not law within the meaning of Article 21, it will stand released from the wholesome and salutary restraint imposed upon the legislative power by Article 13(2) of the Constitution.
[292 G H] The contention that the procedure prescribed by an ordinance cannot be equated with the procedure established by law is equally unsound.
The word 'established ' is used in Article 21 in order to denote and ensure that the procedure prescribed by law must be defined with certainty in order that those who are deprived of t heir fundamental right to life or liberty must know the precise extent of such deprivation.
1293 A B] The argument of the petitioner that the fundamental right conferred by Article 21 can not be taken away by an ordinance really seeks to add a proviso to Article 123(1) to the effect: "that such ordinances shall not deprive any person of his right to life or personal liberty conferred by Article 21 of the Constitution.
" An amendment substantially to that effect moved in the Constituent Assembly was rejected by the Constituent Assembly.
[293 D E] A.K. Gopalan ; , Sant Ram; , , 506, State of Nagaland vs Ratan Singh ; , 851, 852, Govind vs State of Madhya Pradesh & Anr. ; , 955 56, Ratilal Bhanjl Mithani vs Asstt.
Collector of Customs, Bombay & Anr. ; , 928 931 and Pandit M.S.M. Sharma vs Shri Sri Krisna Sinha & Anr.
[1959] Supp.
I SCR 806, 860 861, referred to.
Since the petitioners have not laid any acceptable foundation for holding that no circumstances existed or could have existed which rendered it necessary 274 for the President to take immediate action by promulgating impugned ordinance, the contention that the ordinance is unconstitutional for the reason that the pre conditions to the exercise of power conferred by Article 123 are not fulfilled, has no force.
[298 D] There can be no doubt that personal liberty is a precious right.
So did the founding fathers believe at any rate because, while their first object was to give unto the people a Constitution whereby a Government was established.
their second object, equally important, was to protect the people against the Government.
That is why, while conferring extensive powers on the Government like the power to declare an emergency, the power to suspend the enforcement of fundamental rights and the power to issue ordinances, they assured to the people a Bill of Rights by Part III of the Constitution, protecting against executive and legislative despotism those human rights which they regarded as fundamental.
The imperative necessity to protect those rights is a lesson taught by all history and all human experience.
And therefore, while arming the government with large powers to prevent anarchy from within and conquest from without, they took care to ensure that those powers were not abused to mutilate the liberties of the people.
[300 B D] Section 1(2) of the Fortyfourth Amendment Act is valid.
There is no internal contradiction between the provisions of Article 368(2) and those of section 1(2) of the 44th Amendment Act.
Article 368(2) lays down a rule of general application as to the date from which the Constitution would stand amended in accordance with the Bill assented to by the President, section 1(2) of the Amendment Act specifies the manner in which that Act or any of its provisions may be brought into force.
The distinction is between the Constitution standing amended in accordance with the terms of the Bill assented to by the President and the date of the coming into force of the Amendment thus introduced into the Constitution.
For determining the date with effect from which the Constitution stands amended in accordance with the terms of the Bill, one has to turn to the date on which the President gave, or was obliged to give, his assent to the Amendment.
For determining the date with effect from which the Constitution.
as amended, came or will come into force, one has to turn to the notification, if any, issued by the Central Government under section 1(2) of the Amendment Act.
[310 D F] The contention raised by the petitioners, that the power to appoint a date for bringing into force a constitutional amendment is a constituent power and therefore it cannot be delegated to an outside agency is without force.
It is true that the constituent power, that is to say, the power to amend any provision of the Constitution by way of an addition, variation or repeal must be exercised by the Parliament itself and cannot be delegated to an outside agency.
That is clear from Article 368(1) which defines at once the scope of the Constituent power of the Parliament and limits that power to the Parliament.
The power to issue a notification for bringing into force the provisions of a Constitutional amendment is not a constituent power because, it does not carry with it the power to amend the Constitution in any manner.
It is, therefore, permissible to the Parliament to vest in an outside agency the power to bring a Constitutional amendment into force, [312 C E] 275 Although the 44th Amendment Act received the assent of the President on April 30, 1979 and more than two and a half years have already gone by without the Central Government issuing a notification for bringing section 3 of the Act into force, this Court cannot intervene by issuing a mandamus to the Central Government obligating it to bring the provisions of section 3 into force.
The Parliament having left this question to the unfettered judgment of the Central Government it is not for the Court to compel the Government to do that which according to the mandate of Parliament, lies in its discretion to do when it considers it opportune to do it.
The executive is responsible to the Parliament and if the Parliament considers that the executive has betrayed its trust by not bringing any provision of the Amendment into force, it can censure the executive.
It would be quite anomalous that the inaction of the executive should have the approval of the Parliament and yet the court should show its disapproval of it by against mandamus.
[314 G H] In leaving it to the judgment of the Central Government to decide as to when the various provisions of the 44th Amendment should be brought into force, the Parliament could not have intended that the Central Government may exercise a kind of veto over its constituent will by not ever bringing the Amendment or some of its provision into force.
The Parliament having seen the necessity of introducing into the Constitution a provision like section 3 of the 44th Amendment, it is not open to the Central Government to sit in judgment over the wisdom of the policy of that section.
If only the Parliament were to lay down an objective standard to guide and control the discretion of the Central Government in the matter of bringing the various provisions of the Act into force, it would have been possible to compel the Central Government by an appropriate writ to discharge the function assigned to it by the Parliament.
[316 B D] Expressions like 'defence of India ', 'security of India ' security of the State ' and 'relations of India with foreign powers ', mentioned in section 3 of the Act, are not of any great certainty or definiteness.
But in the very nature of things they are difficult to define.
Therefore provisions of section 3 of the Act cannot be struck down on the ground of their vagueness and certainty.
However, since the concepts are not defined, undoubtedly because they are not capable of a precise definitions, courts must strive to give to those concepts a narrower construction than what the literal words suggest.
While construing laws of preventive detention like the , care must be taken to restrict their application to as few situations as possible.
Indeed, that can well be the unstated premise for upholding the constitutionally of clauses like those in section 3, which are fraught with grave consequences to personal liberty, if construed liberally.
[324 E H] What is said in regard to the expressions 'defence of India ', `security of India ', 'security of the State ' and 'relations of India with foreign powers ' cannot apply to the expression "acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of supplies and services essential to the community ' which occurs in section 3(2) of the Act.
The particular clause in sub section (2) of section 3 of the is capable of wanton abuse in that, the detaining authority can place under detention any person for possession of any commodity on the basis that the authority is of the opinion that the maintenance of supply of that commodity 276 is essential to the community.
This particular clause is not only vague and uncertain but, in the context of the Explanation, capable of being extended cavalierly to supplies.
the maintenance of which is not essential to the community.
To allow the personal liberty of the people to be taken away by the application of that clause would be a flagrant violation of the fairness and justness of procedure which is implicit in the provisions of Article 21.
The power given to detain persons under section 3(2) on the ground that they are acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of supplies and Services essential to the community cannot however be struck down because it is vitally necessary to ensure a steady flow of supplies and services which are essential to the community, and if the State has the power to detain persons on the grounds mentioned in section 3(1) and the other grounds mentioned in section 3(2), it must also have the power to pass order of detention on this particular ground.
No person can be detained with a view to preventing him from acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of supplies and services essential to the community unless, by a law order or notification made or published fairly in advance, the supplies and services, the maintenance of which is regarded as essential to the community and in respect of which the order of detention is proposed to be passed, are made known appropriately, to the public.
[325 A C; 326 BC, FH] R. C. Cooper vs Union of India, ; , 559, Haradhan Saha; , , Khudiram, j ; , Sambhu Nath Sarkar, [1974] 1 SCR I and Maneka Gandhi, [1978]2 SCR 621, explained.
Laws of preventive detention cannot, by the back door, introduce procedural measures of a punitive kind.
Detention without trial is an evil to be suffered, but to no greater extent and in no greater measure than is minimally necessary in the interest of the country and the community.
It is neither fair nor just that a detenu should have to suffer detention in "such place" as the Government may specify.
The normal rule has to be that the detenu will be kept in detention in a place which is within the environs of his or her ordinary place of residence.
[330 E F] In order that the procedure attendant upon detentions should conform to the mandate of Article 21 in the matter of fairness, justness and reasonableness, it is imperative that immediately after a person is taken in custody in pursuance of an order of detention, the members of his household, preferably the parent, the child or the spouse, must be informed in writing of the passing of the order of detention and of the fact that the detenu has been taken in custody.
Intimation must also be given as to the place of detention, including the place where the detenu is transferred from time to time.
This Court has stated time and again that the person who is taken in custody does not forfeit, by reason of his arrest, all and every one of his fundamental rights.
It is, therefore, necessary to treat the detenu consistently with human dignity and civilized norms of behaviour.
[331 C D] Since section 3 has not been brought into force by the Central Government in the exercise of its powers under section 1(2) of the 44th Amendment Act, that section is still not a part of the Constitution.
The question as to whether section 9 of the is bad for the reason that it is inconsistent with the provisions of section 3 of the 44th Amendment Act, has therefore to be decided on the basis that section 3, though a part of the 44th Amendment Act, is not 277 a part of the Constitution.
If section 3 is not a part of the Constitution, it is difficult to appreciate how.
the validity of section 9 of the can be tested by applying the standard laid down in that section.
It cannot possibly be that both the unamended and the amended provisions of Article 22(4) of the Constitution are parts of the Constitution at one and the same time.
So long as section 3 of the 44th Amendment Act has not been brought into force, Article 22(4) in its unamended form will continue to be a part of the Constitution and so long as that provision is a part of the Constitution, the amendment introduced by section 3 of the 44th Amendment Act cannot become a part of the Constitution Section 3 of the 44th Amendment substitutes a new article 22(4) for the old article 22(4).
The validity of the constitution of Advisory Boards has therefore to be tested in the light of the provisions contained in Article 22(4) as it stands now and not according to the amended article 22(4).
[335 D H] On a combined reading of clauses (I) and (3)(b) of Article 22, it is clear that the right to consult and to be defended by a legal practioner of one 's choice, which is conferred by clause (1), is denied by clause (3)(b) to a person who is detained under any law providing for preventive detention.
Thus, according to the express intendment of the Constitution itself, no person who is detained under any law, which provides for preventive detention, can claim the right to consult a legal practioner of his choice or to be defended by him.
It is therefore difficult to hold, by the application of abstract, general principles or on a priori consideration that the detenu has the right of being represented by a legal practioner in the proceedings before the Advisory Board.
[339 D E] Yet the fact remains that the detenu has no right to appear through a legal practitioner in the proceedings before the Advisory Board.
The reason behind the provisions contained in Article 22(3)(b) of the Constitution clearly is that a legal practitioner should not be permitted to appear before the Advisory Board for any party.
The Constitution does not contemplate that the detaining authority or the Government should have the facility of appearing before the Advisory Board with the aid of a legal practioner but that the said facility should be denied to the detenu.
In any case, that is not what the Constitution says and it would be wholly inappropriate to read any such meaning into the provisions of Article 22.
Permitting the detaining authority or the Government to appear before the Advisory Board with the aid of a legal practitioner or a legal adviser would be in breach of Article 14, if a similar facility is denied to the detenu.
Therefore if the detaining authority or the Government takes the aid of a legal practitioner or a legal adviser before the Advisory Board, the detenu must be allowed the facility of appearing before the Board through a legal practitioner.
[344 H; 345 A C] The embargo on the appearance of legal practitioners should not be extended so as to prevent the detenu from being aided or assisted by a friend who, in truth and substance, is not a legal practitioner.
Every person whose interests are adversely affected as a result of the proceedings which have a serious import, is entitled to be heard in those proceedings and be assisted by a friend.
A detenu, taken straight from his cell to the Board 's room, may lack the ease and composure to present his point of view.
He may be "tongue tied, nervous, confused or wanting in intelligence" (see Pet vs Greyhound Racing Association Ltd.), and if justice is to be done he must at least have the help of a friend who can assist him to give coherence to his stray and wandering ideas.
[345 G H] 278 In the proceedings before the Advisory Board, the detenu has no right to cross examine either the persons on the basis of whose statement the order of detention is made or the detaining authority.[352D] Now Prakash Transport Co. Ltd. vs New Suwarna Transport Co. Ltd., , 106, Nagendra Nath Bora vs Commissioner of Hills Division and Appeals, Assam, ; , 1261, State of Jammu & Kashmir vs Bakshi Ghulam Mohammad, , 415, Union of India vs T.R. Verma, [1958] SCR 499, 507 and Kherr.
Chand vs Union of India , 1096, held inapplicable There can be no objection for the detenu to lead evidence in rebuttal of the allegation made against him before the Advisory Board.
Neither the Constitution nor the contains any provision denying such a right to the detenu.
The detenue may therefore offer oral and documentary evidence before the Advisory Board in order to rebut the allegations which are made against him.
[352 E F] It is not possible to accept the plea that the proceedings of the Advisory Board should be thrown open to the public.
The right to a public trial is not one of the guaranteed rights under our Constitution.
[354 C D] Puranlal Lakhanpal vs Union of India, , 475 and Dattatreya Moreshwar Pangarkar vs State of Bombay, ; , 626, referred to.
Yet the Government must afford the detenus all reasonable facilities for an existence consistent with human dignity.
They should be permitted to wear their own clothes, eat their own food, have interviews with the members of their families at least once a week and, last but not the least, have reading and writing material according to their reasonable requirements.
[355 B C] Persons who are detained under the must be segregated from the convicts and kept in a separate part of the place of detention.
It is hardly fair that those who are suspected of being engaged in prejudicial conduct should be lodged in the same ward or cell where the convicts whose crimes are established are lodged.
[355 D] Sunil Batra vs Delhi Administration and Sampat Prakash vs State of Jammu & Kashmir , referred to.
[per Gupta and Tulzapurkar, JJ dissenting] Section 1(2) of the Constitution (Fortyfourth Amendment) Act 1978 cannot be construed to mean that Parliament has left it to the unfettered discretion or judgment of the Central Government when to bring into force any provision of the amendment Act.
After the President 's assent, the Central Government was under an obligation to bring into operation the provisions of the Act within a reasonable time; the power to appoint dates for bringing into force the provisions of the Act was given to the Central Government obviously because it was not considered feasible to give affect to all the provisions immediately.
But the 279 Central Government could not in its discretion keep it in a state of suspended A animation for any length of time it pleased.
[358 A B] From the Statement of objects and Reasons it was clear that the Parliament wanted the provisions of the Amendment Act to be made effective as early as possible.
When more than two and half years have passed since the Amendment Act received the assent of the President, it is impossible to say that any difficulty should still persist preventing the Government from giving effect to section 3 of the Amendment Act.
A provision like section 1(2) cannot be said to have empowered the executive to scotch an amendment of the Constitution passed by Parliament and assented to by the President.
That Parliament is competent to take appropriate steps if it considered that the executive had betrayed its trust does not make the default lawful or relieve this Court of its duty.
[359 B C] [per Gupta J. dissenting.] Normally it is the legislature that has the power to make laws.
The nature of the legislative power of the President has to be gathered from the provisions of Article 123 and not merely from the heading of the chapter, "Legislative Powers of the President".
When something is said to have the force and effect of an Act of Parliament that is because it is not really an Act of Parliament.
Article 123(2) does not say that an ordinance promulgated under this article shall be deemed to be an Act of Parliament to make the two even fictionally identical.
While an ordinance issued under Article 123 has the same force and effect as an Act of Parliament, under Article 357(1)(a) Parliament can confer on the President the power of the legislature of a State to make laws.
The difference in the nature of power exercised by the President under Article 123 and under Article 357 is clear and cannot be ignored.
[360 B, 361 B C] The word "establish" in Article 21 as interpreted by this Court "implies some degree of firmness, permanence and general acceptance".
An ordinance which ceases to operate on the happening of one of the conditions mentioned in Article 123(2) can hardly be said to have that "firmness" and "permanence" that the word "establish" implies.
lt is not the temporary duration of an ordinance that is relevant; what is relevant is its provisional and tentative character which is apparent from Article 123(2).
[362 G] F A.K. Gopalan vs State ; , relied on.
A significant difference between the law made by the President under Article 357 and an ordinance promulgated by him under Article 123 is that while a law made under Article 357 continues to be in force until altered, repealed or amended by a competent legislature or authority, an ordinance promulgated under Article 123 ceases to operate at the expiration of six weeks of reassembly of the Parliament at the latest.
[363 B] The argument that since Article 367(2) provides that any reference in the Constitution to Acts of Parliament should be construed as including a reference to an ordnance made by the President, an ordinance should be equated with an Act of Parliament is without substance because an ordinance has the force and effect only over an area where it can validly operate.
An invalid ordinance can 280 have no force or effect and if it is not 'law ' in the sense the word has been used Article 21, Article 367(2) cannot make it so.
[363 E] [on all other points His Lordship agreed with the conclusions of Hon 'ble the Chief Justice].
[Hon 'ble Tulzapurkar J. agreed with the majority on all other points]
