The Life Insurance Corporation was constituted under the , to provide for the nationalisation of life insurance business in India by transferring all such business to the Life Insurance Corporation of India.
Under Section 11(1) of the Act the services of the employees of the insurers whose business had vested in the Corporation were transferred to the Corporation.
Section 49(1 ) empowered the Life Insurance Corporation of India to make regulations for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of the Act.
Two settlements were reached on January 24, 1974 and February 6, 1974 between the Life Insurance Corporation and its Class III and Class IV employees.
These settlements covered a large ground including the claim for bonus.
These were settlements under section 18 read with section 2(p) of the .
Under clause 12 of the settlements, the settlements were to be effective from 1st April, 1973 for a period of four years that is, from 1st April, 1973 to 31st March, 1977.
In 1975, the Payment of Bonus (Amendment) ordinance was promulgated which was subsequently replaced by the Payment of Bonus (Amendment) Act 1976.
The Central Government decided that the employees of establishments not covered by the Payment of Bonus Act would not be liable 247 to get bonus and ex gratia payment in lieu of bonus.
Payment of Bonus for the A year 1975 1976 to the employees of the Corporation was stopped under instructions from the Central Government.
A writ petition filed by the employees of the Corporation in the Calcutta High Court was allowed, and the Corporation was directed to act in accordance with the terms of the settlement.
In Madan Mohan Pathak vs Union of India and Ors.
; , the Supreme Court held that the 1976 Act offended Article 31(2) of the Constitution and was void, and directed the Union of India and the Life Insurance Corporation to forbear from implementing or enforcing the provisions of the 1976 Act and to pay annual cash bonus for the years 1st April, 1975 to 31st March, 1976 and 1st April 1976 to 31st March, 1977, to Class III and Class IV employees in accordance with the settlements.
On March 31, 1978, the Corporation issued a notice under section 19(2) of the declaring its intention to terminate the settlements on the expiry of two months from the date of notice.
On the same day another notice was also issued by the Corporation under section 9A of the stating that it proposed to effect a change in the conditions of service applicable to the workmen.
These notices were followed by a notification issued by the Corporation under section 49 of the on May 26, 1978 substituting 2 new regulation for the existing regulation No. 58 of the Staff Regulations.
Simultaneously the Life Insurance Corporation (Alteration of Remuneration and other Terms and Conditions of Service of Employees) order, 1957, was amended by the Central Government, substituting a new clause (9) for the original clause concerning bonus, to take effect from June 1, 1978, to provide that the employees of the Corporation shall not be entitled to profit sharing bonus.
The validity of the aforesaid two notices and the notification issued for the purpose of nullifying any further claim to annual cash bonus was challenged by the workmen in a writ petition in the Allahabad High Court.
The High Court allowed the writ petition.
In the appeal by the Corporation to this Court the Life Insurance Corporation of India vs D.J. Bahadur ; and the writ petition filed in the Calcutta High Court transferred to this Court, Chandrasekher Bose and others vs Union of India and Ors.
; , a writ was issued to the Corporation directing it "to give effect to the terms of the settlements of 1974 relating to bonus until superseded by a fresh settlement, an industrial award or relevant legislation".
On January 31, 1981, the Life Insurance Corporation (Amendment) ordinance, 1981 was promulgated.
A new sub clause(c) was inserted with retrospective effect from June 20, 1979 in sub section (2) of section 48 of the Principal Act.
Three new sub sections (2A), (2B) and (2C) were also added to section 48.
Sub section (2A) provided that the regulations and other provisions with respect to the terms and conditions of service of the employees and agents of the Corporation at The commencement of the ordinance shall be deemed to be rules made under clause (cc) of sub section (2) .
Sub section ! (2B) provided that the power to make rules under clause (cc) of sub section (2) shall include (i) the power to give retrospective effect to such rules, and (ii) the power to amend by way of addition, variation or repeal the regulations and other provisions referred to in sub section (2A) with retrospective effect, but not from a date earlier than 248 June 20. 1979.
Sub section (2C) provided that provisions of clause (cc) of sub section (2) and sub section (2B) and any rule made under clause (cc) shall have effect, notwithstanding any judgment, decree, or order of any court, tribunal or other authority, the , any agreement, settlement, award or other instrument.
The Central Government by a notification dated February 2, 1981 made the Life Insurance Corporation of India Class III and Class IV Employees (Bonus and Dearness Allowance) Rules 1981.
Rule 3 which had been given retrospective operation with effect from July 1, 1979 provided by sub rule (1) that: "No Class Ill or Class IV employee of the Corporation shall be entitled to the payment of any profit sharing bonus or any other kind of cash bonus", and sub rule(2) of rule 3 provided that notwithstanding sub rule (1), every Class 111 and Class IV employee shall be entitled to a payment in lieu of bonus (a) for the period commencing from July 1, 1979 and ending on March 31, 1980 at the rate of IS per cent of his salary, and (b) thereafter for every year commencing from 1st April and ending on the 31st day of the March of the following year at such rate and subject to conditions which the Central Government may determine.
Sub rule (3) of rule 3 rescinded regulation 58 of the Staff Regulations and all other provisions relating to the payment of bonus to the extent they were inconsistent with rule 3.
The petitioners in their writ petitions to this Court challenged the validity of the Life Insurance Corporation (Amendment) ordinance, 1981, the Life Insurance Corporation (Amendment) Act, 1981 and the Life Insurance Corporation of India.
Class III and Class IV Employees (Bonus and Dearness Allowance) Rules, 1981 contending that: (1) the Act and the Rules were violative of Articles 14, 19(1)(g) and 21(2) of the Constitution: (2) the Act was invalid on the ground of excessive delegation of legislative functions; (3) sub section (2C) of section 48 was invalid to the extent it permitted retrospective operation to rule 3 to over ride the order of this Court in D.J. Bahadur 's case; (4) Article 14 was infringed because the provisions of sub section (2C) of section 48 provided that any rule under Clause (cc) of sub section (2) of that section touching the terms and conditions of service of the employees of the Corporation shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in the ; (S) sub section (2C) added to section 48 of the by the Amendment Act of 1981 was invalid because of excessive delegation of legislative functions and if sub section (2C) which was an integral part of the Amendment Act was ultra vires, the entire Amendment Act would be unconstitutional.
and (6) the provisions of the Amendment Act of 1981 could not nullify the effect of the writ issued by this Court in D.J. Bahadur 's case.
The writ petitions were contested on behalf of the Union of India and the Lire Insurance Corporation by contending that remuneration that was being paid to Class III and Class IV employees of the Corporation was far in excess of what was paid tn similarly situated employees in other establishments in the public sector, and that the problem of the mounting cost of administration led to the making of the ordinance and the Amendment Act As no improvement in the situation was possible by the process of adjudication, a policy decision was taken that in the circumstances the proper course was legislation and that was why the Amendment Act was passed and the Rules framed.
The as amended and the Rules made after amendment placed the Corporation 249 in the same position as other undertakings, that the advantages being enjoyed by the employees of the Corporation which were not available to similarly situated employees of other undertakings had been taken away removing the discrimination in favour of the employees of the Life Insurance Corporation.
Repealing a law was an essential legislative function which had been delegated to the Central Government and the delegation was not excessive.
It is not the Rules framed by the Central Government in exercise of the delegated authority that over ride the or any other existing law, but the power of abrogating the existing law is in sub section (2C) of section 48 which was enacted by Parliament itself.
Allowing the writ petitions in part ^ HELD: [By the Court] The Life Insurance Corporation (Amendment) Act 1981 can operate but prospectively in so far as it seeks to nullify the terms of the 1974 settlements in regard to payment of bonus.
[269 A C, 271 A B] [Per Gupta & Pathak, JJ] 1.
(i) Rule 3 operating retrospectively cannot nullify the effect of the writ issued in D. J. Bahadur 's case which directed the Life Insurance Corporation to give effect to the terms of the 1974 settlements relating to bonus until superseded by a fresh settlement, an Industrial award or relevant legislation.
[269 A] (ii) The Life Insurance Corporation (Amendment) Act 1981 and the Life Insurance Corporation of India Class 111 and Class IV employees (Bonus and Dearness Allowance) Rules, 1981 are relevant legislation.
In view of the decision in Madan Mohan Pathak 's case these rules in so far as they seek to abrogate the terms of 1974 settlements relating to bonus, can operate only prospectively, that is.
from February 2, 1981 the date of publication of the Rules.
[269 B C] (iii) A claim based on the 1974 settlements is not a fundamental right that could be enforced through this Court.
[259 C] 2.
The burden of establishing hostile discrimination was on the petitioners who challenged the Amendment Act and the rules.
It was for them to show that the employees of the Life Insurance Corporation and the employees of the other establishments to whom the provisions of the were applicable were similarly circumstanced to justify the contention that by excluding the employees of the Corporation from the purview of the they had been discriminated against.
There is no material on the basis of which it can be held that the Amendment Act of 1981 and the rules made on February 2, 1981 infringe Article 14.
[260 F G] Express Newspapers (Private) Limited and another vs Union of India, and Moti Ram Deka etc.
vs General Manager, N.E.F. Railways, Maligaon.
Pandu etc.
; , held inapplicable.
In the instant case section 48(2C) read with section 48(2) (cc) authorises the Central Government to make rules to carry out the purposes of the Act notwithstanding the or any other law.
This means that in 250 respect of the matters covered by the rules, the provisions of the or any other law will not be operative.
[262 A B] 3.
The policy as stated in the preamble of the Amendment Act is that "for securing the interest of the Life Insurance Corporation of India and policyholders and to control the cost of administration, it is necessary that revision of the terms and conditions of service applicable to the employees and the agents 13 of the Corporation should be undertaken expeditiously.
" The policy offers sufficient guidance to the Central Government in exercising its powers under that Act.
[265 B C] 4 Clause (cc) of section 48(2) empowers the Central Government to make rules with regard to the terms and conditions of service of the employees and agents of the Corporation.
Sub section 2(B) of section 48 says that the power to make rules conferred by clause (cc) of sub section (2) shall include the power to add, vary or repeal the regulations and other "provisions" referred to in subsection (2A) with retrospective effect from a date not earlier than June 20, 1979.
A writ issued by this Court is not a regulation nor can it be described as 'other provisions ' which expression includes circulars and administrative directions.
Sub section (2C) of section 48 however provided that any rule made in clause (CC) with retrospective effect from any date shall be deemed to have had effect from that date notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any Court, Tribunal or other authority.
Rule 3 of the rules relating to the subject of bonus cannot make the writ issued by this Court nugatory in view of the decision of this Court in Madan Mohan Pathak vs Union of India.
[265 H 266; 267 A] 5.
It is not really the rules framed by the Central Government that over ride the or any other existing law, but the power of abrogating the existing laws is in sub section (2C) of section 48 enacted by Parliament itself.
[264 F] Hari Shankar Bagla and another vs State of Madhya Pradesh, , referred to.
[Per Chinnappa Reddy J.] The effect of the two judgments in Madan Mohan Pathak 's case and D. J. Bahadur 's case was clear: the settlements of 1974, in so far as they related to bonus, could only be superseded by a fresh settlement, an industrial award or relevant legislation.
But any such supersession could only have future effect, but not retrospective effect so as to disentitle the Class III and Class IV employees of Life Insurance Corporation from receiving the cash bonus which had been earned by them, day by day, and which the Life Insurance Corporation of India was under an obligation to pay in terms of the writ issued in D. J. Bahadur 's case.
The present attempt made by the 1981 amending Act and the rules thereunder to scuttle the payment of bonus with effect from a date anterior to the date of the enactment must, therefore, fail.
The employees are entitled to be paid the bonus earned by them before the date of publication of the Life Insurance Corporation of India Class III and Class IV employees (Bonus and Dearness Allowance) Rules, 1981.
[270H 271 B] 251
