The prosecution case against the appellant was that on the night of occurrence between 11 and 11.30 the informer and two of his friends were standing on a road when suddenly the three accused emerged out of the car and the appellant assaulted and stabbed the injured person with a dagger.
The prosecution alleged that there was enemity between the assailants and the injured person; that the informer lodged a F.I.R. at 00.50 hrs.
and that the injured man was picked up by a Police Wireless Van and admitted in the hospital.
The trial court convicted the accused under section 326/34 I.P.C. and sentenced them variously.
The High Court acquitted two of the three accused.
In regard to the appellant, disbelieving the evidence of the doctor on the ground that the name of the assailant was first written by her as "Tony" but later changed to read as "Tiny" and that secondly there was no particular column in the register where the name of the assailant could be written, the High Court altered the conviction to one under section 326 I.P.C. and sentenced him to rigorous imprisonment for three years.
On appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that (1) the F.I.R. was not lodged at 00.50 hrs.
as claimed by the prosecution; (2) the injured did not know the appellant before the occurrence; (3) the version of the injured that the name of the assailant was disclosed to him by a friend of the informer should not be accepted and (4) the discrepancy in the name of the assailant recorded by the doctor was not such as to completely discredit her evidence.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: (a) The change of name "Tony" into "Tiny" in the hospital register might be due to mis hearing of the name in the first instance and correcting it later.
Much could not be made of this circumstance.
The doctor had initialled the alteration.
The prosecution has not made any attempt to declare 278 the doctor a hostile witness and to cross examine her.
Therefore the change in the name could be a bona fide mistake.
That apart, the injured was fully conscious at the time he made the statement to the doctor.
[282 A C] (b) The High Court was in error in stating that there was no particular column in the hospital register in which the name of the assailant could be mentioned.
The entire part of the register where the statement had been recorded by the doctor is described as the "Registrar 's note" which comprehends everything including the nature of injuries to the injured, any statement made by him or similar other matters.
[281 E F] (c) There is no evidence on record to show that the doctor was in any way friendly with the appellant or inimical towards the injured man; she was an absolutely disinterested and independent witness.
[281 G] 2 (a) The High Court had erred in holding that the doctor 's evidence was inadmissible in that the provisions of section 145 of the Evidence Act had not been complied with.
[282 F] (b) Section 145 applies only to cases where the same person makes two contradictory statements either in different proceedings or in two different stages of a proceeding.
If the maker of a statement is sought to be contradicted, his attention should be drawn to his previous statements under section 145, that is to say, where the statements made by a person or a witness is contradicted not by his own statement but by the statement of another prosecution witness the question of application of section 145 does not arise.
[283 A C] (c) The doctor 's statement was an admission of a prosecution witness.
If it was inconsistent with the statement made by another prosecution witness there was no question of application of section 145 of the Evidence Act.
[283 C] In the instant case the statement of the injured to the doctor being first in point of time it must be preferred to any subsequent statement made by the injured.
There is much evidence to show that the injured did not know the appellant before the date of the incident.
No test identification parade had been held.
The appellant was shown by the police before he identified him.
If the accused was not known to the injured and his friends before the incident and was identified for the first time in the court, this evidence has no value and cannot be relied upon in the absence of a test identification parade.
[285 E,C,F] V.C. Shukla vs State (Delhi Administration), ; and Sahdeo Gosain & Anr.
vs The King Emperor , referred to.
