The petitioner is a driver constable in the Delhi Police Force under the Delhi Administration.
The scale of pay in the Delhi Police Force is for non matriculate drivers Rs. 210 270 and for matriculate drivers 225 308.
The scale of pay of a driver in the Railway Protection Force is Rs. 260 400.
The scale of pay of driver in the non secretariat offices in Delhi is Rs. 260 6 326 EB 8 350, while that of Secretariat offices in Delhi is Rs. 260 6 290 EB 6 326 8 366 EB 8 8 8 390 10 400.
The scale of pay of drivers in the office of the Language Commission is Rs. 260 300 while the drivers of heavy vehicles in the Fire Brigade and the Department of Light House is Rs. 330 480.
The petitioner and other driver constables made a representation to the authorities that their case was omitted to be considered separately by the Third Pay Commission and that their pay scales should be the same as the drivers of heavy vehicles in other departments.
As their claims for better scales of pay did not meet with success, the present application has been filed by the petitioner for the issue of a writ under Article 32 of the Constitution.
Allowing the petition, the Court ^ HELD: 1:1.
The petitioner was appointed as a driver in the Delhi Police Force.
After his discharge from the army question of his employment as a driver in Delhi Police Force was considered, he was asked to appear for a test of proficiency in driving, directed to produce a Civil Heavy Transport Driving Licence, selected thereafter as a driver in Delhi Police Force under the category "Employment of Ex serviceman in Delhi Police as N.T. Driver (Constable).
" He was designated as Constable, because for the purposes of the discipline of the Force and appointment as driver in the Delhi Police Force he had to be made a member of the Delhi Police Force and had to be assigned a rank in the Force.
The investiture of the petitioner with the "powers, functions and privileges of a police Officer" was a consequence of his becoming a member of the Force.
[302 H, 303 A C] 1:2.
The petitioner and other drivers in the Delhi Police Force perform the same functions and duties as other drivers in the service of the Delhi Administration and the Central Government.
If anything, by reason of their investiture with the "power, functions and privileges of a police Officer", their duties and responsibilities are more arduous.
The clarification that the drivers of the 299 Delhi Police Force and the other drivers belong to different departments and that the equal pay for equal work is not a principle which the courts may recognise and act upon is irrational.
[306 A, B, C, D] 2:1.
No doubt, equation of posts and equation of pay are matters primarily for the Executive Government and expert bodies and not for the courts, but where all things are equal that is, where all relevant considerations are the same, persons holding identical posts may not be treated differentially in the matter of their pay merely because they belong to different departments.
Of course, if officers of the same rank perform dissimilar functions and the powers, duties and responsibilities of the posts held by them vary, such officers may not be heard to complain of dissimilar pay merely because the posts are of the same rank and the nomenclature is the same.
[303 G H, 304 A] 3:1.
The principle "equal pay for equal work" is not an abstract doctrine but one of substance.
There can be and there are different grades in a service, with varying qualifications for entry into a particular grade, the higher grade often being a promotional avenue for officers of the lower grade.
The higher qualifications or experience based on length of service, reasonably sustain the classification of the officers into two grades with different scales of pay.
The principle of equal pay for equal work would be an abstract doctrine not attracting Article 14 if sought to be applied to them.
[304 C E] 3:2.
It is true that the principle of "equal pay for equal work" is not expressly declared by our Constitution to be a fundamental right.
But it certainly is a Constitutional goal.
Article 39 (d) of the Constitution proclaims "equal pay for equal work for both men aud women" as a Directive Principle of State Policy.
"Equal pay for equal work for both men and women" means equal pay for equal work for every one and as between the sexes.
Directive Principles have to be read into the fundamental rights as a matter of interpretation.
Article 14 of the Constitution enjoins the State not to deny any person equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws and Article 16 declares that there shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to employment or appointment to any office under the State.
These equality clauses of the Constitution must mean something to everyone.
To the vast majority of the people the equality clauses of the Constitution would mean nothing if they are unconcerned with the work they do and the pay they get.
To them the equality clauses will have some substance if equal work means equal pay.
Questions concerning wages and the like, mundane they may be, are yet matters of vital concern to them and it is there, if at all that the equality clauses of the Constitution have any significance to them.
The preamble to the Constitution declares the solemn resolution of the people of India to constitute India into a Sovereign Socialist Democratic Republic.
Again the word 'Socialist ' must mean something.
Even if it does not mean 'to each according to his need ', it must at least mean 'equal pay for equal work '.
[304 E H, 305 A D] 3:3.
From a construction of Articles 14 and 16 in the light of the Preamble and Article 39(d), it is clear that the principle "equal pay for equal work" is deducible from those Articles and may be properly applied to cases of unequal 300 scales of pay based on no classification or irrational classification though those drawing the different scales of pay do identical work under the same employer.
[305 G H, 306 A] Kishori Lal Mohan Lal Bakshi vs Union of India, A.I.R. , distinguished.
