The five accused Ram Karan, his sons Sunil Kumar, Ved Prakash, Anil Kumar, Satish Kumar and deceased son Chhoteylal filed a Civil Suit 34 of 1967 against the decased Prakash Chandra, his brother Gopi Chandra and one Krishan Devi, alleging that while constructing their new house Prakash Chandra had encroached upon a portion of their land.
In that suit appellant Ram Karan got Commissioners appointed by the court on five or six occasions for taking measurements of the properties with the object of proving his case of encroachment by Prakash Chandra, the deceased.
But these Commissioners ' reports were set aside on the objection raised by Prakash Chandra and the other defendants.
The last Advocate Commissioner Mr. Mathur (C.W. 1) visited the spot on 6 9 1970, the day of occurrence, accompanied by Mr. Zafar Hussain (C.W. 2) who appeared for deceased Prakash Chandra and Mr. Mahesh Chandra (C.W. 3) who appeared for Ram Karan.
After the completion of the survey work and measurements at about 1 P.M. when all the three lawyers were standing and talking in front of the house of the appellants deceased Prakash Chandra and Umesh Chandra came there to talk to the Commissioner, which interference was not liked by the appellants.
This resulted in a sudden quarrel, exchange of hot words later followed by assault with knife etc., on the appellants which, according to prosecution, was in the exercise of right of self defence by the prosecution party, particularly Dinesh Chandra (P.W. 11).
On the side of the appellants Ram Karan 's son Chhotey Lal (accused) died and on the side of the prosecution Prakash Chandra and his son Umesh Chandra died and Dinesh Chandra (P.W. 11) was grievously injured.
All the five accused were tried and convicted by the Sessions Judge for offences under sections 302/149 I.P.C. (two counts) and 307/149 I.P.C. and were sentenced to imprisonment for life and rigorous imprisonment for four years respectively.
Ram Karan was also convicted under section 147 and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for one year and his four sons were convicted under section 148 and sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for two years.
In appeal the 396 High Court acquitted Anil Kumar and Satish Kumar, set aside the conviction and sentence under sections 147 and 148 I.P.C. in respect of the rest and confirmed (a) their sentence of life imprisonment by altering the conviction one under sections 302/34 I.P.C. and (b) their sentence of four years rigorous imprisonment to one under sections 307/34 I.P.C. Hence the appeal by special leave by Ram Karan and his two sons.
Acquitting Ram Karan and allowing the appeal of the other two in part, the Court ^ HELD: Having regard to the age of the appellant Ram Karan who was about 70 years old at the time of the occurrence, there is a reasonable doubt as to whether he would have caught hold of the young man Dinesh Chandra (P.W. 11) by his waist and whether he would have asked all his sons to attack and kill Prakash Chandra and his sons.
The appellant Ram Karan is entitled to be set at liberty.
[409 D E] BY MAJORITY Per Fazal Ali, J. (and on behalf of D.A. Desai, J.) 1:1.
Exception 4 to section 300 I.P.C. provides that culpable homicide is not murder if it is committed without pre meditation in a sudden fight in the heat of passion upon a sudden quarrel and without the offenders having taken undue advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual manner.
[399 D] 1:2.
In this case, the incident occurred upon a sudden quarrel and no one took undue advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual manner on either side.
Prakash Chandra and Umesh Chandra on the side of the prosecution died and Chhotey Lal on the side of the accused died and each of them met a homicidal death.
Therefore exception 4 to section 300 Indian Penal Code is clearly attracted and the offence of murder would be reduced to culpable homicide in respect of Sushil Kumar and Ved Prakash and, therefore, they would be guilty of committing on offence under section 304(1)/34 I.P.C. A sentence of rigorous imprisonment for seven years would be appropriate; conviction and sentence under sections 307/34 I.P.C. being in order would run con currently.
[399 B C, G H, 400 A] Per Varadarajan, J. (contra).
Sunil Kumar and Ved Prakash were the aggressors and they have been rightly convicted under section 302 read with section 34 I.P.C. for the offence of murder of Prakash Chandra land Umesh Chandra and under sections 307/34 I.P.C. with reference to P.W. 11.
Neither Exception 2 nor Exception 4 to section 300 I.P.C. would apply to the facts of the case and the offence cannot be brought under section 304 (Part I) I.P.C.
The evidence of P.Ws. 1, 10 and 11 proves beyond reasonable doubt that these two appellants Sunil Kumar and Ved Prakash attacked the deceased Prakash Chandra and Umesh Chandra with knives as a result of which both of them, who had no weapons died on the spot and these two appellants attacked P.W. 11 with knives with such intention that if he had died as a result of the injuries sustained by him they would be guilty of murder in furtherance of their common intention to murder.
Their conviction under section 307/34 is proper.
[408 F H, 409 C D] 397
