Respondent No. 3, a displaced person from Pakistan, was allotted more than 60 standard acres of land.
Out of this land he made an oral gift of some land in lieu of maintenance to his wife, respondent No. 4, who sold that land to the appellants.
In the proceedings for declaration of the surplus area of the land owned by respondent No. 3 the Special Collector included the land sold to the appellants in the "select area" of Respondent No. 3.
The appeal of Respondent No. 3 to the Commissioner was dismissed as time barred and this order was upheld in revision by the Financial Commissioner.
A single Judge dismissed his petition under Article 226.
In appeal, a Division Bench held that the order of the Special Collector, directing a variation in the reservation made by respondent No. 3 without his consent was not only contrary to the provisions of the Act but was without jurisdiction and a nullity in as much as the Act vested no power of such variation in the Collector.
In the appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant, that: (1) the admission to the effect that respondent No. 3 had intimated his reserved area in Form E to the Collector before gifting the land to his wife was made before the High Court on behalf of the appellants on the basis of some misconception on the part of their counsel, that actually no such reservation was ever made and that the admission could at best be interpreted to mean that respondent No. 3 had sent an intimation in Form E to the Special Collector detailing therein the area selected by him as his permissible area in pursuance of the provisions of sub section (1) of section 5 B of the Act, and (2) If no reservation was made by respondent No. 3 the whole basis of the impugned judgment falls and the Collector would have jurisdiction to amend the permissible area of respondent No. 3 by way of adjustment of the equities arising in favour of the appellants.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: In assuming that respondent No. 3 had intimated his reservation in pursuance of sub section (1) of section 5, the High Court was in error 591 and the case had to be decided on the basis of the factual position that respondent No. 3 had failed to make any reservation under that sub section but that he had made a selection in Form E in pursuance of the provisions of sub section (1) of section 5 B. [600 H 601A] The inclusion of the land in question in the surplus area of respondent No. 3 does not effect the right of ownership of the appellants.
[604 A] 1.
(a) Reservation of land was envisaged only in section 5(1) of the Act and had to be intimated within six months from the date of its commencement i.e. on or before the 15th October, 1953.
[599 E] (b) No provision was ever made in the Act or the rules framed thereunder for a reservation of land by a land owner who had failed to send an intimation thereof on or before the 15th October, 1953.
[599 F] (c) What was provided by section 5 B was, that a landowner who had not exercised the right of reservation under the Act could select his permissible area and send intimation thereof in Form E to the prescribed authority within a period of six months from the 11th December, 1957 i. e. on or before 11th May, 1958. 'Reservation ' was something different from the 'Selection ' of permissible area.
The two terms were not only not synonymous but were mutually exclusive. 'Selection ' of permissible area was allowed only to a landlord who had not exercised his right of 'reservation '.
[599 G 600 A] (d) Form E was meant only for intimation of selection of permissible area under sub section (1) of section 5B and not for reservation under sub section (1) of section 5 which could be made only through an intimation in the Form in Annexure "B" to the 1953 Rules.
[600 B] 2.(a) 'Surplus area ' is arrived at by excluding the reserved area from the total area of a land owner in case a reservation has been made by him lawfully.
(Clauses (4) and (5 a) of section 2.) [601 C] (b) Where no area has been lawfully reserved by the land owner, surplus area is worked out under section 5B or 5C. [601 D] (c) Under section 5, the landowner is entitled to reserve out of the entire land held by him in the State as landowner, any parcel or parcels not exceeding the permissible area by intimating his selection in the prescribed form to the Patwari of the estates, etc.
In doing so he is legally bound to include in his reserved area such land as conforms to the description of any of the 6 categories covered by clauses (a) to (f) of the proviso to sub section (1) of section 5.
[601E] (d) Once a reservation has been intimated within 6 months from the date of commencement of the Act, it cannot be varied either by act of parties or by operation of law, except with the written consent of tenant affected by such variation.
(e) If a land owner has failed to reserve land in accordance with the provisions of section 5 he has another chance to select his permissible area within 6 months from the commencement of the Punjab Security of Land Tenures (Amendment) Act, 1937.
[601 G] (f) The prescribed authority is given the power to select the permissible area of a landowner under sub section (2) of section 5 B but the mandatory condition attached to the exercise of that power is that it shall be resorted to only if the landowner has failed to select his permissible area in accordance with the provisions of sub section (1) of that section.
In other words, if the concerned land owner has already selected his permissible area in accordance with the provision of sub section (1) of section 5 B, sub section (2) of that section does not come into play at all and there is no occasion for the exercise by the prescribed authority or the power of selection.
[602 A C ] In the instant case Respondent No. 3 had made a selection of his permissible area in accordance with the provisions of sub section (1) of section 5 B, a selection which the prescribed authority had no power to vary either under sub section (2) of section 5 B or under any other provisions of the Act.
The order of the Special Collector dated March 30, 1962 was therefore passed without jurisdiction and was a nullity.
[602 D E] Gurucharan Sing and Ors.
vs Prithi Singh and Ors. , distinguished.
