In exercise of powers conferred by section 3 of the , Sugar Control order 1966 was issued by the Government of India, Ministry of Agriculture Clause 5 of that order empowered the Central Government to issue directions, inter alia, to recognised dealers regarding production, maintenance of stock, storage, sale, grading, packing, making weighment, disposal, delivery and distribution of sugar.
By order No. GSR 410 E/Ess.
Com/Sugar dated 14 7 1980, the Central Government issued directions to the effect that no recognised dealer shall keep in stock at any time (a) Vacuum pan sugar in excess of, (i) in Calcutta and other extended area recognised dealers who import sugar from outside West Bengal, 3500 quintals; other recognised dealers 250 quintals; (ii) in other places in cities and towns with a population of one lakh or more 250 quintals and with a population of less than one lakh 100 quintal and (b) Khandsari (open pan sugar) 250 quintals.
Further no recognised dealer shall hold any stock of vacuum pan sugar or khandsari (open pan sugar) for a period exceeding 10 days from the date of receipt by him of such stock of sugar or khandsari.
The recognised dealers, there fore, assailed the constitutional validity of the said order on three grounds: (I) the impugned order is not covered by section 3 of the and is ultra vires (2) the impugned order imposes unreasonable restrictions on the right of the petitioners to carry on their trade and so it is violative of Article 19 (1) (g) of the Constitution: (3) the impugned order is also violative of Article 14 of the Constitution for two reasons: (a) the petitioners have been singled out for hostile treatment from other dealers of sugar at Calcutta: (b) the impugned order is unreasonable and impracticable.
Dismissing the petitions, the Court ^ HELD: 1, The order dated 14 7 1980 is not ultra vires section 3 of the .
The expression "to secure their equitable 511 distribution and availability at fair prices", is wide enough to cover the impugned order Likewise, the expression "storage and distribution" used in clause (d) of sub section (2) of section 3 of the essential Commodities Act, 1955 should be given a liberal construction to give effect to the legislative intent of public welfare.
Sugar, which term includes khandsari, is an essential commodity and over the years it has become a scarce commodity.
In the public interest it became essential to pass the order to secure its equitable distribution and availability at fair prices.
To that end it became 'necessary to prevent hoarding and black marketing.
[515 F H, 516 A E] 2.
Restrictions put by the impugned order can by no means be said to be unreasonable.
It is only regulatory and not prohibitory.
The direction enjoined recognized dealer not to keep sugar in stock at any time in excess of the quantity specified therein.
It only seeks to regulate the limit of storage of sugar and does not prohibit its storage.
By the Impugned order the Central Government sought to prevent hoarding and black marketing, and to ensure equitable distribution and availability of sugar at fair prices in the open market.[516 E, 519 D] A person has a right to carry on any occupation, trade or business and the only restriction on this unfettered right is the authority of tho State to make a law imposing reasonable restrictions under clause (6).
The expression reasonable restrictions ' signifies that the limitation imposed on a person in eojoyment of that right should not be arbitrary or of an excessive nature beyond what is required in the interest of the public.
No cut and dry test can be applied to each individual statute impugned, nor an abstract standard or general pattern of reasonableness can be laid down as applicable in all cases.
The Supreme Court in each case has to strike a proper balance between the freedom guaranteed by Article 19 (1) (g) and the social control permitted by clause (6) of Article 19.
[516 B D] State of Mysore vs H. Sanjeeviah, , explained and distinguished.
M/s. Laxmi Khandsari & Ors.
vs State of U.P. & Ors., , followed.
The order is not violative of Article 14 of the constitution.
The fixation of limits for storing sugar in Calcutta and other places is not arbitrary but is based on reasonable classification.
The government is the best judge of the situation in a particular State and what quantity of sugar will meet the exigencies of the situation at a particular place is purely a governmental function.
For one, Calcutta serves as a feeder line to meet the requirements of sugar to the eastern part of the country, and therefore, the stocks of sugar to be held by the dealers in Calcutta are not required for consumption in Calcutta alone.
Besides, Calcutta being far away from the sugar manufacturing units in Bihar and Uttar Pradesh, from where bulk of supplies are obtained, sugar is transported by the wholesale dealers in railway wagons which take sometime unusually longer time in transit.
These and various other factors have been taken into consideration by the Government while fixing the storage limits of sugar for the dealers in Calcutta.
[519 F H, 520 A] 512 The fact that over the years sugar has become a scarce commodity and people have to purchase it even at a prohibitive price, the dealers would be able to sell the sugar in their stock without difficulty at any time at the prevalent market price.
In a rare exceptional case there may be some hardship on that score but it cannot be said, on that account, that the order is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
In such cases, we hope and trust that the concern ed Government would allow a reasonable time within which the dealers could dispose of the excess quantity of sugar, if any.
[520 G, 5 21 A C] Suraj Mal Kailash Chand & Ors.
vs Union of India & Anr., Writ Petitions Nos.
8334 48 of 1981 decided on September 25, 1981 (unreported case): Bishambhar Dayal Chandra Moharl & ors, etc.
vs State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors. etc.
Writ Petitions Nos.
2907 2908 of 1981 and connected writ petitions (a group of SOS writ petitions) decided on November S, 1981, followed.
