The Andhra Pradesh Land Encroachment Act, 1905 was enacted to check unauthorised occupation of government lands.
Under section 2 of the Act all public roads, streets, lands, paths, bridges etc, are deemed to be government property.
Any person who is in unauthorised occupation of any land which is the property of the government is liable to pay assessment as provided in section 3 of the Act.
Section 5 provides that any person, liable to assessment shall also be liable to pay an additional sum by way of penalty.
Under section 6(1) the Collector, Tahsildar or Deputy Tahsildar has the power to summarily evict any person unauthorisedly occupying any land for which he is liable to pay assessment under section 3 after issuing a show cause notice as provided in section 7.
Some time between the years 1932 and 1937 certain lands were acquired by the Government of Nizam of Hyderabad for the benefit of a University.
A question having arisen as to whether three specific plots of land had been included in the acquisition, the University filed a suit in 1956 praying for the eviction of the occupant.
This suit was dismissed in 1959 on the ground that one of the plots had not been acquired by the Government and in respect of the other two plots the University had failed to prove its possession within 12 years before the filing of the suit.
The trial court found that the heir of the original owner of the plots had encroached on the said two plots in 1942.
The judgment of the trial court was confirmed by the High Court in 1964.
The State Government was not a party to those proceedings.
The University activated the State Government for summary eviction of the heir of the original owner from the three plots of lands.
The Tahsildar initiated action and passed an order of eviction under section 6(1) of the Act on December 15, 1964.
Appeals against the order were rejected by the Collector in 1965 and by the Revenue Board in 1968.
The respondents who purchased the plots during the pendency of the appeal before the Revenue Board were impleaded as parties 501 to the proceedings on the death of the heir of the original owner and.
their appeal from the decision of the Revenue Board was rejected by the Government in 1973 The respondents challenged the order of eviction by a petition under article 226 which was dismissed by a Single Judge of the High Court who held that the question of title to the property could not properly be decided by him under Article 226 but the fact that there was a finding by the Civil Court that there was encroachment by the alleged encroacher was sufficient to entitle the Government to initiate action under the provisions of the Land Encroachment Act.
The appeal of the respondents was allowed by the Division Bench which held that a dispute relating to as far back as 1942 could not be dealt with in summary proceedings under the provisions of the Land Encroachment Act.
The summary remedy could not be resorted to unless there was an attempted encroachment or encroachment of a very recent origin; nor could it be availed of in cases where complicated questions of title arose for decision.
Dismissing the appeals, ^ HELD: (I) The summary remedy for eviction provided by section 6 of tho Act can be resorted to by the Government only against persons who are in unauthorised occupation of any land which is the property of the Government.
If there is a bonafide dispute regarding the title of the Government to any property, the Government cannot take a unilateral decision in its own favour that tho property belongs to it and on that basis take recourse to the summary remedy provided by s 6.
In the instant case there was unquestionably a genuine dispute , between the State Government and the respondents as to whether the three plots of land bad been the subject matter of acquisition proceedings taken by the then Government of Hyderabad, and whether the University for whose benefit the plots were alleged to have been acquired had lost title to the property by operation of the law of limitation.
The respondents had a bonafide claim to litigate and they could not be evicted save by the due process of law.
The summary remedy prescribed by section 6 was not the kind of legal process which was suited to adjudication of complicated questions of title.
That procedure was, therefore, not the due process of law for evicting the respondents.
[506 H; 507 A; 507 D H] 2.
The view of the Division Bench that the summary remedy provided for by section 6 could not be resorted to unless the alleged encroachment was of "a very recent origin" cannot be stretched too far.
It is not the duration, short or long, of encroachment that is conclusive of the question whether the summary remedy prescribed by the Act can be put into operation for evicting a person.
What is relevant for the decision of that question is more the nature of the property on which the encroachment is alleged to have been committed and the consideration whether the claim of the occupant is bonafide.
Facts which raise a bonafide dispute of title between the Government and the occupant must be ad judicated upon by the ordinary courts of law.
The duration of occupation is relevant in the sense that a person who is in occupation of a property openly for 502 an appreciable length of time can be taken prima facie to have a bona fide claim to the property requiring an impartial adjudication according to the established procedure of law.
In the instant case, the long possession of the respondents and their predecessors in title raised a genuine dispute between them and the Government on the question of title.
Whether the title to the property had come to be vested in the Government as a result of acquisition and whether the heir of the original owner had encroached upon that property and perfected his title by adverse possession had to be decided in a properly constituted suit.
[508 A D; 508 E G]
