The petitioner has arrested on June 26, 1981 under the Enemy Agent ordinance.
The Chief Judicial Magistrate rejected his application for bail on the ground that he had no jurisdiction to try him.
The Addl.
Sessions Judge rejected his bail application on the ground that as ha was by then ordered to be detained under the J & K Public Safety Act the bail application has become infructuous.
The detention order dated July 11, 1981 was served on the detenue in jail on July 15, 1981.
His representation dated July 29, 1 981 was forwarded to the State Government on July 29, 1981 and simultaneously a wireless message was sent on the same day.
The representation was received by the Government on August 12, 1981.
After investigations the file was put up to the Chief Minister on August 28, 1981 for approval.
The Chief Minister rejected the representation on August 31, 1981 which was communicated to the petitioner in jail on September 1, ]981.
The detenu 's case was referred to the Advisory Board on August 3, 1981.
Its report was submitted on September 4, 1981.
In this petition under article 32 of the Constitution it was contended before this Court on behalf of the petitioner that as section 13 (1) of the Jammu & Kashmir Public Safety Act 1978 imposes an obligation on the detaining authority to give the detenu the earliest opportunity of making a representation against the detention order the long unexplained delay in this case had invalidated the order of detention.
Allowing the petition, ^ HELD: The petitioner 's representation had not been dealt with as expeditiously as possible.
There was therefore contravention of section 13 of the Act which invalidated the detention.
[532 D] Preventive detention, unlike punitive detention, does not afford an opportunity to the detenu to explain his side of the matter before he is deprived 523 Of his liberty and therefore the statute makes it obligatory on the authorities to A afford him the earliest opportunity to represent his case and a corresponding obligation on the authority to consider the representation.
The word "earliest" which qualifies the term "opportunity" must equally qualify the corresponding obligation of the State to deal with the representation if and when made as expeditiously as possible.
[529 H; 530 A B] The jail authorities who are merely a communicating channel have to move with promptitude so that sufficient guarantee of affording earliest opportunity of making the representation and the same reaching the Government is translated into action.
The corresponding obligation of the State to consider the representation cannot be whittled down by merely saying that time was lost in transit.
The State Government must gear up its own machinery to see that in these cases the representation reaches the Government as early as possible and is considered by the authorities with equal promptitude.
Any unexplained delay would be denial of the statutory protection given to the detenu.
[530 D G] In the instant case there were two time lags: the representation handed in to the Jail Superintendent on July 29, 1981 reached the Government on August 12, 1981 after a time lag of fourteen days and the representation was disposed of on August 31, 1981 after a time lag of nineteen days and the delay has not been explained on any convincing ground.
B] Khudi Ram Das vs State of West Bengal, ; , referred to.
Preventive detention is resorted to, to thwart future action.
If the detenu is already in jail charged with a serious offence, he is thereby prevented from acting in a manner prejudicial to the security of the State.
Where there is need to order preventive detention of a person already in jail the detaining authority must disclose awareness of the fact that the person against whom an order of preventive detention is being made is to the knowledge of the authority already in jail and yet for compelling reasons a preventive detention order needs to be made.
[528 F G] In the instant case there is nothing to indicate awareness of the detaining authority that the detenu was already in jail for more than 16 days and Yet the impugned order was made.
This clearly exhibits non application of mind and would result in invalidation of the order.
But the Court did not base its order on this ground.
[528 G H]
