Section 21 (1) of the Madhya Pradesh Sugar Cane (Regulation of Supply & Purchase) Act, 1958, imposes an obligation upon an occupier of a factory to pay commission at prescribed rates on all its purchases of sugarcane.
While in respect of purchases made through a Cane growers ' Cooperative Society the commission is payable to that Society and the Cane Development Council under section 21 (1) (a), in respect of purchases made directly from the cane growers the commission is payable to the Cane Development Council under section 21 (1) (b).
The appellant, a company which crushes sugar cane in its factory, purchased cane directly from the cultivators of 'reserved area ' as well as of 'non reserved area '.
Respondent No. 2, the Cane Development Council, demanded commission in respect of purchases made from both 'reserved ' as well as 'non reserved ' areas.
The appellant also purchased cane from or through respondent No. 3, a Cane growers ' Cooperative Society and in respect of those purchases, the demand for commission was made by that Society.
The demands for payment of commission were challenged by the appellant by a petition under article 226 which was dismissed by the High Court.
In appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that since the Cane Development Council had been established for the 'reserved area ' of the appellant 's factory so declared under section 15 of the Act and its statutory functions and duties were confined to that area under section 6 of the Act, its demand for commission on purchases made from 'non reserved area ' was illegal, there being no quid pro quo in the shape of rendering services in respect of purchases made from 'non reserved area '.
As Regards the demand of the Cane growers ' Cooperative Society for commission in respect of purchases made through it, the contention was that in everything being done by it, the Society was rendering services to its own members and since no services resulting in any special benefit to the appellant were being rendered by it in terms of the decision of this Court in Kewal Krishan Puri 's case; , , there was no quid pro quo and therefore no commission was legally recoverable by tho Society.
544 Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
The levy under section 21 of the Act though called 'commission ' is really in the nature of a fee and its imposition is supportable only on the basis of quid pro quo in the shape of rendition of services to a factory in the matter of cane purchased by it.
[548 C D] Jaora Sugar Mills (P) Ltd. vs State of Madhya Pradesh and Ors. , referred to.
The imposition of commission by the Cane Development Council on purchases of cane from 'non reserved area ' was proper and justified as there was quid pro quo in the form of rendering services in the matter of better cane production, distribution and supply thereof.
The area of operation or the 'zone ' of the Council could include areas outside the 'reserved area ' of the factory as a Council could be established for a larger or smaller area "than the reserved area of a factory" under section S of the Act, and its functions and duties under cls.
(a) to (g) of section 6(1) included functions like considering and approving development programmes for the zone, devising ways and means for execution of development plan in all its essentials such as cane varieties, cane seed, sowing programme, fertilizers and manures, taking steps for prevention of diseases and pests and rendering all help in soil extension work, etc.
Some of these functions mentioned in cls.
(b), (d) and (e) of section 6(1) are of general character and not confined to even the zone of the Council.
Further, section 21 of the Act does not contain any qualifying words limiting the imposition of commission to purchases of cane made by a factory from 'reserved area ' only; the imposition is on every maund of cane purchased by a factory irrespective of the area from where such purchases might have been made.
[549 A P] 3.
The contention that in respect of purchases of cane made through the Cane growers ' Cooperative Society there was no element of quid pro quo cannot be accepted having regard to the scheme of the Act and the activities undertaken by the Society in the discharge of its normal functions.
The scheme of the Act, particularly in sections 15, 16 and 19, contemplated situations where the appellant 's factory might have had to purchase cane from within reserved or assigned areas, only through the Society.
The Society had been established to develop scientific methods of sugar cane growing and it had called upon its members to introduce modern means of implements for cultivating sugarcane which unquestionably made for assured bulk supply of uniformly good quality cane through its members to the appellant 's factory.
It could not, therefore, be said that no services conferring special benefit on the appellant 's factory in the matter of purchases of cane were being rendered by the Society to the appellant 's factory.
[551 A H; 552 A]
