The second respondent who was the Superintendent of the Bhagalpur Central Jail was suspended by the State Government on the ground that he was negligent in providing proper medical aid to the blinded undertrial prisoners inside the jail and that he had failed to make entries in the jail register as regards the physical condition of the undertrial prisoners.
In a Miscellaneous Petition filed by him he claimed that his order of suspension be quashed as it was passed mala fide with the object of preventing him from filing the affidavit as directed by the Court.
The State Government contested the petition contending that the respondent was suspended for his failure to comply with the requirements of Rule 474 (1) of the Bihar Jail Manual in that he did not scrutinise and sign the entries made in the Admission Register maintained at the jail to satisfy himself whether those entries were correct and whether the relevant rules in regard to the admission of the prisoners were complied with.
He did not also record any 'special order ' under Rule 474 (2) regarding the medical treatment given or to be given to the blinded prisoners with the result that they were not sent for examination to any eye specialist.
He did not make a report on the blindings of the prisoners and, he supplied to newspapers his own version of the blindings.
Dismissing the petitions, ^ HELD: ordinarily an order of suspension cannot be challenged in an incidental proceeding but it was heard since the allegation was that the petitioner was suspended in order to defeat the order passed by this Court.
[539 E] 2.
The order of Suspension was not passed by the Government mala fide as a counter blast to the order passed by this Court on December 1, 1980 and to defeat it.
The allegation that the motive behind the order was to frustrate the purpose of the Court 's direction calling upon the petitioner to file an affidavit is not proved.
The evidence on record indicates that the State Government officials were enquiring into the blindings of the under trial prisoners and there is a report in the Government files recommending that the petitioner be suspended for dereliction of duty.
It cannot be said that this report was prepared later and antedated to justify the order of suspension.
[540 G H; 541 A B] 4.
By placing the petitioner under suspension the State Government could not prevent him from filing an affidavit in Court.
He was free to file his affidavit and in fact he filed an affidavit after suspension.
[541 C] 5.
The petitioner will be at liberty to challenge the order of suspension in a properly constituted proceedings on such grounds as may be open to him including the ground that the order was passed mala fide.
[541 F]
