The Rajasthan Children Act, 1970, provides that any person below the age of 16 years should be presumed to be a child and that a delinquent child should be tried by a Children 's court in accordance with the procedure laid down therein.
The appellant was charged under sections 364 and 302, I.P.C., in connection with an occurrence that took place in Tonk district on March 12, 1973.
A preliminary objection that the Sessions Judge was not competent to try the case of The appellant as he was a child under the provisions of the Children Act was overruled by the trial court.
The revision filed by the appellant against the decision of the trial court was dismissed by the High Court which held that the Children Act was not applicable to the appellant as that Act had not been enforced in Tonk district on the date of the occurrence.
The High Court further held that the appellant had failed to prove that he was below the age of 16 years.
On being directed by this Court to ascertain the actual date of birth, the High Court held that the date of birth of the appellant was September 22, 1956; and, therefore, he was over 16 years on the date of the occurrence.
The High Court rejected the documents produced from the first two schools attended by the appellant which showed his date of birth to be June 22, 1957, for the reason that those documents had not been kept or made by a public officer; it relied on an affidavit furnished by the father of tho appellant while admitting him to the third school in which the date of birth had been changed to September 22, 1956.
The explanation of the appellant 's father that the date of birth had been changed to fulfil the requirement of age under the Rajasthan Board of Secondary Regulations to enable the appellant to appear in the Higher Secondary Examination at the appropriate time was not accepted.
Allowing the appeal, 584 ^ HELD: 1.
(a) The relevant date for applicability of the Rajasthan Children Act, 1970 so far as the age of the accused, who claims to be a child, is concerned, is the date of the occurrence and not the date of the trial as is clear from the provisions of sections 3 and 26 of the Act.
[594 C] (b) At the time of the occurrence, the appellant was undoubtedly a child within the provisions of the Act.
[592 H] (c) The question whether the appellant could be tried as a child if he had become more than 16 years by the time the case went up to the court, does not survive as the Act has now been enforced in the entire State.
A combined reading of sections 3 and 26 clearly shows that the statute takes care of contingencies where proceedings in respect of a child were pending in any court on the date on which the Act came into force.
Section 26 in terms lays down that the court should proceed with the case but after having found that the child has committed the offence it is debarred from passing any sentence but is obliged to forward the child to the Children 's court for passing orders in accordance with the Act.
[592 H; 593 A; 593 F G] (d) The judgment of the Sessions Judge as affirmed by the High Court be set aside and the Additional Sessions Judge, Jaipur, be directed to try the accused and if he gave a finding that the accused was guilty, he shall forward the accused to the Children 's court for receiving sentence in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
[594 E] 2.
There is no legal requirement under section 35 of the Evidence Act that the public or other official book should be kept only by a public officer; all that is necessary is that the document should be maintained regularly by a person whose duty it is to maintain the document.
[588 G; 589 C] Mohd.
Ikram Hussain vs State of U.P., [1964] 5 S.C.R. 86, 100 & Abdul Majid vs Bhargavam, A.I.R. 1963 Ker. 18 referred to.
The Rajasthan Children Act being a piece of social legislation is meant for the protection of infants who commit criminal offences and, therefore, its provisions should be liberally and meaningfully construed so as to advance the object of the Act.
The Children Act was enacted to protect young children from the consequences of their criminal acts on the footing that their mind at that age could not be said to be mature for imputing mens rea as in the case of an adult.
[524 D; 593 H; 594 A] In the instant case there are two documents of two different schools showing the date of birth of the appellant as June 22, 1957 and both these documents have been signed by his father and were in existence ante litem motam.
Hence, there could be no ground to doubt the genuineness of these documents.
At the time when the age of the appellant was first mentioned in the admission form, there was absolutely no dispute about the date of birth and there could Dot have been any motive on the part of the parents to give a false date of birth because it was his first admission to a school at a very early age.
The school to which the appellant was admitted enjoyed good reputation of authenticity.
585 there had been any element of suspicion, the admission register and the scholar 's register would have been corrected by the headmistress of the school.
[591 D; 590 D; 590 H] M/s. Gannon Dunkerlay & Co. Ltd. vs Their Workmen, referred to.
The appellant 's father has given a cogent reason for changing the date of birth and there is no reason for not accepting his explanation particularly because the offence was committed seven years after changing the date of birth.
[592 C]
