The petitioner who was held at the Central Jail in connection with some of the offences committed by him, was served with an order of detention passed by the Commissioner of Police, under sub section (2) of section 3 of the , stating that his detention was necessary with a view to preventing him from "acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order." Two days later he was served with the grounds of detention and copies of documents and statements relied upon in the grounds of detention.
The Commissioner made a report to the Administrator about the passing of the detention order together with the grounds of detention.
The Administrator approved the detention order and sent the report to the Central Government, and also informed the petitioner that the order of detention had been approved by him and that he had a right to make a representation.
The case of the petitioner was placed before the Advisory Board who was of the opinion that there was sufficient cause for his detention.
The Administrator confirmed the detention order under sub section (1) of section 12 and further directed under section 13 of the Act that the petitioner be detained for a period of 12 months from the date of his detention.
In his petition under Article 32 of the Constitution the petitioner contended that: (1) the unexplained delay of two days in furnishing the grounds of detention was a denial of the constitutional imperatives of article 22(5) read with section 8 of the Act which cast a duty on the detaining authority to afford the detenu "the earliest opportunity of making a representation against the order of detention", (2) there was a failure on the part of the Commissioner as well as the 708 Administrator to apply their minds and specify the period of detention while making the order of detention under sub section (2) of section 3 of the Act, and (3) the grounds of detention served were not connected with "maintenance of public order", but relate to "maintenance of law and order".
Dismissing the petition, ^ HELD: 1.
(i) Sub section (1) of section 8 of the Act which is in conformity with Article 22(5) provides that where a person is detained in pursuance of a detention order made under sub section (1) or sub section (2) of section 3 of the Act, the authority making the order shall, "as soon as may be", but ordinarily not later than five days and in exceptional circumstances and for reasons to be recorded in writing not later than ten days from the date of detention, communicate to him the grounds on which the order has been made.
Parliament has thus by law defined the words "as soon as may be" occurring in article 22(5) as meaning normally a period of five days.
[711 F] (ii) The law is that the detaining authority must, as soon as may be, i.e. as soon as practicable, communicate to the detenu the grounds on which the order of detention has been made.
That period has been specified by section 8 of the Act to mean a period ranging from five to ten days depending upon the facts and circumstances of each case.
[712 D] In the instant case, the petitioner was served with the grounds of detention within a period of two days i.e. within the period allowed by section 8 of the Act and that was "as soon as practicable.
" The order of detention is therefore not rendered invalid merely because the grounds of detention were furnished two days later.
[712 E F] (iii) In A.K. Roy vs Union of India, [1982] 1 S.C.C. 271 this Court has not laid down that the detaining authority making an order of detention under sub section (1) or sub section (2) of section 3 of the Act or the authority approving of the same, must specify the period of detention in the order.
[714 B] 2.
Under the scheme of the Act, the period of detention must necessarily vary according to the exigencies of each case i.e. the nature of the prejudicial activity complained of.
It is not that the period of detention must in all circumstances extend to the maximum period of 12 months as laid down in section 13 of the Act.
[714 E] 3.(i) The true distinction between the areas of 'public order ' and 'law and order ' lies not in the nature or quality of the act, but in the degree and extent of its reach upon society.
The distinction between the two concepts of 'law and order ' and 'public order ' is a fine one but this does not mean that there can be no overlapping.
Acts similar in nature but committed in different contexts and circumstances might cause different reactions.
In one case it might affect specific individuals only and therefore touch the problem of 'law and order ' while in another it might affect 'public order '.
The act by itself therefore is not determinant of its own gravity.
It is the potentiality of the act to disturb the even 709 tempo of the life of the community which make it prejudicial to the 'maintenance of public order. ' [715 C E] (ii) Preventive detention is devised to afford protection to society.
The object is not to punish a man for having done something but to intercept before he does it and to prevent him from doing.
Justification for such detention is suspicion or reasonable probability and not criminal conviction which can only be warranted by legal evidence.
It follows that any preventive measures, even if they involve some restraint or hardship upon individuals, do not partake in any way of the nature of punishment, but are taken by way of precaution to prevent mischief to the State.
[715 F G] (iii) The Executive can take recourse to its power of preventive detention in those cases where the Court is genuinely satisfied that no prosecution could possibly succeed against the detenu because he is a dangerous person who has overawed witnesses or against whom no one is prepared to depose.
[716 B] (iv) What essentially is a problem relating to 'law and order ' may due to sudden sporadic and intermittent acts of physical violence on innocent victims in a metropolitan city result in serious 'public disorder '.
It is the length, magnitude and intensity of the terror wave, unleashed by a particular act of violence creating disorder that distinguished it as an act affecting 'public order ' from that concerning 'law and order '.
Some offences primarily injure specific individuals and only secondarily the public interest, while others directly injure the public interest, and affect individuals only remotely.
[717 D E] In the instant case the particular acts enumerated in the grounds of detention clearly shows that the activities of the detenu cover a wide field and fall within the contours of the concept of 'public order '.
[717 G]
