In exercise of the power conferred upon him under the amended clause (c) of section 41, the Excise Commissioner with the previous sanction of the State Government framed Rules Called the U.P. Excise (Wholesale and Retail Vend of Foreign Liquor (2nd Amendment) Rules, 1976 by issuing the Notification No. 27/Licence 3 dated 14th April 1976, which were brought into force with effect from the date of publication in the Gazette, namely, 14th April 1976; by this Notification the existing Rules 639, 641 and 642 as appearing in Excise Manual Vol.
(1962 Edn.) were amended; Rule 639(2) as amended provides that "Licences in form FL 2 shall be settled by the public auction" while Rule 641 as amended provides that "the fee for a licence in form FL 2 shall be the amount of money accepted at the auction of the licence as 'fixed fee ' together with an "assessed fee" charged on the basics of the scales of surcharge fee prescribed in Rule 642.
By the very notification dated 14th of April, 1976 the Excise Commissioner added one more condition in the form of a proviso to the terms and conditions of FL 2 Licence and the said addition made after condition No. 1(c), runs thus: "Provided that the assessment fee on the sales made on the licence in the prescribed manner at such scales of surcharge fee as may be prescribed by the Government and announced at the time of the auction, shall also be payable by the licencee." Relying upon the amendments made in the U.P. Excise Act, 1910 by Act 5 of 1976 and the amended Rules 639, 641 and 642 and the insertion of the new condition in FL 2 licence, the respondents introduced the auction system for the grant of licence in form FL 2 for wholesale vend of beer and Indian Made 756 Foreign Liquor and started levying and recovering the "assessed fee" in addition to the "fixed fee" (auction money) from the grantees of the licences.
The Petitioners who were successful bidders and who had acquired vending rights in Indian Made Foreign Liquor for the financial years 1976 77, 1977 78, 1978 79 and 1979 80 challenged the levy of "assessed fee", in addition to the "fixed fee" on the following grounds: (i) Under Section 30(2) of the Principal Act of 1910 prior to its amendment by U.P. Ordinance No. 4 of 1979 and U.P. Act 13 of 1979 it was open to the respondents to adopt either one or the other method of granting FL 2 licences and determine the licence fee payable by the grantee accordingly, that is to say, the respondents could grant the licence "either by auction or by calling tenders" and once a particular mode was adopted it was incumbent upon them to apply the same for the purpose of determining the sum payable by the grantee; in other words it was not opens them to adopt a combination of two or more methods and claim "assessed fee" in addition to "fixed fee" and this would be illegal and without authority of law.
A combination of two or more methods became available to the respondents only under Section 30(2) as amended by U.P. Ordinance No. 4 of 1979 and by U.P. Act 13 of 1979; (ii) In as much as the petitioners were not informed that any "assessed fee" had been fixed by the State Government, which would be payable by the successful bidder, the respondent 's attempt to levy and recover the "assessed fee" over and above the "fixed fee" (auction money) was unwarranted and illegal in as much as the respondents could not enhance the petitioners ' contractual liability which was limited to the payment of auction money and (iii) as per the newly inserted conditions in FL 2 Licence the "assessed fee" was required to be "prescribed by the Government and announced at the time of auction" but in the instant case such "assessed fee" had been prescribed by the Excise Commissioner and not by the State Government and was not announced at the time of the auction and for this reason also the same would not be recoverable.
Dismissing the petitions the Court, ^ HELD: 1.
The levy and recovery of the "assessed fee" over and above the "fixed fee" by the respondents for granting FL 2 licences to all the petitioners would be legal and valid under the U.P. Excise Act of 1910 as amended by Act 5 of 1976 and the amended rules framed thereunder.
[768 D E] 2:1.
A plain reading of Section 30(2) of the Uttar Pradesh Excise Act 1910 prior to its amendment by U.P. Ordinance No. 4 of 1979 and by U.P. Act No. 13 of 1973 makes it clear that the consideration for the grant of FL 2 licence could be determined either by auction or by calling tenders or otherwise.
[765 C E] 2:2.
The phrase "or otherwise" was sufficiently wide and conferred on its plain grammatical construction, power on the State Government or the Excise Commissioner to grant the licence either by auction or by tenders or partly by auction and partly by tenders or even by adopting yet other methods than by auction or by inviting tenders.
In other words, the phrase "or otherwise" 757 enabled the State Government or the Excise Commissioner to adopt a combination of one or more methods for granting the FL 2 licence and determine the licence fee accordingly.
Having regard to the phrase "or otherwise" occurring in the provision it can not be said that only one method to the exclusion of the others could be adopted for granting the licence or that one type of fee appropriate to that method could alone be charged.
[765 E G] 2:3.
Sub section (2) of Section 3 as amended by U.P. Ordinance 4 of 1979 or U.P. Act 13 of 1979 is clarificatory of the legal position which obtained under Sec.
30(2) that was operative prior to the said amendment.
[765G, 766A B] 3:1.
The bidders who gave their bids must be deemed to have knowledge of the provisions of the relevant Rules subject to which the auctions were held and therefore, the bidders including the successful bidders whose highest bid was accepted did not offer their bids believing that only "fixed fee" would be charged, since it was to their knowledge that the auctions for the grant of FL 2 licence were held under the amended provisions of the Act of 1910 by the Amendment of 1976 and that Rule 641 of Excise Manual clearly provided that the fee for the FL 2 licence shall be the amount of money accepted at the auction of the licence as "fixed fee" together with the "assessed fee" charged on the scales of surcharge fees prescribed in Rule 642.
Further even according to the petitioners, the new condition inserted by the Excise Commissioner in the said licence was read out.
If admittedly the said condition inserted in FL 2 licence was read out at the time of auction then it is clear that the fact that "assessed fee" on the sales made on the licence was also payable by the licensee was announced at the time of auction.
[766 D H. 767 B C] 3:2.
If once it was announced at the time of the auction that "assessed fee" on the sales affected on the licence at the prescribed scales shall also be payable by the Licensee, then the bidders were put on enquiry to find out what scales of surcharge fees had been prescribed under the relevant Rule.
In other words the bidders presented at these auctions had full knowledge that "assessed fee" at prescribed rates will also be charged and it was with full knowledge of this position that they gave their bids.
If that be so, there was no question of the respondents ' attempting to enhance the contractual liability of the successful bidder.
Further admittedly, not only did the bidders know that "assessed fee" would be charged over and above the "fixed fee" (auction money) but many of them actually passed on the "assessed fee" at the prescribed rates to and recovered the same from the retailers to whom they effected sales of beer and Indian Made Foreign Liquor.
[767 C F] 4.
Section 24B(c) which expressly declares that "the Excise Commissioner as the head of Excise Department of the State shall be deemed, while determining or realising such fee, to act for and on behalf of the State Government, makes it clear that the Excise Commissioner has been statutorily declared to be the agent of the State Government and "while determining" such fees by framing the amended Rules 642 he acted for and on behalf of the State Government, in other words, scales of "assessed fee" under Rule 642 must be deemed to have been prescribed by the State Government.
[768 B C] 758
