The two petitioners who were British nationals and friends and collaborators in smuggling enterprises were detained under the provisions of the for smuggling electronic equipment and goods worth several lakhs of rupees in secret compartments and hidden cavities of a Mercedez Benz van.
The High Court dismissed their petitions for release from detention.
In their writ petitions under Article 32 it was contended that: (1) the representation made by them to the Central Government to revoke the orders of detention as long back as March 1982 remained undisposed of and on this ground alone they were entitled to be released; (2) the Bout De Papier presented to the Prime Minister of India during her visit to England pointing out that the order of detention passed against the petitioners might be lifted and the detenus be either released or charged and brought to trial without delay, had not been disposed of; and (3) that they had been denied the right to be represented before the Advisory Board by an Advocate or at least by a 'friend ' and thus they were denied an opportunity to make an appropriate and effective representation to the Advisory Board.
Dismissing the petitions, ^ HELD: (1) Representations from whatever source addressed to whomsoever officer of one or other department of the Government cannot be treated as representations to the Government under the COFEPOSA.
[772 D] (2) The Bout De Papier presented to the Prime Minister during her visit to Britain and the subsequent reminder addressed to the External Affairs Ministry by 770 the British High Commission are not representations to the Central Government.
They were merely diplomatic communications between the Governments of the two countries which will be answered through appropriate diplomatic channels in proper time.
Such diplomatic communications between one country and another cannot be treated as representations to the statutory authorities functioning under the COFEPOSA.
[771 G H; 772 A E] 3(i) The Advisory Board consisting of three Judges of the High Court considered it unnecessary and inadvisable to allow legal representation to the detenus.
That was a matter for decision of the Advisory Board and this Court would not be justified to substitute its judgment in place of the Boards judgment.
[774 C] (ii) A 'friendly ' representation would have been provided by the Board had it been demanded.
But it was not for the Advisory Board to offer 'friendly ' representation to the detenus without being asked for.
[774 D E] In the instant case the order of detention made on January 7, 1982 was considered by the Advisory Board on February 8, 1982 and its report showed that the detention was justified.
[775 C D]
