The appellant and the respondent belong to the Parsi community and they were married in Bombay on the 27th December 1960 according to the rights and ceremonies of the Zoroastrian religion and custom.
A son was born to them on the 6th of May, 1965 and a daughter on the 18th April, 1971, whose name is Gospi and aged 11 years.
Irreconcilable difference and embittered relationship between the appellant and the respondent had led to the filing of Suit No. 14 of 1979.
by the appellant mother, for judicial separation.
In the several applications made by the parents for the custody of the child, the learned judges of the High Court, before whom the said applications came up for disposals interviewed the children separately and in the presence of the parents and passed appropriate and equitable orders, keeping in the forefront the welfare of the minor children.
The boy bas now become a major as per the Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act and tho question of his custody does not arise.
The custody of the minor daughter was ultimately given to the father as per the order of tho Division Bench of the Bombay High Court dated October 16,1981, Hence the appeal by the appellant mother, after obtaining Special Leave of the Court.
Allowing the appeal, the Court.
^ HELD: 1.
It is well settled that any matter concerning a minor, has to be considered and decided only from the point of view of the welfare and interest of the minor, the Court has a Special responsibility and it is the duty of the Court to consider the welfare of the minor and to protect the minor 's interest.
In considering the question of custody of a minor, the Court has to be guided by the only consideration of the welfare of the minor.
[79 B D] Rosi Jocob vs Jacob A. Chakrammakkal [1973] 3 S.C.R. 918 followed.
H 2:1 There is no duty or obligation cast on the part of the Court to interview the minor for ascertaining the wishes of the minor before deciding the question 50 of the child custody under section 49 of the .
[81 F G] 2:2 It is true that Section 17(3) of the speaks of the consideration by the court of the preference of the child "if the minor is old enough to form an intelligent preference".
The instant case, is not one under the Guardian of Wards Act 1890.
[83 B C] 2:3 However, there cannot be any manner of doubt as the Court 's power of entertaining any minor for ascertaining the wishes of the minor, if the Court consider it so necessary for its own satisfaction in dealing with the question relating to the custody of the minor.
[83 D] In the facts and circumstances of the case, the minor is not fit to form an intelligent preference which may be taken into consideration in deciding her welfare.
The report of the Social Welfare Expert records that the interviews, the minor girl faced before the several judges cast a gloom on the sensitive mind of the tender girl and caused a lot of strain and depression on her.
Torn between her love for both her parents and the acrimonious dispute between them resulting in the minor being dragged from court to court is bound to have effected the sensitive mind of the minor girl.
Though the girl is quite bright and intelligent as recorded by the learned judges of the Bombay High Court in their orders after their interviews with the girl who is of a tender age and is placed in a very delicate and embarrassing situation because of the unfortunate relationship and litigation between her parents for both of whom she has great deal of affection, she is not in a position to express any intelligent preference which will be conducive to her interest and welfare.
Mature thinking is indeed necessary in such a situation to decide as to what will ensure to her benefit and welfare Any child who is placed in such an unfortunate position.
can hardly have the capacity to express an intelligent preference which may require the court 's consideration to decide what should be the course to be adopted for the child 's welfare.
Therefore, sending for the minor and interviewing her in the present case, will not only not serve any useful purpose but will have the effect of creating further depression and demoralisation in her mind.
[83 E H, 84 A D] 3:1 on a consideration of all the facts and circumstances of the case and bearing in mind the paramount consideration of the welfare of the child, the child 's interest and welfare will be best served by removing her from the influence of home life and by directing that she should continue to remain in the boarding school, which is admittedly a good institution.
3:2 Home influence plays a very important role in shaping the life of every child.
Influence of a happy home where the children are brought up under the affectionate guidance of their parents and other relations, all concerned with the welfare of the children no doubt, enables the children to lead a normal healthy life and materially contributes to their welfare.
In a happy home, the children are free from any kind of unhappy tension and psychological strain and they grow up in a healthy environment where their interests and welfare are properly looked after by their parents.
In such a case, the court is normally not called upon to interfere and to consider the welfare of the children and the welfare of the children is well taken care of by their parents whose primary concern is to 51 see their interest and welfare.
It is also no doubt true that the children who stay at home with their parents and do not go to boarding school may also be very well disciplined in life and may have a very healthy happy and normal growth, while staying at home.
Therefore, in the interest of the children whom they have brought into existence and who are innocent, every husband and wife should try to compose their differences which are bound to be in any house.
Even when any husband and wife who are not in a position to reconcile their differences and are compelled to part, they should part in a way as will cause s least possible mischief to the children.
[84 E H, 85 H, 86 E] When the atmosphere in a house vitiated and rendered surcharged with tension as a result of bitter squabbles between husband and wife, causes misery and unhappiness to a child, who has to live in constant psychological strain in such a broken home in view of the bitter relationship between her parents fo each of whom she has great affection, the healthy and normal growth of their child is to be seriously affected.
In the interest and for the welfare of the child in such a case, the child is necessarily to be removed from such unhealthy environment of a broken home surcharged with tension.
In such a case, the proper and best way or serving the interest and the welfare of the child will be to remove the child from such atmosphere of acrimony and tension and to put the child in a place where the embittered relationship between her parents does not easily and constantly affect her tender mind.
[88 C E] 3:3 The question of the custody of the child must necessarily be considered from the only view point of tho welfare of the child.
The person to whom tho custody of the child has to be entrusted will necessarily be answerable to the school for payment of all charges and expenses of the child and also in relation to any matter concerning the child in her school life.
[89 D E] In the instant cases, it is clear that the father is not inclined to allow the child to remain in a Boarding institution, If the custody be left to him, the father iq view of the disinclination to allow the child to remain in the Boarding institution, may be in a position to create difficulties for the child for remaining in the institution by non payment of fees or otherwise. ' The 'father is obsessed, with the idea of obtaining exclusive control of the daughter and keeping the daughter with him in his house.
[89 B F] F It is not in dispute and it cannot be disputed that the mother has a great deal of affection for her daughter in her heart and to serve the best interest of the daughter the mother is prepared to make any necessary sacrifice for the welfare of the daughter.
The mother, at considerable expense, had put her in Kimmins Boarding School, Panchghani, which is recognised to be a very good institution She has been paying for all the expenses of the daughter at the G ' school.
She has steady income out of which she is in a position to meet all , the expenses of her daughter at the school.
The mother also does not suffer from any obsession regarding posession of the girl and she wants her daughter to lead a healthy normal life essential for her proper growth and development.
The mother is very anxious that the child should continue to remain in the Boarding; School.
The girl now aged about 11 years, is reaching an age when she will need the guidance of the mother.
Therefore, the custody of the girl should be given to the mother.
[89 F H, 90 A B] 52
