Sanction for the prosecution of the Chief Minister under Section 6 of the Prevention of Corruption Act Whether the Governor should act in his discretion or with the aid and advice of the Council of Ministers Constitution of India, 1950, Article 163.
Dismissing the Special Leave Petition, the Court, ^ HELD: 1:1.
Supreme Court is bound to accept the statement of the judges recorded in their judgment and, therefore, it cannot launch into an inquiry as to what transpired in the High Court.
It is simply not done.
Public policy bars such an action and judicial decorum restrains it.
[12 C] 1:2.
Supreme Court cannot allow the statement of the judges to be contradicted by statements at the Bar or by affidavit and other evidence.
Matters of judicial record are unquestionable and not open to doubt.
Judges cannot be dragged into the arena.
If the judges say in their judgments that something was done, said or admitted before them, that has to be the last word on the subject.
Judges record is conclusive.
[12 C E] 1:3.
If a party thinks that the happenings in court have been wrongly recorded in a judgment, it is incumbent upon the party, while the matter is still fresh in the minds of the judges, to call the attention of the very Judges who have made the record to the fact that the statement made with regard to his conduct was a statement that had been made in error.
That is the only way to have the record corrected.
If no such step is taken, the matter must necessarily end there.
Of course, a party may resile and an Appellate Court may permit him, in rare and appropriate cases to resile from a concession on the ground that the concession was made on a wrong appreciation of the law and had led to gross injustice, but he may not call in question the very fact of making the concession as recorded in the judgment.
[12 F H, 13 A] 9 Rex vs Mellor , quoted with approval.
Madhusudan vs Chandrawati, A.l.R. ; King Emperor vs Barendra Kumar Ghose, Sarat Chandra vs Bibhabati Debi, Samasundaram vs Subramanian.
A.I.R 1926 P.C. 136: approved.
In the facts and circumstances of the present case, it is clear that, when there is to be a prosecution of the Chief Minister, tho Governor would, while determining whether sanction for such prosecution should be granted or not under section 6 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, as a matter of propriety, necessarily act in his own discretion and not on the advice of the Council of Ministers.
[14 F G] 3.
In the instant case, the cause of justice would in no way be advanced by permitting the state of Maharashtra to now resile from the concession so made.
On the other hand the concession was rightly made before the High Court to advance the cause of justice.
[15 A]
