The appellant, an officer of the Forest Department challenged the provisional integrated gradation list of Forest Officers of the former Andhra and Hyderabad States published under the provisions of the States Reorganisation Act, 1947, in his writ petition, contending that (a) the inter se seniority between the appellant and the 6th respondent, both of whom originally belonged to the Andhra Cadre, had been wrongly fixed by showing the 6th respondent as senior to the appellant whereas the appellant was legally entitled to seniority over the 6th respondent, and (b) that respondent nos.
3, 4, 5, 7 and 8 officers allotted to the State of Andhra Pradesh from the Telengana region of the former Hyderabad State, had been erroneously assigned ranks above the appellant in violation of the principles laid down by the Government of India for equation of posts and fixation of inter se seniority.
During the pendency of the writ petition the Central Government set right the appellant 's grievance concerning his ranking and seniority in relation to respondents 3, 4, 5, 7 and 8.
When the writ petition came up for hearing the appellant pressed only his claim for seniority over the 6th respondent and as the contention was well founded, the learned Single Judge, allowed the writ petition and issued a writ of mandamus directing the Government of India to modify the gradation list by showing the appellant as senior to the 6th respondent.
In the appeal to the Division Bench by the 6th respondent, the Division Bench took the view that since the prayer contained in the writ the petition was for the issue of a writ of mandamus directing respondents nos.
1 and 2 to forbear from implementing the provisional gradation list published alongwith the Government Order dated January 27, 1962 and as the appellant had not pressed the prayer for quashing of the list in so far as it related to the officers of Telengana region viz. respondents 3, 4, 5, 7 and 8, the writ petition should have been dismissed on that short ground and the question relating to the inter se seniority between the appellant and the 6th respondent ought not to have been decided.
The Division Bench allowed the writ appeal, set aside the order passed by the single Judge and dismissed the writ petition.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, 160 ^ HELD: In an action where a party has prayed for a larger relief it is always open to the Court to grant him any smaller relief that he may be found to be entitled to in law and thereby render substantial justice.
The Court can take note of changed circumstances and suitably mould the relief to be granted to the party concerned in order to mete out justice.
As far as possible the anxiety and endeavour of the Court should be to remedy an in justice when it is brought to its notice rather than deny relief to an aggrieved party on purely technical and narrow procedural grounds.
[162 G 163 A] In the instant case the writ petition contained the prayer for the quashing of the gradation list in so far as it related to the inter se ranking of the appellant vis a vis respondents nos.
3 to 8 and the appellant had also sought the issuance of a writ of mandamus directing respondents nos.
1 and 2 to forbear from implementing or acting upon the said gradation list.
Subsequent to the institution of the writ petition the Central Government had refixed the ranks of respondents nos.
3, 4, 5, 7 and 8 and placed them below the appellant thereby redressing the grievance of the appellant in so far as it pertained to the ranking of the said respondents.
It, therefore, became unnecessary for the appellant to pursue his claim for relief with respect to the ranks assigned to those five respondents.
It was under those circumstances that the appellant submitted before the single Judge at the time of final hearing of the writ petition that he was pressing the writ petition only in so far as it related to his claim for seniority over the 6th respondent.
This will not operate to preclude him from seeking a lesser relief namely the quashing of the list only in so far as it pertains to the fixation of the inter se seniority between himself and the 6th respondent.
[162 B F]
