Petitioner No. 1, is an organisation formed for the purpose of protecting democratic rights.
It commissioned three social scientists for the purpose of investigating and inquiring into the conditions under which the workmen engaged in the various Asiad Projects were working.
Based on the report made by these three social scientists after personal investigation and study the 1st petitioner addressed a letter to Hon 'ble Mr. Justice Bhagwati complaining of violation of various labour laws by tho respondents ' and/or their agents and seeking interference by the Supreme Court to render social justice by means of appropriate directions to the affected workmen.
The Supreme Court treated the letter as a writ petition on the judicial side and issued notice to the Union of India, Delhi Administration and the Delhi Development Authority.
The allegations in the petition were: (i) The various authorities to whom the execution of the different projects was entrusted engaged contractors for the purpose of carrying out the construction work of the projects and they were registered as principal employers under section 7 of the .
These contractors engaged workers through "Jamadars" who brought them from different parts of India particularly the States of Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and Orissa and paid to these Jamadars the minimum wage of Rs. 9.25 per day per worker and not to the workmen direct.
The Jamadars deducted Rupee one per day per worker as their commis 457 sion with the result that there was a violation of the provisions of A the Minimum Wages Act; (ii) The provisions of were violated as the women workers were being paid Rs. 71 per day, the balance of the amount of the wage was being misappropriated by the Jamadars: (iii) There was violation of Article 24 of the Constitution and of the . provisions of the Employment of Children Acts, 1938 and 1970 in as much as children below the age of 14 years were employed by the contractors in the construction work of the various projects, (iv) There was violation of the provisions of the Contract Labour (Regulations and Abolition) Act, 1970 which resulted in deprivation and exploitation of the workers and denial of their right to proper living condition and medical and other facilities under the Act; and (v) The provisions of the Inter state Migrant Workmen (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1979, though brought into force as far back as 2nd October 1980 in the Union.
Territory of Delhi were not implemented by the Contractors.
Allowing the petition, the Court, ^ HELD: l:1.
Public interest litigation which is strategic arm of the legal aid movement and which is intended to bring justice within the reach of the poor masses, who constitute the low visibility area of humanity, is a totally different kind of litigation from the ordinary traditional litigation which is essentially of an adversary character where there is a dispute between two litigating parties, one making claim or seeking relief against the other and that other opposing such claim or resisting such relief.
Public interest litigation is brought before the court not for the purpose of enforcing the right of one individual against another as happens in the case of ordinary litigation, but it is intended to promote and indicate public interest which demands that violations of constitutional or legal rights of large number of people who are poor, ignorant or in a socially or economically disadvantaged position should not go unnoticed and unredressed.
That would be destructive of the Rule of Law which forms one of the essential elements of public interest in any democratic form of Government.
[467 C F] 1:2.
The Rule of Law does not mean that the protection of the law must be available only to a fortunate few or that the law should be allowed to be prostituted by the vested interests for protecting and upholding the status quo under the guise of enforcement of their civil and political rights.
The poor too have civil and political rights and the Rule of law is meant for them also, though today it exists only on paper and not in reality.
If the sugar barons and the alcohol kings have the Fundamental rights to carry on their business and to fatten their purses by exploiting the consuming public, certainly the "chamaras" to belonging 458 to the lowest strata of society have Fundamental Right to earn on honest living through their sweat and toil.
Large numbers of men, women and children who constitute the bulk of an population are today living a sub human existence in conditions of object poverty; utter grinding poverty bas broken their back and sapped their moral fibre.
They have no faith in the existing social and economic system.
Nor can these poor and deprived sections of humanity afford to enforce their civil and political rights.
(467 P H; 468 A D] 1:3.
The only solution of making civil and political rights meaningful to these large sections of society would be to remake the material conditions and restructure the social and economic order so that they may be able to realise the economic, social and cultural rights.
Of course, the task of restructuring the social and economic order so that the social and economic right become a meaningful reality for the poor and lowly sections of the community is one which legitimately belongs to the legislature and the executive but mere initiation of social and economic rescue programmes by the executive and the legislature would not be enough and it is only through multi dimensional strategies including public interest litigation that these social and economic rescue programmes can be made effective.
[468 G H, 469 B D] 1:4.
Public interest litigation, is essentially a cooperative or collaborative effort on the part of the petitioner, the State or public authority and the Court to secure observance of the constitutional or legal rights, benefits and privileges conferred upon the vulnerable sections of the community and to reach social justice to them.
The State or public authority against whom public interest litigation is brought should be as much interested in ensuring basic human rights, constitutional as well as legal, to those who are in a socially and economically disadvantaged position, as the petitioner who brings the public interest litigation before the court.
The State or public authority which is arrayed as a respondent in public interest litigation should, in fact, welcome it, as it would give it an opportunity to right a wrong or to redress an injustice done to the poor and weaker sections of the community whose welfare is and must be the prime concern of the State or the public authority.
[469 D F] l:5.
The legal aid movement and public interest litigation seek to bring justice to these forgotten specimens of humanity who constitute the bulk of the citizens of India and who are really and truly the "People of India who gave to themselves this magnificent Constitution.
Pendency of large arrears in the courts cannot be any reason for denying access of justice to the poor and weaker sections of the community.
[470 E F] 1:6.
The time has now come when the courts must become the courts for the poor and struggling masses of this country.
They must shed their character as upholders of the established order and the status quo.
They must be sensitised to the need of doing justice to the large masses of people to whom justice has been denied by a cruel and heartless society for generations.
The realisation must come to them that social justice is the signature tune of our Constitution and it is their solemn duty under the Constitution to enforce the basic human rights of the poor and vulnerable sections of the community and actively help in the 459 realisation of the constitutional goals.
This new change has to come if the judicial system is to become an effective instrument of social justice for without it, it cannot survive for long.
Fortunately this change is gradually taking place and public interest litigation is playing a large part in bringing about this change.
It is through public interest litigation that the problems of the poor are now coming to the forefront and the entire theatre of the law is changing.
It holds out great possibilities for the future.
This writ petition is one such instance of public interest litigation.
[470 G H; 471 A C] 2.
It is true that construction industry does not find a place on the schedule to the and the Prohibition enacted in section 3 sub section ( 3) of that Act against the employment of a child who has not completed his fourteenth year cannot apply to employment in construction industry.
But, apart altogether from the requirement of Convention No. 59 of C the International Labour organisation and ratified by India, Article 24 of the Constitution provides that no child below the age of 14 shall be employed to work in any factory or mine or engaged in any other hazardous employment.
This is a constitutional prohibition which, even if not followed up by appropriate legislation, must operate propiro vigore and construction work being plainly and indubitably a hazardous employment, it is clear that by reason of this Constitutional prohibition, no child below the age of 14 years can be allowed to be engaged in construction work.
Therefore, notwithstanding the absence of specification of construction industry in the Schedule to the , no child below the age of 14 years can be employed in construction work and the Union of India as also every state Government must ensure that this constitutional mandate is not violated in any part of the Country [474 A F] 3.
Magistrates and Judges in the country must view violations of labour laws with strictness and whenever any violations of labour laws are established before them, they should punish the errant employers by imposing adequate punishment.
The labour laws are enacted for improving the conditions of workers and the employers cannot be allowed to buy off immunity against violations of labour laws by paying a paltry fine which they would not mind paying, because by violating the labour laws they would be making profit which would far exceed the amount of the fine.
If violations of labour laws are to be punished with meagre fines, it would be impossible to ensure observance of the labour laws and the labour laws would be reduced to nullity.
They would remain merely paper tigers without any teeth or claws.
[476 E H] 4:1.
It is true that the complaint of the petitioners in the writ petition is in regard to the violations of the provisions of various labour laws designed for the welfare of workmen, and therefore from a strictly traditional point of view it would be only the workmen whose legal rights are violated who would be entitled to approach the court for judicial redress.
But the traditional rule of standing which confines access to the judicial process only to those to whom legal injury is caused or legal wrong is done has now been jettisoned by the Supreme Court and the narrow confines within which the rule of standing was imprisoned for long years as a result of inheritance of the Anglo saxon system of jurisprudence have been broken and a new dimension has been given to the doctrine of 460 locus standi which has revolutionised the whole concept of access to justice in a way not known before to the Western System of jurisprudence.
[477 F H] 4:2.
Having regard to the peculiar socio economic conditions prevailing in the country where there is considerable poverty, illiteracy and ignorance obstructing and impeding accessibility to the judicial process, it would result in closing the doors of justice to the poor and deprived sections of the community if the traditional rule of standing evolved by Anglo Saxon jurisprudence that only a person wronged can sue for judicial redress were to be blindly adhered to and followed, and it is therefore Necessary to evolve a new strategy by relaxing this traditional rule of standing in order that justice may become easily available to the lowly and the lost.
[478 A C] 4:3.
Where a person or class of persons to whom legal injury is caused or legal wrong is done is by reason of poverty, disability or socially or economically disadvantaged position not able to approach the Court for judicial redress, any member of the public acting bonafide and not out of any extraneous motivation may move the Court for judicial redress of the legal injury or wrong suffered by such person or class of persons and the judicial process may be set in motion by any public spirited individual or institution even by addressing a letter to the court.
Where judicial redress is sought of a legal injury or legal wrong suffered by a person or class of persons who by reason of poverty, disability or socially or economically disadvantaged position are unable to approach the court and the court is moved for this purpose by a member of a public by addressing a letter drawing the attention of the court to such legal injury or legal wrong, court would cast aside all technical rules of procedure and entertain the letter as a writ Petition on the judicial side and take action upon it.
[478 C F] Here, the workmen whose rights are said to have been violated and to whom a life of basic human dignity has been denied are poor, ignorant, illiterate humans who, by reason of their poverty and social and economic disability, are unable to approach the courts for judicial redress and hence the petitioners have, under the liberalised rule of standing, locus standi to maintain the present writ petition espousing the cause of the workmen.
The petitioners are not acting mala fide or out of extraneous motives since the first petitioner is admittedly an organisation dedicated to tho protecting and enforcement of Fundamental Rights and making Directive Principles of State Policy enforceable and justiciable.
There can be no doubt that it is out of a sense of public service that the present Litigation has been brought by the petitioners and it is clearly maintainable.
[478 G H; 479 A B] 4.4 The Union of India, the Delhi Administration and the Delhi Development Authority cannot escape their obligation to the workmen to ensure observance of the provisions of various labour law by its contractors and for non compliance with the laws by the contractors, the workmen would clearly have a cause of actions against them as principal employers.
So far as to Con tract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970 is concerned, section 20 is clear that if any amenity required to be provided under sections 16 to 18 or 19 for the 461 benefit of the workmen employed in an establishment is not provided by the contractor, the obligation to provide such amenity rests on the principal employer.
[479 C D] Sections 17 and 18 of the Inter state Migrant Workmen (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act 1979 also make principal employer liable to make payment of the wages to the wages to the migrant workmen employed by the contractor as also to pay the allowances provided under sections 14 and 15 and to provide the facilities specified in section 16 of such migrant workmen.
[479 F G] Article 24 of the Constitution embodies a Fundamental Right which is plainly and indubitably enforceable against every one and by reason of its compulsive mandate, no one can employ a child below the age of 14 years in a hazardous employment.
Since, construction work is a hazardous employment, no child below the age of 14 years can be employed in constructions work and therefore, not only are the contractors under a constitutional mandate not to employ any child below the age of 14 years, but it is also the duty of the Union of India, the Delhi Administration and the Delhi Development Authority to ensure that this constitutional obligation is obeyed by the contractors to whom they have entrusted the construction work of the various Asiad Projects.
Similarly the respondents must ensure compliance with by the contractors of the Provisions of the equal Remuneration Act, 1946 as they express the principle of equality embodied in Article 14 of the Constitution.
[479 G H; 480 A D] No doubt, the contractors are liable to pay the minimum wage to the workmen employed by them under the Minimum Wage Act 1948 but the Union of India, the Delhi Administration and the Delhi Development Authority who have entrusted the construction work to the contractors would equally be responsible to ensure that the minimum wage is paid to the workmen by their contractors.
[480 G H] 5:1.
It is true that the present writ petition cannot be maintained by the petitioners unless they can show some violation of a Fundamental Right, for it is only for enforcement right that a writ petition can be maintained in this Court under Article 32.
But, certainly the following complaints do legitimately form the subject matter of a writ petition under Article 32; namely, (i) the complaint of violation of Article 24 based on the averment that children below the age of 14 years are employed in the construction work of the Asiad Projects, (ii) allegation of non observance of the provisions of the Equal Remuneration Act 1946, is in effect and substance a complaint of breach of the principle of equality before the law enshrined in Article 14; and (iii) the complaint of non observance of the provisions of the and the Interstate Migrant Workmen (Regulations of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act 1979 as it is a complaint relating to violation of Article 21.
Now the rights and benefits conferred on the workmen employed by a contractor under the provisions of the and the Inter State Migrant Workmen Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act 1979 which became enforceable w.e.f. 4 6 1982 are clearly intended to ensure basic 462 human dignity to the workmen and if the workmen are deprived of any of these rights and benefits to which they are entitled under the provisions of these two pieces of social welfare legislation, that would clearly be a violation of Article 21 by the Union of India, the Delhi Administration and the Delhi Development Authority which, as principal employers, are made statutorily responsible for securing such rights and benefits to the workmen; and (iv) the complaint in regard to non payment of minimum wage to the workmen under the , is also one relating to breach of a Fundamental Right enshrined in Article 23 which is violated by non payment of minimum wage to the workmen.
[481 D H; 482 A F] Maneka Gandhi vs Union of India, [1978] 2 SCR 663; Francis Coralie Mullin vs The Administrator of Union Territory of Delhi & Others, ; , applied.
Many of the fundamental rights enacted in operate as limitations on the power of the State and impose negative obligations on the State not to encroach on individual liberty and they are enforceable only against the State.
But there are certain fundamental rights conferred by the Constitution which are enforceable against the whole world and they are to be found inter alia in Articles 17, 23 and 24.
[483 C D] 5:3.
Article 23 is clearly designed to protect the individual not only against the State but also against other private citizens.
Article 23 is not limited in its application against the State but it prohibits "traffic in human beings and begar and other similar forms of forced labour" practised by anyone else.
The prohibition against "traffic in human being and begar and other similar forms of forced labour" is clearly intended to be a general prohibition, total in its effect and all pervasive in its range and it is enforceable not only against the State but also against any other person indulging in any such practice.
[484 G H; 485 A] 5:4.
The word "begar" in Article 23 is not a word of common use in English language, but a word of Indian origin which like many other words has found its way in English vocabulary.
It is a form of forced labour under which a person is compelled to work without receiving any remuneration.
Begar is thus clearly a film of forced labour.
[485 E G] section Vasudevan vs S.D. Mittal AIR 1962 Bom.
53 applied.
It is not merely 'begar ' which is constitutionally prohibited by Article 23 but also all other similar forms of forced labour.
Article 23 strikes at forced labour in whatever form it may manifest itself, because it is violative of human dignity and is contrary to basic human values.
To contend that exacting labour by passing some remuneration, though it be inadequate will not attract the provisions of Article 23 is to unduly restrict the amplitude of the prohibition against forced labour enacted in Article 23.
The contention is not only illfounded, but does not accord with the principle enunciated by this Court in Maneka Gandhi vs Union of India that when interpreting the provisions of the Constitution conferring fundamental rights, the attempt of the Court should be to expand the reach and ambit of the fundamental rights rather than to attenuate 463 their meaning and content.
The Constitution makers did not intend to strike only at certain forms of forced labour leaving it open to the socially or economically powerful sections of the community to exploit the poor and weaker sections by resorting to other forms of forced labour.
There could be no logic or reason in enacting that if a person is forced to give labour or service to another without receiving any remuneration at all, it should be regarded as a pernicious practice sufficient to attract the condemnation of Article 23, but if some remuneration is paid for it, then it should be outside the inhibition of that Article.
To interpret Article 23 as contended would be reducing Article 23 to a mere rope of sand, for it would then be the easiest thing in an exploitative society for a person belonging to a socially or economically dominant class to exact labour or service from a person belonging to the deprived and vulnerable section of the community by paying a negligible amount of remuneration and thus escape the rigour of article 23.
It would not be right to place on the language of Article 23 an interpretation which would emasculate its beneficient provisions and defeat the very purpose of enacting them.
Article 23 is intended to abolish every form of forced labour.
[486 E H; 487 A D] 5:6.
The words "other similar forms of forced labour" are used in Article 23 not with a view to importing the particular characteristic of 'begar ' that labour or service should be exacted without payment of any remuneration but with a view to bringing within the scope and ambit of that Article all other forms of forced labour and since 'begar ' is one form of forced labour, the Constitution makers used the words "other similar forms of forced labour".
If the requirement that labour or work should be exacted without any remuneration were imported in other forms of forced labour.
they would straight away come within the meaning of the word 'begar ' and in that event there would be no need to have the additional words "other similar forms of forced labour.
" These words would be rendered futile and meaningless and it is a well recognised rule of interpretation that the court should avoid a construction which has the effect of rendering any words used by the legislature superfluous redundant.
[487 E G] The object of adding these words was clearly to expand the reach and content of Article 23 by including, in addition to 'begar ', other forms of forced labour within the prohibition of that Article.
Every form of forced labour, 'begar ' or otherwise, is within the inhibition of Article 23 and it makes no difference whether the person who is forced to give his labour or service to another is remunerated or not.
Even if remuneration is paid, labour supplied by a person would be hit by Article 23 if it is forced labour, that is, labour supplied not willingly but as a result of force or compulsion.
For example, where a person has entered into a contract of service with another for a period of three years and he wishes to discontinue serving such other person before the expiration of the period of three years, if a law were to provide that in such a case the contract shall be specifically enforced and he shall be compelled to serve for the full period of three years, it would clearly amount to forced labour and such a law would be void as offending Article 23.
That is why specific performance of a contract of service cannot be enforced against an employee 464 and the employee cannot be forced by compulsion of law to continue to serve the employer.
Of course, if there is a breach of the contract of service, the employee would be liable to pay damages to the employer but he cannot be forced to continue to serve the employer without breaching the injunction of Article 23.
[487 H; 488 A D] Baily vs Aalabama, ; Law Ed. 191; quoted with approval, 5:7.
Even if a person has contracted with another to perform service and there is consideration for such service in the shape of liquidation of debt or even remuneration, he cannot be forced by compulsion of law or otherwise, to continue to perform such service, as that would be forced labour within the inhibition of Article 23, which strikes at every form of forced labour even if it has its origin in a contract voluntarily entered into by the person obligated to provide labour or service, for the reasons, namely; (i) it offends against human dignity to compel a person to provide labour or service to another if he does not wish to do so, even though it be breach of the contract entered into by him; (ii) there should be no serfdom or involuntary servitude in a free democratic India which respects the dignity of the individual and the worth of the human person; (iii) in a country like India where there is so much poverty and unemployment and there is no equality of bargaining power, a contract of service may appear on its face voluntary but it may, in reality, be involuntary, because while entering into the contract the employee by reason of his economically helpless condition, may have been faced with Hobson 's choice, either to starve or to submit to the exploitative terms dictated by the powerful employer.
It would be a travesty of justice to hold the employee in such a case to the terms of the contract and to compel him to serve the employer even though he may not wish to do so.
That would aggravate the inequality and injustice from which the employee even otherwise suffers on account of his economically disadvantaged position and lend the authority of law to the exploitation of the poor helpless employee by the economically powerful employer.
Article 23 therefore, provides that no one shall be forced to provide labour or service against his will, even though it be under a contractor of service.
[490 C H] Pollock vs Williams, ; Lawyers Edn. 1095; referred to.
Where a person provides labour or services to another for remuneration which is less than the minimum wage, the labour or service provided by him clearly falls within the scope and ambit of the words "forced labour" under Article 23.
Such a person would be entitled to come to the court for enforcement of his fundamental right under Article 23 by asking the court to direct payment of the minimum wage to him so that the labour or service provided by him ceases to be 'forced labour ' and the breach of Article 23 is remedied.
[492 F G] 5:9.
Ordinarily no one would willingly supply labour or service to another for less than the minimum wage, when he knows that under the law he is entitled to get minimum wage for the labour or service provided by him.
Therefore when a person provides labour or service to another against receipt of remuneration which is less than the minimum wage, he is acting under the force of 465 some compulsion which drives him to work though he is paid less than what he is entitled under law to receive.
What Article 23 prohibits is 'forced labour ' that is labour or service which a person is forced to provide." [491 B D] 5:10. 'Force ' which would make such labour or service 'forced labour ' may arise in several ways.
It may be physical force which may compel a person to provide labour or service to another or it may be force exerted through a legal provision such as a provision for imprisonment or fine in case the employee fails to provide labour or service or it may even be compulsion arising from hunger and poverty, want and destitution.
Any factor which deprives a person of a choice of alternative and compels him to adopt one particular course of action may properly be regarded as 'force ' and if labour or service is compelled as a result of such 'force ', it would be 'forced labour '.
Where a person is suffering from hunger or starvation, when he has no resources at all to fight disease or to feed his wife and children or even to hide their nakedness, where utter grinding poverty has broken his back and reduced him to a state of helplessness and despair and where no other employment is available to alleviate the rigour of his poverty, he would have no choice but to accept any work that comes his way, even if the remuneration offered to him is less than the minimum wage.
He would be in no position to bargain with the employer; he would have to accept what is offered to him.
And in doing so he would be acting not as a free agent with a choice between alternatives but under the compulsion of economic circumstances and the labour of service provided by him would be clearly 'forced labour '.
The word 'forced ' should not be read in a narrow and restricted manner so as to be confined only to physical or legal 'force ' particularly when the national character, its fundamental document has promised to build a new socialist republic where there will be socio economic justice for all and every one shall have the right to work, to education and to adequate means of livelihood.
The constitution makers have given us one of the most remarkable documents in history for ushering in a new socio economic order and the Constitution which they have forged for us has a social purpose and an economic mission and, therefore, every word or phrase in the Constitution must be interpreted in a manner which would advance the socio economic objective of the Constitution.
It is a fact that in a capitalist society economic circumstances exert much greater pressure on an individual in driging him to a particular course of action than physical compulsion or force of legislative provision.
The word 'force ' must therefore be construed to include not only physical or legal force but force arising from the compulsion of economic circumstances which leaves no choice of alternatives to a person in want and compels him to provide labour or service even though the remuneration received for it is less than the minimum wage.
Of course, if a person provides labour or service to another against receipt of the minimum wage, it would not be possible to say that the labour or service provided by him is 'forced labour ' because he gets what he is entitled under law to receive.
No inference can reasonably be drawn in such a case that he is forced to provide labour or service for the simple reason that would be providing labour or service against receipt of what is lawfully payable to him just like any other person who is not under the force of any compulsion.
[491 D H; 492 A E] 6.
Wherever any fundamental right which is enforceable against private individuals such as, for example, a fundamental right enacted in Article 17 or 23 466 or 24 is being violated, it is the constitutional obligation of the State to take necessary steps for the purpose of interdicting such violation and ensuring observance of the fundamental right by the private individual who is transgressing the same.
The fact that the person whose fundamental right is violated can always approach the court for the purpose of enforcement of his fundamental right, cannot absolve the State from its constitutional obligation to see that there is no violation of the fundamental right of such person, particularly when he belongs to the weaker section of humanity and is unable to wage a legal battle against a strong and powerful opponent who is exploiting him.
[493 A D]
