The appellant Board invites tenders for the supply of goods.
One of the terms of the tenders required the intending supplier of goods to pay earnest money and/or security to the Board along with the tender a sum approximately equivalent to 10% of the estimated price of goods tendered.
But where an intending tenderer deposited a sum of Rs. 50,000 either in cash or in any form approved by the Board such as a Bank guarantee he could offer to supply goods of any value either under one or more tenders without complying with the above condition.
In accordance with the terms of tender the company in liquidation offered a bank guarantee for a sum of Rs. 50,000 for supply of goods to the Board.
As security for the guarantee, the Bank took from the company in liquidation a fixed deposit receipt and some quantity of imported zinc ingots and the Bank had certain rights in respect of these securities.
In August, 1973 the Board called upon the Bank to pay to it the guarantee amount.
In the meanwhile, however, the High Court ordered the winding up of the company in liquidation.
The Bank then wrote to the Official Liquidator that the company in liquidation was liable to the Bank a large sum of money one of which was the sum of Rs. 50,000 demanded by the Board.
On application by the Official Liquidator the company Judge issued an order restraining the Board from realising the amount from the Bank on the ground that since the Bank would have recourse to the securities given by the company in liquidation for realising the amount paid by it in accordance with the bank guarantee and that since such action of the Bank would affect the assets of the company in liquidation, it was not open to the Board to claim the amount of guarantee from the Bank except as a creditor in the winding up proceedings.
A Division Bench of the High Court dismissed the Board 's appeal.
562 On the question whether the Board could recover from the Bank the sum of Rs. 50,000 according to the terms of the bank guarantee and what its effect would be on liquidation proceedings, Allowing the Appeal, ^ HELD: It was not open to the company Judge to make any order under the prohibiting the Board from realising the amount guaranteed by the Bank as this had nothing to do with the assets of the company in liquidation.
[568 D] The terms of the document on the basis of which the Board has claimed the amount from the Bank constituted a contract of guarantee and not a contract of indemnity.
[566 F] The three transactions, namely (1) the bank guarantee, (2) the contract of supply between the Board and the Company in liquidation and (3) the document under which the Company in liquidation gave a fixed deposit receipt and some quantity of zinc ingots as security are independent of each other in so far as their legal incidents are concerned.
[566 H; 567 A] In order to realise the guarantee amount of Rs. 50,000 all that the Board had to do was to make a demand, within 48 hours of which the Bank had to pay the sum to the Board.
The Board was not required to prove any default on the part of the Company in liquidation.
Nor could the Bank raise the plea that it was liable only to the extent of any loss sustained by the Board.
The Bank 's liability to pay the sum demanded by the Board was absolute and unconditional.
[567 C D] The fact that the principal debtor had gone into liquidation would not have any effect on the Bank 's liability as guarantor.
Under section 128 of the Indian Contract Act the liability of the surety is co extensive with that of the principal debtor unless it is otherwise provided by the contract.
A surety is no doubt discharged under section 134 of the Indian Contract Act by any contract between the creditor and the principal debtor by which the principal debtor is released or by any act or omission of the creditor, the legal consequence of which is the discharge of the principal debtor.
But a discharge which the principal debtor may secure by operation of law in bankruptcy (or in liquidation proceedings in the case of a company) does not absolve the surety of his liability.
[567 D F] Jagannath Ganeshram Aggarwala vs Shivnarayan Bhagirath In re Fitzegeorge Ex parte Robson, , referred to.
Punjab National Bank Limited vs Bikram Cotton Mills & Anr., ; , held inapplicable.
On payment of the sum demanded by the Board it was open to the Bank to have recourse to the securities given by the Company in liquidation.
The 563 Board was not concerned with what the Bank did to reimburse itself.
It was the Bank 's responsibility to deal with the securities held by it in accordance with law.
