The petitioner who had been arrested on March 2, 1982 and whose application for bail had been rejected on March 25, 1982 was in jail when the District Magistrate, Dhanbad made the impugned order of detention against him on April 20, 1982 under sub section
(2) read with sub section
(3) of section 3 of the .
Another application for bail moved by the petitioner was rejected on April 23, 1982.
The grounds of detention were served on April 23, 1982 and the representation submitted to the State Government on May 13, 1982 was rejected on June 3, 1982 and the order of detention was confirmed on June 10, 1982.
It was contended that the impugned order could not have been made against the petitioner as he was already in jail, that the order was vitiated by non application of mind as the detaining authority was not even aware of the petitioner 's custody in jail and as there was inordinate delay in considering the representation against the order.
Allowing the petition, ^ HELD: When a preventive detention order is made against a person already deprived of his personal liberty, the detaining authority must show awareness of the fact that the person against whom the detention order is proposed to be made is already in jail and is incapable of acting in a manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order and yet, for reasons which may appeal to the detaining authority on which its subjective satisfaction is grounded, a preventive detention order is required to be made.
This awareness must appear in the order or in the affidavit justifying the order when challenged.
[633 A B] In the instant case neither in the order nor in the affidavit was there even a whimper of this aspect being present to the mind of the detaining authority while making the order.
The order having been mechanically made and suffering from the vice of non application of mind was vitiated.
[633 C] Rameshwar Shaw vs District Magistrate, Burdwan & Anr. ; ; Vijay Kumar vs State of J&K and Ors. ; ; Biru Mahto vs 631 District Magistrate, Dhanbad; , and M. Satyanarayana, etc.
vs State of Andhra Pradesh & Ors. ; followed.
(b) When a detention order is made in exercise of the power conferred by sub section
(2) read with sub section
(1) of section 3 of the Act, sub section
(4) makes it obligatory upon the State Government to examine the order and approve the same within a period of 12 days from the date of making the order.
[633 G H] In the facts and circumstances of the instant case, a time of 21 days taken by the State Government in examining the representation of the detenu showed inordinate delay which vitiated the order.
[634 B]
