In both the Writ Petitions, when the petitioners were already in judicial custody and thus have been deprived of their liberty, the District Magistrate Adilabad passed the detention orders in exercise of the power conferred under Section 3(2) read with Section 3(3) of the .
The detenu in each of these petitions filed a petition for writ of habeas corpus in the Andhra Pradesh High Court and both the petitions were rejected.
In the present petitions, it was contended as follows: (i) that in both the cases, the detenus being in judicial custody were already prevented from pursuing any activity which may prove prejudicial to the maintenance of public order and, therefore, no order of detention could be passed against each of them; (ii) that the affidavit in opposition was filed by a sub inspector of police and not by the detaining authority, i.e. the District Magistrate had completely abdicated his powers; and (iii)that in flagrant violation of the assurances given at the hearing of A.K. Roy 's case, that the drastic and draconian power of preventive detention will not be exercised against political opponents, the affidavit in opposition would show that the power of preventive detention was exercised against political opponents because the detenu in each case was a member and organizer of C.P.I. (M.L.) (Peoples War Group), a political party operating in this country.
Allowing the petition, the Court 636 ^ HELD: 1:1.
A preventive action postulates that if preventive step is not taken the person sought to be prevented may indulge into an activity prejudicial to the maintenance of public order.
In other words, unless the activity is interdicted by a preventive detention order the activity which is being indulged into is likely to be repeated.
That this is the postulate, indisputably transpires from the language employed in sub section (2) of Section 3, which says that the detention order can be made with a view to preventing the person sought to be detained from acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order.
If it is shown that the man sought to be prevented by a preventive order is already effectively prevented, the power under sub section (2) of Section 3, if exercised, would imply that one who is already prevented is sought to be further prevented which is not the mandate of the section, and would appear tautologous.
[640 F H, 641 A] 1.2 The detaining authority before exercising the power of preventive detention would take into consideration the past conduct or antecedent history of the person and as a matter of fact it is largely from the prior events showing the tendencies of a man that an inference could be drawn whether he is likely even in the future to act in a manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order.
If the subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority leads to this conclusion it can put an end to the activity by making a preventive detention order.
If the man is already detained a detaining authority cannot be said to have subjectively satisfied himself that a preventive detention order can be made.
[641 A C] Ujagar Singh vs State of Punjab, Jagir Singh vs State of Punjab ; and Rameshwar Shaw vs District Magistrate, Burdwan and Anr.
[1964]4 S.C.R. 921 referred to.
The subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority must comprehend the very fact that the person sought to be detained in jail is under detention and yet a preventive detention order is a compelling necessity.
If the subjective satisfaction is reached without the awareness of this very relevant fact the detention order is likely to be vitiated.
But, it will depend on the facts and circumstances of each case.
[642 D F] Vijay Kumar vs State of J & K and Ors.
A.I.R. 1982 S.C. 1023, applied.
The awareness of the detaining authority must be of the fact that the person against whom the detention order is being made is already under detention.
This would show that such a person is not a free person to indulge into a prejudicial activity which is required to be prevented by detention order.
And this awareness must find its place either in the detention order or in the affidavit justifying the detention order when challenged.
The absence of this awareness would permit an inference that the detaining authority was not even aware of this vital fact and mechanically proceeded to pass the order which would 637 unmistakably indicate that there was non application of mind to the most relevant fact and any order of such serious consequences resulting in deprivation of liberty, if mechanically passed without the application of mind is liable to be set aside as invalid.
[643 D G] 3:1.
A sub inspector of police cannot arrogate to himself the knowledge about the subjective satisfaction of the District Magistrate on whom the power of detention is conferred by the .
If the power of preventive detention is to be conferred on an officer of the level and standing of a sub inspector of police, we would not be far from a police state.
[644 E F] 3:2.
Parliament has conferred power primarily on the Central Government and in specific cases, if the conditions set out in sub section (3) of section 3 of the Act are satisfied and the Notification is issued by the State Government to that effect, this extra ordinary power of directing preventive detention can be exercised by such highly placed officers as District Magistrate or Commissioner of Police.
[644 F G] 3:3.
In this case, (a) the District Magistrate, the detaining authority has not chosen to file his affidavit, (b) the affidavit in opposition filed by the sub inspector would imply either he had access to the file of the District Magistrate or he had influenced the decision of the Magistrate for making the detention order and in any case the District Magistrate completely abdicated his functions in favour of the sub inspector of Police because (i) the sub inspector does not say in the affidavit how he came to know about the subjective satisfaction of the District Magistrate or that he had access to the file, and (ii) the file was not made available to the Court.
If the District Magistrate is to act in the manner he has done in this case by completely abdicating his functions in favour of an officer of the level of a sub inspector of Police, the safe guards noticed by the Supreme Court are likely to prove wholly illusory and the fundamental right of personal liberty will be exposed to serious jeopardy.
Hence the affidavit in opposition cannot be taken notice of, here.
[644 G H, 646 A C] A.K. Roy vs Union of India & Ors. ; , referred to.
The affidavit in opposition filed in the present case would show that the power conferred for ordering preventive detention was exercised on extraneous and irrelevant consideration in respect of each detenu he being a member of and organiser of C.P.I. (M.L.) (People War Group), a political party operating in this country which fact motivated the order and, therefore, a flagrant violation of the assurances given on the floor of Parliament and while hearing the case of A.K. Roy wherein the constitutional validity of the Act was challenged that the drastic and draconian power of preventive detention will not be exercised against political opponents.
But it is unnecessary to examine this aspect on merits, in view of the fact that the detention orders have been found to be invalid for more than one reason.
Non examination of the contention need not lead to the inference that the contention is rejected but kept open to be examined in an appropriate case.
[646 D E, 647 A B]
