Sub section
(3) of section 51 of the States Reorganization Act, 1956, provides that notwithstanding anything contained in sub section
(1) or sub s.(2) thereof the Judges and division Courts of the High Court of a new State may also sit at such other place or places in that State as the Chief Justice may, with the approval of the Governor, appoint.
Prior to the constitution of the States Reorganization Commission, leaders of political parties from the Marathi speaking areas in the country had signed an agreement called the 'Nagpur Pact ' which ultimately formed the basis for the creation of the Maharashtra State.
Clause (7) of this agreement stipulated that the provision with regard to the establishment of a permanent Bench of the High Court at Nagpur shall apply mutatis mutandis to the Marathwada region.
The brought into being the new State of Bombay with effect from November 1, 1956.
By virtue of sub s.(1) of section 49, the existing High Court of Bombay was deemed to be the High Court for the New State of Bombay and, by a Presidential Order issued under sub section
(1) of section 51, Bombay was declared to be its principal seat.
The then Chief Justice issued an order under sub section
(3) of section 51 appointing Nagpur to be a place at which the Judges and division Courts of the High Court would also sit with effect from November 1, 1956.
The Bench at Nagpur continued to function till May 1, 1960 when the State was bifurcated into Maharashtra and Gujarat and section 41 of the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960 provided for the establishment of a permanent Bench at Nagpur.
Due to the continued demand of the people of Marathwada region and the passing of a unanimous resolution in support by the Legislative Assembly the 656 State Government recommended to the Central Government in 1978 that a permanent Bench of the High Court be established at Aurangabad under sub section (2) of section 51 and simultaneously made preparations, in consultation with the Chief Justice for setting up the Bench.
However, when it became evident that the Central Government would take time in reaching a decision on the proposal, it was decided, in view of the preparations made and the mounting expectations of the people, that, pending the establishment of a permanent Bench under sub section (2) of s 51, resort be had to the provisions of sub section
(3) thereof.
Accordingly, on August 27,1981, the Chief Justice, with the prior approval of the Governor of the State, issued an Order under sub section
(3) of section 51 appointing Aurangabad as a place at which the Judges and division Courts of the High Court of Judicature at Bombay may also sit.
The respondents challenged the validity of the order and the High Court set aside the same on the following grounds: 1.
The Act being of a transitory nature, the exercise of the power under sub section
(3) of section 51 after a lapse of 26 years was constitutionally impermissible.
There was no nexus between the purpose.
and objects of the Act and the setting up of Aurangabad as an additional venue for sittings of Judges and division Courts of the High Court.
After the bifurcation of the bilingual State of Bombay, the power of the Chief Justice under sub.
section (3) of section 51 would no longer be exercised as the State of Maharashtra was not a 'new State ' within the meaning of section 51 read with section 2(1) of the Act.
The Order was bad in law as it had brought about a territorial bifurcation of the High Court.
Under sub section
(3) of section 51 the Chief Justice had neither the power to establish a Bench at any place nor the power to issue administrative directions for filing or institution of proceedings at such a place.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: The Act is a permanent piece of legislation enacted by Parliament under Articles 3 and 4 of the Constitution.
Section 14 of the , provides that, where, by any Central Act or Regulation, any power is conferred, then, unless a different intention appears, that power may be exercised from time to time as occasion arises.
A statute can be abrogated only by express or implied repeal.
It cannot fall into desuetude or become inoperative through obsolescence or by lapse of time.
The powers conferred on the President and the Chief Justice under sub sections
(2) and (3) of section 51 are intended to be exercised from time to time as occasion arises, as there is no intention to the contrary manifested in the Act.
The assumption that these provisions have ebbed out by lapse of time is plainly contrary to the meaning and effect of section 69 of the Act which in terms provides that Part V which contains section 51 shall have.
effect subject to any provision that may be made on or after the appointed day with respect to the High Court of any State by the Legislature or any other authority having power to make such provision.
Further, the opening words of section 41 of the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960 manifest a clear legislative intention to preserve the continued existence of the provisions contained in section 51 of the .
[669 B C, 668 E G, 670 A B] 657 R.v.
London County Council, referred to. 2.
It cannot be said that the impugned Order is not directly connected with the reorganisation of States.
There has been a long standing demand for the establishment of a permanent Bench of the Bombay High Court at Aurangabad.
A solemn assurance in this behalf had been given to the people of Marathwada region by cl.
(7) of the 'Nagpur Pact '.
Under the scheme of the Act it would appear that having constituted a High Court for the new State of Bombay and conferred jurisdiction on it under section 52 in relation to the territories of the new State, Parliament left it to the various high Constitutional functionaries designated in section 51 to determine the place where the principal seat of the High Court should be located and places where permanent Bench or Benches of the High Court may be established, or where the Judges and division Courts of the High Court may also sit.
While Nagpur was given a Bench by an order issued under sub s (3) of section 51 and the arrangement made permanent by s.41 of the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960, the proposal for setting up a permanent Bench at Aurangabad is still under the active consideration of the Central Government.
[670 D, 671 H, 672 A B, 661 B, 670 H, 671 F G, 672 A] 3.
The expression "new State" occurring in sub section
(1) of section 49 of the Act is defined in section 2(1) to mean "a State formed under the provisions of Part II".
The State of Bombay was a 'new State ' formed under section 8 of the Act which occurs in Part II.
The High Court of Bombay was the High Court for the new State of Bombay within the meaning of sub section
(1) of section 49 and therefore the provisions of section 51 are still applicable.
Sub section
(1) of section 28 of the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960 provides that as from May 1,1960, there shall be a separate High Court for the State of Gujarat and that the High Court of Bombay shall become the High Court for the State of Maharashtra and sub s, (2) thereof provides that the principal seat of the Gujarat High Court shall be at such place as the President may, by notified order, appoint.
It is significant that the Act contains no similar provision with regard to the principal seat of the High Court of Bombay.
That being so, the continued existence of the principal seat of the Bombay High Court at Bombay is still governed by sub section
(1) of section 51.
If there is continued existence of sub section
(1) of section 51 in relation to the principal seat of the High Court for a new State, a fortiori there is to an equal degree, the continued existence of the provisions contained in sub sections
(2) and (3) of section 51.
That the Legislature pre supposed the continued existence of section 51 in relation to the High Court of Bombay is clear from the opening words of section 41 of the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960 which provides for the setting up of a permanent Bench of the High Court at Nagpur.
That section begins with the words "Without prejudice to the provisions of section 51 of the ".
Thus while enacting that section, Parliament retained in tact the power conferred on the President of India and the Chief Justice under section 51 of the .
[666 D, 665 H, 666 E G, 657 C E] 4.
(a) The Constitution and structure of a High Court depends on the statute creating it.
It is clear from sub sections
(1) and (2) of section 51 that the President has the power to appoint the principal seat of the High Court for a new State and also establish a permanent Bench of that High Court at one or more places within the State.
Under these provisions the President has the power not only to define the territorial jurisdiction of the permanent Bench in relation to the 658 principal seat but also confer on it exclusive jurisdiction to hear cases arising in the territory falling within its jurisdiction.
The creation of a permanent Bench under sub section
(2) of section 51 must therefore, bring about a territorial bifurcation of the High Court.
In contrast, the power of the Chief Justice to appoint, under sub section
(3) of section 51, the sittings of the Judges and Division Courts of the High Court at places other than the place of the principal seat or the permanent Bench, is in the unquestioned domain of the Chief Justice, the only condition being that he must act Justice, the only condition being that he must act with the approval of the Governor.
It is basically an internal matter pertaining to the High Court.
The Chief Justice has full power, authority and jurisdiction in the matter of allocation of the business of the High Court and this flows not only from the provisions contained in sub section
(3) of section 51 but inheres in him in the very nature of things.
The non obstante clause contained in sub section
(3) of section 51 gives an over riding effect to the power of the Chief Justice.
There is no territorial bifurcation of the High Court merely because the Chief Justice directed under sub section
(3) of section 51 that the Judges and division Courts shall also sit at Aurangabad.
The Judges and division Courts at Aurangabad are part of the same High Court and they exercise jurisdiction as Judges of the High Court of Bombay at Aurangabad.[673 G, 675 H, 676 A C, D H, 677 A] Seth Manji Dhana vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay Bombay on July 22, 1958), approved.
Manickam Pillai Subbayya Pillai vs Assistant Registrar, High Court of Kerala, Trivandrum, ; overruled.
(b) It is difficult to comprehend how the Chief Justice can arrange for the sittings of the Judges and Division Courts at a particular place unless there is a seat at that place.
It may be true in the juristic sense that the seat of the High Court must mean "the principal seat of such High Court" i.e. the place where the High Court is competent to transact every kind of business from any part of the territories within its jurisdiction.
It is impossible to conceive of a High Court without a seat being assigned to it.
The place where its jurisdiction can be invoked is an essential and indispensable feature of the legal institution known as 'Court '.
Where there is only one seat of the High Court it must necessarily have all the attributes of the principal seat.
But where the High Court has more than one seat, one of them may or may not be the principal seat according to the legislative scheme.
When the Chief Justice makes an order in terms of sub section (3) of section 51 that Judges and Division Courts of the High Court shall also sit at such other place, the High Court in the generic sense has also a seat at such other place.
It is both sound reason and commonsense to say that the High Court of Bombay is located at its principal seat at Bombay, but it also has a seat at the permanent Bench at Nagpur.
Besides administering Justice, the High Court has the administrative control over the subordinate judiciary in the State.
The High Court must necessarily carry on the administrative functions from the principal seat but it may have more than one seat for transaction of judicial business.[673 A G] Nasiruddin vs State Transport Appellate Tribunal, [1976] 1 S.C.R. 505; distinguished.
659 (c) Provisions similar to sub section
(3) of section 51 of the Act existed in almost all the Letters Patent of the Acts under which the various High Courts have been constituted.
Clause 31 in each of the Letters Patent under which the High Courts of Calcutta, Madras and Bombay were established provided for "exercise of jurisdiction elsewhere than at the ordinary place of sitting of the High Court" Whenever a High Court was established by Letters Patent under section 1 of the Indian High Courts Act, 1861, or under section 113 of the Government of India Act, 1935.
The High Court was 'erected and established ' at a particular place mentioned in the Letters Patent.
The expression 'erect and establish ' in relation to a High Court meant nothing more than to indicate the establishment of the High Court at a particular place where the High Court was competent to transact every kind of business arising from any part of the territory within its jurisdiction.
[674 C,
