Premises, "Aranaya Kutir" bearing Municipal No. 47A Jakhan in Dehradun was owned by one Shri R.C. Sood.
He executed a gift deed in favour of Shree Anand Mayee Sangh, Dehradun, with a stipulation that the donor shall remain in possession of the premises during his life time and after his death his widow if alive would remain in possession.
The management of the same would be taken up by the Sangh after their death.
In 1967, the appellant, the widow of the brother of Shri R.C. Sood was invited by Shri Sood to reside with him in the aforesaid house and ever since she has been residing peacefully there.
On 10th of October, 1973 Shri R.C. Sood expired.
Respondent No. 1, Shri Nawal Kishore as secretary of the Anand Mayee Saogh, served a notice dated 13th November, 1973 on the appellant asking her to vacate the premises immediately, and threatening to take criminal action against her on failure to do so, as her further stay in the premises would be deemed to be in the nature of a criminal trespass.
When the appellant did not vacate the premises, respondent No. 1 filed a complaint under section 468 of the Penal Code.
The Sub Divisional Magistrate, Mussorie found that the continued stay of the appellant amounted to criminal trespass within the meaning of section 441 of the Penal Code, convicted her under section 448 and sentenced her to pay a fine of Rs. 100 or in lieu thereof to undergo simple imprisonment for 40 days.
In addition, the learned Magistrate also passed an order directing the appellant to vacate the premises within two months of the order, purporting to be one under section 456 o; the Criminal Procedure Code.
The appeal preferred by the appellant was allowed and the conviction and sentence passed were set aside.
Respondent No. 1, therefore assailed the order of acquittal by filing a criminal appeal before the High Court.
The High Court allowed it and reversed the order of acquittal passed by the Sessions Judge and convicted the appellant.
In the opinion of the High Court, the appeal filed by the appellant before the Sessions Judge was incompetent, as no appeal would lie against the imposition of fine.
The High Court declined to treat the appeal as a division in as much as under the provisions of section 401(5) of the Criminal 872 Procedure Code, it is permissible to treat a revision as an appeal but not vice versa.
Hence the appeal by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1.1.
In order to satisfy the conditions of section 441 of the Penal Code, it must be established that the party, complained of entered in possession over the premises with intent to commit an offence.
Every trespass does not amount to criminal trespass within the meaning of that section.
[875 G] 1:2.
Initiating criminal proceedings in the circumstances of this instant case is only an abuse of the process of the court.
This is essentially a civil matter which could be properly adjudicated upon by a competent civil court.
(a) The appellant was allowed to occupy tho premises in 1967 by Mr. Sood perhaps on 'lease and license ' basis.
(b) A bare perusal of the complaint filed by Respondent No. 1 makes it abundantly clear that there is absolutely no allegation about the intention of the appellant to commit any offence, or to intimidate, insult or annoy any person in possession; and (c) If a suit for eviction is filed in the civil court, the appellant, who may be fondly thinking that she had a right to occupy the premises even after the death of Shri Sood, might be in a position to vindicate her right and justify her possession.
[875 E H, 876 A, E F] 2.
The appeal filed by the appellant before the Sessions Judge was competent and maintainable.
If the learned Magistrate had only awarded a sentence of fine, in that case revision alone would be competent and not an appeal.
But in the instant case, the Magistrate not only awarded the fine of Rs. 100 but also directed the appellant to vacate the premises within two months from the date of the order.
This part of the order presumably was passed under section 456 of Criminal Procedure Code, and this made the order appealable.
[876 F H]
