Jagannathdas and his wife Premwati had no children.
Premwati suffered from tuberculosis and died on September 24, 1951.
Thereafter Jagannathdas created a trust in respect of his estate which comprised of properties falling to his share in a family partition.
The appellant filed a suit claiming that he had been adopted by Jagannathdas and Premwati as their son on September 24,1951, that the trust was void and that he was entitled to a half share in the estate.
The trial court decreed the suit after finding that the appellant had in fact been adopted by Jagannathdas and Premwati and that the adoption was valid.
On appeal by the trustees the High Court reversed the finding of tho trial court taking a different view of the evidence on record and dismissed the suit.
Allowing the appeal against the order of the High Court, ^ HELD: In an appeal against a trial court decree, when the appellate court considers an issue turning on oral evidence it must bear in mind that it does not enjoy the advantage which the trial court had in having the witnesses before it and of observing the manner in which they gave their testimony.
When there is a conflict of oral evidence on any matter in issue and its resolution turns upon the credibility of the witnesses, the general rule is that the appellate court should permit the findings of fact rendered by the trial court to prevail unless it clearly appears that some special feature about the evidence of a particular witness has escaped the notice of the trial court or there is a sufficient balance of improbability to displace its opinion as to where the credibility lies.
The principle is one of practice and governs tho weight to be given to a finding of fact by the trial court.
852 There is, of course, no doubt that as a matter of law if the appraisal of the evidence by the trial court suffers from a material irregularity or is based on inadmissible evidence or on a misreading of the evidence or on conjectures and surmises the appellate court is entitled to interfere with the finding of fact.
[856 D E; 857 B C] W.C. Macdonald vs Fred Latimer, A.I.R. 1929 P.C. 15; Watt vs Thomas, ; Sara Veeraswami alias Sara Veerraju v Talluri Narayya (deceased) and Ors.
A.I.R. ; Sarju Parshad vs Raja Jwaleshwari Pratap Narain Singh and Ors.
, ; ; and The Asiatic Steam Navigation Co. Ltd vs Sub Lt.
Arabinda Chakravarti, [1959] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 979 referred to.
In the instant case the question whether the appellant had in fact been adopted by Jagannathdas and Premwati had been determined by the trial court essentially on tho basis of oral testimony and reference had been made to a few documents only in supplementation of the oral evidence.
The judgment of the trial court showed that it had analysed tho testimony of each material witness and in reaching its conclusions on the issues of fact it had relied in some instances upon its own appraisal of the manner in which the witnesses present before it had rendered their testimony and had weighed with great care the probative value of the evidence in the context of established fact and probability.
But the High Court had, in disagreeing with the trial court, adopted an erroneous approach.
It proceeded to judge the credibility of the witnesses mainly with reference to their relationship with the parties without placing adequate weight on the nature of the evidence and the probability of its truth in the context of the surrounding circumstances.
It rejected the testimony of the appellant 's witnesses substantially on the ground that they were related to the appellant.
This cannot, by itself constitute a sufficient basis for discrediting the witnesses.
When a witness holds a position of relationship favouring the party producing him or of possible prejudice against ' the contesting party, it is incumbent on the court to exercise appropriate caution when appraising his evidence and to examine its probative value with reference to the entire mosaic of facts appearing from the record.
It is not open to the court to reject the evidence without anything more on the mere ground of relationship or favour of possible prejudice.
The High Court should also have reminded itself that the witnesses had given their evidence before the trial court which had the opportunity of seeing their demeanour in the witness box and tho appreciation of their evidence by the trial court bad to be given due consideration in the light of that fact.
[856C; 857 D; 861 E G; 862 A B] (b) It is well settled that a person who seeks to displace the natural ' succession to property by alleging an adoption must discharge the burden that lies upon him by proof of the factum of adoption ar d its validity.
It is also true that the evidence in proof of the adoption should be free from all suspicion of fraud and so consistent and probable as to give no occasion for doubting its truth.
Nontheless the fact of adoption must be proved in tho same way as any other fact.
[862 C D] A. Ragavamma and Anr.
vs A. Chanchamma and Anr.
A.I.R. and.
Kishori Lal vs Chaltibai [1959] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 698 referred to.
853 (c) For a valid adoption the physical act of giving and taking is an essential requisite, a ceremony imperative in all adoptions, whatever the caste.
And this requisite is satisfied in its essence only by the actual delivery and acceptance of the boy, even though there exists an expression of consent or an executed deed of adoption.
In some cases to complete the adoption a "datta homam" has been considered necessary but in the case of the twice born classes no such ceremony is needed if the adopted boy belongs to the same gotra as the adoptive father.
[862 E; 863 B] Shoshinath v Krishnasunder (1881) L.R. 7 I.A. 250; Lakshman Singh v Smt.
Rupkanwar ; and Bal Gangadhar Tilak vs Shrinivas Pandit (1915) L.R. 42 I.A. 135 referred to.
In the instant case the High Court, relying on certain observations made by the Privy Council in Susroogan v Sabitra, held that the trial court had not scrutinised the evidence relating to the performance of the ceremony of giving and talking and also did not have due regard to the probabilities and, on that basis, proceeded to reappraise the evidence in elaborate detail.
When the Privy Council made those observations it had in mind cases where it was possible no doubt to make the acknowledgements, observe the ceremonies and give the notices adverted to by it.
The High Court applied that standard to a case which was quite different.
The issue here was whether the adoption had been effected in circumstances which plainly did not permit time for making acknowledgements, observing elaborate ceremonies and giving notices generally.
According to both the parties, Premwati was seriously ill.
The appellant 's case is that she was so ill that she wanted to effect the adoption that very day.
The respondents have alleged that she was already incapable of any activity.
It is inconceivable that any elaborate arrangements for adoption could have been envisaged.
In consequence, the High Court misdirected itself in applying a standard of proof to the evidence which the circumstances did not warrant.
Even upon the approach adopted by the High Court its findings are vitiated by its failure to consider material evidence on record and by its reaching conclusions not sustainable in reason.
The appellant has pleaded the custom of his community that the act of giving and taking suffices to effect a valid adoption and nothing has been shown to indicate that the further ceremony of 'datta homam ' was necessary [863 D H; 864 A D; 864 F; 863 B] Sutroogan vs Sabitra, referred to (d) Separation from a Joint Hindu Family is effected by a clear and unequivocal intimation on the part of a member of the Family to his co sharers of his desire to sever himself from the Family.
A mere uncommunicated declaration amounts to no more than merely harbouring an intention to separate.
A valid ' partition requires notice to the co sharers of the intention to separate.
[869 C E] Girja Bai vs Sadashiv Dhundiraj, [1960] 43 I.A, 151; Bal Krishan and Ors.
vs Ram Krishan and Ors., [1931] 58 I.A. 220; A Raghavamma and Anr.
vs A Chenchamma and Anr A.I.R. ; Puttrangamma and Ors., vs M.S. Ranganna and Ors. ; and Kalyani (dead) by L. Rs. vs Narayanan and Ors.
, ; referred to. 854 In the instant case the trust deed contained a declaration on the part of Jagannathdas of his intention to separate in the event of the adoption deed being found valid by the court but no notice of such intention was given nor could be inferred from Jagannathdas to the appellant.
Both the trial court and the High Court rightly rejected the contention that the declaration in the trust deed must R be regarded as effecting partition.
[869 E; 869 A]
