A Food Inspector of the Municipal Corporation visited tho premises of a shopkeeper and purchased a sample of toffees which, when analysed by Public Analyst, was found not to conform to the prescribed standards.
In clause No. S of the complaint filed before the Magistrate it was stated: "That the accused No. 3 is tho Manager of accused No. 2 and accused No. 4 to 7 are the Directors of accused No. 2 and as such they were incharge of and responsible for the conduct of business of accused No. 2 at the time of sampling." Accused No. 2 was the Company which manufactured the toffees, accused No. 3 was its Manager and accused Nos. 4 to 7 were its Directors (respondents l to 5 here).
The Magistrate passed an order summoning all the accused for being tried for violation of sections 7/16 of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act and that order was assailed before the High Court.
It was argued before the High Court that the complaint did not attribute any criminal responsibility to the Directors inasmuch as there was no clear averment of the fact that the Directors were really incharge of the manufacture of toffees and were responsible for the conduct of business and that the words 'as such ' in clause No. S of the complaint indicated that the complainant had merely presumed that the Directors of the Company must be guilty because they were holding a particular office.
The High Court accepted the argument and quashed the proceedings against the Directors as well as the Manager of the Company.
In appeal, it was contended on behalf.
Of the appellant that on the allegations made in the complaint, a clear case had been made out against all the respondents and the High Court ought not to have quashed the proceedings on the ground that the complaint did not disclose any offence.
Counsel for respondents contended that even taking the allegations of the complaint ex facie no case for trial had been made out.
885 Upholding the order of the High Court in respect of quashing of proceedings against the Directors and allowing the appeal in respect of quashing of proceedings against the Manager, ^ HELD: Where the allegations set out in the complaint do not constitute any offence it is competent to the High Court exercising its inherent jurisdiction under 8.
482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 to quash the order passed by the Magistrate taking cognizance of the offence.
It is true that section 397(2) bars the jurisdiction of the court in respect of interlocutory orders.
But section 482 confers a separate and independent power on the High Court alone to pass orders ex debito justitiae in cases where grave and substantial injustice has been done or where the process of the court has been seriously abused.
It is not merely a rovisional power meant to be exercised against the orders passed by subordinate courts.
Nothing in section 397(2) limits or affects the inherent power under section 482.
The scope, ambit and range of the power under section 482 are quite different from those of the power conferred under section 397.
It may be that in some cases there may be overlapping but such cases would be few and far between.
It is well settled that the inherent powers under section 482 can be exercised only when no other remedy is available to the litigant and Dot where a specific remedy is provided by the statute.
It is clear that proceedings against an accused in the initial stages can be quashed only if on the face of the complaint or the papers accompanying the same, no offence is constituted.
The test is that taking the allegations and the complaint as they are, without adding or subtracting anything, if no offence is made out then the High Court would be justified in quashing the proceedings in the exercise of its powers under section 482.
[889 A B, G; 887 C; 888 A B; 887 G H; 888 C D; 890 A B] Madhu Limaye vs State of Maharashtra [1978] 1 S.C.R. 749; Ra; Kapoor and Ors.
vs State and Ors.
, [1980] 1 S.C.C. 43; Smt.
Nagavva vs Veeranna Shivalingappa Konjalgi and Ors., ; and Sharda Prasad Sinha vs State of Bihar.
[9771] 2 S.C.R. 357, referred to.
In the instant case, so far as the Manager of the Company was concerned, from the very nature of his duties it could be safely inferred that he would be vicariously liable for the offence as he must have been in the knowledge of the manufacture and sale of the disputed sample.
So far as the Directors of the Company were concerned, there was nothing to show, apart from the presumption drawn by the complainant, that there was any act committed by them from which a reasonable inference could be drawn to the effect that they were also vicariously liable and the High Court was right in holding that no case had been made out ex facie on the allegations made in the complaint.
{891 D; 891 A; 891 E F] 2.
The mere fact that the proceedings have been quashed against the Directors will not prevent the court from exercising its discretion under section 319 of the Code if it is fully satisfied that a case for taking cognizance against them is made out on the additional evidence led before it.
Section 319 gives ample powers to any court to take cognizance and add any person not being an accused before it and try him along with the other accused.
However, this being an extraordinary power conferred on the court, it should be used very sparingly and only if compelling reasons exist for doing so.
[893 G; 893 G; 893 F] Joginder Singh and Anr.
vs State of Punjab and Anr.
; , referred to. 886
