The word 'retrenchment ' as defined in section 2(oo) and the word retrenched ' in section 25F of the , as amended by Act XLIII of 1953, have no wider meaning than the ordinary accepted connotation of those words and mean the discharge of surplus labour or staff by the employer for any reason whatsoever, otherwise than as a punishment inflicted by ' way of disciplinary action, and do not include termination of services of all workmen on a bona fide closure of industry or on change of ownership or management thereof.
Pipraich Sugar Mills Ltd. vs Pipraich Sugar Mills Mazdoor Union , followed.
Burn & Co., Calcutta vs Their Employees ; , referred to.
The provisions of the Act have in view an existing and continuing industry and cls.
(a), (b) and (c) of the definition only exclude certain categories of termination of service from within its ambit but do not indicate what are to be included therein.
The word 'retrenchment ' has acquired no special meaning so as to include a discharge of workmen on a bona fide closure of an industry, as a result of certain Labour Appellate Tribunals awarding compensation to workmen on such closure as an equitable relief for a variety of reasons.
The intention of the legislature in enacting section 25F of the Act appears to have been to simplify and standardise the payment of compensation for retrenchment, as ordinarily understood, on the basis of the length of service of the retrenched workman.
The Hyderabad Vegetable Oil Products Ltd. vs Their Workers , Employees of Messrs. India Reconstruction Corporation and Kandan Textiles Ltd. vs Their Workers , considered.
Section 25FF, which was inserted into the Act by the amending Act of 1956, is not retrospective and does not apply to the instant 16 122 cases, and the object the legislature had in view in enacting the same was to partially nullify the effect of certain judicial decisions relating to the effect of a change of ownership or management and it was not intended to be a parliamentary exposition of the pre existing law.
The language of item Io of the third and fourth schedules, engrafted into the Act by section 29 Of the Industrial Disputes (Amendment and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1956, indicates that the legislature envisaged a distinction between retrenchment and closure and the former does not include the latter.
Although on such construction, section 25F applies only to an existing industry and section 25FF becomes largely redundant, no question of any hardship arises as the judicial decisions on the basis of which section 25FF was enacted were themselves incorrect and must be overruled.
In construing a parliamentary statute the time when and the circumstances in which it was enacted may be taken into consideration and the general principle of parliamentary exposition or subsequent legislation as an aid to construction of prior legislation, can have no application where the subsequent statute itself was based on incorrect assumptions and judicial decisions based on such assumptions.
Great Northern Railway vs United States of America, 315 U.S. 262 and Ormond Investment Co. Limited vs Betts [1928] A.C. 143, referred to.
If the other conditions of the definition clause are fulfilled, the transfer of ownership or management of an industry and its closure stand on the same footing so far as the definition clause is concerned, notwithstanding that there is a distinction in fact between the two; there is, however, no retrenchment within the meaning of the definition clause unless there is a discharge of surplus labour or staff by the employer in a continuing industry, for any reason whatsoever, otherwise than as a punishment inflicted by way of disciplinary action.
Consequently, in the instant cases, where in one the services of all the workmen were terminated by the employer on a real and bona fide closure of the industry and in the other on a change of ownership, such termination did not amount to retrenchment within the meaning Of section 2(00) or section 25F of the Act and the appellants were not bound to pay any compensation under cl.
(b) Of section 25F of the Act.
