One Natu, m his suit filed in 1940 against his nephew Laxman for partition of the joint family property and for separate possession of his half share obtained a decree in his favour.
The total area of the lands to be divided is 108 acres.
Natu and his four sons assigned on August 22, 1945, 318th share in decree obtained by them in favour of Prem Chand Patil.
Prem Chand filed a Special Civil Suit No 67 of 1950, for partition of his assigned share in the decree.
In that suit, a compromise decree was passed providing that if the sons of Natu paid Rs. 30,000 on or before March 1, 1958, then the decree holder would not been titled to claim any partition and in default he should get possession of the share claimed by him.
The sons of Natu committed default and Prem Chand Patil became entitled to partition of 318th share of 108 acres of land.
Prem Chand Patil, however assigned his decree in favour of Vishnu Hari Patil, respondent No. 1, who started the execution proceedings, under section 54 of the Code of Civil Procedure under which the lands in respect of which assessment was payable to the Government had to be divided by the Collector and the parties had to be put in possession of their respective shares.
During the pendency of these proceedings, the appellants purchased from the sons of Natu who were parties to the suit five fields out of these 108 acres four through private sales and one by court auction and were in possession of the said fields, having acquired title thereto.
These fields were allotted by the Collector in favour of Respondent No. 1 as part of his 3/8th share without giving any consideration to the claims of the appellants for equitable partition.
The appellants challenged the validity of the partition proceedings before the Commissioner, Bombay Division.
The appeal was dismissed on the ground that the appellants had no locus standi to ask for an equitable allotment under section 54 Code of Civil Procedure, as their names did not figure in the decree even though the sates in their favour were not in dispute.
The further appeals before the State Government as well as the Writ Petitions filed before the Bombay Hit h Court also failed.
Hence the appeals by special leave.
899 Allowing the appeals, tho Court.
^ HELD : 1.1.
Section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act, no doubt, lays down that a transferee, pendente lite of an interest in an immovable properly which is the subject matter of a suit from any of the parties to the suit will ba bound in so far as that interest is concerned by the proceedings in the suit.
Such a transferee is a representative in interest of the party from whom he has acquired that interest.
[902 E F] 1:2.
A transferee from party of a property which is the subject matter of partition can exercise all the rights of a transferor.
When a party can ask for an equitable partition, a transferee from him, therefore, can also do so.
[903 D E] 2:1.
Rule 10 of order XXII of the Code of Civil Procedure clearly recognises the right of a transferee to be impleaded as a party to the proceedings and to be heard before any order is made.
It may be That if he does not apply to be impleaded, he may suffer by default on account of any order passed in the proceedings.
But if he applies to be impleaded and heard he can also prefer an appeal against an order made in the said proceedings but with the leave of the appellate court, where he is not already brought on record.
[902 FG ] 2:2.
The position of a person on whom any interest has devolved on account of a transfer during the pendency of any suit or proceeding is some what similar to the position of an heir or a legatee of a party who dies during the pendency of a suit or a proceeding, or an official receiver who takes over the assets of such a party on his insolvency.
An heir or a legatee or an official receiver or a transferee can participate in the execution proceedings even though their names may not have been shown in the decree, preliminary, or final.
If they apply to the court to be impleaded as parties, they cannot be turned out.
[902 G H; 903 A B] 3.
The Collector, who has to effect partition of an estate under section 54 of the Code of Civil Procedure has, no doubt, to divide it, in accordance with the decree sent to him.
But if a party to such a decree dies leaving some heirs about whose interest there is no dispute, he need not fold up his hands and return the papers to a civil court.
He may proceed to allot the share of tho deceased party to his heirs.
Similarly, he may, when there is no dispute, allot the share of a deceased party in favour of his legatees.
In the case of insolvency of a party, the official Receiver may be allotted the share of the insolvent.
In the case of transferees, pendente lite also, if there is no dispute, the Collector may proceed to make allotment of properties in an equitable manner instead of rejecting their claim for such equitable partition on the ground that they have no locus standi.
Such a construction of section 54 of the Code of Civil Procedure advances the cause of justice.
Otherwise, in every case where a party dies or where he transfers some interest in the suit property pendente lite the matter has got to be referred back to the Civil Court, even though there may be no dispute about the succession, devolution or transfer of interest.
In any such case, where there is no dispute if the Collector makes an equitable partition taking into consideration the interests of all concerned including those on whom any interest in the subject matter has devolved, he would 900 neither be violating the decree nor transgressing any law.
His action would not be ultra vires.
On the other hand, it would be in conformity with the intention of the Legislature which has placed the work of partition of lands subject to payment of assessment to the Government in his hands to be carried out "in accordance with the law (if any) for the time being in force relating to the partition or the separate possession of shares".
[903 B C; F G]
