For committing an offence under section 16(1)(a) of the , as it stood on March 1, 1972, the maximum punishment prescribed was imprisonment for six years and fine.
Section 21 of the Act provided that such offences were triable by a Presidency Magistrate or Magistrate First Class.
By the Prevention of Adulteration of Food, Drugs and Cosmetics (West Bengal Amendment) Act, 1973, enacted by the State Legislature of West Bengal, the maximum punishment for an offence under this section had been enhanced to imprisonment for life, as a result of which an offence committed under the section in the State of West Bengal became exclusively triable by a court of sessions.
The Amendment Act received the assent of the President and came into force from April 29, 1974.
In 1976 Parliament amended the Food Adulteration Act and the amendment came into force with effect from April 1, 1976.
For offences punishable under section 16(1)(a) the Amendment Act provided for a reduced punishment for a term of three years instead of six years as before.
By the same Amendment Act section 16A was inserted in the Act providing that all offences under section 16(1) shall be tried in a summary way by a Judicial Magistrate, First Class, or by a Metropolitan Magistrate.
On September 24, 1975 the appellant lodged a complaint against the respondent for having committed an offence punishable under section 16(1)(a) read with section 7 of the Act.
On the date of the commission of the alleged offence the law in force in the State of West Bengal was the 1954 Act as amended by the West Bengal Amendment Act.
Purporting to follow the decision of a single Judge of the Calcutta High Court in B. Manna and Ors.
vs State of West Bengal, in which it was held that the Central Amendment Act was not intended to be retrospective in operation because it had not expressly repealed the West Bengal amendment nor dealt with the Act or any of its provisions in any manner, the Magistrate held that the case was triable by the Court of Sessions.
906 Disagreeing with the view of the single Judge, a Division Bench of the High Court held that after the Central Amendment Act came into force on April 1, 1976 all proceedings pending for trial of offences punishable under section 16(1)(a) as amended by the West Bengal Act which had not been concluded, would cease to be governed by the West Bengal Amendment Act and would come within the purview of the Central Act as amended by the Central Amendment Act and that therefore such offences committed prior to the amendment were triable in accordance with the procedure under section 16A as amended by the Central Amendment Act.
On the question whether the previous operation of the repealed West Bengal Amendment Act in respect of any liability incurred thereunder is preserved by section 8 of the Bengal General Clauses Act, 1899 which is in pari materia with section 6 of the both as to procedure for trial of such offences and the nature of punishment liable to be imposed.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: By virtue of the proviso to article 254 (2) of the Constitution, Parliament may repeal or amend a repugnant State law either directly or by itself by enacting a law repugnant to the State law with respect to the same matter.
Even though the subsequent law made by Parliament does not expressly repeal a State law, the State law will become void under Article 254 (1) if it conflicts with a later law made by Parliament creating repugnancy.
Such repugnancy may arise where both laws operate in the same field and the two cannot possibly stand together: As for example, where both prescribe punishment for the same offence, both the punishments differs in degree or kind or in the procedure prescribed.
In all such cases the law made by Parliament shall prevail over the State law under article 254(1).
In the instant case when Parliament stepped in and enacted the Central Amendment Act, which is a later law made by Parliament with respect to the same matter the West Bengal Amendment Act stood impliedly repealed with effect from April 1, 1976.
[915 D G] Zaverbhai Amaidas vs The State of Bombay [1955] 1 S.C.R. 799, applied.
The applicability of section 6 of the is not ruled out when there is a repeal of an enactment followed by fresh legislation.
But the Parliament having reenacted the law relating to the same offence under section 16(1)(a) of the Act and provided for altered procedure and also provided a reduced sentence, the accused must be tried according to the new procedure provided by section 16A of the Act and must also have the benefit of the reduced punishment.
[919 G H] Dictum of Sargant J. in Re. Hale 's Patent , held in applicable.
In so far as the Central Amendment Act creates new offences or enhances punishment for a particular type of offence, no person can be convicted by such ex post facto law nor can the enhanced punishment prescribed by amendment be applicable; but insofar as it reduces the punishment for an offence punishable under section 16(1)(a) of the Act, there is no reason why the accused should not 907 have the benefit of such reduced punishment.
The rule of beneficial construction requires that even ex post facto law of such a type should be applied to mitigate the rigour of the law.
[919 F H] Craies on Statute Law, 7th edn.
at pp.
387 388 referred to.
It is a well settled rule of construction that when a later statute again describes an offence created by an earlier statute and imposes a different punishment or varies the procedure, the earlier statute is repealed by implication.
Michell vs Brown ; , 912, Smit vs Benabo and Regina vs Youle ; , 315 316 referred to.
The rule is however subject to the limitation contained in article 20(1) against ex post facto law providing for a greater punishment and has no application where the offence described in the later Act is not the same as in the earlier Act i.e, when the essential ingredients of the two offences are different.
In the premises, the Central Amendment Act having dealt with the same offence as the one punishable under section 16(1)(a) of the Act and provided for a reduced punishment, the accused must have the benefit of the reduced punishment.
[921 E F]
