The respondents were the heirs and legal representatives of one of the directors of a Company in liquidation.
When the company was ordered to be wound up, the Official Liquidator took out summons under section 543 (1) of the Companies Act against its directors for a declaration that the said directors were guilty of misfeasance and breach of trust and also for an order directing them to repay or restore the money or property of the company in liquidation which they were alleged to have retained wrongfully.
During the pendency of the proceedings one of the directors died intestate leaving behind the respondents as his heirs and legal representatives.
At the instance of the Official Liquidator the Company Judge passed an order substituting the respondents in place of the deceased director.
Allowing the respondents ' appeal, a Division Bench of the High Court held that no further action in the misfeasance proceedings could be taken against the legal representatives of the deceased director.
In coming to this conclusion the High Court purported to follow the decision of this Court in Official Liquidator vs P.A. Tendolkar (dead) by L. Rs.; , Allowing the Appeal, ^ HELD: The liability arising under the misfeasance proceedings is founded on the principle that a person who has caused loss to the company by an act amounting to breach of trust should make good the loss.
Section 543 of the Act provides for a summary remedy for determining the amount payable by such person on proof of the necessary ingredients.
The section authorises the Court to direct such persons chargeable under it to pay a sum of money to the Company by way of compensation.
This is not a provision intended to punish a man who has been found guilty of misfeasance but is only intended for compensating the company in respect of the loss occasioned by his misfeasance.
Whenever there is a relationship based on contract, quasi contract, some fiduciary relation or a failure to perform a duty, there is no 212 abatement of the liability on the death of the wrong doer.
When once the liability is declared, it is open to the Official Liquidator to realise the amount due by resorting to section 634 of the Act and section 50 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
In Tendolkar 's case this Court did not consider the effect of section 634 of the Act which made the relevant provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure relating to execution of decrees applicable to orders passed by the Court under the Act.
[223 C F] At the conclusion of the proceedings under section 543 a declaration of the liability is made.
Such declaration partakes of the character of a decree in a suit.
When once such declaration is made it can be enforced under section 634 of the Act and where the order made by one court has to be executed by another court the procedure prescribed by section 635 of the Act has to be followed.
In the course of such execution proceedings the provisions of section 50 of the Code of Civil Procedure have to be applied when the person who is made liable dies before the order is satisfied and the liability of the legal representatives should be determined accordingly.
[223 G H] Official Liquidator, Supreme Bank Ltd. vs P.A. Tendolkar (dead) by L.Rs, & Ors.
; , , applied.
Aleykutty Varkey Tharakan & Anr.
vs Official Liquidator Shiwalik Transport Co. Ltd. (in liquidation) vs Thakur Ajit Singh & Ors., [1978] 48 Comp.
465, approved.
