The respondent was charged under section 135 (b) of the read with section 85 (ii) of the Gold (Control) Act, 1968.
The case against him was supported inter alia by the oral evidence of the Inspector who had seized 28 gold bars from him at a railway station, the ticket collector on duty at the time of seizure and the goldsmith who had certified the purity and weight of the gold bars seized.
The goldsmith had deposed that he could by experience assess the purity of gold by rubbing it on a touch stone.
The documentary evidence included a statement made by the respondent before the Customs Superintendent admitting that the gold bars had been seized from him and that the same had not been legally imported.
That the respondent had made this statement of admission had been affirmed by the Inspector in his deposition.
In his examination under section 342 Cr.
P.C., when the respondent was asked what he had to say regarding the deposition of the Inspector, he stated: It is true that gold was recovered from my box.
It was not mine.
It was handed over to me by the person called Mammu asking me to give it in his house.
I had no knowledge that it was gold.
" The respondent was convicted and sentenced by the District Magistrate.
After his appeal against the same was rejected by the Sessions Judge the respondent filed a revision petition which was allowed by the High Court on the ground that the prosecution had failed to establish that the metallic bars seized from the respondent were gold bars.
The High Court rejected the evidence of the goldsmith on the ground that he did neither have the training nor the qualification in the art of testing gold and that he had not conducted either the furnance test or the specific gravity test to determine the character of the metallic bars.
According to it, the goldsmith had miserably failed in the witness box to give the impression that he was a competent person to certify that what were seized from the respondent were gold bars.
The High Court was of the view that no importance could be given to the respondent 's statement of admission before the Customs Superintendent as the same had not been put to him under s, 342, 226 Cr.
P.C. and the person who recorded it had also not been examined.
In so far as the answer given by the respondent to the question put by the court under section 342, Cr.
P.C. the High Court observed that even assuming that it would have some value, the prosecution could not seek to split the same into various parts and rely on what it considered to be advantageous to establish its case.
Allowing the appeal against acquittal, ^ HELD: The onus of proving the facts essential to the establishment of the charge against an accused lies upon the prosecution and the evidence must be such as to exclude every reasonable doubt about the guilt of the accused.
If a reasonable doubt arises in the mind of the court after taking into consideration the entire material before it regarding the complicity of the accused the benefit of such doubt should be given to the accused but the reasonable doubt should be a real and substantial one and a 'well founded actual doubt arising out of the evidence existing after consideration of all the evidence '.
[230 C E] Woodroffe & Ameer Ali 's Law of Evidence, 13th ed.
I, pp.
203 204, referred to.
In the instant case the doubt entertained by the High Court about the nature of the metallic bars cannot be considered to be a reasonable doubt.
It is well known that persons who are goldsmiths by profession are able to find out whether a piece of metal is gold or not by the colour of the streak produced by rubbing it on a touch stone used by them even though their assessment of its purity may not be exact.
Further, the respondent did not dispute that gold had been recovered from his box.
Reading his answer to the question put under section 342, Cr.
P.C. as a whole, it means that he knew that when his steel trunk was opened and searched there was gold in it but he had no knowledge that the packet contained gold when it was handed over to him by Mammu.
The High Court erred in holding that the statement of the respondent that the gold was seized from him could not be used against him on the ground that it would result in the splitting up of the statement which was on the whole exculpatory.
[230 H. 231 A E] In this case even without the aid of the statement made by the respondent before the Customs Superintendent it is possible to hold that the metallic bars seized from the respondent were gold bars in view of the evidence of the Inspector, the ticket collector and the goldsmith and the statement of the respondent before the Court.
Further, in the circumstances in which the gold bars had been seized from the respondent, the burden of proving that they were not smuggled goods was on respondent under section 123 of the .
[231 E G]
