The Gujarat Panchayat Act, 1961 (Gujarat Act No. VI of 1962) came into force on June 15, 1962 in the State of Gujarat except in Kutch area and the district of Dangs.
By an order made by the State Government on March 4, 1963, the areas which were within the jurisdiction of the several municipalities constituted under the Bombay Municipal Act, 1901 were declared to be gram or nagar, as the case may be.
On April 1, 1963, sections 203 to 205 of the Panchayats Act were brought into operation.
On March 26, 1963, the State Government entrusted some of its functions relating to recovery of land revenue etc.
to the nagar and gram panchayats with effect from April 15, 1963.
On August 1, 1963 by a notification issued under section 149 of the Panchayats Act, the State Government delegated some of its powers under the Land Revenue Code and rules made thereunder to the gram and nagar panchayats.
Service rules like the Gujarat Panchayat Service (Conduct) Rules, 1964, the Gujarat Service (Discipline & Appeal) Rules, 1964, Gujarat Panchayat Service (Absorption Seniority, Pay & Allowances) Rules, the Gujarat Panchayat Service (Transfer of Servants) Rules, 1968, Gujarat Panchayat Service (Promotion to Cadres in State Service) Rules, 1974, Gujarat Panchayat Service (Pension) Rules, 1976 were promulgated and issued by the State Government.
On January 2, 1967, the State Government passed an order under sub section (2) of section 203 of the Panchayats Act directing that the Panchayat Service shall consist of district cadre, taluka cadre and local cadre and specified the posts which were to belong to each of such cadres in the Schedule appended to the said order.
In Part III of the Schedule to that Order, the posts belonging to the local cadre were specified.
Although the above steps were taken by the State for the constitution of the Panchayat Service, the State Government did not make any order regarding the equation of posts of the staff in the local cadre and fixation of their pay scale till 1975 notwithstanding repeated representations made by the ex municipal employees and others who were included in the local cadre.
The State Government also did not make any rules prescribing the promotional 145 avenues for the staff borne on the local cadre of the Panchayat Service, nor extended the benefit of revisions of pay scales and other allowances which were made on the basis of the recommendations of the First Pay Commission (Sarela Commission) and of the Second Pay Commission (Desai Commission).
The Respondent Nos. 1 to 5 in the appeal filed a writ application in a representative capacity for and on behalf of themselves and other officers and servants who were originally in the employment of several municipalities which had been constituted under the Bombay District Municipal Act, 1901 and who were working as employees under gram panchayats or nagar panchayats which were established in the place of municipalities under the provisions of the Gujarat Panchayats Act, 1961 for a Writ, order or direction to the Appellant (State of Gujarat) and others who had been impleaded as respondents directing them: (i) to pass orders regarding appointment in equivalent posts in the Panchayat Service of the State Government, fixation of seniority, pay scales and allowances in the equivalent posts with retrospective effect and payment of the difference in salary and allowances, (ii) to frame rules providing for promotional avenues in the Panchayat Service as also in the State Service, and (iii) to extend the benefits flowing from pay revisions ordered by the State Government on the basis of the recommendations of the First Pay Commission (Sarela Commission) and the Second Pay Commission (Desai Commission) retrospectively.
It was contended that the Panchayat Service was as much a service under the State as any other Civil Service, that the State Government had failed to discharge its statutory duties in relation to the members of the staff included in the local cadre of the Panchayat Service and that the denial of benefits similar to those extended to other members of the State Civil Service on the basis of the reports of the two Pay Commissions amounted to hostile discrimination.
The State Government contested the application alleging that the members of the Panchayat Service were not government servants.
Following its earlier decision in G. L. Shukla & another vs The State of Gujarat & Ors.
the High Court held that the respondents who belonged to the local cadre were government servants and allowed the application.
During the pendency of the appeal to this Court, the Gujarat Panchayats (Amendment) Ordinance 1978 was promulgated by the Governor amending some of the provisions of the Panchayats Act and the said Ordinance was repealed and replaced by the Gujarat Panchayats (Third Amendment) Act, 1978.
As the Ordinance and the Amending Act adversely affected the interests of the employees, writ petitions were filed questioning the validity of the Amending Act.
In the appeal and writ petitions to this Court on the questions: (1) Whether the Panchayat Service was a Civil Service of the State, and (2) Whether under the unamended Act, there was a common Centralized Panchayat Service.
^ HELD: 1.
(i) The Panchayat Service constituted under section 203 of the Panchayats Act has all the characteristics of a Civil Service of the State.
This also appears to have been the view of the State Government when it constituted the Second Pay Commission (Desai Commission) to examine the 146 general conditions of service applicable to Government employees other than officers of the all India services but including employees in the Panchayat Service.
[165H 166B] (ii) It is a question of fact to be decided in the circumstances of each case whether every employee of a Panchayat should be treated as a member of the State Civil Service.
[166H 167A] 2.
The provisions contained in section 206 of the Panchayats Act and the provisions in sub sections (2), (2A), (3) and (4) of section 203 clearly establish that the Panchayat service constituted under section 203 can only be a centralized service and recruitment of candidates to be made under section 210 of the Panchayats Act by the Gujarat Panchayat Service Selection Board can only be to that centralised service.
The division of the Panchayat Service into district cadre, taluka cadre and local cadre does not affect the integrity of the Panchayat Service.
It continues to be a single service notwithstanding such division.
When the Panchayat Service is a Statewise service, it has necessarily to be a common centralised service.
[167B C] 3.
Municipal Corporations, city municipalities, town municipalities, municipal boroughs, district boards, zilla parishads, taluka development boards, town panchayats, village panchayats, sanitary boards and town area committees were some of the different kinds of local bodies which were constituted under the local laws and the management of their affairs were entrusted subject to the control of the State Government to elected bodies.
Each one of them was treated as a body corporate.
In the staffing pattern of these bodies there were at least three classes of persons.
Officers holding high administrative posts such as commissioners of corporations, deputy commissioners of corporations, municipal health officers, municipal educational officers, district development officers and chief executive officers of district boards were usually drawn from the ranks of the provincial or the State Services and they were deputed to the various bodies to discharge functions which were either statutory or non statutory.
Even though they drew their salary and allowances from the local bodies to which they were deputed, they still retained their identity as officers of the State Civil Service and their services were liable to be withdrawn by the State Government at any time it pleased.
[159D E] 4.
The expressions 'civil service ' or 'civil post ' are not formally defined.
Entry 70 of List I of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution refers to Union Public Services and All India Services, and Entry 41 of List II of that Schedule refers to State Public Services.
Part XIV of the Constitution deals with services under the Union and the States.
In Article 309 of the Constitution, there is reference to persons appointed to public services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of any State.
Article 310 of the Constitution distinguishes the defence service from the civil service when it refers to members of a 'defence service or of a civil service '.
But all persons who are members of a defence service or of a civil service of the Union or of an all India service or persons who hold any post connected with defence or any civil post under the Union are treated as persons serving the Union and every person who is a member of the civil service of a State or holds any civil post under a State is treated as a person serving a State.
[160D F] 5.
The true test for determination of the question whether a person is holding a civil post or is a member of a civil service is the existence of a relationship of master and servant between the State and the person holding 147 a post under it and that the existence of such relationship is dependent upon the right of the State to select and appoint the holder of the post, its right to suspend and dismiss him, its right to control the manner and method of his doing the work and the payment by it of his wages and remuneration.
The relationship of master and servant may be established by the presence of all or some of the above factors in conjunction with other circumstances.
[161E F] State of Assam & Ors.
vs Shri Nanak Chandra Dutta, ; Superintendent of Post Offices etc.
vs P. K. Rajamma etc. ; , referred to.
Entry 5 of List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution specifically refers to local authorities established for the purpose of local self Government or village administration as part of local government.
The local authorities are included in the definition of the expression 'State ' in Article 12 of the Constitution.
[165D] 7.
The Panchayats exercise many governmental functions which the State Government can perform.
They are entrusted with the power to levy taxes and to exercise large number of powers which are loosely called as "police powers" regulating several aspects of human life.
Articles 276 and 277 of the Constitution also take note of the powers of local authorities to levy certain taxes.
[165E] 8.
The Panchayats Act was enacted for the purpose of consolidating and amending the law relating to village Panchayats and district local boards in the State of Gujarat with a view to reorganising the administration pertaining to the local Government in furtherance of the object of democratic decentralisation of powers in favour of different classes of panchayats.
It provided for the establishment of Panchayats of different tiers viz. a gram panchayat for each gram, a nagar panchayat for each nagar, a taluka panchayat for each taluka and a district panchayat for a district.
[151C D] 9.
Section 203 of the Panchayats Act provided for the constitution of a Panchayat Service which shall be distinct from the State Service.
The State Government was authorised to determine by orders issued from time to time the several classes, cadres and posts in the Panchayat Service and the initial strength of the officers and servants in each such class and cadres.
The Panchayat Service consisted of district cadres, taluka cadres and local cadres.
A servant belonging to a district cadre was liable to be posted either by promotion or transfer to any post in any taluka in the district, a servant belonging to a taluka cadre was liable to be posted similarly to any post in any gram or nagar in the same taluka, and a servant belonging to a local cadre similarly to be posted in the same gram or, as the case may be, nagar.
The Panchayat Service was also to consist of certain posts designed as deputation posts, which may be filled in accordance with section 207.
The State Government was empowered to make rules regulating the mode of recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to the Panchayat Service and the powers in respect of appointments, transfers and promotions of officers and servants in the panchayat Service and disciplinary action against any such officers or servants.
[154B E] 10.
Under section 206 of the Panchayats Act, it is open to the State Government to allocate to the Panchayat Service such number of officers and servants out of the staff allotted or transferred to a panchayat under sections 157, 158 and 325 as it may deem fit.
[154G] 148 11.
Sections 102, 122 and 142 of the Panchayats Act provide that the gram panchayat or the nagar panchayat or the taluka panchayat or the district panchayat as the case may be, shall have such other officers and servants as may be determined under section 203 of the Panchayats Act and such officers and servants shall be appointed by such authority and their conditions of service shall be such as may be prescribed.
Clause (c) of sub section (2) of section 143 of the Panchayats Act empowers the District Development Officer to appoint such class of officers and servants as may be prescribed.
[163C, B] 12.
The Panchayat Service contemplated under section 203 is a single service for the whole State and it is not a collection of distinct and separate services of each individual panchayat.
That Panchayat Service is a service under the State is again emphasized by section 206 which authorises the State Government to pool together the four classes of persons mentioned therein who originally belonged to four different sources and to allocate them to the Panchayat Service and one class of such persons are those who belong to the State Service.
Unless the Panchayat Service is held to be a State Service, inclusion of officers and servants in the State Service will be unconstitutional.
[163E F] State of Mysore vs H. Papanna Gowda & Anr.
; , , referred to.
In the instant case there is no compelling reason to hold that the Panchayat Service is not a civil service under the State.
Further recruitment of candidates to the Panchayat Service had to be made by the Gujarat Panchayat Service Selection Board constituted by the State Government.
[163H] Jalgaon Zilla Parishad vs Duman Govind & Ors.
Civil Appeals Nos.
24 and 25 of 1968 decided on December 20, 1968 distinguished.
Entry 41 of List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, refers to State Public Services suggesting that there can be more than one State Public Service under the State.
A number of such services under a State e.g. Police Service, educational service, revenue service etc.
State Public Services may be constituted or established either by a law made by the State Legislature or by rules made under the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution or even by an executive order made by the State Government in exercise of its powers under Article 162 of the Constitution.
The recruitment and conditions of service of the officers and servants of the State Government may also be regulated by statute, rules or executive orders.
[164A B] 14.
The administration of a service under a State involves broadly the following functions: (1) the organisation of the Civil Service and the determination of the remuneration, conditions of service, expenses and allowances of persons serving in it; (ii) the manner of admitting persons to civil service; (iii) exercise of disciplinary control over members of the service and power to transfer, suspend, remove or dismiss them in the public interest as and when occasion to do so arises.
[164C D] In the instant case, the Panchayat Service is constituted by the Panchayats Act and the State Government is empowered to make orders and rules regarding its organisation and management.
Having regard to the broad features of the Panchayat Service, the declaration in Section 203 that the Panchayat Service, shall be distinct from the State Service, appears to have been made only to distinguish the Panchayat Service from other services of the State attached to the several departments which are under the direct control of the State Government.
[164E] 149 15.
If the members of the Panchayat Service are not to be members of a Service under the State Government but are to be the officers and servants of the panchayat unit to which they are allotted then sub sections (2), (2A) and 4(a) of section 203 of the Panchayats Act would to some extent become unworkable, as every time there is a transfer of an officer borne on the Panchayat Service there would be a change of master.
The Legislature could not have contended such a bizarre result.
[164F] 16.
The reason for treating Panchayat Service as a service distinct from State Service appears to be that the law intended that persons belonging to the Panchayat Service should be transferable from one post in a panchayat to another post in a panchayat and unless there was an order of promotion, such persons could not be transferred to posts outside the Panchayats.
[165B] 17.
Merely because the Panchayats are declared to be body corporates, it cannot be said that any of the persons working under them cannot be considered as members of a civil service under a State.
The panchayats constituted under the Panchayats Act derive their authority from the statute and are under the control of the State Government.
They form part of the local self Government organisation which the State Government is under an obligation to foster under Article 40 of the Constitution.
[165C]
