The appellant pleader who already had strained relation with the Munsif made certain objectionable remarks in open Court, suggesting partiality and unfairness on the part of the Munsif.
The Munsif drew up a proceeding under sections 13, 14 Of the , against the pleader and submitted a report to the High Court through the District judge.
An application to the Additional District judge was filed by the pleader, for time to move the High Court to get an order to have the matter heard by some judicial Officer other than the 168 Munsif who had made the report.
One month 's time was accordingly granted, and for some reason which is not very apparent, the Additional District judge sent the record back to the Munsif.
The Additional District judge made an effort to settle the trouble.
It was arranged that the pleader should apologise and a resolution should be passed by the members of the local Bar Association.
Accordingly, the pleader appeared in the Court of the Munsif and filed a written apology and expressed his regret, and the Munsif dropped the proceeding.
It was later found that the resolution was not passed in the terms suggested by the Additional District judge, and the terms of settlement suggested by the latter were not fully carried out.
Accordingly, the proceeding was re opened and the report was re submitted to the District judge who with his opinion forwarded the same to the High Court.
The High Court suspended the pleader for 5 years.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant that there was no valid reason for reviving the proceeding, after it had once been dropped on the submission of an apology and expression of regret.
Held, that the report under section 14 of the is a report which is submitted to the High Court.
When a report is made to the High Court by any Civil judge subordinate to the District judge, the report shall be made through the District judge and the report must be accompanied by the opinion of such judge.
Once the report has been made, it is not open to the District judge to send back the record to the Subordinate Civil judge, and no order passed by the Subordinate Civil judge can have the effect of terminating or bringing to an end the proceeding.
The High Court alone is competent to pass final orders on the report.
A member of the Bar is an officer of the Court, and though he owes a duty to his client and must place before the Court all that can fairly and reasonably be submitted on behalf of his client, he also owes a duty to the Court and must uphold the dignity and decorum of the Court in which he is appearing.
Making amputations of partiality and unfairness against the subordinate Civil judge in open Court is scandalizing the Court in such a way as to pollute the very fount of justice ; such conduct is not a matter between an individual member of the Bar and a member of the judicial Service.
With regard to disciplinary action against a member of the Bar, the Supreme Court would be reluctant to interfere with the order of the High Court unless there are clear mitigating circumstances.
