Consequent upon the taking over by the Government of the municipal school in which the respondent worked as a teacher, he was absorbed in Government service.
The order stated that his absorption in Government service was subject to verification of his antecedents.
Sometime later, on the basis of the report of the Superintendent of Police that before being absorbed in Government service the respondent had taken part in RSS and Jan Sangh activities his services were terminated on the ground that he was not a fit person to be entertained in Government service.
On the view that the order of termination of his service was of a punitive character, passed without complying with the provisions of article 311 of the Constitution, the High Court quashed that order.
Dismissing the special leave petition under article 136 of the Constitution, ^ HELD: per section Murtaza Fazal Ali, J.
The special leave petition should be dismissed in limine.
[394 H] per o. Chinnappa Reddy, J.
The respondent cannot be turned back at the very threshold on the ground of his past political activities.
Once he becomes a Government servant, a he becomes subject to the various rules regulating his conduct and his activities must naturally be subject to all rules made in conformity with the Constitution.
[402 E P] The determination of the people of this country to constitute India into a democratic republic and to secure to all its citizens "liberty of thought, expression.
belief, faith and worship; Equality of status and opportunity" has been written into the articles of the Constitution in the shape of fundamental 394 rights and they are what makes India a democratic republic and what marks India from authoritarian or police states.
The right to form associations and unions, among other rights, is declared as a fundamental right; yet the State Government sought to deny employment to him on the ground that the report of a police officer stated that he once belonged to some political organisation.
[395 F H] The action sought to be taken against the respondent was not any disciplinary action on the ground of his present involvement in political activities contrary to some service conduct rule nor was there any allegation that he ever participated in any illegal or subversive activity or that he was a perpetrator of violent deeds.
All that was said was that before he was absorbed in Government service he had taken part of RSS and Jan Sangh activities.
What those activities were had never been disclosed.
Neither the RSS nor the Jan Sangh was alleged to be engaged in any subversive or other illegal activities, nor were they banned organisations.
Most people may not agree with the programme and philosophy of the Jan Sangh or RSS but that is irrelevent.
Everyone is entitled to his thought and views.
Members of these organisations continue to be members of Parliament and State legislatures.
They are heard often with respect both inside and outside the Parliament.
[395 H; 396 A D] The whole idea of seeking a police report on the political faith and the past political activity of a candidate for public employment appears to cut at the very root of the fundamental rights of equality of opportunity in the matter of employment and freedom of association.
It offends the fundamental rights guaranteed by articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution to deny employment to an individual because of his past political affinities, unless such affinities are considered likely to affect the integrity and efficiency of the individual 's service.
[397 D E] Wieman vs Updegraff, ; & Speisar vs Randall, ; , referred to.
