The appellants, who were serving in the office of the Chief Engineer Nagarjuna Unit as officiating Upper Division Clerks, were transferred to the office of Deputy Chief Accounts officer,.
N.S. Project by an order dated February 8, 1964.
Respondents 2 to 108 were initially recruited as Lower Division Clerks during the period 1959 65 and some of them were promoted as Upper Division Clerks from 1961 onwards.
After their transfer, their services were regularised by the Chief Engineer, as per his proceedings dated August 11, 3 1968.
This was challenged by some of the persons similarly situated like the present respondent and the High Court dismissed the Writ Petition as well as the writ appeal, holding that the transfer was on administrative grounds and therefore their length of service in the parent department had to be taken into account for the purpose of determining their seniority.
By its order G.O.M.S. 27 P.W.D. dated February 3,1972, the State Government accorded sanction to the permanent retention of the posts set out in the order with effect from 1 4.1967 in the office of the Deputy Chief Accounts officer.
Among other, 38 posts of the Upper Division Clerks were thus made permanent by this order with a further provision that the posts so made permanent shall be filled in by personnel already working in the Accounts organisation.
The appellants, whose services were already regularised were now made permanent by the Deputy Chief Accounts officer.
Feeling aggrieved by the said orders the respondents filed a writ petition before the High Court of Andhra Pradesh which was transferred to the A.P. Administrative Tribunal.
The Tribunal allowing the petition held that the Deputy Chief Accounts officer had not the powers of the Head of a Department and was, therefore, not competent to absorb and retain the appellants in his office and confirm them against the posts made permanent.
Hence the appeal by special leave.
405 Allowing the appeal, tho Court ^ HELD: 1:1.
The Deputy Chief Accounts officer DOW redesignated as Director of Accounts is the Head of Department for the purpose of Rule 3(2) of Service Rules and, therefore, the confirmation of the appellants against the permanent posts of Upper Division Clerk is in order.
[411 E, 415 A B] 1:2.
The Deputy Chief Accounts officer is shown to be directly working 8 under a secretariat department without intervention of any higher office.
When the office of the Financial Adviser and Chief Accounts officer under whom the Dy.
C.A.O. was directly working, was declared in 1966 as Secretariat department, the Dy.
C.A.O. was invested with power of appointing authority which comprehended the power to appoint persons who would be eligible for pay scales applicable to the staff in the offices of the Heads of Department.
The unofficial note dated June 11, 1969 of the F.A. and C.A.O. makes the position clear.
[412 G; 413 A B] 1:3.
Even without reference to Rule 3(2), tho appellants could be absorbed, in tho instant case.
Appellants were transferred to tho office of Dy.
C.A.O. in 1964.
Their regularisation was held as valid and regular by an earlier decision of the A.P. High Court They having rendered service for eleven long years in the Accounts organisation before the impugned action was taken, they were entitled to be absorbed in the department by virtue of tho proviso in G.O.M.S. 27 dated 3rd February 1972.
[415 D,E,F H, 416 A] 2.1 The inter se seniority of the appellants and the respondents would be governed by the first proviso to Rule 36(e) and not by the second proviso thereto.
This position not only stands concluded by tho earlier decision of the A.P. High Court but also by the very orders of transfer.
[417 A B] 2:2.
The transfers were on administrative grounds and certainly not at the request of the appellant.
Further tho transferred personnel could not have been considered as on deputation because if a Government servant is sent outside his office on deputation, there are certain benefits to which be would be entitled which in this case are not shown to have been made available to the appellants.
[412 A B]
