Being in need of money, respondent entered into an agreement with the appellant for a loan of Rs. 2,000 and it was decided that simultaneously she should execute a nominal document of sale and rent note, of her house situated near Sarafa Bazar in Amravati.
These documents were executed on January 7, 1953.
The respondent continued in the possession of the house property throughout and carried on repairs from time to time.
Since the appellant was attempting to enforce the document as a sale deed by filing suits in the Court of Small Causes for recovery of rent and the said suits had resulted in a decree, the respondent filed a suit for declaration that she was and continued to be owner of the house property.
The documents executed on January 7, 1953, it was said, were never intended to be acted upon.
In defence, the appellant maintained that the sale deed represented a genuine transaction, and ownership of the house property had passed to her.
It was further pleaded that the decrees passed by the Court of Small Causes operated as res judicata barring the respondent from pleading that the sale deed was merely a nominal transaction.
Reliance was also placed on section 92 of the Indian Evidence Act.
Dismissing the appeal by special leave, the Court ^ HELD: 1:1.
When a finding as to title to immovable property is rendered by a Court of Small Causes res judicata cannot be pleaded as a bar in a subsequent regular civil suit for the determination or enforcement of any right or interest in immovable property.
In order to operate as res judicata the finding must be one disposing of a matter directly and substantially in issue in the former suit and the issue should have been heard and finally decided by the court trying such suit.
A matter which is collaterally or incidentally in issue for the purpose of deciding the matter which is directly in issue in the case cannot be made the basis of a plea of res judicata.
A question of title in a Small Cause suit can be regarded as incidental only to the substantial issue in the suit and cannot operate as res judicata in a subsequent suit in which the question of title is directly raised.
[H81 G 1182A C] 1177 1:2.
Explanation VIII to section 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure operates only where an issue has been heard and finally decided in the earlier suit.
[1182 D E] 1:3.
In the instant case, the finding rendered by the Court of Small Causes in the two suits filed by the appellant that the document executed by the respondent is a sale deed cannot operate as res judicata.
[1182 E] Poholi Mullick vs Fukeer Chunder Patnaik, (1874) 22 Suth W.R. 349; Chet Ram and Others vs Ganga, 1886 Allahabad Weekly Notes; Anwar Ali vs Nur Ul Haq and Another, ; Khandu Valad Keru vs Tatia valad Vithoba, (1871) 8 Bombay H.C.R.A.C. 23(24) (DB); Mohd. Yusuf and another vs Abul Wahid, A.I.R. 1948 All.
296 and S.A.A. Annamalai Chettiar vs Molaiyan and others, A.I.R. 1970 Mad. 396, approved.
Muhammad Abdul Ghafur Khan vs Gokul Prasad and others, A.I.R. 1914 All.
527; Gulabchand Chhotalal Parikh vs State of Bombay, ; Madan Kishor and Another vs Mahabir Prasad and others, A.I.R. 1929 All. 816; Ram Dayal Sonar vs Sukh Mangal Kalwar, A.I.R. 1937 All. 676; Ganga Prasad vs Nandu Ram, A.I.R. 1916 Patna 75; Ganesh Das vs Feroze Din, A.I.R. 1934 Lahore 355, Puttangowda Mallangowda Patil vs Nikanth Kalo Deshpande, XV Bombay Law Reporter 773; Asgarali Roshanalli and another vs Kayumalli Ibrahimji, A.I.R. 1956 Bombay 236: Lala Jageshwar Prasad vs Shyam Behari Lal, A.I.R. 1967 All. 125; Shyam Behari Lal vs Lala Jogeshwar Prasad, ; Manzural Haq and another vs Hakim Mohsin Ali, A.I.R. 1970 All. 604; Pateshwari Parshad Singh vs A. section Gilani, A.I.R. 1959 Punjab 420, referred to and dissented from.
The bar imposed by sub section (1) of section 92 applies only when a party seeks to rely upon the document embodying the terms of the transaction.
In that event, the law declares that the nature and intent of the transaction must be gathered from the terms of the document itself and no evidence of any oral agreement or statement can be admitted as between the parties to such document for the purpose of contradicting or modifying its terms.
The sub section is not attracted when the case of a party is that the transaction recorded in the document was never intended to be acted upon at all between the parties and that the document is a sham.
Such a question arises when the party asserts that there was a different transaction altogether and what is recorded in the document was intended to be of no consequence whatever.
For that purpose oral evidence is admissible to show that the document executed was never intended to operate as an agreement but that some other agreement altogether, not recorded in the document, was entered into between the parties.
[1183 C F] Tyagaraja Mudaliyar and another vs Vedathanni, A.I.R. 1936 Privy Council 70, followed.
