The respondent 's suit for the recovery of money from the first appellant 's husband was decreed and in the execution of the decree certain property of the appellant was brought to sale.
The decree holder purchased that property.
The appellant 's husband having died in the meanwhile his legal representatives filed an application under order XXI, Rule 90 of the C.P.C. for setting aside the sale.
That application was dismissed by the executing court.
On the appellant 's appeal, the sale was set aside.
At the stage of second appeal filed by the respondent the parties entered into a compromise with the leave of the court which after granting leave made an order in terms of the compromise.
Under a term of the compromise, the appellants agreed to deposit, and the respondent agreed to receive a sum of Rs. 60,000/ in full and final settlement of the decree.
It was also stated that if the deposit was not made on or before the stipulated date, the sale was to stand confirmed and the second appeal of the respondent was to stand.
Having found it difficult to deposit the money in terms of the compromise, the appellants filed an application under Ss. 148 and 151 of the C.P.C. praying that the time for depositing the money in terms of the compromise be extended.
The High Court dismissed this application on the ground that the Court could not extend time where time had been stipulated by the parties in the compromise arrived at between them.
In appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellants that where a compromise had been made the order of the Court, it was open to the Court to extend the time under section 148 C.P.C.
Allowing the appeal and remanding the case to the High Court to dispose of the execution second appeal afresh in accordance with the law. ^ HELD: As there was no statutory compulsion to dismiss the application under order XXI, Rule 90, C.P.C, in the absence of an agreement between the parties, the Court would have decided the appeal arising out of tho application 468 on the merits.
The parties in the instant case however entered into a compromise and invited the court to make an order in terms of the compromise, which the Court did.
The time for deposit stipulated by the parties became the time allowed by the Court and this gave the Court the jurisdiction to extend time in appropriate cases.
Time would not be extended ordinarily, nor for the mere asking but would be granted in rare cases to prevent manifest injustice.
Where the contract of the parties has merged in the order of the Court the Court 's freedom to act to further the ends of justice would not stand curtailed.
The High Court was in error in thinking that they had no power to extend time.
[472 B F] Hukumchand vs Bansilal and ors.
; , , held inapplicable.
