On the basis of a news item that migrant workmen employed in tho Salal Hydro Electric Project were being denied the benefits of various labour Iaws, the Peoples ' Union for Democratic Rights addressed a letter to an Hon 'ble Judge of the Court requesting that the same be treated as a writ Petition and justice be done to the workmen.
The request was acceded to and in compliance with a direction made, the Labour Commissioner, Jammu, visited the site of the project, ascertained the position and submitted two reports which disclosed inter alia that the project was being carried out by the Government of India.
The petition was heard on the basis of the reports made and tho affidavits in reply filed by the Union of India pursuant to the directions made in that behalf.
The National Hydro Electric Power Corporation which had been entrusted with the execution of the work relating to the project was carrying out certain portions of the work through workmen directly employed by it and had entrusted the remaining portions to several contractors.
The contractors, in their turn, were doing a part of the work given to them through workmen directly employed by them while the remaining part had been allotted by them to subcontractors.
The being applicable to the establishments pertaining to the project work, the Executive Engineers of the National Hydro Electric Power Corporation having supervision and control over the respective establishments were registered as principal employers and the contractors to whom different portions of the work were entrusted for execution were licensed by the licensing officers appointed by the Central Government but the sub contractors did not hold any licence.
The sub con tractors were being called 'piece wagers ' with a view to circumvent the provisions of the Act.
The workmen employed on the project were mostly drawn frorm other states.
There was no uniform pattern of employment but so far as Oriya workman were 474 concerned they were usually recruited by khatedars from their villages in Orissa and given advances before being taken to the project site.
Some Bihari workmen were also found to have received such advances.
The contractors and 'piece wagers ' had not provided rest rooms, canteens and washing facilities to the workmen employed by them.
The 'piece wagers ' were making payments to workmen like Oriya labourers who were employed in groups, through khatedars and there were complaints of deductions on account of advances made to them, messing charges, etc., although the muster rolls did not reflect the deductions.
Payments of wages made by 'piece wagers ' were not being supervised by any authorised representative of the principal employers or of the Central Government and almost fifty per cent of over time wages earned by workmen was being taken away by khatedars.
The provisions of the Inter State Migrant Workmen (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1979 conferring benefits and advantages on workmen were not being implemented.
No weekly off day was being allowed in respect of workmen employed by 'piece wagers.
Some minors were also found employed on the project site.
The minimum wage fixed for workmen employed on the project was found to be a rupee less than that fixed by the State Government for workmen employed in tho construction industry.
Allowing the petition, ^ HELD: The Inter State Migrant Workmen (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1979 was enacted with a view to eliminating abuses to which workmen recruited from one State and taken for work to another State were subjected by the contractors, sardars or khatedars recruiting them.
The Act and the rules framed thereunder came into force with effect from October 2, 1980 and became applicable to the establishments pertaining to the project work.
The Central Government ought to have enforced the provisions contained in sections 12 to 16 and also those relating to registration of principal employers and licensing of contractors at least.
from June, 1982 when the various authorities contemplated under the Act were appointed.
The stand taken by the Central Government that the workers had gone to Salal Project for work on their own and therefore, strictly speaking, they were not migrant workmen, cannot be accepted as valid.
Oriya workmen recruited by khatedars from their villages in Orissa and brought to the project site for work are lnter State migrant workmen within the meaning of section 2 (e) of the Act.
[480 H; 481 F; 482 A E] 2.
Not only a contractor but also a sub contractor who comes within the definition of the term 'contractor in section 2 (c) of the Contract Labour Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970 is bound to obtain a licence under sub section
(I) of section 12 thereof before he can undertake or execute any work through contract labour.
Sections 16 to 21 of the Act read with rs.
41 to 62 provide for making various facilities available to workmen employed by contractors for securing their health and welfare and 'piece wagers ' or sub contractors who are 'contractors ' within the meaning of s 2 (c) cannot escape their obligations under these provisions by not applying for a licence under sub section
(1) of section 12.
In fact, if sub contractors under 475 take or execute any work through contract labour without obtaining a licence under sub (l) of section 12, they would be guilty of a criminal offence punishable under 8. 23 or section 24.
[483 G; 484 B D] 3.
Sub.s.
(2) of section 21 of the requires that every principal employer shall nominate a representative duly authorised by him to be present at the time of disbursement of wages by the contractor and it shall be the duly of such representative to certify the amount paid as wages in such manner as may be prescribed and under sub section
(3) of section 21 it is the duty of the contractor to ensure that disbursement of wages is made in the presence of the authorised representative of the principal employer.
Wages due to workmen employed by the 'piece wagers ' or sub contractors must be paid directly to the workmen without the intervention of khatedars, and no deductions can be made from the wages on account of any advances alleged to have been made by the khatedars to the workmen.
[487 C F] Peoples ' Union for Democratic Rights & ors.
vs Union of India & ors.(Asiad workers ' Case) [1983] I S.C.R. 456, referred to.
Under article 24 of the Constitution no child below the age of 14 years can be employed in 'construction work ' which has been declared to be a hazardous employment in the Asiad Workers ' case.
This constitutional prohibition must be enforced.
The children of construction workers living at or near the project site should be given facilities for schooling and this may be done either by the Central Government itself or if the Central Government entrusts the project work or any part thereof to a contractor, necessary provisions to this effect may be made in the contract with the contractor.
[485 G H; 486 D G] Asiad Worker 's Case, referred to. 5.
There can be no doubt that the minimum rates of wages fixed by the Central Government include the element of weekly day of rest and that no extra wages are legally payable to the workmen for the weekly off days.
The complaint made is not that extra wages are not being paid for the weekly off days but that weekly paid off days are not being given to the workmen, meaning thereby that the workmen are required to work even on their weekly paid off days These complaints have to be remedied by the Central Government by taking appropriate action and the only way in which this can be done effectively is by carring out periodically detailed inspections.
[488 G H; 489 A B] The following directions were made by the Court: (i) The Central Government will at once proceed to identify inter state migrant workmen employed in the project work and adopt necessary measures for ensuring to them the benefits and advantages provided under the Inter State Migrant Workmen (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1979.
[482 F] (ii) The Central Government will take immediate steps for ensuring that 'piece wagers or the sub contractors do not execute any portion of tho project 476 work without obtaining a licence under sub section
(I) of section 12 of the and that they carry out their obligations under that Act and Rules framed thereunder.
It will also take immediate steps for ensuring that canteen, rest rooms and washing facilities are provided by the contractors and piece wagers ' or sub contractors to the workmen employed by them in accordance with the requirements of sections 16, 17 and 18(c) read with rs.
41 to 50 and 57.
[484 G, 485 D E] (iii) The Central Government will tighten up its enforcement machinery and ensure that thorough and careful inspections are carried out by fairly senior officers at short intervals with a view to investigating whether the labour laws are being properly observed, particularly in relation to the workmen employed either directly or through khatedars by the contractors as well as the 'piece wagers ' or sub contractors.
The Central Government must also strictly enforce the requirement that payment of wages particularly to workmen employed either directly or through khatedars by the 'piece wagers ' or sub contractors is made in the presence of an authorised representative appointed by the National Hydro E1ectric Power Corporation or the Central Government and wages are paid directly to the workmen without the intervention of khatedars and free from any deductions whatsoever, except those authorised by law.
When payment of overtime wages is made to the workmen, the Central Government must ask its authorised representative to check up with reference to the over time work done by the workmen, whether they are receiving the full amount of over time wages due to them or any part of it is being taken away by tho khatedar"s, [489 D H, 490 A C] (iv) The Central Government will take note of the anomalous situation in which a workman employed in the Salal Project is getting a minimum wage of only Rs. 91 per day because it is a work which is being carried out by the Central Government whereas a workman employed in construction industry in the State of Jammu and Kashmir would be entitled to Rs. 10/ per day.
[490 F H, 491 A] (v) The Central Government will file an affidavit setting out the steps taken by it in respect of directions (i) to (iii) above within one month from the date of the judgment.
[485E, 490 C D]
