Under section 16 F(4) of the U.P. Intermediate Education Act, 1921 the Director of Education had the power to appoint the Principal of a recognised institution from amongst the qualified persons who had applied for that post, if the recommendation made under sub section
(2) by the Selection Committee constituted under section 16 E had twice been disapproved by the Regional Deputy Director and the representation of the management of the institution, if any, under sub s.(3) against that disapproval had been rejected.
This power of the Director in relation to minority institutions was taken away by the amending Act 26 of 1975 with effect from August 18, 1975.
Respondent No. 2 was appointed Principal of a minority institution by the Director of Education on March 8, 1977 in exercise of his power under section 16 F(4) of the Act.
The process of selection for the post in question had been commenced in 1973 and the recommendation of the Selection Committee had been rejected twice by the Regional Deputy Director of Education.
The appellant challenged the appointment on the ground that (i) on the date of appointment the Director had no power to appoint a Principal of a minority institution as it had been taken away by the amending Act; and (ii) that in any event the Director could not have appointed respondent No. 2 as his selection had been disapproved earlier by the Deputy Director.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: No retrospective effect should be given to any statutory provision so as to impair or take away an existing right, unless the statute either expressly or by necessary implication directs that it should have such retrospective effect.
The amending Act had no retrospective effect.
It did not provide expressly that the amendment in question would apply to the pending proceedings under section 16 F, nor did it contain any words which by necessary intendment would affect such pending proceedings.
The process of selection under section 16 F commencing from the stage of calling for applications or a post 599 upto the date on which the Director becomes entitled to make a selection is an integrated one.
At every stage in that process certain rights are created in favour of one or the other candidates.
[603 B, 602 G H, 603 A] In the instant case, the proceedings for the selection had commenced in the year 1973 and after the Deputy Director had disapproved the recommendations made by the Selection Committee twice the Director acquired the jurisdiction to make an appointment from amongst the qualified candidates, who had applied for the vacancy in question.
Although the Director exercised that power subsequent to August 18, 1975 on which date the amendment came into force, it cannot be said that the selection made by him was illegal.
[603 B D] The Act does not state that a person who had been recommended by a Selection Committee once and whose selection had been disapproved by the Deputy Director should not be considered for the post in question by the Director when he exercised his power under section 16 F(4).
The fact that the Deputy Director had disapproved the recommendation of the Selection Committee recommending respondent No. 2 for the post in question once before cannot be construed as amounting to a disqualification.
[603 F H]
