Appellants along with three others were tried by the Additional Sessions Judge, Ferozepore for offences under Section 302 I.P.C. read with sections 120 B and 149 on the charge that, in pursuance of a conspiracy, they caused the death of five persons and injuries to three others on the night between the 29th and 30th September, 1978 in the village of Kaila.
The background of the incident leading to the crime and furnishing its motive was that certain members of the family of those who were murdered in the instant case were tried for the murder in June 1977, of Buta Singh, the son of accused No. 1 but acquitted.
In order to prove the charges against the accused, the prosecution examined as many as 53 witnesses while the accused examined 16 witnesses in their defence.
The case of the prosecution rested mainly on three categories of evidence : (1) the evidence of the three eye witnesses, Mohinder Singh (PW 15), Naval Singh (PW 16) and Sant Kaur (PW) 247 ; (2) the dying declaration (Exh. PV) made by Sohan Singh ; and (3) the recovery of fire arms and cartidges from the possession of Accused Nos.
3,4,5,6.
and 7.
The Additional Sessions Judge convicted nine out of the ten accused for the offences of conspiracy and murder, sentenced accused nos.
1, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 to death and accused nos.
2, 8 and 9 to life imprisonment.
Accused No. 10, Harbans Kaur, wife of accused No. 2 Darshan Singh alias Bhasuri, was acquitted.
The High Court of Punjab and Haryana confirmed the death sentence imposed upon accused nos.
1, 3, 5, 6 and 7, but reduced the sentence of accused No. 4 to lift imprisonment.
Hence the appeals by five persons who are sentenced to death and two who are sentenced to life imprisonment.
Accepting the appeals of accused 1 and 2 and acquitting them, and, while maintaining the convictions of the rest, but altering the sentence of death imposed on accused nos.
3, 5, 6 and 7 to one of life imprisonment, the court 606 ^ HELD: 1 : 1 No rule of law stipulates that an accused whose name is not mentioned in the First Information Report is entitled to an acquittal.
The fact that the names of other accused are not mentioned in the First Information Report was at least a circumstance which the prosecution had to explain [609 D E] In the instant case, the High Court, instead of considering the circumstances in which, and the reasons for which, Mohinder Singh did not mention the names of the other accused in the First Information Report, erroneously took the view that the omission in the F.I.R. was a matter of little consequence since it was made good by the fact that Sohan Singh had mentioned the names of all the accused in his dying declaration, further overlooking the fact that the dying declaration itself was open to grave exception.
[609 E F, 610A] 1 : 2 When it is said that a conviction can rest on a dying declaration, it is implied that it must inspire confidence so as to make it safe to act upon it.
[610 E] Here, if the vital organs of Sohan Singh, according to Dr. Birinder Pal (PW 2) who conducted the postmortem examination on his body, were "completely smashed", it is impossible to believe that he was in a fit state of mind and body to make any kind of coherent or credible statement relating to the circumstances which resulted in his death.
True, he was quite near his creator on the morning of the 30th, dangerously so indeed, so that one may accept that his mind was then free from failings which afflict the generality of human beings, like involving enemies in false charges.
But, Sohan Singh was too ill to entertain any thoughts, good or bad, and he could not possibly have been in a position to make any kind of intelligible statement so as to implicate accused 3 to 9.
His dying declaration cannot therefore, be relied upon.
[610 B D] 2.
Liquor is no lie detector.
The evidence regarding conspiracy, let in through the mouth of Surat Singh (PW 27) an utter stranger, to implicate Accused nos.
1 and 2 to the effect that the conspirators discussed their plans to commit the murders, throwing all caution to winds and in an intoxicated condition cannot be believe.
It cannot be assumed that accused nos.
1 and 2 were so drunk as to overlook the presence of a stranger in their midst and yet not so drunk so as to be unable to discuss the execution of their criminal design.
Once Surat Singh is disbelieved and the story of conspiracy is discounted, the resultant conclusion obviously is the absence of Accused nos.
1 and 2 at the scene of occurrence entitling them to an acquittal [610 F, H, 611 A B] 3.
If age was a circumstance in favour of one of the accused, the same criterion must be applied to all.
More so in a case like this, when a large group of persons took part in the murders and untrue evidence has been mixed up with the true evidence, it becomes difficult to hold any particular accused guilty of any particular act.
[612 E, F] 607
