Section 303, I.P.C. provides that whoever, being under sentence of imprisonment for life, commits murder, shall be punished with death Counsel for appeallants/petitioners contended that section 303, I.P.C. is unconstitutional not only for the reason that it is unreasonable and arbitrary but also because it authorises deprivation of life by an unjust and unfair procedure.
Counsel for respondents on the other hand contended that since the validity of death sentence has been upheld in Bachan Singh and since section 303 does no more than prescribe death sentence for the offence of murder, the ratio of Bachan Singh should apply and the question as regards the validity of section 303, I.P.C. must be treated as having been concluded by that decision.
Upholding the contention of the appellants/petitioners, ^ HELD: Per Chandrachud, C.J. (Chinnappa Reddy, J Concurring) Section 303, I.P.C. is unconstitutional and void.
It violates the guarantee of equality contained in article 14 as also the right conferred by article 21 that no person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to procedure established by law.
[712 A; 711 E] (i) There is no rational justification for making a distinction in the matter of punishment between persons who commit murders whilst they are under the sentence of life imprisonment and persons who commit murders whilst they are not under the sentence of life imprisonment.
Further, no rational distinction can be made in the matter of sentencing between a person who commits murder after serving out the sentence of life imprisonment and a person who commits murder while he is still under that sentence.
A person who stands unreformed after a long term of incarceration is not, by any logic, entitled to preferential treatment as compared with a person who is still under the sentence of life imprisonment.
The classification based upon such a distinction proceeds upon irrelevant considerations and bears no nexus with the object of the statute, namely, the imposition of a mandatory sentence of death.
[70 C D; 704 H; 705 B D] 691 (ii) Murders are, by and large, committed for any one or more of a variety of motives which operate on the mind of the offender, whether he is under a sentence of life imprisonment or not.
Such motives are too numerous and varied to enumerate but hate, lust, sex, jealousy, gain, revenge and a host of weaknesses to which human flesh is subject, are common motives for the generality of murders.
Those reasons can operate as a motive force of the crime whatever may be the situation in which the criminal is placed and whatever may be the environment in which he finds himself.
[702 D F] (iii) Even limiting oneself to murders committed by life convicts within the four walls of the jail or while they are on parole or on tail, it is difficult to hold that the prescription of the mandatory sentence of death answers the test of reasonableness.
The circumstance that a person is undergoing a sentence of life imprisonment does not minimise the importance of mitigating factors which are relevant on the question of sentence which should be imposed for the offence committed by him while he is under the sentence of life imprisonment.
Indeed, a crime committed by a convict within the jail while he is under the sentence of life imprisonment may, in certain circumstances, demand and deserve greater consideration, understanding and sympathy than the original offence for which he was sentenced to life imprisonment.
[703 F G; 702 H; 703 A B] (iv) Convicts who are sentenced to long terms of imprisonment like the sentence of life imprisonment are subject to extraordinary stresses and strains and they should not be discriminated against as compared with others.
There is no justification for prescribing a mandatory sentence of death for the offence of murder committed inside or outside the prison by a person who is under the sentence of life imprisonment.
Research studies conducted abroad have indicated that the frequency of murders committed by life convicts while they are on parole is not so high as to justify a harsher treatment being accorded to them when they are found guilty of having committed a murder while on parole, as compared with other persons who are guilty of murder.
There is no comparable statistical data in our country in regard to the behaviour of life convicts who are released on parole or bail but there is no reason to assume that the incidence of murders committed by such persons is unduly high.
Indeed, if there is no scientific investigation on this point in our country, there is no basis for treating such persons differently from others who commit murders.[705 D H; 706 A H; 707 A C] (v) There are as many as 51 sections in the Penal Code which provide for the sentence of life imprisonment.
A person who is sentenced to life imprisonment for any of these offences incurs the mandatory penalty of death under section 303, if he commits a murder while he is under the sentence of life imprisonment.
It is impossible to see the rationale of this aspect of section 303.
There might have been the semblance of some logic to explain, if not to sustain, such a provision if murder was the only offence for which life imprisonment was prescribed as a punishment.
It could then be argued that the intention of the legislature was to provide for enhanced sentence for the second offence of murder.
But, under the section as it stands, a person who is sentenced to life imprisonment for breach of trust or for sedition under section 124 A or for counterfeiting a coin under section 232 or for forgery under s.467 will have to be sentenced to death if he commits a murder while he is under the sentence of life 692 imprisonment.
There is nothing in common between such offences previously committed and the subsequent offence of murder.
Indeed, it defies all logic to understand why such a provision was made and what social purpose can be served by sentencing a forgerer to a compulsory punishment of death for the mere reason that he was undergoing the sentence of life imprisonment for forgery when he committed the offence of murder.
The motivation of the two offences is different, the circumstances in which they are committed would be different and indeed the two offences are basically of a different genre.
To prescribe a mandatory sentence of death for the second of such offences for the reason that the offender was under the sentence of life imprisonment for the first of such offences is arbitrary beyond the bounds of all reason.
[708 E H; 709 A C] (vi) A standardised mandatory sentence, and that too in the form of a sentence of death, fails to take into account the facts and circumstances of each particular case.
It is those facts and circumstances which constitute a safe guideline for determining the question of sentence in each individual case.
The impossibility of laying down standards is at the very core of the criminal law as administered in India which invests the judges with a very wide discretion in the matter of fixing the degree of punishment.
The exercise of judicial discretion on well recognised principles is, in the final analysis, the safest possible safeguard for the accused.
There is no reason why in the case of a person whose case falls under section 303, factors like the age and sex of the offender, the provocation received by the offender and the motive of the crime should be excluded from consideration on the question of sentence.
[707 D H; 708 A] Jagmohan Singh vs State of U.P. ; , referred to.
(vii) Equity and good conscience are the hall marks of justice.
A provision of law which deprives the court of the use of its wise and beneficent discretion in a matter of life and death, without regard to the circumstances in which the offence was committee and, therefore without regard to the gravity of the offence, cannot but be regarded as harsh, unjust and unfair.
The legislature cannot make relevant circumstances irrelevant, deprive the courts of their legitimate jurisdiction to exercise their discretion not to impose the death sentence in appropriate cases, compel them to shut their eyes to mitigating circumstances and inflict upon them the dubious and unconscionable duty of imposing a pre ordained sentence of death [704 D F] (viii) It is because the death sentence has been made mandatory by section 303 I.P.C. in regard to a particular class of persons that, as a necessary consequence, they are deprived of the opportunity under section 235 (2), Cr.
P.C. to show cause why they should not be sentenced to death and the Court is relieved from its obligation under section 354 (3), Cr.
P.C. to state the special reasons for imposing the sentence of death.
The deprivation of these rights and safeguards which is bound to result in injustice is harsh, arbitrary and unjust.
[708 C D] (ix) After the decisions in Maneka Gandhi, Sunil Batra and Bachan Singh it cannot be contended that it is for the legislature to prescribe the procedure and for the courts to follow it or that it is for the legislature to 693 provide the punishment and for the courts to impose it.
The courts are not bound and are indeed not free, to apply a fanciful procedure by a blind adherence to the letter of the law or to impose a savage sentence.
The last word on the question of justice and fairness does not rest with the legislature.
Just as reasonableness of restrictions under cls.
(2) to (6) of article 19 is for the courts to determine, so is it for the courts to decide whether the procedure prescribed by a law for depriving a person of his life or liberty is fair, just and reasonable.
[698 G H; 699 C D] Maneka Gandhi vs Union of India, [1978] 2 S.C.R. 621; Sunil Batra vs Delhi Administration, ; ; and Bachan Singh vs State of Punjab, , referred to.
(x) In Bachan Singh the majority concluded that s.302, I.P.C. is valid for three main reasons: Firstly, that the death sentence provided for by section 302 is an alternative to the sentence of life imprisonment; secondly, that special reasons have to be stated under section 354 (3), Cr.
P.C. if the normal rule is departed from and the death sentence has to be imposed; and, thirdly, because the accused is entitled under section 235 (2), Cr.
P.C. to be heard on the question of sentence.
The ratio of Bachan Singh, therefore, is that, death sentence is constitutional if it is prescribed as an alternative sentence for the offence of murder and if the normal sentence prescribed by law for murder is imprisonment for life.
Since there is a fundamental distinction between the provisions of section 302 and section 303, I.P.C., the ratio of Bachan Singh will not govern the question as regards the validity of s.303: whereas section 302, I.P.C. provides for the sentence of death as an alternative sentence, the only sentence which section 303 I.P.C. prescribes is the sentence of death; and since section 303 I.P.C. does not provide for an alternative sentence, ss.354 (3) and 235(2), Cr.
P.C. have no application to cases arising under that section.[700 D H; 701 A D] Bachan Singh vs State of Punjab explained.
per Chinnappa Reddy, J. (concurring): Section 303, I.P.C. is out of tune with the philosophy of our Constitution.
It particularly offends article 21 and the new jurisprudence which has sprung around since the Bank Nationalisation case.
Maneka Gandhi carried article 21 to nobler rights and made it the focal point round which must now revolve to advantage all claims to rights touching life and liberty.
The procedure prescribed by law has to be fair, just and reasonable, not fanciful, oppressive or arbitrary.
Bachan Singh sustained the validity of s.302 because the sentence of imprisonment for life and not death was the normal punishment for murder, and the sentence of death was an alternative penalty to be resorted to in the most exceptional of cases and the discretion to impose or not to impose the sentence of death was given to the Judge.
Judicial discretion was what prevented the outlawing of the sentence of death even as an alternative penalty for murder.
Judged in the light of Maneka Gandhi and Bachan Singh, it is impossible to uphold section 303 as valid.
Section 303 excludes judicial discretion.
So final, so irrevocable and so irrestitutable is the sentence of death that no law which provides for it without involvement of the judicial mind can be said to be fair, just and reasonable.
[712 C H; 713 A G] 694 Bank Nationalisation Case; , ; Maneka Gandhi vs Union of India, [1978] 2 S.C.R. 621; and Bachan Singh vs State of Punjab, [1980] 2 S.C.C.684, referred to.
