The General Secretary of the Employees Association of the National Institute of Foundry and Forge Technology, Ranchi filed a complaint before the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Ranchi to take action against Banktesh Prasad.
the Security Officer of the Institute and the Appellant, the Director of the Institute, alleging that both had committed certain acts amounting to offences punishable the former under Sections.
323 and 504 IPC and the latter under Sections 323 and 506 IPC.
After recording the statement of the complainant and the evidence of six witnesses under section 202 Cr.
Procedure Code 1973, the Chief Judicial Magistrate felt that there was no prima facie case made out for proceeding against the appellant and accordingly he declined to issue process against him.
A revision petition filed by the complainant against that order was dismissed by the Judicial Commissioner, Ranchi.
However, in the course of further proceedings against Banktesh Prasad, the First Class Judicial Magistrate, Ranchi to whose Court the proceedings were transferred allowed an application under section 319 filed by the complainant to the effect that since it was in the further evidence of the witnesses that the appellant had also taken out his revolver and threatened to shoot and kill the complainants ' party, he should be summoned to stand trial along with Banktesh Prasad.
The appellant questioned the order of the Magistrate before the Patna High Court at Ranchi in a Revision Petition.
That Petition was dismissed.
Hence the appeal by Special Leave.
Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1 : 1 Having regard to the nature of the proceedings under Section 202 of the Criminal Procedure Code, it may be difficult to hold that there is a legal bar based on the principle of issue estoppel to proceed under Section 319 against a person complained against on the same material, if the Court has dismissed a complaint under Section 203.
But it is not necessary 725 to express any final opinion on that question since, in the instant case, it is seen that the magistrate decided to take action under section 319 of the Code on the basis of fresh evidence which was brought on record in the course of proceedings that took place after the inquiry contemplated under Section 202 of the Code was over and in the course of the trial against Banktesh Prasad.
[730 G H, 731 A B] 1 : 2 Even when an order of the magistrate declining to issue process under Section 202 is confirmed by a higher court, the jurisdiction of the magistrate under Section 319 remains unaffected, if other conditions are satisfied.
[731 B] 1 : 3 The autre fois principle adumbrated in Section 300 of the Code cannot, however, apply to this case.
In the instant case, the magistrate had good reason to summon the appellant under Section 319 of the Code, as it appears from the evidence led at the trial that there was a strong case made out against the appellant for joining him in the criminal case as an accused.
[731 B, 732 D] Pramathanath Taluqdar vs Saroj Ranjan Sarkar [1962] Suppl.
2 SCR 297; Municipal Corporation of Delhi vs Ram Kishan Rohatgi and ors. ; followed.
2 : 1 The object of the inquiry under Section 202 of the Code is the ascertainment of the fact whether the complaint has any valid foundation calling for the issue of process to the person complained against or whether it is a baseless one on which no action need be taken.
Section 202 does not require any adjudication to be made about the guilt or otherwise of the person against whom the complaint is preferred.
[728 H, 729 A B] 2 : 2 An inquiry under Section 202 of the Code is not in the nature of a trial for there can be in law only one trial in respect of any offence and that a trial can commence only after the process is issued to the accused.
The said proceedings are not strictly proceedings between the complainant and the accused.
A person against whom a complaint is filed does not become an accused until it is decided to issue process against him.
Even if he participates in the proceedings under Section 202 of the Code, he does so not as an accused but as a member of the public.
[728 G H] Vadilal Panchal vs Dattatraya Dulaji Ghadigaonker and Anr., ; Chandra Deo Singh vs Prokash Chandra Bose and Anr., ; , referred to.
