During the pendency of the ceiling appeal under the U.P. Imposition of Ceiling on Land Holdings Act, 1960, the sole appellant died on January 9, 1980, On October 25, 1980, his three sons applied for setting aside of abatement and condonation of delay and for substitution of their names as legal representatives of their deceased father.
The Additional District Judge dismissed the appeal on the view that there was no sufficient cause for condonation of delay and for vacating the abatement.
The High Court dismissed the appellants ' Writ Petition holding that Article 120 of the First Schedule of the was applicable and that therefore the petition for substitution should have been filed within 90 days from the date of death.
In appeal to this Court, it was contended that in view of the provisions of sections 38 and 42 of Act, the Code of Civil Procedure 1908 applied only for the disposal of appeals and the provisions of the , excepting sections 4, 5 and 12, were not applicable to proceedings under the Act.
Dismissing the appeal.
^ HELD: Section 38(1) of the Act clearly extends the procedure applicable to appeals under the Code to appeals under the Act.
The extension of the procedure available under the Code to appeals under the Act attracts the entire procedure of the Code relevant for the purpose of disposing of an appeal under the Act.
There is no substance in the contention that the principles of abatement and delay were not applicable to the instant case.
[738 C D] Under the Code.
when death occurs at an appellate stage, substitution is effected in accordance with the procedure laid down in Order XXII.
In terms of section 34(1) of the Act, if death occurred of one of the parties at the appellate stage of a ceiling appeal, substitution had also to be made according to the procedure laid down in O. XXII of the Code.
Rule 11 of Order XXII indicates that the provisions of the Code do apply to appeals.
[737 B] 735 Again under Rule 3(2) of Order XXII if no application is made under sub rule (1) within the time limited by law the suit shall abate.
Time has been limited by law in Article 120 of the First Schedule of the which provides that an application under the Code to have the legal representatives of the deceased appellant made a party has to be within 90 days from the date of death of the appellant and Article 121 provides 60 days period for the application for an order to set aside abatement from the date of abatement.[737 E G] If the Code and the applied at the time when the application for substitution was made, the legal representatives had to ask for substitution, setting aside of abatement and condonation of delay in term of rule 9(3) of Order XXII of the Code.
There is little room to dispute that if order XXII of the Code applies necessarily Articles 120 and 121 of the First Schedule of the would also apply.
[737 A] In the instant case the application for substitution of the legal representatives of the deceased appellant when made, was beyond 150 days from the date of his death and the High Court had rightly rejected the appellants ' application.
