In Deokinandan Prasad vs State of Bihar & Ors., [1971] Supp.
S.C.R. 634 decided on May 4,1971 the Court had, after coming to the conclusion that the petitioner herein was a member of the Bihar Education Service entitled to pension under r. 5 of the Bihar Pension Rules, issued a writ of mandamus directing the State Government to consider the claim of the petitioner for payment of pension according to law.
Inspite of the petitioner having approached the Chief Minister for implementation of the mandamus it was not until 1974 that the concerned file reached the Chief Minister and orders were passed by him that the petitioner should be deemed to belong to Class I post of Selection Grade from January 1, 1952 and that his claims should be settled within a month.
Three years after this direction of the Chief Minister the petitioner received intimation that his pension had been computed on the basis that he had retired from Class III service.
Further representations having failed to evoke any response from the State Government, the petitioner approached the Court once again.
Allowing the petition ^ HELD: The respondent State and all its officers are bound to compute pension of the petitioner not only on the footing that he is a member of the Bihar Education Service but also on the footing he was promoted to Class II by the date mentioned in the earlier judgment and from January 1, 1952 to Class I as rightly held by the Chief Minister.
Officers dealing with the pension case of the petitioner appear to have scant regard for the decision of tho Supreme Court in that both the promotion to Class II and further promotion to Class I from deemed dates were ignored and pension was computed on the basis that the petitioner retired from Class III service.
The State cannot be permitted to play ducks and drakes with a solemn decision of this Court.
The State and the subordinate officers responsible for computation of pension of the petitioner are directed to complete this computation by July 31, 1983 and by that date pension payment order correct and consistent with the direction herein given shall be issued without fail.
The State is also directed to pay the arrears of pension on the aforesaid computation within the same period with interest at 6 per Cent from January 10, 1967.
As the officers of the State have harassed the petitioner which is intentional, deliberate and motivated, exemplary costs quantified at Rs. 25,000 shall be paid.
to the petitioner before July 922 31,1983.
The slightest failure or deviation from the time schedule in carrying A out this mandamus will be unquestionably visited with contempt action.
[924 H: 925 A: 925 C H: 926 A:]
