The Committee of Management of a non Government aided school, by its resolution dated April 19,1981 appointed the appellant as Principal of the college run by it.
The order was communicated to the appellant on April 27 198} and he assumed charge on May 1, 1981.
In the meanwhile on April 7, 1981 the Secretary to the Government of U. P. Education Department communicated by radiogram to the various authorities the order of the Government stopping all fresh selections and appointments of principals in all non Government aided secondary schools.
A copy of it was sent to the college by the District Inspector of Schools on May 1,1981.
Though the appellant continued to function as Principal of the college the Committee of Management stopped payment of his salary on the ground that his appointment was not valid after the issue of the Government order dated April 7,1981.
The appellant filed a writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution praying for a writ of mandamus directing the Committees of Management of the College not to interfere with the discharge of his duties as Principal and also to pay him his salary.
T he High Court, dismissing his petition, held that the appellant 's appointment as Principal of the college was invalid in that the Committee of Management had no power to set up the Selection Committee nor had the Selection Committee the power to make any appointment.
In appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that on the date of his appointment as Principal the Committee of Management had the power to make the appointment notwithstanding the fact that the Government had withdrawn that power.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: The order of the Government became effective the moment it was issued.
The effect of that order was that the Selection Committee had no right to select the appellant nor did the Committee of Management have any power to make the appointment.
[1979 A B] 972 The Board constituted under the Act had the power to make regulations and this power could be exercised only with the previous sanction of the State Government.
Section 9(4) specifically confers power on the State Government without making any reference to the Board to make, modify or rescind any regulation.
This power comprehend the power to stop all appointments for the time being.
Exercising power under this section the State Government issued orders stopping all fresh selections and appointments of Principals in all non Government aided schools.
The effect of the order was to rescind the regulation conferring power on the Committee of Management to make appointments of Principals.
[978 B G] There was no merit in the submission that the letter dated May 1, 1981 had not been received by the Management.
[979 D] If the order was valid and power to make the appointment was with drawn or suspended, it would not be open to the Selection Committee to select the appellant an issue the order of appointment to him.
The appointment in that event would be by a body not authorised to make it and so it was in effective though not invalid.
[979 E F] Section 16E (10) which provides that where the competent authority was satisfied that a person had been appointed as Principal in contravention of the provisions of the Act, it may cancel such appointment after affording him an opportunity of being heard has no application to the present case because power of appointment conferred by the regulation on the Committee of Management was withdrawn or suspended and therefore the Committee had no power to make the appointment.
1980 E Gl
