It appears that proceedings under r. 12(5) of the Central Sales Tax (Orissa) Rules 1957 and under sub section
(4) of section 12 of the Orissa Sales Tax Act, 1947 were initiated against the petitioners for the assessment year 1980 81 in relation to assessment of tax on sales in the course of inter state trade and commerce under the and inside sales effected during the year in question under the Orissa Sales Tax Act, 1947.
Despite repeated opportunities to get themselves ready for the assessment of tax and to produce their account books and other documents, they sought adjournments on the one pretext or another.
Eventually the Assistant Sales Tax Officer, Cuttack II circle, Cuttack before whom the assessment proceedings were pending, refused to grant any further adjournment and proceeded to best judgment assessment and treated the gross turnover of Rs. 7,13,94,903.63 p. as returned by the petitioners for purposes of the to be their taxable turnover.
Similarly, he treated the gross turnover of Rs. 2,02,07,852.65 p returned by the petitioners as representing inside sales vis a vis the State of Orissa to be their taxable turnover.
After allowing adjustment of Rs. 27,88,388.47 p paid by the petitioners, the learned Sales Tax Officer raised a demand for the payment of a sum of Rs. 43,57,101.89 p towards tax on sales in the course of inter State trade and commerce payable under the and after allowing adjustment of Rs. 1,08,480.11 p paid by the petitioners, he raised the demand for payment of a sum of Rs. 13,06, 069.60 p as tax payable under the Orissa Sales Tax Act, 1947.
Thus the petitioners were faced with a total demand of Rs. 56,57,171.49 p for the assessment year 1980 81.
The petitioners instead of preferring appeals under sub s (1) of section 23 of the Act filed petitions before the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution challenging the validity of the two orders of assessment.
The High Court was not satisfied that this was a case of inherent lack of jurisdiction or any violation of principles of natural justice and accordingly held that they were not entitled to invoke the extraordinary jurisdiction of the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution, Dismissing the Petitions, ^ HELD: In the provenance, of tax where the Act provides for a complete machinery which enables an assessee to effectively raise in the courts the question of the validity of an assessment denied an alternative jurisdiction 744 to the High Court to interfere under article 226 of the Constitution.
The phrase "made under the Act" describes the provenance of the assessment; it does not relate to its accuracy in point of law.
The use of the machinery provided by the Act, not the result of that use, is the test.
[748 G H; 749 A] Under the scheme of the Act, there is hierarchy of authorities before which the petitioners can get adequate redress against the wrongful act complained of.
They have the right to prefer an appeal before the prescribed authority under sub section
(1) of section 23 of the Act.
If they are dissatisfied with the decision in the appeal, they can prefer a further appeal to the Tribunal under sub section
(3) of section 23 of the Act, and then ask for a case to be stated on a question of law for the opinion of the High Court under section 24 of the Act.
The Act provides for a complete machinery to challenge an order of assessment, and the impugned orders of assessment can only be challenged by the mode prescribed by the Act and not by a petition under article 226 of the Constitution.
[751 F H] Raleigh Investment Company Limited vs Governor General in Council, 74 IA 50, followed.
K.S. Venkataraman & Co. vs State of Madras ; and State of Uttar Pradesh vs Mohammad Nooh ; ; distinguished.
The question whether a provision is ultra vires or not cannot obviously be decided by any of the authorities created by the Act and therefore cannot be the subject matter of a reference to the High Court or a subsequent appeal to this Court.
No such question arises in a case like the present where the impugned orders of assessment are not challenged on the ground that they are based on a provision which is ultra vires.
This is a case in which the entrustment of power to assess is not in dispute and the authority within the limits of his power is a Tribunal of exclusive jurisdiction.
The challenge is only to the regularity of the proceedings before the learned Sales Tax Officer as also his authority to treat the gross turnover returned by the petitioners to be the taxable turnover.
Investment of authority to tax involves authority to take transactions which in exercise of his authority the taxing officer regards as taxable and not merely authority to tax only those transactions which are, on a true view of the facts and the law, taxable.
There is no justification for extending the principles laid down in Raleigh Investment Company 's case or Mohammad Nooh 's case to a case like the present where there is an assessment made by the learned Sales Tax Officer under the Act.
[749 E H; 753 A B] The question whether another adjournment should have been granted or not was within the discretion of the learned Sales Tax Officer and is a matter which can properly be raised in an appeal under sub section
(1) of section 23 of the Act.[751 D] The rule laid down in Mohammad Nooh 's case which requires the exhaustion of alternative remedies is a rule of convenience and discretion, rather than a rule of law.
[751 E] 745 The Act provides for an adequate safeguard against an arbitrary or unjust assessment.
The petitioner have a right to prefer an appeal under sub section
(1) of section 23 of the Act subject to their payment of an admitted amount of tax as enjoined by the proviso thereto.
As regards the disputed amount of tax, they have the remedy of applying for stay of recovery to the Commissioner of Sales Tax under cl.
(a) of the second proviso to sub section
(1) of section 13 of the Act.
It is for the Commissioner to decide whether or not there should be such stay on such terms and conditions as he thinks fit, looking to the nature of the demand raised in the facts and circumstances of the present case.
[752 E F; 753B C]
