The predecessor of the respondents filed a suit for eviction of the predecessor of the appellants from a shop and obtained a decree on March 21, 1960 for eviction.
The decree holder filed an application for the execution of the decree on March 22, 1966 and during the pendency of these proceedings, a compromise was entered into between the parties, and the Executing Court passed an order dated March 21, 1968 in terms of the compromise.
The compromise provided for the judgment debtor to give vacant possession of the remaining half of the shop to the decree holder by December 31, 1972 and to pay damages for use and occupation by the 5th of every month to the decree holder at Rs. 110/ per month, and that on six months damages being due the decree holder will be entitled to have the shop vacated.
The decree holder filed an execution petition for recovery of possession on November 25, 1975 alleging that the judgment debtor had not paid damages at the rate of Rs. 110/ per month from July 1, 1975.
The judgment debtor contested the execution proceedings contending that the terms of compromise created a fresh lease in favour of the judgment debtor in respect of the remaining half of the shop, and that the decree was therefore not executable.
The Executing Court upheld the objection holding that the compromise dated March 21, 1968 amounted to a fresh lease.
On appeal, the District Judge, set aside the order of the Executing Court, but in Second Appeal, the High Court upheld the order of the District Judge, and dismissed the appeal.
In the appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant/judgment debtor, that the compromise dated March 21, 1968 created a fresh lease, in favour of the judgment debtor in respect of the undelivered half of the shop and the decree holder 's remedy was by way of a suit for recovery of possession.
202 Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: When a compromise takes place in the course of execution of a decree for eviction the compromise may extinguish the decree and create a fresh lease, or the compromise may provide a mere mode for the discharge of the decree.
What actually takes place depends upon the intention of the parties to the compromise, and the intention has to be gathered from the terms of the compromise and the surrounding circumstances including the order recorded by the Court on the basis of the compromise.
[205 C D] In the instant case para 1 of the compromise petition and the order of the Executing Court recording the compromise disclose the intention of the parties.
The judgment debtor had already vacated "half of the shop and given its possession" and time was granted till December 31, 1972 for vacating and delivering possession of the other half of the shop as the judgment debtor wanted time till then lest his business "will be ruined by vacating the shop in hurry." This shows that the intention of the parties was not to create a fresh lease in respect of the half of the shop in possession of the judgment debtor but to help him to find out alternative accommodation and time for vacating was given till December 31, 1972.
Further, the term 'damages ', and not 'rents ' is used in the compromise petition as well as the order of the Executing Court.
The intention of the parties clearly was not to extinguish the decree for eviction but to create a mode of its full discharge.
[205 E H] Konchada Ramamurthy Subudhi & Anr.
vs Gopinath Naik, ; , referred to.
