The firm 'Sanchaita Investments ', commenced its business on July 1,1975, its three partners, the three respondents in the appeal contributing a total capital of Rs. 7,000/ .
The firm carried ' on business as financiers and investors and in its business the firm accepted loans or deposits from the general public for different periods repayable with interest at 12% per annum.
Under the terms of deposits, the depositors had a right to withdraw the deposit with the firm at any time.
In case of premature withdrawal the depositors were to lose interest of 1%.
Under the terms and conditions of the deposit the firm had also the liberty to repay the amount with interest to any depositor at any time before the expiry of the stipulated period of deposit without giving any reason.
The firm was carrying on its business on a very extensive scale.
In the year 1978 Parliament passed the .
The Act came into force on December 13, 1978 and section 12 provided a two years period ' 'for winding up every kind of business relating to prize chits and money circulation schemes.
122 On 13th December, 1980 the Commercial Tax officer lodged a complaint of violation of the Act by the firm with the police.
The FIR stated that the firm had been offering fabulous interest at 48% per annum lo its members, later reduced to 36% though the loan certificate receipts showed the rate of interest to be 11% only.
The amount in excess of 12% clearly indicated that the 'Money Circulation Scheme ' was being promoted and conducted for the making of quick and/or easy money and that prizes and for gifts in cash were also awarded to agents, promoters and members, and that the firm and its three partners in conducting such money circulation schemes had violated section 3 of the Act and were therefore punishable under section 4.
On tho same day the office of the firm was searched by the police and a sum of Rs. 42 lakhs was recovered.
The residences of the partners were also searched and large amount of cash as well as documents were seized.
Certain lists of agents seized during the investigation showed that code numbers were assigned to many of the agents and that the agents had acquired large properties at various places and had also started new business activities.
The partners were arrested and enlarged on bail.
The firm and its partners filed a writ petition in the High Court challenging the validity of the F.I.R. and the proceedings arising out of it including the validity of the searches and seizure of documents, papers and cash.
It was contended that the F.I.R. does not disclose any offence under the Act which does not apply to the firm and that there was no violation of any provisions of the Act.
The petition was contested by the State Government contending that the payment of interest by the firm and its partners at the clandestine rate of 36% against the bank rate of 12% in the context of the scheme promoted and conducted by the firm was tantamount to an activity which was banned under the Act.
and that in the process of its working, the scheme of the firm generated quick and easy money so as to render such scheme or arrangement a 'money circulation scheme ' within the meaning of the Act.
The High Court held that the Act did not apply to the Firm and that the searches and seizures were wrongful, illegal and improper and quashed the proceedings and directed the return of all documents and the refund of the cash seized.
In the appeals to this Court it was contended on behalf of the State Government that: (I) the question of applicability of the Act will only come up for consideration after the investigation has been completed and all relevant materials have been gathered on such investigation and that at the investigation stage, the Court does not interfere and also does not quash any proceedings before the investigation has been completed, (2) materials which had been gathered as a result of the investigation indicate that though the loan certificate stipulate interest to be paid @ 12% much larger sum by way of interest ranging between 36@ to 48% was actually paid to the depositions, in cash in a clandestine manner, depriving and defrauding the revenue of its legitimate dues, (3) the nature of business carried on by the firm indicates that the firm is conducting a 'Money circulation scheme ' thereby violating section 3 of the Act, and (4) the searches have been carried out in accordance with section 7 of the Act and the cash money and other books and documents have been lawfully seized 123 On behalf of the respondents it was contended that: (I) Investigation has to be done when an offence is disclosed for collecting materials for establishing an offence and any investigation when no offence is disclosed by the F.I.R. and the other materials, means unnecessary harassment for the firm and its partners and illegal and improper deprivation of their liberty and property, (2) even if all the allegations in the F.I.R. and in the other materials before the Court are accepted to be correct, the said allegation do not go to show that the firm is conducting a money circulation scheme and do not disclose any offence under the Act, (3) if no offence under the Act is disclosed and the Act has no application, there cannot be any question of any search or seizure under the Act, and (4) to be a chit fund or a money circulation scheme, an element of uncertainty or luck is essential and in so far as the transactions carried on by the firm are concerned, the said element is nowhere.
Dismissing the appeals.
^ HELD: By the Court 1.
The investigation which has been commenced upon the First Information Report is without jurisdiction and must, therefore, be quashed.
No further investigation shall take place in pursuance or on the basis of the F.I.R. dated December 13, 1980 lodged by the Commercial Tax officer, Bureau of Investigation.
[143 D] 2.
The documents, books, papers, cash and other articles seized during the investigation shall be retained by the police in their custody for a period of two months and will be returned, on the expiry of that period, to persons from whom they were seized.
[148 C] [Per Chandrachud, C.J. and Varadarajan J.] 1.
Two conditions must be satisfied before a person can be held guilty of an offence under section 4 read with sections 3 and 2 (c) of the Act.
In the first place, it must be proved that he is promoting or conducting a scheme for the making of quick or easy money and secondly, the chance or opportunity of making quick or easy money must be shown to depend upon an event or contingency relative or applicable to the enrollment of members into that scheme.
[132 P G] 2.
Besides the prize chits, what the Act aims at banning is money circulation schemes.
The activity charged as falling within the mischief of the Act must be shown to be a part of a scheme for making quick or easy money, dependent upon the happening or non happening of any event or contingency relative or applicable to the enrollment of members into that scheme.
[133 E F] 3.
A transaction under which, one party deposits with the other or lends to that other a sum of money.
On promise of being paid interest at a rate higher than tho agreed rate of interest cannot, without more, be a 'money circu 124 lation scheme ' within the meaning of section 2 (c) of the Act, howsoever high the promised rate of interest may be in comparison with the agreed rate.
What section 2 (c) requires is that the reciprocal promises, express or implied, must depend for their performance on the happening of an event or contingency relative or applicable to the enrollment of members into the scheme.
[134 A B] In the instant case it seems impossible to hold on the basis of the allegations in the F.I.R. that any offence can be said to be made out prima facie under section 3 of the Act.
In the first place, the F.I.R. does not allege, directly or indirectly, that the firm was promoting or conducting a scheme for the making of quick or easy money, dependent on any event or contingency relative or applicable to the enrollment of members into the scheme.
Secondly, the F.I.R. does not contain any allegation whatsoever that persons who advanced or deposited their monies with the firm were participants of a scheme for the making of quick or easy money, dependent upon any such event or contingency.
The F.I.R. bears the stamp of hurry and want of care.
It seems to assume, that it is enough for the purposes of section 2 (c) to show that the accused is promoting or conducting a scheme for the making of quick or easy money, an assumption which is fallacious.
An essential ingredient of section 2 (c) is that the scheme for making quick or easy money must be dependent on any event or contingency relative or applicable to the enrollment of members into the scheme.
[135 D G] 4.
A First Information Report which does not allege or disclose that the essential requirements of the penal provision are prima facie satisfied, cannot form the foundation or constitute the starting point of a lawful investigation.
[135 G] 5.
There is no allegation even in any of the affidavits filed on behalf of the State and its officers that the depositors and the promoters are animated by a community of interest in the matter of the scheme being dependent upon any event or contingency relative or applicable to the enrollment of members into it.
That being an essential ingredient of the offence charged, it cannot be said in the absence of any allegation whatsoever in that behalf, that there is "reason to suspect" the commission of that offence within the meaning of section 157 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, so as to Justify the investigation undertaken by the State authorities.
[138 B D] 6.
The rule of strict interpretation of penal statutes does not In any way affect the fundamental principle of interpretation, that the primary test which can safely be applied is the language used in the Act and, when the words are clear and plain, the court must accept the expressed intention of the legislature.
[139 B] 7.
The investigation can be quashed if no cognizable offence is disclosed by the F.I.R.
The judiciary should not interfere with the police in matters which are within their province It is surely not within the province of the police to .
investigate into a Report which does not disclose the commission of a cognizable offence and the Code does not impose upon them the duty of inquiry in such cases.
[142 B C] 125 8.
The condition precedent to tho commencement of investigation under section 157 of the Code is that the F.I.R. must disclose, prima facie, that a cognizable offence has been committed.
It is wrong to suppose that the police have an unfettered discretion to commence investigation under section 157 of the Code.
Their right of inquiry as conditioned by the existence of reason to suspect the commission of a cognizable offence and they cannot, reasonably, have reason so to suspect unless the F.I.R. prima facie, discloses the commission of such offence.
If that condition is satisfied, the investigation must go on.
The Court has then no power to stop the investigation for to do so would be to trench upon the lawful power of the police to investigate into cognizable offences on the other hand, if the F.I.R. does not disclose the commission of a cognizable offence, the Court would be justified in quashing the investigation on the basis of the information as laid or received.
[142 D F] W.H. King vs Republic of India ; , 424; M.V. Joshi vs M.U. Shimpi, ; , 993 994; R.P. Kapur vs The State of Punjab , 392 393; S.N. Sharma vs Bipen Kumar Tiwari ; ; State of West Bengal vs S.N. Basak ; ; Jehan Singh vs Delhi Administration ; and King Emperor vs Khwaja Nazir Ahmed 71 I.A. 203, referred to.
The power to investigate into cognizable offences must be exercised strictly on the condition on which it is granted by the Code.
[142 G] Prabhu Dayal Deorah vs The District Magistrate, Kamrup, ; , 22 23, referred to.
The State Government, the Central Government and the Reserve Bank of India must be given a reasonable opportunity to see if it is possible, under the law, to institute an inquiry into the affairs of the firm and in the meanwhile to regulate its affairs.
Such a step is essential in the interests of countless small depositors who, otherwise will be ruined by being deprived of their life 's savings.
[147 H; 148 A B] [Per A.N. Sen, J.] 1.
Once an offence is disclosed, an investigation into the offence must necessarily follow in the interest of justice.
If, however, no offence is disclosed, an investigation cannot be permitted, as any investigation, in the absence of any offence being disclosed, will result in unnecessary harassment to a party, whose liberty and property may be put to jeopardy for nothing.
The liberty and property of any individual are sacred and sacrosanct and the Court zealously guards them and protects them.
An investigation is carried on for the purpose of gathering necessary materials for establishing and proving an offence which is disclosed.
When an offence is disclosed, a proper investigation in the interest of justice becomes necessary to collect materials for establishing the offence, and for bringing the offender to book.
In the absence of a proper investigation in a case where an offence is disclosed, the offender may succeed in escaping from the consequences and the offender may go unpunished to the deteriment of the cause of justice and the society at large.
[170 F H; 171 A] 126 2.
Justice requires that a person who commits an offence has to be brought to book and must be punished for the same.
If the Court interferes with the proper investigation in a case where an offence has been disclosed, the offence will go unpunished to the serious deteriment of the welfare of the society and the cause of the justice suffers.
It is on the basis of this principle that the Court normally does not interfere with the investigation of a case where an offence has been disclosed.
[171 A C] 3.
Whether an offence has been disclosed or not must necessarily depend on the facts and circumstances of each particular case.
In considering whether an offence into which an investigation is made or to be made is disclosed or not, the Court has mainly to take into consideration the complaint of the F.I.R. and the Court may in appropriate cases take into consideration the relevant facts and circumstances of the case.
On a consideration of all the relevant materials.
the Court has to come to the conclusion whether an offence is disclosed or not.
If on a consideration of the relevant materials, the Court is satisfied that the offence is disclosed the Court will normally not interfere with the investigation into the offence and will generally allow the investigation into the offence to be completed for collecting materials for proving the offence.
If, on the other hand the Court on a consideration of the relevant materials is satisfied that no offence ii disclosed, it will be the duty of the Court to interfere with any investigation and to stop the same to prevent any kind of uncalled for and unnecessary harassment to an individual.
[171 G H; 172 A B] W.H. King vs Republic of India ; , 424; M.V. Joshi vs M.U. Shimpi, ; , 993 994; R.P. Kapur vs The State of Punjab ,392 393; S.N. Sharma vs Bipen Kumar Tiwari [1970](3) SCR 946; State of West Bengal vs S.N. Basak ; ; Jehan Singh vs Delhi Administration ; and King Emperor vs Khwaja Nazir Ahmed 71 I.A. 203 referred to.
The word 'scheme ' has not been defined in the Act.
It has however, has been defined in the Rules.
Cl. 2 (g) of the Rules state that a "scheme means a money circulation scheme or as the case may be a prize chit as defined in cl.
(c) and (e) respectively of section 2".
The word 'scheme ' as contemplated in section 2 (c) of the Act is therefore, to be money circulation scheme within the meaning of the Act.
To be money circulation scheme, a scheme must be for the making of quick or easy money on any event or contingency relative or applicable to the enrollment of the members into the scheme.
The scheme has necessarily to be judged as a whole, both from the view point of the promoters and also of the members.
[181 B D] In the instant case investment of monies with the firm have been made with the expectation of getting interest @48% and a big part of in black in a clandestine manner.
The transaction cannot be considered to be a scheme for the making of quick or easy money, though it may offend against revenue laws or any other law.
Transactions in black money do not come within the mischief 127 Of this Act.
Judged from the point of view of the depositors, it cannot.
therefore, be said that their investment in the firm for high return by way of interest part of which is above board and a part of which is clandestine, will form any part or a scheme for making easy or quick money, [t 81 D H; 182 A B] 5.
There is nothing to indicate that the firm makes any investment ill consultation with its depositors.
The materials indicate that the firm indulges in high risk investments and also advances monies to political parties.
Neither of these acts are illegal and do not go to show that the firm makes easy or quick money.
The materials however show that the firm pays a larger amount by way of interest than payable on the basis of the rates stipulated in the loan certificate and the excess amount of interest is paid to the depositor in a clandestine manner.
This does not, in any way, indicate the existence of any scheme for making quick or easy money.
[182 C E] In the instant case the requirements of a money circulation scheme are not satisfied.
As there is no money circulation scheme, there can be no scheme as contemplated in the Act in view of the definition of scheme in the Rules.
The materials, appear to disclose violation of revenue laws.
The materials do not disclose that the firm is promoting or circulating money circulation scheme and the question, therefore, of any violation of section 3 of the Act does not arise.
[182 G H] In the instant case as the firm is not conducting or promoting a money circulation scheme, and as no case is made that the firm is conducting or promoting a chit fund, the Act cannot be said to be applicable to the firm.
[183 A] 6.
As no offence under the Act is at all disclosed, it will be manifestly unjust to allow the process of criminal code to be issued or continued against the firm and to allow any investigation which will be clearly without any authority.
[184 E]
