The plaintiffs, who were Thekedars, filed two suits for possession of land Leased out by the Zamindars to the defendants lessees on the ground that since the Thekedars had become hereditary tenants under section 12 of the U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1 950 and were in possession of that land on 1st day of May, 1950, the Zamindars had no right to grant lease and the lessees had no right to enter and remain in possession of that land after that date.
The lessees pleaded that they were in cultivatory possession of the land during the year 1359 Fasli and were entitled to all the rights of adhivasis under the U.P. Land Reforms (Supplementary) Act, 1952.
The trial court dismissed the suits observing that the Thekedars had acquired rights of hereditary tenants but the lessees were in cultivatory possession in 1359 Fasli who had therefore acquired the right of adhivasi.
The first appellate court dismissed the appeals.
The High Court in second appeal reversed the decision of the trial court and the first appellate court and decreed the suits.
On appeal, it was contended that since there was no authority given to the Thekedars for personal cultivation of the lands comprised in the Theka the Thekedars did not acquire the right of hereditary tenants under section 12 of the 1950 Act.
Dismissing the appeals, ^ HELD: Section 12 of the 1950 Act provides that if any land was given to a person for personal cultivation by him on the 1st day of May 1950, as a Thekedar thereof, then because of the non obstante clause occurring in sub section (I) of section 12 the Thekedar would be deemed to be a hereditary tenant of the land entitled to hold the land as such and liable to pay rent at hereditary rates.
If such hereditary tenant has lost possession he is entitled to regain his possession.
If, however, the land was in the personal cultivation of the Thekedar who was appointed merely to collect rent from other tenants and incidentally allowed to cultivate the Sir, or Khudkasht land of the lessor then he will be a mere asami in accordance with section 13 928 of the Act.
Before a Thekedar can claim the status of a hereditary tenant, A he must not only be a Thekedar but the Theka must be specifically granted for personal cultivation of the land included in the Theka by the Thekedar.
[931 H, 932 A C] Babu Noorul Hasan Khan vs Ram Prasad Singh and Ors [1980] I SCR 977 and Raghunandan Singh and Ors vs Brij Mohan Singh and Ors.
, ; , referred to.
In the instant case the Theka was created exclusively for personal cultivation of the land involved in the Theka be the Thekedars and not as a consideration for some other duties to be performed by the Thekedars to the Zamindars.
The Thekedars were in possession of the land and were personally cultivating the land on the 1st day of May, 1950.
The Thekedars acquired the status of hereditary tenants under section 12 of the 1950 Act.
[933 C E] Section 3 of the 1952 Act provides that any person who has not become a bhumidar, sirdar, adhivas.
Or asami under the 1950 Act if he is in cultivatory possession of any land during the year 1359 Fasli and if the bhumidar or sirdar was not such a person, such person in cultivatory possession would acquire the status of an adhivasi.
To obtain the benefit of section 3 the person claiming to be in cultivatory possession must show that his or her possession was lawful.
[933 F G, 934 F] Sonawati and Ors.
vs Sri Ram and Anr., [1968] I SCR 617, referred to.
In the instant case since the Thekedars had acquired the status of hereditary tenants as Theka was up to and inclusive of the year 1359 Fasli, the Zamindars had no right to induct lessees in possession after depriving the Thekedars of their possession and therefore possession of the lessees in 1359 Fasli was not lawful.
Therefore the lessees did not acquire the right of adhivasi.
[933 H, 935 A]
