Whether the land owned and held by the wife as her separate property can be clubbed together with the lands held by her husband and the other members of the family for the purpose of computing the ceiling on the holding of the ' family unit ' under the Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling on Holdings) Act, 1961.
Section 4(1) of the said Act provides that for the purpose of determining the ceiling area of the family unit all land held by each member of a family unit, whether jointly or separately, shall be deemed to be held by the family unit.
Explanation to section 4(1) states that 'Family unit ' means a person and his spouse and their minor sons and minor unmarried daughters, if any.
Respondent 's claim that certain land which stood in the name of his wife was her separate property was not accepted by the Surplus Lands Determination Tribunal, which included that land in the total holding of the respondent.
Before the Additional Commissioner, the respondent contended that the land which was sold by his wife after the notified date was wrongly included in the holding of the family unit.
The Additional Commissioner remanded the matter to the Tribunal for a fresh inquiry into the question as to whether the sale effected by the Respondent 's wife was supported by legal necessity.
On a writ petition filed by the respondent the High Court directed the Tribunal to enquire also into the question as to whether the land which was in the name of the respondent 's wife was her separate property.
On appeal, the appellant contended that the High Court was in error in enlarging the scope of the order of remand passed by the Additional Commissioner.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: All land held by each member of the family unit, whether jointly or separately, is to be deemed to be held by the family unit, for the purpose of determining the ceiling area which the family unit may retain.
The circumstance that the land held by a constituent members of the family unit is separate property or stridhan property is a matter of no consequence whaatso 2 ever for the purpose of determining the ceiling area which the family unit can retain.
[4 E G] In the instant case the respondent, his wife and their minor sons and minor unmarried daughters, if any, are all constituent members of the family unit and all the lands held by them have to be pooled together for the purpose of determining the ceiling area which is permissible to the family unit.
The nature or character of their interest in the land held by them is irrelevant for computing the ceiling area which the family unit may retain.
[4 G H]
