By a notification issued under section 3A of the Punjab Motor Vehicles and Taxation (Amendment) Act, 1981 the State Government Imposed on every stage carriage plying for hire and use for the transport of passengers a sum of Rs. 500 per seat subject to a maximum of Rs. 35,000 irrespective of the distance over which it operated daily.
The petitioners, in their petitions under Article 32 of the Constitution, contended that the tax was expropriatory and not compensatory in character and was being collected by the State Government for augmenting its general revenues which is forbidden by the Constitution, and that the levy was an unreasonable restriction on the freedom of trade, commerce and intercourse within the State.
Dismissing the petitions, ^ HELD: The impugned tax is compensatory in nature and does not contravene Articles 301 and 304(b) of the Constitution.
[1023 H] The mandate of Part XIII of the Constitution is not that trade, commerce and intercourse should be absolutely free, i.e., subject to no law and no taxes at all.
Trade, commerce and intercourse should pay their way, that is, the price for the facilities provided by the State in the form of roads, bridges and many other facilities.
Therefore, there is nothing inconsistent with the conception of freedom of trade and commerce if in truth what is collected by way of tax is a pecuniary charge which is compensatory in character.
What is essential is that the burden should not disproportionately exceed the cost of facilities provided by the State.
It is not unreasonable to ask the owners of the motor vehicles to contribute towards the cost of maintenance of roads as they happen to belong to a class having a special and direct benefit of the facilities provided.
Courts 1010 have the power to decide whether what is recovered by way of tax is in truth and substance either a contribution towards the construction and maintenance of roads and bridges and other facilities necessary for smooth transport service or an exaction in excess of what is needed for this purpose.
They cannot, however, insist upon an exact correlation between the tax recovered and the cost so incurred because such exact correlation is in the very nature of things impossible to attain.
In the case of fee if at least a good and substantial portion (two thirds or three fourths) collected is shown with reasonable certainly to have been spent for rendering services to those from whom fees were collected, the Courts have upheld the levy.
In law there cannot be much difference between this principle applicable to fees and the principle that ought to govern the levy of motor vehicles tax which is claimed to be of a Compensatory character.
[1020H, 1021 A H, 1023 F G] Kewal Krishan Puri & Anr.
vs State of Punjab &.
, ; ; referred to.
The petitioners have not placed before the Court sufficient material to hold that the ievy suffered from the vice of discrimination.
It is well settled that a legislature, in order to tax some need not tax all.
It can adopt a reasonable qualification of persons and things in imposing tax liabilities.
Unless a fiscal law is manifestly discriminatory the Court should refrain from striking it down on the ground of discrimination.
[1025 B, 1024 E F] In the instant case stage carriages which travel on an average about 260 Km every day with an almost assured quantum of traffic, belong to a class distinct and separate from public carriers which carry goods on undefined routes.
The amount of wear and tear caused to the roads by any class of motor vehicles may not always be a determining factor in classifying motor vehicles for the purposes of taxation.
[1024 G H, 1025 A] Merely because a business becomes uneconomical as a consequence of a new levy, it cannot be said that it would amount to an unreasonable restriction on the fundamental right to carry on the business.
[1025 H, 1026 A]
