The respondent, as plaintiff, filed a suit against the appellant, as defendant, in the Original side of the Bombay High Court for the enforcement of its claim for a large amount of over Rs. 40 lakhs.
The appellant not only contested the claim but also made a counter claim.
The appellant made a request that in the event of a decree being passed against them, they may be allowed to pay the decretal amount in instalments.
A single Judge dismissed the counter claim and passed a decree in favour of respondent and allowed the decretal amount to be paid in instalments.
Delivery of Judgment which commenced on 12th December 1980 was concluded on 16th December 1980, upon which the advocates for the appellant addressed a letter to the Prothonotary and Senior Master, High Court, requesting that the accompanying memorandum of appeal be taken on file.
This appeal which was numbered 36 of 1981 26 was filed on 20th January, 1981.
The appeal was directed against the order in respect of instalments.
On 21st January 1981, when the matter was called for admission before a Division Bench the appellant asked for leave to withdraw the appeal and the appeal was allowed to be withdrawn.
A week after the withdrawal of appeal No. 36 the appellant filed an appeal against the judgment taking grounds relating to the merits of the case and also the direction as to instalments.
This appeal was numbered 44 of 1981.
After this appeal was heard on merits for a few days, the respondent raised a preliminary objection that because the appellant had earlier filed appeal No. 36 against the provision regarding instalments and which had been withdrawn, the present appeal No. 44 was not maintainable.
The Division Bench upheld the preliminary objection and dismissed appeal No. 44 on the ground that the appellant had by filing appeal No. 36 against the provision relating to instalments abandoned its right to challenge the decree on merits.
The appellant contended in this Court that the filing of earlier appeal No. 36 or the withdrawal thereof does not affect the right of appellant to prefer appeal No. 44 against the decree on merits.
Appeal No. 36 was filed against the order of the High Court passed under Order 20, r. 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure in regard to instalments only and not against the decree.
Appeal No. 36 had been filed soon after the judgment had been pronounced and long before the decree incorporating the order regarding instalments had been drawn up.
Appeal No. 36 must be considered to be an appeal against the order and not against the decree.
The right to prefer an appeal is a creature of statute.
The order regarding instalments is not appealable under C.P.C. and such an order cannot also be considered to be a 'Judgment ' within the meaning of clause 15 of the Letters Patent.
Appeal No. 36 which was against the order regarding instalments was incompetent and was therefore no appeal in the eye of law and for all legal purposes was non est.
Even if appeal No. 36 has to be considered an appeal against the decree in view of amended provision of Order 20, r. 11 of C.P.C., the said appeal still must be held to be incompetent and no appeal in the eye of law as the appeal was filed without a certified copy of the decree and was even withdrawn before a certified copy of the decree could be filed.
Appeal No. 44 filed against the decree in terms of the provisions contained in the Original Side Rules of Bombay High Court becomes a proper and competent appeal as the earlier appeal No. 36 was not a valid appeal in the eye of law.
The provisions of Order 2, r. 2 and Order 23, r. 1 of C.P.C. do not in any way affect the maintainability and the merits of appeal No. 44 as the cause of action and the subject matter of appeal No. 44 are entirely different from the cause of action and the subject matter of appeal No. 36.
The appellant did not waive his statutory right to file the appeal.
The appellant by his conduct has also not disentitled himself to file Appeal No. 44.
Appeal No. 36 was filed on the advice of lawyer under mistaken belief; mistaken advice of a lawyer cannot be the foundation of a plea of estoppel.
No prejudice has been caused to the respondent by filing and withdrawal of appeal No. 36 by the appellant.
The respondent contended that in view of the amended provisions of Order 20, r. 11, the order regarding instalments which is required to be incorporated in the decree necessarily forms a part of the decree.
In view of the 27 provisions contained in Order 2, r. 2 and Order 23, r. 1 of C.P.C. it was open to the appellant to prefer an appeal against the decree or to appeal against any part thereof.
The appellant preferred to file appeal No. 36 only against the part of the decree relating to instalments and not against the decree as a whole.
The filing of appeal restricted to the directions as to the instalments bars a subsequent appeal against the decree on merits.
The appellant having obtained a benefit or advantage under the decree to the prejudice of respondent cannot now question the correctness of the decree passed.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: The provisions of Order 20, r. 11, Order 41, r. 1 Order 5, r. 2 and Order 23, r. 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure do not deprive the appellant of his right to file appeal No. 44.
[54 D] The right to prefer an appeal is a right created by statute.
A right of appeal may be lost to a party in appropriate cases by the provisions of law and also by the conduct of the party.
The law of limitation may deprive the party of the right he may enjoy to prefer an appeal.
Also in appropriate cases a party may be held to have become disentitled from enforcing the right to appeal which he may otherwise have.
[46 A C] In the instant case the defendant appellant did have a right of appeal against the decree by virtue of the provisions of section 96 read with Order 41 of Civil Procedure.
The appeal has been filed within the period of limitation, The law of limitation, therefore, does not defeat the right of the appellant to file an appeal.
[46 C D] Order 20, r. 11 makes provisions for postponement of payment of money decree and of its payment in instalments and lays down the procedure for directing payment of a money decree in instalments.
The amendment introduced in 1976 to Order 20, r. 11 requires that any provision directing the payment of the amount decreed shall be postponed or shall be made by instalments may be incorporated in the decree.
The direction regarding payment of the decretal amount is an independent order which is required to be incorporated in the decree and it can only be incorporated in the decree when the decree is drawn up.
It retains the character of an order till it is so incorporated in the decree.
The rules of the Original Side of the Bombay High Court make necessary provisions as to the drawing up of a decree.
In view of procedure laid down in the rules for the drawing up of a decree, there is bound to be a time lag between the judgment and the drawing up of a decree, in which the order regarding instalment is to be incorporated.
Appeal against any provision granting instalments or refusing to grant instalments will not be competent if the direction granting or refusing to grant instalments is considered to be an order.
Such an order is not appealable under the Code.
Such an order will also not be a 'judgment ' within the meaning of clause 15 of the Letters Patent and will not be appealable as such if however, the direction with regard to instalments is considered to be a part of the decree, an appeal will undoubtedly lie as an appeal from a decree.
[47 D E, 41 G H, 41 C D, 47 F H] 28 The provisions of Order 20, r. 11 do not deprive the appellant in the instant case of his right to prefer an appeal against the decree.
The earlier appeal No. 36 of 1981 had been filed long before the decree in which the order regarding instalments under Order 20, r.11 of the Code was to be incorporated had been drawn up.
As at the time of filing the earlier appeal No. 36 the order regarding instalments had not been incorporated in the decree, the order retained its character of an order.
The earlier appeal No. 36 at the time when it was filed, should therefore be regarded as an appeal against an order.
The precipe filed for the drawing up of the order, the letter to the Prothonotary and Senior Master of the High Court by the Advocates for the appellant, the memorandum of appeal filed and the amount of stamp furnished on the memorandum are facts which go to indicate that the earlier appeal had been filed against the order regarding instalments treating the same to be an order.
The appeal No. 36 must therefore be held to be incompetent.
If the earlier appeal No. 36 were to be considered to be an appeal against the decree, the appeal would still be incompetent, because the appellant had furnished the amount of stamp necessary for preferring an appeal against the order and the requisite stamp in respect of an appeal against a decree had not been affixed.
[46 E, 48 D E, 48 H, 49 A B, 48 B, 43 D C] Under Order.
41, r.1, every appeal has to be preferred in the from of a memorandum signed by the appellant or his pleader and presented to the court or to such officer as it appoints in that behalf, and has to be accompanied by a copy of the decree appealed from, and of the judgment on which it is founded.
Rule 1 empowers the appellate court to dispense with the filing of the judgment but there is no jurisdiction in the appellate court to dispense with the filing of the decree.
The requirement that the decree should be filed alongwith the memorandum of appeal is mandatory and in the absence of the decree the filing of the appeal would be incomplete, defective and incompetent.
So long as the certified copy of the decree is not filed there is no valid appeal in the eye of law.
Though by virtue of the provisions of the Original Side Rules of the Bombay High Court the earlier appeal could be permitted to be filed without a certified copy of the decree or order, the appeal would not be valid and competent unless the further requirement of filing the certified copy had been complied with.
[49 G H, 50 A, 53 C, F] In the instant case, at the time when the earlier appeal No. 36 had been withdrawn, the certified copy of the decree had not been filed.
The said appeal without the certified copy of the decree remained an incompetent appeal.
The withdrawal of an incompetent appeal which would indeed be no appeal in the eye of law cannot in any way prejudice the right of any appellant to file a proper appeal, if the right of appeal is not otherwise lost by lapse of time or for any other valid reason.
[52 F G] Order 2, r.2, contemplates that at the time of the institution of the suit, the whole of the claim which the plaintiff is entitled to make in respect of the cause of action, has to be made and also deals with the consequences of non compliance with the requirements of the said rule.
It is doubtful whether the principles underlying this rule can be said to be applicable to an appeal.
This rule is applicable only to suits and cannot in terms apply to appeals.
Even if 29 an appeal be considered to be a continuation of a suit for certain purposes, the provision of this rule cannot in terms be made applicable to an appeal in view of the scheme of the said rule and the language used therein.
[53 F G, 53 E F] In the instant case the provisions of Order 2, r.2 of the Code do not stand in the way of the appellant in the matter of filing the subsequent appeal No. 44.
Even if the principles underlying Order 2, r.2 are considered as applicable to an appeal the maintainability of the appeal No. 44 cannot be held to be affected in any way as the cause of action in respect of the present appeal is entirely different from the cause of action on which the earlier appeal was filed.
[23 A B, G] Order 23, r.1 of the Code does not also stand in the way of the maintainability of the instant appeal No. 44.
Apart from the incompetency of the earlier appeal No. 36, the subject matter of the said appeal was entirely different from the subject matter of the present appeal.
[53 H, A B] The provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure contained in Order 20, r.11, Order 2.
r. 2 and Order 23,r.
1 do not in terms deal with any question in relation to the right of appeal or the extinguishment thereof.
These provisions do not by themselves confer any right of appeal on a party or deprive any party of the right of appeal which a party may enjoy.
These are not the statutory provisions which either confer a right of appeal on a party or deprive a party of any such right.
[54 B C] A mere prayer for postponement of payment of decretal amount or for payment thereof in instalments on the basis of the provisions contained in Order 20, r.11 (1) of the Code at a time when the decision in the suit is yet to be announced can never be considered to amount to such conduct of the party as to deprive him his right to prefer an appeal against any decree, if ultimately passed, and to disentitle him from filing an appeal against the decree.
[55 G H] In the matters of litigation the litigant who is not expected to be familiar with the formalities of law and rules of procedure is generally guided by the advice of his lawyers.
The statement of the lawyers recorded by the Division Bench in its judgment clearly goes to indicate that the lawyer had advised filing of the earlier appeal under mistaken belief.
The act done by the defendant appellant on the mistaken advice of a lawyer cannot furnish a proper ground for depriving the defendant appellant of his valuable statutory right of preferring an appeal against the decree.
The filing of an incompetent appeal on the mistaken advice of a lawyer cannot, in our opinion, reflect any such conduct on the part of the defendant appellant as to disentitle him to maintain the present appeal.
[56 C, D; F, G] The present appeal No. 44 had been filed long before the decree had been drawn up, and, there can be no question of execution of any decree at the time when that appeal was filed.
The question of the defendant appellant having obtained an advantage under the decree does not therefore really arise.
[59 A B] 30
