Section 9 of the as amended retrospectively by the Central Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1969 provided for levy and collection of tax and penalties on sale of goods effected by a dealer in the course of inter State trade or commerce.
lt further provided that the authorties for the time being empowered to assess, re assess, collect and enforce payment of any tax under the general sales tax law of the appropriate State shall, on behalf of Government of India, assess, re assess, collect and enforce payment of tax including any penalty, payable by a dealer under this Act as if the tax or penalty payable by such a dealer under this Act is a tax or penalty under the general sales tax law of the State; and for this purpose they may exercise all or any of the powers they have under the general sales tax law of the State.
Consequent upon the decision of this Court in Khemka & Co. vs State of Maharashtra ; holding by a majority that it was not open to the authorities under the State law to levy and recover penalty for delay or default in payment of tax under the , section 9 of the Act came to be amended by the Central sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1976 introducing sub section (2 A) in it.
Sub section (2 A) of section 9 provided that all the provisions relating to offences and penalties (with certain exceptions) of the general sales tax law of each State shall with necessary modification, apply in relation to the assessment, re assessment, collection and the enforcement of payment of any tax required to be collected under this Act in such State as if the tax under this Act were a tax under such sales tax law.
199 Section 9 of the Amending Act, 1976 declared that the provisions; of section 9 of the 1956 Act would have effect and should be deemed always to have had effect in relation to the period commencing from January 5, 1957 (the date of coming into force of 1956 Act) and ending with the date immediately proceeding the date of commencement of the Amending Act.
The petitioners in these two batches of petitions filed under Article 32 of the Constitution are dealers under the (herein after referred to as 'the Act ') having their places of business at Maharashtra, Haryana etc.
They have questioned the constitutional validity of sub section (2 A) of section 9 of the Act as introduced by the Central Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1976 (herein after referred to as 'the Amending Act ' and section 9 of the Amending Act validating the levy of penalties under the Act with retrospective effect on the following grounds: (1) That the introduction of sub section (2 A) in section 9 of the Act by the Amending Act, 1976 does not have the effect of making the provisions relating to penalties leviable under the general sales tax laws of the States applicable to the assessees under the Act 25 the word 'penalties ' is not Found along with the words 'assessment, re assessment, collection and the enforcement of payment of any tax ' in sub section (2 A); the lacuna in the Act, which was pointed out by this Court in Kehmka 's case namely that there is no specific provision levying penalties in the Act remains unfilled up even now and hence no penalties can be recovered by utilising the provisions of the general sales tax laws of the respective States.
(2) Sub section (2 A) of section 9 suffers from the vice of excessive delegation of legislative power; the Parliament by adopting the provisions relating to offences and penalties referred to in the various general sales tax laws of the States has abdicated its essential legislative function.
(3) That sub section (2 A) of section 9 of the Act and section 9 of the Amending Act are violative of Article 20(1) of the Constitution; that any act or omission which is considered to be a default under the Act for which penalty is leviable is an offence, that such act or omission was not an offence, and no penalty was payable under the law in force at the time when it was committed and hence they cannot be punished by the levy of penalty under a law which is given retrospective effect.
(4) The levy and collection of penalties with retrospective effect amounts to an imposition of an unreasonable restriction on the fundamental right of the petitioners to own property and to carry on business guaranteed under Article 19 (1) (f) and (g) of the Constitution.
(5) That in the case of assessees of the State of Haryana, section 48 of the Haryana General Sales Tax Act, 1973 which authorises the levy of penalty of 'a sum of not less than twice and more than ten times the amount of tax ' on proof of the defaults mentioned therein is violative of Article 14 of the 200 Constitution as there is no guidance given to the authority levying the penalty about the quantum of penalty.
Dismissing the petitions, ^ HELD 1.
Sub section (2 A) of section 9 of the Act and section 9 of the Amending Act are adequately enough to assess and realise penalties w.e.f. January 5, 1957 as contemplated therein.
The principal object of the Act is not the levying of the penalties.
Its object is assessment, re assessment collection and the enforcement of payment of central sales tax.
The assessees incur the liability to pay penalties on account of certain acts or omissions committed by them at the various stages specified above, namely, assessment, re assessment, collection and the enforcement of payment of tax.
The inclusion of the word 'penalties ' along with these four stages would have, therefore been redundant apart from being inappropriate.
Sub section (2 A) of section 9 of the Act expressly makes all the provisions relating to offences and penalties which are committed or incurred as the case may be, under the general sales tax laws of the respective States applicable to persons who commit corresponding acts and omissions at the above mentioned stages under the Act.
There is no lacuna in the language of sub section (2 A) of section 9 of the Act which makes the provisions relating to penalties under the general sales tax laws of the respective States inapplicable even now to the proceedings under the Act.
While sub section (2 A) of section 9 of the Act makes the provisions relating to both offences and penalties in the general Sales tax laws of the States applicable to the proceedings under the Act prospectively, section 9 of the Amending Act makes all the provisions relating to penalties only in the general sales tax laws of the States applicable to the proceeding under the Act retrospectively by adopting the same language appearing in sub section (2 A) of section 9 of the Act.
This pattern of legislation had to be adopted perhaps because Parliament wished rightly not to give retrospective effect to the provisions relating to offences also which are referred to in sub section (2 A) of section 9.
Having thus given retrospective effect to section (2 A) of section 9 w. e. f. January 5, 1957 in so far as penalties were concerned by enacting sub section (1) of section 9 of the Amending Act, Parliament removed the deficiency pointed out in Khemka 's case.
[217 E F, 216 E G, 217 A D] Khemka & Co. vs State of Maharashtra [1975] 3 S.C.R. 1973, referred to.
The question whether there has been excessive delegation or abdication of legislative power has to be decided on the meaning of the words in the Statute and the policy behind it, Legislation by incorporation of provisions of another statute even though passed by a different legislature is a well known method of legislation which does not effect the validity of the legislation particularly when the scheme of the other statute is similar and such incorporation is relevant and necessary for the purpose of advancing the objects and purposes of the legislation.
[217 H, 218 A B] 201 In the instant case sub section (2 A) of section 9 of the Act does not suffer from the vice of excessive delegation merely because the provisions relating to penalty in the general sales tax laws of the States are adopted for purposes of the Act.
The assessees under the Act who are spread over various States are accustomed to the general pattern of sales tax law in their respective States and the various duties and responsibilities of an assessee who is liable to pay sales tax.
The officers who assess and collect the tax under the Act are the officers who discharge similar functions under the State laws.
In this situation if Parliament has, with the knowledge of the various provisions relating to offences and penalties in the general sales tax laws of the various States adopted them for purposes of assessment, re assessment, collection and enforcement of the provisions of the Act it cannot be said that it has abdicated its legislative functions.
[222 B C, 218 C E] The circumstances leading to imposition of penalties and the rates of penalties very from on State to the other but the power to make a legislative provision on matters relating to penalties is circumscribed by various economic factors and it cannot be said that Parliament had virtually surrendered its legislative judgment to the State legislatures.
There is a clear legislative policy adopted by Parliament in the case of levy of penalties and that is that the penalties payable under the Act should be the same as the penalties payable under the general sales tax law of each State if the rates of penalties exceed reasonable limits the States which are beneficiaries of the tax collected under the Act themselves suffer as such unreasonable levy is bound to lead to the killing of the goose which lays the golden egg.
The trade would immediately shift to areas outside the State which resorts to higher taxes and penalties.
The political and economic factors which operate in this field are so powerful that the provisions with regard to penalties to be made by the State Legislature cannot but be reasonable as they would affect the levy of tax under the State Act also.
The penal nature of the penalties itself is a sufficient guidance regarding maximum limits upto which penalties can be levied.
A penalty cannot be wholly disproportionate to the extent of infringement of law.
Moreover Parliament always has the power to amend its own law i. e the Act if it finds that the provisions realting to penalties in any State law cross the limits of public interest.
[222 C G] State of Madras vs N.K. Nataraja Mudaliar, ; ; Gwalior Rayon Silk Mfg.
(Wvg.) Co. Ltd. vs The Asstt.
Cvmmissioner of Sales Tax & Ors.
[1974] 2.
S.C,R. 879; M,K Papiah & Sons vs The Excise Commissioner & Anr ; , referred to.
The marginal note of our Article 20 is 'protection in respect of conviction for offences .
The presence of words 'conviction ' and 'offences ', in the marginal note 'convicted of an offence ', 'the act charged as an offence ' and 'commission of an offence ', 'in clause (1) of Article 20, 'prosecuted and punished ' in clause (2) of Article 20 aud 'accused of an offence ' and 'compelled to be a witness against himself ' in clause (3) of Article 20 clearly suggests that Article 20 relates to the constitutional protection given to persons who are charged with a crime before a criminal Court.
[226 A B] 202 The word 'penalty ' is a word of a wide significance.
Sometimes it means recovery of an amount as a penal measure even in a civil proceeding.
An exaction which is not of a compensatory character is also termed as a penalty even though it is not being recovered pursuant to an order finding the person concerned guilty of a crime.
In Article 20(1) the expression 'penalty ' is used in the narrow sense as meaning a payment which has to be made or a deprivation of liberty which has to be suffered as a consequence of a finding that the person accused of a crime is guilty of the charge.
The word 'penalty ' unsed in Article 20 (1) cannot be construed as including a 'penalty ' levied under the sales tax laws by the departmental authorities for violation of statutory provisions.
A penalty imposed by sales tax authorities is only a civil liability, though penal in character.
It may be relevant to notice that sub section (2 A) of section 9 of the Act specifically refers to certain acts and omissions which are offences for which a criminal prosecution would lie and the provisions relating to offences have not been retrospective effect by section 9 of the Amending Act.
[226 B D, 230 C D] Constitutional Law of India by H.M. Seervai; 3rd Ed.
p. 759; Maqbool Hussain vs The state of Bombay; , ; Jawala Ram vs State of Pepsu, ; ; State of West Bengal vs S.K Ghosh ; ; M/s. Hati Singh Mfg Co. Ltd. & Anr.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; Pai Bahadur Hurdut Roy Mati Lal Jute Mills v The State of Bihar & Anr., [1956] 7 S.T.C. 609; The State of Bihar vs Rai Bahadur Hurdut Ray Moti Lall Jute Mills & Anr., ; ; Shew Bhagwan Goenka vs Commercial Tax Officer & Ors.
[1973] 32 S.T.C. 368; Commissioner of Wealth Tax, Amritsar vs Suersh Seth, ; ; Raghunathan Prasad Mohan Lal vs Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, Delhi Bench & Ors., ; Central India Motors vs C.L. Sharma, Assistant Commissioner of Sales Tax, Indore Region, Indore & Anr., [1980] 46 S.T.C. 379, referred to.
If in its essential features a taxing statute is within the competence of the legislature, it would not cease to be so if retrospective effect is given to it.
The provision for levying of interest and to levy penalties retrospectively and to validate earlier proceedings under laws which had been declared unconstitutional after removing the element of unconstitutionality is included within the scope of legislative power.
[231 E] Under the Constitution the grounds on which infraction of the rights to property is to be tested have to be considered on the precise criteria set out in Article 19 (5).
Mere retrospectivity in the imposition of the tax cannot per se render the law unconstitutional on the ground of it infringing the rights to hold property under Article 19 (1) (f).
The test of the length of time covered by the retrospective operation cannot by itself be treated as a decisive test.
[231 E, 233 D] In the instant case, there is no dispute about the validity of the tax payable under the Act during the period between January 1, 1957 and the date of commencement of the Amending Act.
It has to be presumed that all the tax has been collected by the dealers from their customers.
There is also no dispute that the law required the dealers to pay the tax within the specified time.
The 203 dealers had also the knowledge of the provisions relating to penalties in the general sales tax laws of their respective States.
It was only owing to the deficiency in the Act pointed out by this Court in Khemaka 's case the penalties became not payable.
In this situation where the dealers have untilised the money which should have been paid to the Government and have committed default in performing their duty, if Parliament calls upon them to pay penalties in accordance with the law as amended with retrospective effect it cannot be said that there has been any unreasonable restriction imposed on the rights guaranteed under Article 19 (1) (f) and (g) of the Constitution, even though the period of retrospectivity is nearly nineteen years.
[233 H, 234 A C] Chhotabhai Jethabhai Patel & Co, vs The Union of India The State of Bihar; , , referred to.
Section 48 of the Haryana General Sales tax Act, 1973 provides both the minimum and the maximum amount of penalties leviable and it is correlated to the amount of tax which would have been avoided if the turnover returned by such dealer had been accepted as correct.
The degree of remissness involved in the default is a factor to be taken into account while levying penalty.
The order levying penalty is quasi judicial in character and involves exercise of judicial discretion.
An order levying penalty under section 48 is also subject to the provision relating to appeal.
In the circumstances, it is not possible to hold that section 48 confers an uncanalised, unguided and arbitrary power on the authority levying penalty.
[235 E G] Hindustan Steel Ltd. vs State of Orissa, [1970] 1 S.C.R. 753, referred to.
