These petitions on behalf of the assessees raised the common question as to the constitutionality of section 5(7 A) of the Indian Income tax Act, which was raised but not decided by this Court in Bidi Supply Co. V. The Union of India, ; Reliance was placed on the observations of Bose, J. in his Minority judgment in that case and it was contended that the section read with the explanation, subsequently added to it as a result of that decision,conferred arbitrary and uncontrolled powers of transfer on the Income tax Commissioner and the Central Board of Revenue, was discriminatory and violative of the provisions of article 14 and imposed an unreasonable restriction on the right to carry on trade or business in contravention of article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution.
It was further contended that the omnibus wholesale orders of transfer made without any reference to any particular case or without any limitation as to time were inconvenient and discriminatory and ran counter to the majority judgment in that case.
The contention of the Central Board of Revenue, supported by affidavits filed on its behalf, was that the section was intended to minimize administrative inconvenience, there was no discrimination after transfer because the same relevant provisions of the Act as applied to others similarly situated, were applied after the transfer and any resulting inconvenience to the assessee was sought to be minimised by transferring his case either to the nearest area or, where that was not feasible, by examining his accounts or evidence, if required by him, at a place suited to his convenience and that the wholesale omnibus orders of transfer were covered by the explanation: Held, that section 5(7A) of the Indian Income tax Act was a measure of administrative convenience, was constitutionally valid and did not infringe any of the fundamental rights conferred by articles 14 and (19)(g) of the Constitution and the orders of transfer in question were saved by the explanation: to that section and. were constitutionally valid.
30 234 The right conferred on the assessee by section 64(1) and (2) of the Act was not an absolute right and must be subject to the primary object of the Act itself, namely, the assessment and collection of income tax, and where the exigencies of tax collection so required, the Commissioner of Income tax or the Central Board of Revenue had the power under section 5(7A) of the Act to transfer his case to some other officer outside the area where he resided or carried on business and any difference in his position created thereby as compared to that of others similarly situated would be no more than a minor deviation from the general standard and would not amount to a denial of equality before the law.
This discretionary power vested in the Authorities by the section to override the statutory right of the assessee must be distinguished from the discretion that has to be exercised in respect of a fundamental right guaranteed by the Constitution and the two tests to judge whether it was discriminatory would be, (I) whether it admitted of the possibility of any real and substantial discrimination and (2) whether it impinged on a fundamental right guaranteed by the Constitution and, so judged, the discretion vested in the Authorities by section 5(7 A) of the Act was not at all discriminatory nor did the section impose any unreasonable restriction on the fundamental right to carry on trade or business.
Bidi Supply Co. vs The Union of India, ; M.K. Gopalan vs The State of Madhya Pradesh, (1955) I S.C.R.168 ; The State of West Bengal vs Anwar Ali Sarkay, ; ; Dayaldas Kushiram vs Commissioner of Income tax, (Central),, I.L.R. ; Dayaldas Kushiram vs Commissioner of Income tax, Central, ; and Wallace Brothers & Co., Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay, Sind & Baluchistan, A.I.R. 1945 F.C. 9, discussed.
The explanation added to the section by the Amending Act XXVI Of 1956, was intended to expand the connotation of the ' term 'case ' used in the section and included both pending proceedings as also other proceedings under the Act which might be commenced in respect of any year after the date of transfer and as such the orders in question were not unconstitutional or void.
The Income Tax Authorities, however, must be held bound by the statements made in their affidavits and where an assessee could make out a prima facie case of a mala fide or discriminatory exercise of the discretion ' vested in them, the Court will scrutinise the circumstances in the light of those statements and where necessary quash an abuse of the power under articles 226 and 32 Of the Constitution.
Ratanlal Gupta vs The District Magistrate of Ganjam, I.L.R. 1951 Cuttack 441 and Brundaban; Chandra Dhir Narendra vs 235 The State of Orissa (Revenue Department), I.L.R. 1952 Cuttack 529, referred to.
The Income tax Authorities should follow the rules of natural justice and, where feasible, give notice of the intended transfer to the assessee concerned in order that he may re_ resent his view of the matter and record the reasons of the transfer, however briefly, to enable the Court to judge whether such transfer was mala fide or discriminatory, if and when challenged.
