On a routine inspection a Supervisor of the State Electricity Board found that by tampering with the electric connection, the respondent was using switches, lights and fans inside the house without the meter recording any consumption.
On the direction of the Assistant Engineer he lodged a report against the respondent with the police alleging theft of electricity by him.
The trying Magistrate acquitted the respondent of the offence with which he was charged on the ground that section SO of the did not authorise the Supervisor to lodge a complaint.
The High Court upheld the Magistrate 's order holding that the notification issued by the Electricity Board authorizing, among others, supervisors to institute prosecutions in terms of section SO not having been published in the official Gazette, the Court could not take judicial notice of it and that the prosecution had failed to establish that the supervisor was competent to lodge the complaint.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD .
The order of acquittal recorded by the Magistrate as affirmed by the High Court proceeds on a construction of section 50 of the Act which is wholly unwarranted and has resulted in manifest miscarriage of justice.
Section 50 of the Act nowhere requires that the authorisation should be by a notification published in the official Gazette.
The prosecution had been launched `at the instance of the Electricity Board within the meaning of section 50 of the Act.
The meaning of the phrase 'at the instance of ' does not imply the same degree of obligation to obey as does 'command '.
That is also the legal sense in which the phrase has been understood in section SO of the Act: [252 B C Dl Ram Chander Prasad Sharma vs State of Bihar & Anr, referred to.
Vishwanath vs Emperor AIR 1936 All. 742; State (Dehli Administration) vs Dharm Pal ; State of Karnataka vs Abdul Nabi approved.
250 The High Court was misled by the use of the word 'notification ' contained in the manual.
The notification is a general order issued by the Board in terms of section 50 authorising certain of its officials to institute prosecutions or make complaints to the police for instituting prosecutions for offences under certain sections of the Act.
It was an internal matter for the Electricity Board.
It is quite clear upon the terms of section SO that the Supervisor was authorised to lodge a complaint with the police.
The Board, being a public authority, it was sufficient for the prosecution to have placed on record a copy of the manual containing the relevant notifications.
That was sufficient proof of the authorisation requisite under section 50 of the Act.
A C] Even if the requirement of section 50 was that the authorisation should have been by a notification published in the official Gazette that would have hardly made a difference.
[255 C D]
