Sub section (l) of section S of the Bihar Finance Act, 1981 provides for the levy of a surcharge in addition to the tax payable, on every dealer whose gross turnover during a year exceeds Rs. 5 lakhs and, sub section
(3) thereof prohibits such a dealer from collecting amount of surcharge payable by him from the purchaser.
In exercise of the power conferred by this section, the State Government fixed the rate of surcharge at 10 per cent of the total amount of tax payable by a dealer.
Two of the appellants in this batch of appeals were companies engaged in the manufacture and sale of the medicines throughout India whose branches sales depots in Bihar were registered as dealers.
Their products were sold through wholesale distributors/stockists appointed in almost all the districts of the Slate and their gross turnover within the State during the relevant period ran into crores of rupees.
Most of the medicines and drugs sold by them were covered by the Drugs (Price Control) Order, 1919 issued under sub section
(l) of 131 section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act in terms of which they were expressly prohibited from selling those medicines and drugs in excess of the controlled A price fixed by the Central Government from time to time but were allowed to pass on the liability to the consumer.
During the assessment years 1980 81 and 1981 82 they had to pay the surcharge under section 5(1) of the Bihar Finance Act, 1981 at 10 per cent of the tax payable by them.
The appellants challenged the Constitutional validity of sub section
(3) of section 5 but the same was repelled by the High Court relying on the decision in section Kodar.
vs State of Kerala, [1979]1 S.C.R. 121.
It was contended on behalf of the appellants: (i) that sub section
(3) of section S of the Act which is a State law relatable to Entry 54 of List 11 of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution and which provides that no dealer shall be entitled to collect the surcharge levied on him is void in terms of the opening words of article 246(3) of the Constitution as it is in direct conflict with paragraph 21 of the Drugs (Price Control) order 1979, issued under sub section
(1) of section 3 of the essential Commodities Act, 1955 which is a Union Law relatable to Entry 33 of List III and which enables the manufacturer or producer of drugs to pass on the liability to pay sales tax to the consumer; (ii) that the words "a law Mads by Parliament which Parliament is competent to enact ' contained in article 254(1) must be construed to mean not only a law made by Parliament with respect to one of the matters enumerated in the Concurrent List but also to include a law made by Parliament with respect to any of the matters enumerated in the Union List and therefore sub section
(3) of section 5 of the Act being repugnant to Paragraph 21 of the Control order is void under article 254(iii) that if both sub section
(1) and sub section
(3) of section 5 were relaxable to Entry 54 of List II, there was no need for the Governor to have referred the Bihar Finance Bill, 1981 to the President for his assent and that the President 's assent is justiciable; (iv) that dealers of essential commodities who cannot raise their sale prices beyond the controlled price cannot be equated with other dealers who can raise their sale prices and absorb the surcharge and since sub section
(3) of section S treats "unequals as equals" it is arbitrary and irrational and therefore Violative of article 14 of the Constitution: (v) that sales tax being essentially an indirect tax, the legislature was not competent to make a provision prohibiting the dealer from collecting the amount of surcharge and that the true nature and character of surcharge being virtually a tax on income, sub section
(3) of section 5.
is unconstitutional as it imposes an unreasonable restriction upon the freedom of trade guaranteed under article 19(1)(g).
(vi) that sub section
(3) of section S of the Act which is a State law being repugnant to paragraph 21 of the Drugs (Price Control) Order which is issued under a Union law, the latter must prevail in view of the non obstants clause in section 6 of the Essential Commodities Act and the former which is inconsistent therewith should be by passed in terms of the decision in Hari Shankar Bagla and Anr.
vs State of Madhya Pradesh, [1955] I S.C.R. 380.
and (vii) that in view of the decision in A. V fernandez vs State of Kerala.[1957] S.C.R. 837, sub section
(1) of section 5 of the Act which makes the "gross turnover" as defined in section 2(j) of the Act which includes transactions taking place in the course of inter state or International Commerce to be the basis for the levy of surcharge is ultra vires the State Legislature, 132 Dismissing the appeals, ^ HELD: 1. (a) It cannot be doubted that the surcharge partakes of the nature of sales tax and therefore it was within the competence of the State Legislature to enact sub section (1) of section 5 of the Act for the purpose of levying surcharge on certain class of dealers in addition to the tax payable by them.
When the State Legislature had competence to levy tax on sale or purchase of goods under Entry 54 of List II of the Seventh Schedule it was equally competent to select the class of dealers on whom the charge would fall.
If that be so, the State Legislature could undoubtedly have enacted sub section
(3) of section S prohibiting the dealers liable to pay the surcharge under sub s.(l) thereof from recovering the same from the purchaser.
[156 H 157 B] (b) The power of the State Legislature to make a law with respect to the levy and imposition of a tax on sale or purchase of goods relatable to Entry 54 of List II and to make ancillary provisions in that behalf is plenary and is not subject to the power of Parliament to make a law under Entry 33 of List III.
There is no warrant for projecting the power of Parliament to make a law under Entry 33 of List III into the State s power of taxation under Entry 54 of List II.
Otherwise, Entry 54 of List II will have to be read as: "Taxes on sale or purchase of goods other than the essential commodities, etc.
" When one entry is made 'subject to ' another entry, all that it means is that out of the scope of the former entry, a field of legislation covered by the latter entry has been reserved to be specially dealt with by the appropriate legislature.
Entry 54 of List II is only subject to Entry 92A of List I and there can be no further curtailment of the State 's power of taxation.
[183 F H, 184 A B] (c) The Constitution effects a complete separation of the taxing power of the Union and of the States under article 246 The various entries in the three lists are not 'powers of legislation, but 'fields of legislation.
The power to legislate is given by article 246 and other Articles of the Constitution.
Taxation is considered to be a distinct matter for purposes of legislative competence.
Hence, the power to tax cannot be deduced from a general legislative entry as an ancillary power.
Further, the element of tax does not directly flow from the power to regulate trade or commerce in, and the production supply and distribution of essential commodities under Entry 33 of List II, although the liability to pay tax may be a matter incidental to the Centre 's power of price control.
[184 E G] (d) A scrutiny of Lists I and II would show that there is no overlapping anywhere in the taxing power and that the Constitution gives independent sources of taxation to the Union and the States.
There is a distinction made between general subjects of legislation and taxation and these are dealt with in separate groups of entries: in List I, Entries I to 81 deal with general subjects of legislation and entries 82 to 92A deal with taxes; in List II Entries I to 44 deal with general subjects of legislation and Entries 45 to 63 deal with taxes.
This mutual exclusiveness is also brought out by the fact that in List III, there is no entry relating to a tax it only 133 contains an entry relating to levy of fees.
Thus, in our Constitution, a conflict of taxing power of the Union and of the States cannot arise.
The two A laws viz., sub section
(3) of section S of the Act and paragraph 21 of the Drugs (Price Control) order issued under sub s (I) of section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act operate on two separate and distinct fields and both are capable of being obeyed.
There is no question of any clash between them.
[184 H 185 F] M.P. Sundararamier and Co. vs State of Andhra Pradesh and Anr., ; , referred to.
Seervai: Constitutional Law of India, 3rd Ed., Vol, I, pp. 81 82, referred to.
(e) The words `Notwithstanding anything contained in cls.
(2) and (3) in cl.
(1) of article 246 and the words "Subject to cls.
(1) and (2)" in cl.
(3) thereof lay down the principle of Federal Supremacy viz., that in case of inevitable conflict between Union and State powers, the Union power as enumerated in List I shall prevail over the State power as enumerated in Lists ll and III, and in case of overlapping between Lists li and III, the former shall prevail.
But the principle of Federal Supremacy laid down in article 246 cannot be resorted to unless there is an 'irreconcilable ' conflict between the Entries in the Union and State Lists.
The non obstante clause in cl.
(I) of article 246 must operate only if reconciliation should prove impossible.
However, no question of conflict between the two Lists will arise is the impugned legislation, by the application of the doctrine of 'pith and substance ' appears to fall exclusively under one List, and encroachment upon another List is only incidental [165 A E] (f ) The true principle applicable in judging the constitutional validity of sub section
(3) of section S of the Act is to determine whether in its pith and substance it is a law relatable to Entry 54 of List II and not whether there is repugnancy between it and paragraph 21 of the Drugs (Price Control) order The constitutionality of the law has to be judged by its real subject matter and.
not by its incidental effect upon any topic of legislation in another field.
Once it is found that in pith and substance the impugned Act is a law on a permitted field any incidental encroachment on a forbidden field does not affect the competence of the legislature to enact that Act.
No doubt, in many cases it can be said that the enactment which is under consideration may be regarded from more than one angle and as operating in more than one field.
If, however, the matter dealt with comes within any of the classes of subjects enumerated in List II, then, under the terms of article 246(3) it is not to be deemed to come within the classes of subjects assigned exclusively to Parliament under article 246(1) even though the classes of subjects looked at singly overlap in many respects.
The whole distribution of powers must be looked at from the point of view of determining the question of validity of the impugned Act.
It is within the competence of the State Legislature under article 246(3) to provide for matters which though within the competence of Parliament, are necessarily incidental to effective legislation by the State Legislature on the subject of legislation expressly enumerated in List II.
[162 B, 171 D, 177 C E] 134 In the Central Provinces and Berar Sales of Motor Spirit and Lubricants Taxation Act, 1938, ; Citizen Insurance Company vs William Parsons, ; Attorney General for the Province of ontario vs Attorney General for the Dominion of Canada, ; A.L.S.P.P.L. Subrahmanyam Chettiar vs Muttuswami Goundan, ; Governor General in Council vs Province of Madras, ; The Province of Madras vs Messers Boddu Paidanna & Sons, , Prafulla Kumar Mukherjee & Ors vs Bank of Commerce Ltd., Khulna, A.I.R. ; and Grand Trunk Railway Company of Canada vs Attorney General of Canada, L R [19071 A.C. 65, referred to.
2.(a) The question of repugnancy under article 254(1) between a law made by Parliament and a law made by the State Legislature arises only in case both the legislations occupy the same field with respect to one of the matters enumerated in the Concurrent List and there is direct conflict between the two laws.
It is only when both these requirements are fulfilled that the State law will, to the extent of repugnancy become void.
article 254(1) has no application to cases of repugnancy due to overlapping found between List ll on the one hand and List I and List Ill on the other.
If such overlapping exists in any particular case, the State law will be ultra Vires because of the non obstante clause in article 246(1) read with the opening words 'Subject to ' in Art 246(3).
In such a case, the State law will fail not because of repugnance to the Union law but due to want of legislative competence.
[145 C, 181 F] (b) It is no doubt true that the expression "a law made by Parliament which Parliament is competent to enact" in article 254(1) is susceptible of a construction that repugnance between a State law and a law made by Parliament may take place outside the Concurrent sphere because Parliament is competent to enact law with respect to subjects included in List III as well as List I.
But, if article 254(1) is read as a whole, it will be seen that it is expressly made subject to cl.
(2) which makes reference to repugnancy in the field o Concurrent List.
In other words, if cl.
(2) is to be the guide in the determination of the scope of cl.
(l), the repugnancy between Union and State law must be taken to refer only to the Concurrent field.
article 254(1) speaks of a State law being repugnant to a law made by Parliament or an existing law.
The words "with respect to qualify both the clauses in article 254(1) viz., a law made by Parliament which Parliament is competent to enact as well as any provision of an existing law.
The underlying principle is that the question of repugnancy arises only when both the legislatures are competent to legislate in the same field, i.e., with respect to one of the matters enumerated the Con current List.
[181 G 182 A, R C] Deep Chand vs State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors [1959] Supp. 2 S.C.R. 8 Ch.
Tika Ramji & ors vs State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors., ; zaverbhai Amidas vs State of Bombay, [1955] I S.C.R. 799; M. Karunanidhi vs Union of India, ; ; T. Barai vs Henry Ah Hoe, [1983] I S.C.C. 177; A. section Krishna vs State of Madras, [1957] S.C.R. 399; Clyde Engineering C xf8.
Ltd. vs Cowburn, [1926] 37 Com.
L.R. 465; Ex Parte Mclean, [1930] 43 ; and Stock Motor Ploughs Limited vs Forsyth, , referred to.
(c) Entry 54 of List II is a tax entry and therefore there is no question of repugnancy between sub section
(3) of section 5 of the Act and paragraph 21 of the Control order.
The question of repugnancy can only arise in connection with the subjects enumerated in the Concurrent List as regards which both the Union and the State Legislatures have concurrent powers.
[178 G 179 B] B 3.
It is clear from articles 200 and 201 that a Bill passed by the State Assembly may become law if the Governor gives his assent to it or if, having been reserved by the Governor for the consideration of the President, it is assented to by the President.
There is no provision in the Constitution which lays down that a Bill which has been assented to by the President would be ineffective as an Act if there was no compelling necessity for the Governor to reserve it for the assent of the President.
It is for the Governor to exercise his discretion and to decide whether he should assent to the Bill or should reserve it for consideration of the President to avoid any future complication.
Even if it ultimately turns out that there was no necessity for the Governor to have reserved a Bill for the consideration of the President still he having done so and obtained the assent of the President, the Act so passed cannot be held to be unconstitutional on the ground of want of proper assent.
This aspect of the matter, as the law now stands, is not open to scrutiny by the Courts.
In the instant case, the Finance Bill which ultimately became the Act in question was a consolidating Act relating the Different subjects and perhaps the Governor felt that it was necessary to reserve it for the assent of the President The assent of the President is not justifiable and the Court cannot spell out any infirmity arising out of his decision to give such assent.
[193 A 194 B] Teh Chang Poh @ Char Meh.
vs Public Prosecutor.
, Malaysia, referred to.
(a) There is no ground for holding that sub section
(3) of section 5 of the Act is arbitrary or irrational or that it treats "unequals as equals" or that it imposes a disproportionate burden on a certain class of dealers.
A surcharge in its true nature and character is nothing but a higher rate of tax to raise revenue for general purposes.
The levy of surcharge under sub section
(l) of section S falls uniformly on a certain class of dealers depending upon their capacity to bear the additional burden.
The economic wisdom of a tax is within the exclusive province of the legislature.
The only question for the Court to consider is whether there is rationality in the behalf of the legislature that capacity to pay the tax increases by and large with an increase of receipts.
The view taken by the Court in kodar 's case that, to make the tax of a large dealer heavier is not arbitrary discrimination, but an attempt to proportion the payment to capacity to pay, and thus to arrive at a more genuine equality, is in consonance with social justice in an egalitarian State.
[186 H 187 A, 191 B, 191 A] section Kodar vs State of Kerala, [1975] I S.C.R. 121, relied on.
136 (b) There is no basis for the submission that the Court was wrong in Podar 's case.
The contention that ability to pay is not a relevant criterion for upholding the validity of sub section
(3) of section 5 of the Act in question cannot be accepted.
On questions of economic regulations and related matters, the Court must defer to the legislative judgment.
When the power to tax exists, the extent of the burden is a matter for the discretion of the law makers It is not the function of the Court to consider the propriety or justness of a tax or enter upon the realm of legislative policy.
If the evident intent and general operation of the tax legislation is to adjust the burden with a fair and reasonable degree of equality, the constitutional requirement is satisfied The equality clause in article 14 does not take away from the State the power to classify a class of persons who must bear the heavier burden of tax.
The classification having some reasonable basis does not offend against that clause merely because it is not made with mathematical nicety or because in practice it results in some inequalities.
[189 H 190 G] (c) There is no lacteal foundation laid to support the contention that the levy of surcharge imposes a disproportionate burden on a certain class of dealers such as manufacturers or producers of drugs, etc.
The business carried on by the appellants in the State of Bihar alone is of such magnitude that they have the capacity to bear the additional burden of surcharge That apart under the scheme of the Control order the profit margins of manufacturers and producers of medicines and drugs is considerably higher than that of wholesalers.
If the appellants find that the levy of surcharge cannot be borne within the present price structure of medicines and drugs, they have the right to apply to the Centrals Government for revision as the retail price of 'formulations under paragraph I S of the Control order.
G, 189 G] 5.
It is no doubt true that a sales tax is, according to the accepted notions, intended to be passed on to the buyer, and the provisions authorising and regulating the collection of sales tax by the seller from the purchaser are a usual feature of sales tax legislation.
However, it is not an essential characteristic of sales tax that the seller must have the right to pass it on to the consumer; nor is the power of the legislature to impose a tax on sales conditional on its making a provision for sellers to collect the tax from the purchasers Whether a law should be enacted, imposing a sales tax, or validating the imposition of sales tax, when the seller is not in a position to pass it on to the consumer, is a matter of policy and does not affect the competence of the legislature.
The contention based on article 19(1)(g) cannot therefore be sustained.
[191 E H] The Tata Iron & Steel Co., Ltd. vs The State of Bihar, ; ; M/s. J. K Judge Mills Co. Ltd. vs 'The State of Uttar Pradesh; , and section Kodar vs State of Kerla, [1975] I S.C.R. 121, referred to.
(a) The appellants being manufacturers or producers of 'formulations ' are not governed by paragraph 21 of the Control order but by paragraph 24 thereof and therefore the price chargeable by them to wholesaler or distributor is inclusive of sales tax.
There being no conflict between sub section (3) of 137 section 5 of the Act and paragraph 24 of the Control order, the question of the non obstante clause to section 6 of the Essential Commodities Act coming into play does A not arise.
[158 G] Hari Shankar Bagla & Anr.
vs State of Madhya Pradesh, , referred to.
(b) Even otherwise, i.e., if some of the appellants were governed by paragraph 21 of the Control order, that would hardly make any difference.
Under the scheme of the Act, a dealer is free to pass on the liability to pay sales tax payable under section 3 and additional sales tax payable under section 6 to the purchasers.
Sub section
(3) of section 5 however imposes a limitation on dealers liable to pay surcharge under sub section
(I) thereof from collecting the amount of surcharge payable by them from the purchasers which only means that surcharge payable by such dealers under sub section
(I) of section 5 will cut into the profits earned by such dealers.
The controlled price or retail price of medicines and drugs under paragraph 21 remains the same, and the consumer interest is taken care of inasmuch as the liability to pay surcharge; under sub section
(3) of section 5 cannot be passed on.
That being so, there is no conflict between sub section
(3) of section 5 of the Act and paragraph 21 of the Control order.
[158 H 159 C] The predominant object of issuing a control order under sub section
(I) of section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act is to secure the equitable distribution and availability of essential commodities at fair prices to the consumers, and the mere circumstance that some of those engaged in the field of industry, trade or commerce may suffer a loss is no ground for treating such a regulatory law to be unreasonable, unrest the basis adopted for price fixation is so unreasonable as to be in excess of the lower to fix the price, or there is a statutory obligation to ensure a fair return to the industry.
[159 G H] Shree Meenakshi Mills Ltd. vs Union of India, ; and Prag Ice & oil Mills vs Union of India, ; referred to 7.
The decision in Fernandez 's case is an authority for the proposition that the State Legislature, notwithstanding article 286 of the Constitution, while r making a law under Entry 54 of the List II can, for purposes of registration of a dealer and submission of returns of sales tax, include the transactions covered by article 286.
That being so, the constitutional validity of sub section (I) of section 5 which provides for the classification of dealers whose gross turnover during a year exceeds Rs. 5 lakhs for the purpose of levy of surcharge in addition to the tax payable by them, is not assailable.
So long as sales in the course of inter State trade and Commerce or sales outside the State and sales in the course of import into, or export out of the territory of India are not taxed there is nothing to prevent the State Legislature while making a law for the levy of surcharge under Entry 54 of the List II to take into account the total turnover of the dealer within the State and provide that if the gross turnover of such dealer exceeds Rs. 5 lakhs in a year he shall, in addition to the tax, also pay a surcharge at such rate not exceeding 10% of the tax as may be provided.
The liability to pay the surcharge is not on the Gross turnover 138 including the transactions covered by article 286 but is only on inside sales and A the surcharged is sought to be levied on dealers who have a position of economic superiority.
The definition of gross turnover in section 2(j) is adopted not for the purpose of bringing to surcharge inter State sales etc., but is only for the purpose or classifying dealers within the State and to identify the class of dealers liable to pay such surcharge.
There is sufficient territorial nexus between the persons sought to be charged and the State seeking to tax them.
[196 F 197 D] A. V. Fernandez vs State of Kerala, ; ; State of Bombay vs R.M.D. Chamarbaugwala, ; ; The Tata Iron and Steel Company Ltd. vs State of Bihar, ; ; and International Tourist Corporation etc.
vs State of Haryana and Ors.
, ; , referred to.
