The appellant, a government servant employed in the Sachivalaya at Gandhinagar was found guilty, by the Sessions Judge, Mehsna, of serious charges of sexual misbehaviour with two young girls (aged about 10 or 12 and was convicted for the offence of rape, outraging the modesty of women, and wrongful confinement The appeal carried to the High Court substantially failed.
The High Court affirmed the orders of conviction under section 342 I.P.C. for wrongfully confining the girls and conviction under Section 354 I.P.C. for outraging the modesty of the two girls.
With regard to the more serious charge of rape on one of the girls, the High Court came to the conclusion that what was established by evidence was an offence or attempt to commit rape and not of rape.
Accordingly, the conviction under Section 376 was altered into one under Section 376 read with Section Sl I I.P.C. Dismissing the appeal and maintaining the conviction on all counts, Court ^ HELD: 1:1 A concurrent finding of fact as recorded by the Sessions Court and affirmed by the High Court, cannot be reopened in an appeal by Special Leave unless it is established (1) that the finding is based on no evidence or (2) that the finding is perverse, it being such as no reasonable person could have arrived at even if the evidence was taken at its face value or (3) the finding is based and built on inadmissible evidence, which evidence if excluded from vision, would negate the prosecution case or substantially discredit or impair it or (4) some vital piece of evidence which would tilt the balance in favour of the convict has been overlooked, disregarded, or wrongly discarded.
The present is not a case of such a nature.
[285 G H, 286 A] 1:2.
Discrepancies which do not go to the root of the matter and shake the basic version of the witnesses therefore cannot be annexed with undue 281 importance.
More so when the all important "probabilities factor" echoes in favour of the version narrated by the witnesses.
The reasons are: (1) By and large a witness cannot be expected to possess a photographic memory and to recall the details of an incident.
It is not as if a video tape is replayed on the mental screen; (2) ordinarily it so happens that a witness is overtaken by events.
The witness could not have anticipated the occurrence which so often has an element of surprise.
The mental faculties therefore cannot be expected to be attuned to absorb the details; (3) The powers of observation differ from person to person.
What one may notice, another may not.
An object or movement might emboss its image on one person 's mind whereas it might go unnoticed on the part of another; (4) By and large people cannot accurately recall a conversation and reproduce the very words used by them or heard by them.
They can only recall the main purport of the conversation.
It is unrealistic to expect a witness to be a human tape recorder; (5) In regard to exact time of an incident, or the time duration of an occurrence, usually, people make their estimates by guess work on the spur of the moment at the time of interrogation.
And one cannot expect people to make very precise or reliable estimates in such matters.
Again, it depends.
On the 'timesense ' of individuals which varies from person to person.
(6) ordinarily a witness cannot be expected to recall accurately the sequence of events which take place in rapid succession or in a short time span.
A witness is liable to get confused, or mixed up, when interrogated later on; (7) A witness, though wholly truthful, is liable to be overawed by the court atmosphere and the piercing cross examination made by counsel and out of nervousness mix up facts; get confused regarding sequence of events, or fill up details from imagination on the spur of moment.
The subconscious mind of the witness sometimes so operates on account of the fear of looking foolish, or being disbelieved, though the witness is giving a truthful and honest account of the occurrence witnessed by him Perhaps it is a sort of a psychological defence mechanism activated on the spur of the moment.
[286 B H, 287 A E] 2:1.
Corroboration is not the sine quo non for a conviction in a rape case.
In the Indian setting, refusal to act on the testimony of a victum of sexual assault in the absence of corroboration as a rule, is adding insult to injury.
Viewing the evidence of the girl or the women who complains of rape or sexual molestation with the aid of spectacles fitted with lenses tinged with doubt, disbelief or suspicion, is to justify the charge of male chauvinism in a male dominated society.
C D] Rameshwar vs The State of Rajasthan, ; @ 386 followed.
Corroboration may be considered essential to establish a sexual offence in the backdrop of the social ecology of the Western World.
It is wholly unnecessary to import the said concept on a turn key basis and to transplant it on the Indian soil regardless of the altogether different atmosphere, attitudes, mores, responses of the Indian Society, and its profile.
The identities of the two worlds are different.
The solution of problems cannot therefore be idential.
It is conceivable in the Western Society that a female may level false accusation as regards sexual molestation against a male for several reasons such as: (1) The female may be a 'gold 282 digger ' and may well have an economic motive to extract money by holding out the gun of prosecution or public exposure; (2) She may be suffering from psychological neurosis and may seek an escape from the neurotic prison by phantasizing or imagining a situation where she is desired, wanted and chased, by males.
(3) She may want to wreak vengence on the male for real or imaginary wrongs.
She may have a grudge against a particular male, or males in general, and may have the design to square the account; (4) She may have been induced to do so in consideration of economic rewards, by a person interested in placing the accused in a compromising or embarassing position, on account of personal or political vendetta; (5) She may do so to gain notoriety or publicity or to appease her own ego, or to satisfy her feeling of self importance in the context of her inferiority complex; (6) She may do so on account of jealousy; (7) She may do so to win sympathy of others; (8) She may do so upon being repulsed.
By and large these factors are not relevant to India, and the Indian Conditions.
[288 F H, 289 A E] 2:3.
Rarely will a girl or a woman in India make such false allegations of sexual assault, whether she belongs to the urban or rural society, or, sophisticated, or, not so sophisticated, or, unsophisticated society.
Only very rerely can one conceivably come accross an exception or two and that too possibily from amongst the urban elites.
Because: (1) A girl or a woman in the tradition bound non permissive Society of India would be extremely reluctant even to admit that any incident which is likely to reflect on her chastity had ever occurred; (2) She would be conscious of the danger of being ostracised by the Society or being looked down by the society including by her own family members, relatives, friends, and neighbours; (3) She would have to brave the whole world; (4) She would face the risk of losing the love and respect of her own husband and near relatives, and of her matrimonial home and happiness being shattered; (5) If she is unmarried, she would apprehend that it would be, difficult to secure an alliance with a suitable match from a respectable or an acceptable family; (6) lt would almost inevitably and almost invariably result in mental torture and suffering to herself; (7) The tear of being taunted by others will always haunt her; (8) She would feel extremely embarrassed in relating the incident to others being over powered by feeling of shame on account of the upbringing in a tradition bound society where by and large sex is taboo; (9) The natural inclination would be to avoid giving publicity to the incident lest the family name and family honour is brought into controversy; (10) The parents of an unmarried girl as also the husband and members of the husband 's family of a married woman, would also more often than not, want to avoid publicity on account of the fear of social stigma on the family name and family honour; (11) The fear of the victim herself being considered to be promiscuous or in some way responsible for the incident regardless of her innocence; (12) The reluctance to face interrogation by the investigating agency, to face the court, to face the cross examination by Counsel for the culprit, and the risk of being disbelieved, acts as a deterrent.
In view of these factors the victims and their relatives are not too keen to bring the culprit to books.
And when in the face of these factors the crime is brought to light there is a built in assurance that the charge is genuine rather than fabricated.
[289 F H, 290 A E] 283 2:4.
On principle the evidence of a victim of sexual assault stands on par with evidence of an injured witness.
Just as a witness who has sustained an injury (which is not shown or believed to be self inflicted) is the best witness in the sense that he is least likely to exculpate the real offender, the evidence of a victim of a sex offence is entitled to great weight, absence of corroboration notwithstanding.
And while corroboration in the form of eye witness account of an independent witness may often be forthcoming in physical assault cases, such evidence cannot be expected in sex offences, having regard to the very nature of the offence.
It would therefore be adding insult to injury to insist on corroboration drawing inspiration from the rules devised by the courts in the Western World.
[290 E G] 2:5.
Therefore, if the evidence of the victim does not suffer from any basic infirmity, and the 'probabilities factor ' does not render it unworth of credence, as a general rule, there is no reason to insist on corroboration except from the medical evidence, where, having regard to the circumstances of the case, medical evidence can be expected to be forthcoming, subject to the following qualification: Corroboration may be insisted upon when a woman having attained majority is surprised in a compromising position and there is a likelihood of her having levelled such an accusation on account of the instinct of self preservation.
Or when the 'probabilities factor ' is found to be out of tune.
[290 G H, 291 A B] 2:6.
To countenance the suggestion, in the instant case, that the appellant has been falsely roped in at the instance of the father of P.W. 2 who was supposed to have some enmity against the appellant would be wrong.
Ordinarily no parents would do so in Indian Society as at present and thereby bring down their own social status and spoil their reputation in Society, not to speak of the danger of traumatic effect on the psychology of their daughter.
Having regard to the prevailing mores of the Indian Society, it is inconceivable that a girl of 10 or 12 would invent on her own a false story of sexual molestation.
Moreover, the medical evidence fully supports the finding of the High Court that there was an attempt to commit rape on P.W. 1 by the appellant.
[291 G H, 292 A D]
