The appellant was convicted under section 376, I.P.C., for raping a tribal woman mainly on the evidence of the victim who was the complainant, her husband and two other witnesses, one of whom had deposed that he had seen the appellant on the body of the victim while the other had stated that he had seen the appellant fleeing away from the scene of occurrence.
The High Court dismissed the appeal and confirmed the conviction.
The appellant submitted that the local Mukhiya to whom the complainant and her husband were alleged to have gone to complain about the incident immediately after its occurrence, the police officer who was alleged to have refused to record the complaint and also two other witnesses mentioned in the complaint had not been examined by the prosecution and this, together with the absence of a medical examination report given by a doctor after examining the person of the complainant immediately after the occurrence, was fatal to the prosecution case.
The Mukhiya and one of the two other witnesses mentioned in the complaint who had not been examined earlier were examined pursuant to the orders made by the Court and they did not support the prosecution case.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: Even though a victim of rape cannot be treated as an accomplice, on account of a long line of judicial decisions the evidence of the victim in a rape case is treated almost like the evidence of an accomplice requiring corroboration.
Section 133 of the Evidence Act says that an accomplice shall be a competent witness against an accused person and a conviction is not illegal merely because it proceeds upon the uncorroborated testimony of an accomplice.
But the rule of practice is that it is prudent to look for corroboration of the evidence of an accomplice by other independent evidence.
This rule is based on human experience and is incorporated in illustration (b) to section 114 of the Act.
There must be an indication in the course of the judgment that the judge had this rule in his mind when he prepared the judgment 313 and if in a given case the judge finds that there is no need for such corroboration he should give reasons for dispensing with the necessity for such corroboration.
But if a conviction is based on the evidence of a prosecutrix without any corroboration it will not be illegal on that sole ground.
In the case of a grown up and married woman it is always safe to insist on such corroboration.
Wherever corroboration is necessary it should be from an independent source but is not necessary that every part of the evidence of the victim should be confirmed in every detail by independent evidence.
Such corroboration can be sought from either direct evidence or circumstantial evidence or from both.
[318 E H; 319 A D] Rameshwar vs State of Rajasthan, ; ; Gurucharan Singh vs State of Haryana, ; Kishan Lal vs State of Haryana, ; ; King vs Baskerville , referred to.
In the instant case a reading of the deposition of the complainant shows that it has a ring of truth around it.
Her evidence has been corroborated in material particulars by the evidence of her husband and the other two witnesses.
The statement made by the complainant to her husband immediately after the incident is admissible under section 157 of the Act and has a corroborative value.
[319 F H] The Mukhiya has not given any version about the incident but has merely stated that the complainant and her husband had not gone to him to complain.
It is significant that his name figured in the complainant as a witness.
The complainant could not have taken the risk of including his name if he had not been actually contacted by her.
He was cited as a witness to show that immediately after the occurrence the complainant had made a statement regarding the crime before him which would be corroborating evidence.
It has to be borne in mind that he was examined nearly 12 years after the incident and it is a sufficiently long period and particularly for persons of easy conscience to make half hearted statements in courts.
In the circumstances it is difficult to hold that the evidence of the other witnesses before the court is in any way affected by the evidence of the Mukhiya.
The same criticism applies to the evidence of the other witness examined along with the Mukhiya.
The non examination of the police officer who declined to record the information said to have been given by the complainant is found to be not fatal to the prosecution.
[317 C H] The complainant and her husband being persons belonging to backward community like the Santhal tribe living in a remote area could not be expected to know that they should rush to a doctor.
The absence of any injuries on the person of the complainant may not by itself discredit the statement of the complainant.
Merely because the complainant was a helpless victim who was by force prevented from offering serious physical resistance she cannot be disbelieved.
[318 B D]
