The appellant 's motor car, insured with the respondent (`insurer ') suffered damage in an accident and was taken to and left in the custody of a repairer.
On receipt of intimation of the accident, the insurer entered into correspondence with the repairer, accepted the estimate of repair charges and advised the repairer to proceed with the repairs.
motor car was, however, destroyed in a fire which occurred hl the repairer 's workshop.
The appellant filed a suit claiming from the insurer the value of the motor car on the footing that the insurer was the bailee of the motor car while it was in the custody of the repairer.
The trial court upheld the contention of the appellant and decreed the suit but, in appeal, the High Court set aside the decree and dismissed the suit on a ground not related to the contention based on the contract of bailment.
In Civil Appeal No, 142 of 1965 decided on October 31,1967 this Court allowed the appeal of the appellant and remitted the same to the High Court requesting it to deal with the following questions: (i) whether the insurer was a bailee of the motor car; (ii) Whether the insurer failed to take as much care of the car as a person of ordinary prudence would in similar circumstances; and (iii) The value of the destroyed car.
1 he High Court held on the basis of the correspondence between the parties that the car was entrusted to the repairer by the appellant 's son on behalf of the appellant, that this was done without reference to the insurer, that the insurer had only agreed to pay the repair charges and that therefore the insurer was not a bailee of the motor car.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
A bare perusal of some of the conditions contained in the contract of insurance would unmistakably lead to the conclusion that the insurer was a bailee of the motor car.
The custody of the repairer was that of a sub bailee.
The High Court went wrong in not making any reference to the contract of insurance between the parties.
In a contract of insurance, there are mutual rights and obligations both of the insurer and the insured.
If the motor car is damaged in an accident, a duty is cast on the insured not to leave the damaged car unattended which of necessity would oblige the insured either to keep a watchman or if the car is in a condition to be moved it ought to be 480 taken to a repairer, and the insurer undertakes an obligation to reimburse the cost of removal to the insured.
This would imply that from the scene of the accident, it is the duty of the insurer to remove the car to the nearest repairer but this duty is to be performed by the insured on behalf of the insurer.
Another important condition of the contract is that, once the car is damaged in an accident, the insurer may, at its own option, either repair, reinstate or replace the motor car.
When the insurer has the option to replace the motor car, it can take over the damaged car and the insured is bound to submit to the same.
If the insure, on the other hand, exercises the option of repairing the car, it is entitled not merely to choose the repairer but also to determine the charges for repairs to be settled between the insurer and the repairer and the insured has hardly anything to do with it.
[486A, 487 C D, 488 C D] Moris vs C. W. Martin & Sons, Ltd., [1965] 2 All E.R. 725; and Gilchrist Watt and Sanderson Pty Ltd. vs York Products Ltd., ; referred to.
In the instant case, when the appellant 's son soon after the accident took the damaged car to the nearest repairer, the car virtually came into the custody of the insurer and the repairer took the custody for and on behalf of the insurer.
The obligation to get the car repaired was that of the insurer.
The insurer formally took the car into its custody when it accepted the repairer to whom the custody was given and entered into negotiations about the repair charges and finally agreed to pay the repair charges to the repairer.
[487 E] As a condition of contract of insurance the insurer has to take custody of the damaged car, reserving the option to repair or replace if.
The insured has to remove the car to the nearest repairer on behalf of the insurer and is entitled to be reimbursed the cost of removal.
Therefore, from the time of accident, under the contract of insurance, the insurer would be the bailee.
If the option to repair is exercised and the repairer is approved and paid, the repairer becomes the sub bailee.
[490 E G] 2.
When the car was in the custody of the sub bailee, it was destroyed by fire that occurred in the repairer 's workshop.
The sub bailee was bound to take the same care as a man of ordinary prudence would take in regard to his own goods of the same quality and value as was expected of the bailee.
When the custody is of the bailee or the sub bailee, the burden is on them to show how they handled the car.
In the instant case the High Court did not touch upon this aspect while reversing the decision of the trial court.
There is no evidence on behalf of the insurer as to what amount of care had been taken by the repairer.
The appellant has led some evidence in this behalf as to the careless manner in which the car was kept in the workshop where inflammable material was kept.
The burden being on the bailee and the sub bailee and the same having not been discharged, the trial judge was justified in accepting the evidence of the appellant and in according the finding that the bailee and sub bailee had not taken such care of the car as was expected of a prudent man in respect of his own goods of the same quality and value.
Therefore, the bailee is liable for the loss suffered by the appellant, the bailer.
