In the reasonable belief that the respondents were smuggling silver out of the country, the Customs officials apprehended the respondents at about midnight while they were going in a fishing vessel off the coast of Bombay and found 194 ingots of silver in the vessel.
I hey were prosecuted for offences under section 120 B Indian Penal Code, section 135(1) (a) (ii) of the , section 5 of the Imports and Exports (Control) Act, 1947 and section 23(1A) of the Foreign Exchange Regulations Act, 1973.
While the Magistrate found them guilty of all the offences the High Court on appeal set aside the conviction under the and Foreign Exchange Regulations Act.
The appellant accepted the acquittal Under section 23(1A) of the Foreign Exchange Regulations Act but impugned the judgment of the High Court in so far as it set aside the conviction under section 135 (1) (a) (ii) of the .
It was contended on behalf of the prosecution that the accused were knowingly concerned with fraudulent evasion or attempt at evasion of the prohibition imposed under the Export Trade Control order of 1968 on the export of silver without licence and that therefore they were guilty of an offence under the .
The respondents, on the other hand, contended that the words "with respect to such goods" occurring in the section, refer to goods on which duty was chargeable as contemplated in the first part of the section and since no duty was chargeable on export of silver it did not fall within the words "with respect to such goods" and therefore there was no fraudulent evasion or attempt at evasion of the prohibition on export of silver without a licence imposed under the Export Trade Control order, 1968 issued under section 3 of the Imports and Exports (Control) Act, 1947, which was punishable under the . 501 Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: Where goods are chargeable with duty and any person is knowingly concerned in any fraudulent evasion or attempt at evasion of such duty, the case would fall within the first part of the section, but where a prohibition is imposed with respect to any goods under the or any other law for the time being in force, then, irrespective of whether duty is chargeable on such goods or not, any person who is knowingly concerned in any fraudulent evasion or attempt at evasion of such prohibition, would be covered by the second or third part as the case may be.
[506 E] In the instant case the Export Trade Control order, 1968 issued under section 3 of the Imports and Exports (Control) Act, 1947, prohibited the export of silver without a licence.
On the facts established by the prosecution the accused were knowingly concerned in fraudulent evasion or attempt at evasion of such prohibition on export of silver and their case was therefore covered by the third part of section 135(1)(a)(ii).
The provision enacted in section 135(1)(a)(ii) is divisible into three parts: the first part postulates that goods in respect of which the offence is committed must be goods chargeable with duty; the second and third parts are not concerned with the question whether any duty is chargeable on the goods or not.
They speak only of fraudulent evasion or attempt at evasion of any prohibition for the time being imposed under the or any other law in force in respect of any goods.
What they contemplate is that in respect of goods in question there must be a prohibition imposed under the or any other law for the time being in force irrespective of whether duty E is chargeable on such goods or not and the accused must be concerned in any fraudulent evasion or attempt at evasion of such prohibition.
The prohibition fraudulently evaded or sought to be evaded might be with respect to "any goods": it is not necessary that it should be with respect to goods on which duty is chargeable.
The expression "with respect to such goods": had to be used at the end of the section because the second and third parts start with the words "if any person is in relation to any goods knowingly concerned in any fraudulent evasion or attempt at evasion".
The words "such goods" have clearly reference to "any goods" at the commencement of the section.
These words are not descriptive of the kind of goods to which the first part of the section is applicable.
It is totally impermissible on a plain, natural construction of the language used in the section to read these words as importing the requirement that the goods must be chargeable with duty in order to fall within the second or third part of the section.
[505 E, 506 A D]
