The petitioners challenged the constitutional validity of Jammu and Kashmir Agrarian Reforms Act, 17 of 1976 on the ground that the Act violated Articles 14, 19 and 31 of the Constitution.
The petitioners contended that as the Act contained certain provisions which were not co related to agrarian welfare, the Act could not be said to be a measure of agrarian reform and therefore not saved by Article 31A of the Constitution.
Dismissing the petitions, ^ HELD: The Act is a measure of agrarian reform and is saved by article 31A from the challenge under articles 14, 19 or 31 of the Constitution.
[541 D] The question as to whether any particular Act is a measure of agrarian reform has to be decided by looking at the dominant purpose of that Act.
In the instant case the dominant purpose of the statute is to bring about a just and equitable redistribution of lands, which is achieved by making the tiller of the soil the owner of the land which he cultivates and by imposing a ceiling on the extent of the land which any person, whether landlord or tenant, can hold.
The matters which are dealt with by the Act are essential steps in any well conceived scheme of agrarian reform.
The decision in Kochuni was treated in Ranjit Singh as a special case which cannot apply to cases where the general scheme of legislation is definitely agrarian reform and under its provisions, something ancillary thereto in the interests of rural economy has to be under taken to give full effect to those reforms.
[541 A D, 541 D] Ranjit Singh vs State of Punjab, ; and Kavalappara Rottarathil Kochuni & Ors.
vs State of Madras & Ors., , referred to.
The circumstance that the Act is made applicable to agricultural lands situated within the limits of local authorities will not affect its character as a measure of agrarian reform.
If any land situated in a developed area is used predominantly for the purpose of agriculture, it is open to the legislature to 537 include that land in a scheme of agrarian reform so as to make the tiller of that land its owner.
The hypothetical possibility that after becoming statutory owners of agricultural lands situated in developed areas on payment of a paltry price, the tillers will part with those lands at a high price which lands in developed areas like urban areas fetch, cannot affect the basic position that the Act is conceived in the larger interest of agrarian reform.
The payment of a larger compensation to land holders under a land reform law than what would be payable under an Act like the Urban Ceiling Act does not lead to the conclusion that the former is not a measure of agrarian reform.
[543 A F] Section 7(2)(b) of the Act creates an anomalous situation, especially in the context of the definition of 'personal cultivation ' in section 2(12) of the Act.
If it is permissible to cultivate a land through another person as specified in clauses (b) to (g) of section 2(12), there is no reason why residence in the village where the land is situated or in an adjoining village should be compulsory for all persons, even for minors, widows, insane persons and persons in detention.
The exception made by the legislature in favour of the members of defence forces ought to be extended to these other persons also.
The exclusion of a constitutional challenge under Articles, 14, 19 and 31 which is provided for by Article 31A does not justify in equity the irrational violation or these articles.
[543 G, 544 B D] Waman Rao & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
; , referred to.
