The appellants who had their own source of generation of electrical energy (generating machinery having been installed and commissioned before 2.1.1973) and were also purchasing electrical energy from another source challenged the correctness of the decision of a Full Bench of the High Court reversing the decision of a Division Bench and holding that a user of electricity was liable to pay electricity duty on consumption of energy from his own source of supply regardless of whether or not he also purchased electricity from some other source indicated in sec.
3(1) (a) and (b).
The appellant contended that in view of the user of the expression 'another person ' in sec.
3(1) (c) and sec.
4(1) (c) only those consumers who wholly fell outside the orbit of sec.
3(1) (a) and (b) were exigible to electricity duty under sec.
3(1) (c).
The appellant submitted that under Notification dated March 17, 1973 exemption must be granted to all persons having their own source of electricity regardless of the date on which the source generation is installed to save it from challenge under article 14 of the Constitution of India.
In Civil Appeal 1312 the State of U.P. challenged the correctness of the decision of the Division Bench.
Allowing the Appeal No. 1312 and dismissing other appeals, ^ HELD: The duty was chargeable in respect of energy consumed by a person from his own source of generation regardless of the fact that he 'also ' purchased electricity from other source indicated in sec.
3(1) (a) and sec.
4(1) (a).
[671 G] On a plain reading of sec.
3(1) (c) it is evident that duty has been levied on the energy consumed by a person from his own source of generation without anything more.
The fact that the user of electricity from his own source of generation purchases electricity from some other source as well, is an altogether irrelevant factor from the stand point of liability imposed by the said provisions.
Be it realized that duty is levied on the consumption of energy The 667 taxing event being the consumption of energy, the source from which the electricity is acquired would become altogether irrelevant.
3(1) as also Sec.
4(1) has to be read as a whole and has to be interpreted in a harmonious and meaningful manner.
A person having his own source of energy who also purchases energy from another source indicated in sec.
3(1 j (a) will be covered by 3(1) (a) to the extent he purchases electricity from such a source, and will be equally covered by sec.
3(1) (c), in so far as he consumes energy from his own source of generation.
He will be covered by both the provisions read conjointly.
The same reasoning applies in the context of clauses (a) (b) and (c) of sec.
There is no rational basis for exonerating a person from payment of duty merely because he has his own source of generation and he also purchases electricity from some other source.
In fact it will be irrational to do so and it would give rise to an anachronism.
Why make him pay 'only ' if he generates his own energy and why exempt him altogether merely because he 'also ' purchases from some other source ? [670 D H] As acute shortage of power was being experienced there was a need to encourage the consumers to acquire their own source of energy with a view to reduce or lessen the burden on the existing sources of electricity generation.
Obviously this purpose can be achieved only by granting the exemption prospectively to those consumers who install their own source of generation of energy pursuant to the concession being granted under the provision for exemption.
Those who already had their own source of generation of energy need no such encouragement in respect of the source of generation, already installed.
If they wanted to further augment their own source or generation of energy they would also be entitled to exemption in respect or the 'additional ' source of generation installed 'after ' the date specified in the notification.
The classification is, therefore, rational, purposeful, as also meaningful, and it is calculated to effectively serve the real purpose of granting exemption.
Article 14 cannot be invoked in a situation like this to successfully assail that part of the notification whereby the date of installation has been made the precondition for qualifying the exemption.
[672 G 673 B] State of Uttar Pradesh vs Jageshwar, ; referred to.
