The services of the appellant workman were terminated by the Management of the respondent.
On a report from the Conciliation Officer the Government referred the dispute to the Labour Court.
The Management contended that the workman had not raised any demand with the Management and that there was, therefore, no industrial dispute.
The Labour Court found as a fact that the Union had raised a valid demand with the Management and that the termination of services of the workman was illegal and mala fide.
The Management invoked the jurisdiction of the High Court under article 226.
A Single Judge of the High Court quashed the Award of the Labour Court on the finding that no demand had been raised and there was no industrial dispute which could be properly referred by the Government for adjudication.
The judgment of the Single Judge was affirmed by the Division Bench.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: The High Court was not right in interfering with the Award of the Labour Court under article 226 on a mere technicality, [728 E] The jurisdiction under article 226 of the Constitution is truly wide but, for that very reason, it has to be exercised with great circumspection.
It is not for the High Court to constitute itself into an appellate court over Tribunals constituted under special legislations to resolve disputes of a kind qualitatively different from ordinary civil disputes and to readjudicate upon questions of fact decided by those Tribunals.
That the questions decided pertain to jurisdictional facts does not entitle the High Court to interfere with the findings on jurisdictional facts which the Tribunal is well competent to decide.
[727 D F] In the instant case there was a conciliation proceeding, the conciliation had failed and the Conciliation Officer had so reported to the Government.
The Government was justified in thinking that there was an industrial dispute and referring it to the Labour Court.
The High Court 's discussion on what was an industrial dispute and what was a jurisdictional fact was an entirely unnecessary exercise.
[727 G F; 728 A B] Sindhu Resettlement Corporation Ltd. vs The Industrial Tribunal of Gujarat, [1968]1 S.C.R. 515, explained and distinguished.
