The Petitioners had committed default in payment of the tax payable by them under the U.P. Sales Tax Act, 1948.
Any such dues could be recovered as if arrears of land revenue in terms of sub sections (3) and (8) of section 8 of the 1948 Act read with Rule 50 of the U.P. Sales Tax Rules, 1948.
Section 5 of the , as in force in the State of Uttar Pradesh speaks of the obligation and other duties of the collectors for recovery of sums recoverable as arrears of revenue on the certificates of public officers and Local Authorities.
The procedure for such a recovery however is provided in sections 279 and 281 of the U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Revenue Act, 1950 read with Rules 246, 247A, 247B and 251 of the U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Revenue Rules, 1952.
Under clause (b) of the sub section (1) of section 279 of the UPZALR Act, recovery by resort to arrest and detention of the person concerned" is also provided.
On certificates issued by the assessing Authority, in terms of section 33 of the U.P. Sales Tax Act, 1948, warrants of arrest had either been issued or were about to be issued by the concerned Revenue Officers for the arrest and detention of the petitioners, in the course of the recovery proceedings.
The petitioners have challenged the same as constitutionally invalid being violative of Articles 14, 19(1) (d) and 21 of the Constitution and repugnant to Article 11 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
Allowing the petitions in part, the Court ^ HELD: 1:1.
The impugned procedure contained in the U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1948 and the Rules made thereunder is not violative of Articles 14, 19(1) (d) and 21 of the Constitution.
[699 G] The Collector of Malabar vs Erimal Ebrahim Hajee, ; applied.
685 Sangam Lal Gupta vs Sales Tax Officer & Others., [1969] All.
L J. 257, approved.
In the instant cases, the petitioners cannot be detained pursuant to any warrant of arrest already issued, since no such enquiry, as contemplated in Rule 251 of the U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Rules, 1952, by the officer who issued the warrant into the question whether the detention of the defaulter would compel him to pay the arrears by arresting and detaining the defaulters in accordance with law by passing fresh orders.
[695 G H] 2.
Article 11 of the International Covenant of Civil and Political Rights cannot come to the aid of the petitioners since it has not been made yet a part of Indian municipal law and further it relates to a debt due under a contractual obligation.
[692 C] Jolly George Verghese and Another vs The Bank of Cochin, ; , explained and distinguished.
3:1 Whether a restriction imposed by a statutory provision on the fundamental right guaranteed under Article 19(1) (d) of the Constitution is reasonable or not is now governed by well established norms.
It is settled by a long line of decisions of this Court that the restriction must not be arbitrary or excessive in nature so as to be beyond the requirement of the general public.
The Court should strike a just balance between freedom contained in Article 19(1) (d) of the Constitution and the social interest to be protected.
No universal rule can be laid down in this regard.
The changing social conditions, the values of human life, the prevailing social philosophy and all the surrounding circumstances should be taken into consideration.
In a case like this where public dues are to be collected some amount of coercion is necessary to make a recalcitrant defaulter who has fraudulently secreted his assets to screen them from being proceeded against to pay up the dues.
In the contemporary Indian conditions the process of arrest and detention of the judgment debtor or a defaulter to enforce payment of the amount due from him is not altogether unreasonable.
It cannot be held to be unconstitutional if there are sufficient safeguards which make the process conform to reasonable standards.
[692 G H, 693 A B, 695 B C] State of Madras vs V.G. Row, ; , referred to.
The defaulter has adequate opportunity to satisfy the Recovery Officer concerned that there is no justification to order his detention.
While section 281 of the UP ZALR Act prescribes necessary safeguards in respect of the process of arrest and detention like the maximum period of detention upto fifteen days and exemption of certain persons viz. women, minors, a bhumidhar of the specified class etc.
Rule 251 of UP ZALR Rules provides safeguards like report by a Tehsildar issuing a warrant of arrest to the Collector without delay and production of the arrested defaulter before the officer issuing the warrant without delay and that such defaulter should not be detained in custody unless there is reason to believe that the process of detention will compel the payment of the whole or a substantial portion of the arrear.
Under 686 Rule 251, there is necessity to enquire into the question whether the detention of the defaulter would be productive of payment of the arrear of a substantial portion thereof.
The officer concerned is, therefore, required to decide on the basis of the material before him and any evidence tendered or submission made by the defaulter whether there is any justification for detaining him and it is only after he is satisfied that the detention of the defaulter will compel him to make the payment of the whole or substantial part of the arrear he can order his detention.
If he is not so satisfied the officer is under an obligation to release him.
C H] 3:3.
Each State is well within its right to devise its own machinery for the recovery of its own public demands and that no person belonging to one State can complain that the law of his State is more rigorous than that of the neighbouring State or the procedure prescribed by the Code of Civil Procedure for execution of the decrees.
[696 E G] Purshottam Govindji Halai vs Shree B.M. Desai, Addl.
Collector of Bombay and Others, ; , followed.
The proviso to section 33 of the U.P. Sales Tax Act no doubt says that without prejudice to the powers conferred under that section the Collector shall also have the powers of a civil court for the purpose of recovery of an amount due under a decree.
This proviso does not impose any further restriction on the power of the Collector under section 281 of the UP ZALR Act and the Rules made thereunder which constitute a complete code on the process of arrest and detention of a defaulter and it is not modified by any of the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure.
Where the procedure relating to execution mentioned in the Code of Civil Procedure is to be adopted, U.P. ZALR Act has made an express reference to it in section 282(2) which deals with attachment and sale under section 282 shall be made according to the law in force for the time being for the attachment and sale of movable property in execution of a decree of a civil court.
Section 341 of the UP ZALR Act states that unless otherwise expressly provided by or under that Act the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure would apply to the proceedings under that Act.
There are express provisions in the UP ZALR Act and the Rules made thereunder governing the process of arrest and detention.
Hence the provisions of section 51 of the Code of Civil Procedure would not in terms be applicable to the process of arrest and detention under the UP ZALR Act.
[698 E H, 699 A C] Seth Banarsi Das Gupta vs State of U.P. & Others, [1975] Revenue Decisions, 246 (Allahabad High Court), over ruled.
However, a writ of demand or citation ordinarily should be issued to the defaulter before resorting to the drastic process of issuing an arrest warrant under section 281 of the UP ZALR Act.
Even if a formal writ of demand is not issued, it is implicit in the nature of the process to be issued under section 281 of the U.P. ZALR Act that the defaulter concerned should have prior notice of the issue of the certificate for recovery to enable him to pay up the amount demanded to avoid the arrest.
[699 E G] 687
