On a reference being made to it concerning the dismissal from service of the appellant who was a Development officer in the Life Insurance Corporation, the Industrial Tribunal upheld a preliminary objection to the maintainability of the reference and ruled that Development officers in the Corporation were not workmen within the meaning of section 2(s) of the .
His petition under article 226 questioning the validity of the Tribunal 's ruling having been dismissed in limine by the High Court, the appellant approached this Court under article 136.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: Development officers in the Life Insurance Corporation are workmen ' within the meaning of section 2(s) of the [821 B] (i) The Act is a legislation intended to bring about peace and harmony between labour and management in industry and, for that purpose, it makes provision for the investigation and settlement of industrial disputes.
It is, therefore, necessary to interpret the definitions of 'industry ', 'workman ', `industrial disputes ' etc., so as not to whittle down, but to advance the object of the Act.
Disputes between forces of labour and management are not to be excluded from the operation of the Act by giving narrow and restricted meanings to expressions in the Act.
Parliament could never be credited with the intention of keeping out of the purview of the legislation small bands of employees who, though not on the managerial side of the establishment, are yet to be denied the ordinary rights of the forces of labour for no apparent reason at all.
[803 D F] Workmen of Indian Standards Institution vs Management of Indian Standards Institution, ; , referred to.
(ii) The words "any skilled or unskilled manual, supervisory, technical or clerical work" in section 2(s) of the Act are not intended to limit or narrow the amplitude of the definition of 'workman '; on the other hand they indicate and emphasize the broad sweep of the definition which is designed to coverall manner of persons employed in an industry, irrespective of whether they are 800 engaged in skilled work or unskilled work, manual work or supervisory work, technical work or clerical work.
Quite obviously, the broad intention is to take in the entire `labour force ' and exclude the 'managerial force '.
[803 B C] (iii) one does not have to be carried away by the appellation 'development officer ' but must look to the nature of his duties to discover what precisely a development officer is.
It is seen from the Life Insurance Corporation of India (Staff) Regulations that development officers, while classified separately from 'Supervisory and Clerical Staff ' are also classified separately from 'officers ' and from the scales of pay prescribed as well as the authorities competent to appoint and take disciplinary action in respect of various categories of officers and staff mentioned therein it is clear that the appellation 'development officer ' is no more than a glorified designation.
Development officers are separated from 'officers ' strictly so called and are generally placed on a par with subordinate and clerical staff.
The nature of the duties of a development officer gathered from the letter of appointment issued to the appellant indicate that he is to be a whole time employee of the Corporation, that his operations are to be restricted to a defined area, that he is liable to be transferred, that he has no authority to bind the Corporation in any way, that his principal duty is to organise and develop the business of the Corporation in an area allotted to him and for that purpose to recruit active and reliable agents and to train them and that even so, he has not the authority either to appoint them or to take disciplinary action against them.
Further, it was admitted that a development officer has no subordinate staff working under him.
It is thus clear that a development officer cannot by any stretch of imagination be said to be engaged in any administrative or managerial work.
[804 D H, 805 A E, 811 B] 2.
Whenever an industrial dispute is referred to a tribunal for adjudication it has become a fashion with all employers to raise three preliminary objections, viz., that there is no industry, that there is no industrial dispute and that the workman is no workman.
It is a pity that when the Central Government, in all solemnity, refers an industrial dispute for adjudication, a public sector corporation which is an instrumentality of the State instead of welcoming a decision by the tribunal on merits so as to absolve itself of any charge of being a bad employer should attempt to evade decision on merits by raising such objections and never thereby satisfied, carry the matter or ten times to the High Court and to the Supreme Court, wasting public time and money.
Public sector corporations must be model employers and model litigants.
They should not attempt to avoid adjudication by raising needless objections or by adopting needless postures or by indulging in luxurious litigation and drag workman from court to court merely to vindicate, not justice, but some rigid technical stand taken up by them.
[801 D H]
