Section 72A of the Income Tax Act, 1961 enables an Amalgamated Company to carry forward and set off accumulated loss and unabsorbed depreciation allowance in certain cases of amalgamation on the fulfilment of three conditions viz; (a) that the amalgamating company was, immediately before its amalgamation financially non viable by reason of its liabilities, losses and other relevant factors; (b) that the amalgamation was in the public interest; and (c) such other conditions as central government may by notification in the official Gazette specify, to ensure.
that the benefit under the section is restricted to amalgamation which would facilitate the rehabilitation.
Or revival of the business of amalgamating company.
The Central Government 's satisfaction in respect of the three conditions is to be based on the recommendation of the specified Authority, referred to in Section 72A.
The Central p Government then has to make a declaration to that effect and the effect and consequence of such a declaration is that notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of the Act, the accumulated loss and unabsorbed depreciation of amalgamating company is deemed to be the loss or as the case may be, allowance for depreciation of the amalgamated company for the previous year in which the amalgamation was effected.
For claiming the benefit of the section, the certificate issued by the specified authority under sub section 2(ii) of section 72A to the effect that adequate steps have been taken by the amalgamated company for the rehabilitation or revival of the business of the amalgamating company must be submitted alongwith the return of the income for the said assessment year.
Mahindra and Mahindra Ltd. was incorporated under the Indian Companies Act 1913 and is thus duly registered under the Act of 1956.
Its share capital has been widely held, the principal share holders being the public 774 financial institutions to the extent of about 40% of its equity share capital; it is engaged in the manufacture of jeeps, motor vehicles etc.
One M/s. Inter national Tractor Company of India Ltd. incorporated on April 15, 1963 under the Indian as a public company for the manufacture of essential commodities like agricultural tractors was commercially insolvent at the close of the financial year ending October 31, 1977.
Therefore, proposal for amalgamating ITCI with M & M was considered and approved by the Boards of Directors of both the companies by two resolutions dated 4.10.76 since it was felt that it would be advantageous to both if their operations could be rationalized for better and more efficient utilisation of their existing capacities and facilities.
A scheme of Amalgamation effective from 1.11.1977 was prepared and finalised and, after obtaining the approval of the Central Government to the scheme of amalgamation as required under section 23(2) of the , the Bombay High Court was moved under sections 391 and 394 of the seeking its sanction which was granted.
On April 27, 1978, M & M, moved an application under Section 72A of the Income Tax, 1961 Act for the grant of relief of the requisite declaration v from the Central Government which was received by the Central Government on May 3 of 1978.
As the amalgamation had been effected from November 1, 1977 M & M filed the said application so as to enable the authorities to investigate the requisite factual pre conditions for the grant of the relief and to arrive at a decision in order to enable it to file its return of income for the assessment year 1979 80 (the relevant previous year being 1.11.1977 to 31.10.1978 during which the amalgamation was effected) alongwith the requisite certificate of the Specified Authority before the due date June 30, 1979.
Later M & M also furnished the latest audited financial position of ITCI together with other particulars as desired.
By a notification No. S.O. 710(E) dated 11.10.1977 the Central Government constituted and notified the Specified Authority consisting of respondent Nos. 6 to 10 under section 72A of the Act and at the suggestion of the Specified Authority the Central Government also set up a separate Screening Committee of experts to investigate as to whether the requisite statutory conditions were present or not.
After considering the particulars furnished in the application made by M & M, further correspondence and evidence produced in that behalf and after hearing M & M the Specified Authority by its order dated May/June 2, 1980 recommended that the amalgamation of ITCI with M & M did not satisfy the condition specified in cl.
(a); in other words, it opined that amalgamating company was financially viable and not non viable immediately before its amalgamation with M & M. The Central Government, adopting the reasons recorded by the specified Authority for its opinion, accepted the recommendation made by it and passed an order on December 1, 1980 whereby it refused to issue the declaration under Section 72A of the Act to M & M. The aforesaid recommendation of the Specified Authority and the Central Government 's decision based thereon were challenged by M & M by filing a writ petition in the Delhi High Court; the challenges was principally 775 met by raising a contention that the Central Government had refused the relief to M & M on the basis of its subjective decision about the non fulfilment of the condition specified in cl.
(a) of section 72A (1) and for relevant and cogent reasons and hence the decision could not be reviewed or interfered with by the Court and with a view to show that both the Specified Authority and the Central Government had considered all the relevant factors and that M & M had been fairly treated in the matter great reliance was placed on the minutes of the several meetings held by the Specified Authority which were produced before the Court.
On a consideration of the entire material placed before it as well as the rival submissions made by counsel for the parties the High Court came to the conclusion that the view taken by the Specified Authority and the Central Government in the impugned orders was just not possible to be formed and that no reasonable authority much less the Specified Authority or an expert body of the Central Government could have reasonably come to the conclusion that IICI was, immediately before its amalgamation with M&M, financially viable.
The High Court quashed the impugned recommendation dated May, June 2, 1980 of the Specified Authority as well as the Central Governments decision dated December 1, 1980 and directed (i) them to deal with M & M 's application and dispose it of within a period of six months from the date of its order in light of its judgment; (ii) the specified Authority to consider and issue, the requisite statutory certificate under Section 72A (2)(ii) of the Act within one month of the declaration made by the Central Government; and (iii) the Income Tax officer concerned to treat the statutory certificate when furnished by the M&M, as if It was filed by M & M with its Return for the concerned year.
Hence the appeal by Special Leave Dismissing the appeal the Court ^ HELD: 1.
By now, the parameters of the Court 's power of judicial review of administrative or executive action or decision and the grounds on which the Court can interfere with the same are well settled.
If the action or decision is perverse or is such that no reasonable body of persons, properly informed, could come to or has been arrived at by the authority misdirecting itself by adopting a wrong approach or has been influenced by irrelevant or extraneous matters, the Court would be justified in interfering with the same.
[786 F H] Barium Chemicals Ltd. vs Company Law Board [1966] Supp.
SCR 311; Smt.
Shalini Soni etc, vs Union of India and ors.
; referred to.
The budget speech of the Finance Minister and the Notes on clauses of the Finance Bill (No. 2) of 1977 explaining the provision of the said Bill, make it clear that sickness among industrial undertakings was regarded as a matter of grave national concern inasmuch as closure of any sizable manufacturing unit in any industry entailed social costs in terms of loss of production and unemployment as also waste of valuable capital assets, and experience had shown that taking over of such sick units by Government was not always a satisfactory or economical solution; and that a more effective 776 method would be to facilitate amalgamation of sick industrial units with sound ones by providing incentives and removing impediments in the way of such amalgamation which would not merely relieve the Government of uneconomical burden of taking over and running sick units but save the Government from social costs in terms of loss of production and unemployment.
With such objective in view, in order to facilitate the merger of sick industrial units with sound ones and as and by way of offering an incentive in that behalf section 72A was introduced in the Act where under by a deeming fiction the accumulated loss or unabsorbed depreciation of the amalgamating company is treated to be a loss or, as the case may be, allowance for depreciation of the amalgamated company in the previous year in which the amalgamation was effected; but the amalgamated company, although a successor in interest, would be entitled to carry forward and set off the accumulated loss and unabsorbed depreciation of the amalgamating company only where the amalgamating company was not, immediately before such amalgamation, financially viable and the amalgamation, was in public interest.
[789 H, 790 A E] 2:2.
The expression "financial non viability" has not been defined in the Income Tax Act, 1961.
However, the Finance Minister 's speech, the notes on clauses of the Bill and the Memorandum explaining the provisions thereof make it clear that the financial non viability of an undertaking has been equated with the 'sickness ' of such undertaking and obviously in the context of its revival by a sound undertaking the sickness must be of a temporary character and not any basic or permanent sickness.
An undertaking which is basically or potentially non viable will ordinarily be incapable of revival and would face a closure; in other words, the financial non viability spoken of by the section must refer to sickness brought about by temporary adverse financial circumstances that disables the unit to stand and work on its own.
This is also made clear by the provisions contained in cl.
(a) of sub sec.
(1) which states that the financial non viability of the amalgamating company has to be judged by reference to "its liabilities, losses and other relevant factors".
[790 F H] Moreover, since the expression is occurring in a taxing statute in the P context of amalgamation of companies it will have to be understood in its popular sense, that is to say, the sense or meaning that is attributed to it by men of business, trade or commerce and by persons or institutions interested in or dealing with companies.
[790 H, 791 A] 2:3.
The true concept of financial non viability as understood by men of business and commence and by financial institutions may be discerned.
While announcing its scheme of merging sick units with healthy ones (Finance Act, 1977) Government of India had classified "those units where the losses, past and present, have eroded 50% of capital and reserves as sick '.
According to the Reserve Bank of India, commercial banks consider a unit to be sick "if it has incurred cash loss for one year and in their judgment is likely to continue to incur cash losses for the current year as well as the following year and which has an imbalance in its financial structure, such as current ratio of less than 1:1 an worsening debt equity ratio (total outside liabilities to net worth)".
While the commercial banks follow these criteria for banking purposes, the 777 State Bank of India defines a sick unit as one "which fails to generate internal surplus on a regular basis and depends for its survival on the constant infusion of funds from outside.
According to National Council of Applied Economic Research, where all the three parameters profitability, liquidity and solvency show positive figures the unit 's financial viability will be sound; where one of the three parameters shows a negative figure the unit could be regarded as 'tending towards sickness '; when two of the three parameters show negative figures, it would be a case of 'incipient sickness ' and when all the three parameters show negative figures the unit is 'sick '.
It is by reference to these several tests or criteria adopted by them that the question has to be decided whether a particular undertaking is financially non viable at a given point of time.
[791 B F, 792 A B] 3:1.
A careful and close scrutiny of para 3 of the Central Government 's order comprising three aspects which constitute the substratum of the reasoning behind the conclusion will show that both had misdirected themselves in law by adopting a wrong approach and proceeding on a wrong assumption about the possibility of financial assistance from M & M which did not exist either i fact or in law: (i) Section 72A does not require the undertaking to be basically non viable, but merely financially non viable which must of necessary be of a temporary character, (ii) further the close link between the two companies referred to by both, divorced from financial assistance would be an irrelevant factor; (iii) the provisions of Sections 370 and 371 o. the companies Act, 1956 have been completed ignored.
Indisputably at the relevant time having regard to the provisions of section 370 of the the maximum limit up to which M & M could lend and advance was Rs. 120 lakhs and in view of the advances already made to various parties to the tune of Rs. 70 lakhs it could have advanced only Rs. 50 lakhs to ITCI as against its requirement of over ten times that amount namely, Rs. 5 crores and odd, moreover any financial help in excess of Rs. 50 lakhs would have visited M & M and its directors or officers with penal consequences under section 371 of the .; (iv) the fact that during the year 1977 78 following the amalgamation M & M took adequate steps for the revival of ITCI 's undertaking by making repayments to its creditors to the tune of Rs. 4 crores and by making investment of Rs. 0.7 crore on maintenance, replacement of machinery etc.
thereby enabling the undertaking to earn a cash profit of Rs. 3.9 crores could not be regarded as a factor showing the financial viability of ITCI prior to 1.11.1977 as was wrongly done by the Specified Authority and the Central Government.
All this shows that the impugned conclusion was the result of an entirely wrong approach being adopted as regards the true concept of financial non viability.
On the other hand, at the material time namely, immediately before its amalgamation with M & M which took place on 1.11.1977 ITCI, having regard to its financial position, was commercially insolvant and that all the three parameters of profitability, liquidity and solvency, by reference to which its sickness (financial non viability) is required to be judged, showed negative figures.
Admittedly, during the two years 1974 75 and 1976 77 it had Made huge losses to the tune of Rs. 253 lakhs and Rs. 433 lakhs respectively and the nominal profits of Rs. 70 lakhs (or for that matter even Rs. 208 lakhs) earned by it in 1975 76 did not convert it into a profitable concern as on 31st of October, 1977. (v) As regards solvency, admittedly, cheques and bill issued by ITCI had bounced, 778 suppliers had stopped supply of raw materials financial institutions had stopped further monetary help and legal actions including winding up proceedings had been threatened.
Further, the excess of liabilities (including loans) over the assets (share capital plus free reserves) was to the tune of Rs. 61 lakhs and odd as on 31st October, 1977 and as such the entire share capital plus free reserves had been eroded (and not merely 50% as per the test of Government of India) and the 'current ratio was extremely strained at 40:60 (being less than 1:1 as required by the test adopted by commercial Banks).
In other words according to the tests or criteria adopted by men of business or commerce and financial institutions ITCI, immediately before its amalgamation with M & M, was clearly and blatantly financially non viable.
In spite of such situation that obtained and which was brought to the notice of the Specified Authority and the Central Government an almost perverse conclusion was arrived at; at any rate it was a conclusion which no reasonable body of persons, properly informed, could come to; (vi) The so called statement at para 14 of ITCI 's company petition No. 789177 could not be given any significance at all; (vii) Admittedly the poor performance and losses incurred by ITCI were due to factors such as mechanics of price control and the sluggishness in the market over which it had no control: (viii) The share exchange ratio fixed under the Amalgamation scheme does not passes the negative, effect, but it would only be a neutral factor.
After all several aspects and considerations weigh with the share holders of the companies concerned in the amalgamation while approving the proposed share exchange ratio and since in the instant case all the concerned share holders of M & M including the public financial institutions had, with full knowledge of all the facts including the commercially insolvent position of ITCI, agreed to the ratio and which was not disturbed by the High Court in spite of objection being raised by the Regional Director Company Law Board, it cannot be said that tile exchange ratio so fixed possesses probative value of negative character; and (ix) According to well settled principles and practice of Commercial Accounting, the concept of "Net Worth" of ITCI as per the books of account was negative on the date of amalgamation and therefore when the Specified Authority and the Central Government took into consideration the market value of the assets of the ITCI as on the date of amalgamation for coming to the conclusion that the company was a viable unit, they were clearly influenced by irrelevant and extraneous material vitiating the impugned conclusion.
[792 G H, 793 A H, 794 A H 79; A H, 796 A E] 3:2.
That the amalgamation was in public interest is clear.
There is a specific averments made to it in the writ petition itself.
But that apart, the admitted facts are (a) ITCI was engaged in the manufacture of agricultural tractors which have been declared as an essential commodity under the , (b) the production had declined to 2000 tractors as against its licensed and installed capacity of 10,000 tractors during the period 1.10.76 to 31.10.1977, (c) because of its adverse financial position it was facing the prospect of immediate closure entailing social costs in terms of loss of production of an essential commodity and loss of employment to over 2000 workers employed by it, (d) the closure of ITCI would have rendered idle a large investment in productive capacity which would not have been in the national interest, and (e) the amalgamation forestalled the necessity for the State Government to take over that unit and conduct it as a relief undertaking, 779 thereby avoiding a heavy burden falling on the public exchequer.
In Act M & M had taken adequate steps for the revival of ITCI and had carried on the same business without any modification or reorganisation during the relevant previous year.
[796 H, 797 A G]
