Dismissing the petition of the accused and the States petitions against the acquittal of the co accused and for enhancement of the sentence to death sentence, the Court, ^ HELD: (i) In the instant case, the three petitions for special leave to appeal do not warrant interference by the Court.
[761 D] 2:1 The circumstantial evidence on record clearly connect the accused with the crime and concealment thereof.
Regarding motive, there is the clearest evidence in that Dr. Saxena had an illicit affair with the co accused, a nurse due to which he used to harass, pressurise, threaten and assualt the deceased Sudha his wife.
Her murder was a Consummation which the nurse must have devoutly wished for.
[760 H; 761 E] 2:2 Further the conduct of the accused, in buying a box packing the dead body of his wife into that box, travelling with that box from Hardoi (the venue of crime) to Lucknow by the Sialdah Express, taking another train from Lucknow to Kanpur, throwing the box on way into the Ganges and little realising that the Ganges had refused to accept the box which contained tell tale evidence of the dastardly murder of a defenceless woman, informing his own parents and parents in law that the deceased ran away from the house and finally lodging a false and misleading reports to the same effect with the police cannot favour the theory of commission of suicide by her.
[760 G H; 761 A B] In the presence of Dr. Saxena in the house, the deceased could not have hung herself by a rope in that very house that too with a two year child near her.
Neither a rope was found nor the medical evidence did show that the death was due to hanging.
[760 G H] 759 (3) Faced with such a situation where the death sentence so justifiable imposed by the learned Sessions Judge is reduced to life imprisonment by the High Court under Sections 392 and 370 Crl.
P.C., for the reason that the two learned Judges differed on the question as to the guilt of the accused, the Supreme Court cannot interfere under order XXI against the sentence.
[761 C D]
