Section 32 of the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1948 provides that every tenant of agricultural land shall be deemed to have purchased from his landlord as on April 1, 1957 (Tiller 's Day) the land held by him as tenant free from all encumbrances.
However to protect petty or small landlords against statutory compulsory purchase, provision was made in Part lI A of Chapter lII read with section 88 C of the Act enabling them to obtain exemption certificate under section 88 C. While section 33 A designates such petty land lords as 'certificated landlords ' and tho tenants of such exempted lands as `excluded tenants ', section 33 B confers a special right on a certificated landlord to terminate the tenancy of the excluded tenant in respect of the exempted land and obtain possession of such land if he bona fide requires the same for cultivating it personally.
The land in question in this appeal had fallen to the share of the respondent in a family partition.
The bona fides of the partition was the main issue in the proceedings held under section 88 C for grant of an exemption certificate in favour of the respondent.
However, the order granting the certificate withstood all challenge from the tenants and became final.
In the subsequent proceedings instituted by the respondent under section 33 B for possession of the land the Tehsildar arrived at the finding that the respondent required the land bonafide for his personal cultivation and this finding was confirmed by the Sub Divisional officer in appeal and the tenants were directed to hand over possession of the land to the respondent.
The tenants filed revision applications before the Revenue Tribunal which allowed them on the ground that the Sub Divisional officer had wrongly declined to admit an important piece of evidence having a direct bearing on the question of bona fides of the partition.
The respondent moved the High Court under article 227 and the High Court set aside the Tribunal 's judgment holding that the bona fides of the partition which had already been agitated inter partes in proceedings under section 88 C could not be reconsidered in a subsequent proceedings under section 33 B and directed the Tribunal to decide the revision in accordance with law.
The Tribunal, taking note of the fact that the respondent had sold a piece of land 1 112 years before filing the present application for possession and also that he owned house property in Poona City, came to the conclusion that the respondent did not bona fide require the land in question for personal cultivation and 823 dismissed the application for possession of land.
The respondent once again moved the High Court under article 227.
The High Court restored the decision of the Sub Divisional officer, holding that the Tribunal was in error in holding that in order to obtain possession of land from an excluded tenant under section 33 B, it was obligatory upon a certificated landlord to prove the compelling necessity to cultivate the land, and that the sale of land by the respondent prior to the commencement of the present proceedings which was for a small price did not have an adverse impact on his bona fides.
Counsel for appellant tenants submitted that even assuming that the High Court was right in holding that the bona fides of the partition could not be the subject matter of a collateral attack in the present proceedings as the same had been considered and decided in proceedings held under section 88 C, still the question could be gone into to ascertain the bona fides of the landlord when he moved an application under section 33 B seeking eviction for personal cultivation.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: It is true that a certificated landlord is not entitled to recover possession from the excluded tenant merely for asking.
He can only obtain the direction for possession if he bona fide requires the exempted land for cultivating it personally.
When it is said that the landlord bonafide requires possession of the land, it would be necessary for him to prove that he is acting honestly and that the application for possession is not a device to dispossess the tenant and that he requires, in the sense needs possession of, the land for personal cultivation.
In other words, personal cultivation is necessary to obtain the yield of the land for himself.
Some element of requirement could inhere the requirement for maintenance by undertaking the avocation of personal cultivation.
lt is not that the landlord even if he has sufficient source of maintenance, can seek possession merely because he wants to pursue the avocation of cultivating the land personally but this aspect hardly ever arises in an application under section 33 B because such an application can only be made by a certificated landlord and none else and the certificated landlord is one whose holding does not exceed an economic holding.
As long as the certificate of exemption under section 88 C subsists, two inferences flow therefrom: that the landlord is a petty or small land holder and that his annual income from all sources including rent of land does not exceed Rs. 1,500.
lt is the bonafide requirement of such a small and petty landlord for personal cultivation that has to be examined under section 33 B.
It may be that while examining the bona fides of the requirement of the certificated landlord, the court may take into account how the landlord became the owner of the land and, if it is by partition, the bona fides of the partition may be examined.
[830 G H; 831 A D] Arvind Lal Bhukanda vs Khandu, 63 B.L.R. 929 approved and distinguished.
In the instant case, the appellant tenants contested the proceedings initiated by the landlord for certificate of exemption under section 88 C at all levels and on all available contentions, the principal one being the nature and 824 character of the partition.
That contention having been concurrently negatived cannot be re opened.
The Tehsildar arrived at the finding that the respondent required the land bonafide for his personal cultivation and it was confirmed by the first appellate court which was the last fact finding court.
The Tribunal interfered with this finding on the ground that some important piece of evidence had been over looked.
The finding cannot be reopened this state on the short submission that the Court declined to examine the genuineness or validity or bona fides of the partition particularly when this very question was considered in an earlier round of proceedings and decided in favour of the landlord.
[832 E F; 833 E H]
