Section 129 A of the authorises the seizure and detention of a motor vehicle by a police officer or any other person authorised by the State Government in that behalf if such officer or person has reason to believe that the vehicle has been or is being used without a certificate of registration as required under section 22 or without a permit as required under sub section
(1) of section 42 or in contravention of any condition of such permit.
The appeals in this group of matters were directed against a judgment of the Andhra Pradesh High Court striking down section 129 A as an unreasonable restriction on the fundamental right guaranteed by article 19(1) (g) of the Constitution for the reason that there was no discernible purpose behind the seizure authorised by the section, that the seizure was based on the subjective satisfaction of the police officer or the person authorised, that there was neither any obligation on him to produce the vehicle in the court nor was any power conferred on the court either to confiscate the vehicle or to pass any orders regarding its temporary custody, that there was no provision in the Act indicating as to what should be done after seizing and detaining the vehicle and that there was also no provision prescribing any maximum period for the detention of the vehicle or providing for an appeal against seizure.
Upholding the validity of section 129 A and allowing the appeals, ^ HELD: There is no lacuna in regard to the proper custody and disposal of the motor vehicle seized under section 129 A of the .
The provisions of the Act have to be read in conjunction with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
[739 A B] (i) Section 129 A contemplates three situations where the police officer or the person authorised may seize and detain the vehicle and these are precisely the three situations made punishable under section 123(1).
The power given to seize and detain the vehicle under section 129 A has to be exercised by the police officer or the person authorised when he has reason to believe that an offence punishable under section 123(1) has been or is being committed.
After detecting the commission of an offence punishable under section 123(1) the next step for him would be to consider whether the offence should be compounded as provided 730 under section 127 B and thereafter to lay a complaint before the Court competent to take cognizance of the offence.
Section 4(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure provides that all offences under any law other than the Penal Code shall also be investigated, inquired into, tried and otherwise dealt with in accordance with the provisions of the Code subject to any enactment for the time being in force regulating the manner or place of investigating, inquiring into, trying or otherwise dealing with such offences.
Chapter XIII of the Code deals with "Jurisdiction of the Criminal Courts in inquiries and trials".
So, subject to section 132 of the Act, the Court before which the complaint may be laid has to be determined in accordance with Chapter XIII of the Code and after the complaint is laid before the appropriate court it has to be tried in accordance with the provisions of the Code subject to section 130 of the Act.
This is how the offender has to be dealt with.
[733 D; H; 734 A B; G H; 735 A B] (ii) A pre condition to the seizure of a vehicle under section 129 A is that the police officer or the person authorised must have reason to believe that one or the other of the offences specified in section 123 has been or is being committed.
The seizure is expected to serve a manifold purpose such as to prevent repetition of the offence, to use the thing seized as material evidence in the prosecution and so on.
Section 129 A itself provides that the detention of the vehicle by the authorised officer or person is to be temporary, and obviously, until appropriate orders regarding its disposal are made.
The vehicle may be released if the owner satisfies the authorised officer or person that no offence such as that mentioned in section 129 A had been or was being committed.
Again, since the detention is for temporary safe custody, the vehicle may be released to the owner subject to suitable security and an undertaking to produce it when called upon to do so.
If the offence is compounded under section 127 B, the vehicle has naturally to be returned to the owner.
If a complaint is laid before the appropriate court, the court acquires jurisdiction to pass appropriate orders regarding the custody and the disposal of the vehicle under Chapter XXXIV and sections 451 and 452 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
[735 H; 736 C H; 737 A] 2.
The contention that section 129 A should be held unreasonable as it does not provide any safeguard in regard to the several removable items which are usually found in tourist vehicles such as spare tyres, spare parts, radio, video, etc., has no substance.
Section 100 of the Code of Criminal Procedure which was referred to in this context deals with searches and not seizures.
In the very nature of things when property is seized and not recovered during a search, it is not possible to comply with the provisions of sub sections
(4) and (5) of section 100, Cr.
In the case of a seizure under the , there is no provision for preparing a list of the things seized in the course of seizure for the obvious reason that all those things are seized not separately but as part of the vehicle itself.
But it is in the interests of the very officer or person seizing the vehicle to prepare a list of detachable things which are ordinarily not part of the vehicle and give a copy of the list to the person in charge of the vehicle at the time of the seizure.
[739 A D]
