The Andhra Pradesh (Agricultural Produce and Livestock) Markets Act, 1966 was enacted to regulate the purchase and sale of agricultural produce, livestock and products of livestock (compendiously referred to as agricultural produce), to establish markets in connection therewith, to eliminate middlemen and to protect the producers in such agricultural produce from exploitation and to ensure them a fair price for their produce.
The Act empowers the State Government to establish Market Committees.
Section 7 prohibits the setting up of any Place for the purchase, sale etc.
Of any notified agricultural produce except in accordance with the conditions of a licence granted by the Market Committee.
Sub section (6) of section 7 prohibits the purchase or sale of any notified agricultural produce outside the market in the notified area.
Section 12 empowers the State Government to authorise the Market Committees to levy a fee on agricultural produce purchased or sold within the The market fee which in 1970 was 25 paise for every hundred rupees of the aggregate amount for which the notified agricultural produce was purchased or sold was raised to 50 paise in 1972.
It was eventually raised to Re. 1.
It was contended on behalf of the petitioners that (i) section 7(6) which totally prohibits the purchase and sale of any notified agricultural produce outside the market in that area encroaches upon the right of the citizen to carry on trade or business and is repugnant to Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution and is therefore void; (ii) levy of market fee under section 12(1) on transactions effected by the petitioners from their business premises which are located in the notified market area but outside the market proper is per se illegal and unconstitutional as such levy is not correlated to any services rendered to them, 844 Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: Having regard to the purpose and object of the legislation the restriction imposed by section 7(6) of the Act is reasonable restriction within the meaning of Article 19(6) of the Constitution.
[865 A B] Marketing legislation which seeks to enable producers to get a fair price for the commodities produced by them by eliminating middlemen and providing regulated markets, cannot be said to impose an unreasonable restriction on the citizen 's right to do business unless it is clearly established that the provisions are too drastic to achieve the object for which the law was enacted.
In order to make such legislation effective it would be reasonable for the legislature to control transactions between traders and also the sale within the market area of produce grown outside the market area.
[859 D F] The liberty of the individual must yield to the common good.
There can be no protection of the right themselves unless there is a measure of control and regulation of the rights of each individual in the interest of all.
[863 G] In order to determine the reasonableness of a restriction the court must have regard to the nature and conditions prevailing in that trade.
Section 7(6) was enacted for the very purpose of controlling the business in agricultural produce by the establishment of regulated markets in connection therewith.
Therefore the section cannot be said to be arbitrary or of an excessive nature which is beyond what is required in the interests of tho community.
If the agricultural produce is sold in the notified area the transactions would be carried on under the supervision and control of the market committee.
The producers can get tho best competitive prices and the transactions will be in ready cash.
The producers do not have to pay the middlemen.
The use of standard weights and measures would eliminate the possibility of the producer being victimized by malpractices of the traders.
Supervision of tho operations in the notified market area can be more conveniently done if business is carried on in a specified area.
[873 H, 864 B C, F G] M.C.V.S. Arunachala Nadar etc.
vs State of Madras and Ors., [1959] Supp. 1 SCR 92; Mohammad Hussain Gulam Mohammad and Anr.
vs State of Bambay and Anr.
, ; and Mohammadbhai Khudabux Chhipa and Anr.
vs State of Gujarat and Anr.
, [19621 Suppl.
3 SCR 875, relied on.
. : The contention that no liability is cast on the petitioners to pay market fee on transactions of sale and purchase of notified agricultural produce if they carry on such trade from their own premises in the notified area but outside the market in that area proceeds on wrong assumption because firstly in view of the express prohibition contained in Section 7(6) the petitioners cannot carry on such trade by not resorting to the market proper.
Contravention of the provisions of section 7(6) is made a penal offence under section 23(1).
Secondly, establishment of regulated markets for agricultural produce is a service rendered to those who are engaged in the business of purchase and sale of such commodities.
The duty of the market committee does not and with 845 the establishment of such markets but extends under section 15 of the Act to providing facilities in the market.
Service rendered by a market committee and facilities so be provided are not confined to the market proper but extend through the notified area.
[865 F H, 866 D E] Immidisetti Ramakrishnaiah vs State of A.P., [1976] ILR (AP) 878, approved.
There is no irreconcilable conflict between the provisions of section 7(6) and 12(1) because they are meant to achieve two distinct and separate objects operate on two different planes.
[868 B] The argument of the petitioners that since the market committees do not provide any additional facilities to justify increase in the rate of market fee is devoid of substance.
The decision of this Court in Kewal Krishan Puri 's case does not lay down any legal principle of general applicability and is clearly distinguishable on facts.
In that case the increase in the market fee was quashed because the income of the market fee had become a source of revenue.
The market committees throughout the State were left with huge surplus funds and the State Government had directed the market committees to contribute a large sum to a Medical College and deposit the surplus amounts with the State Agricultural Marketing Board and the Board in turn advanced interest free loans to Marketing Federations.
Even after incurring these unauthorised expenditures, the market committees were left with huge surpluses and were required to make donations to many educational institutions.
The marketing committees also spent large sums on general improvement of the Municipal areas.
The Punjab Act permitted diversion of funds for any purpose calculated to promote the general interest of the committees or the national or public interest.
[870 C, F H] Kewal Krishan Puri and Anr.
vs State of Punjab and Ors.
, ; , distinguished and held inapplicable.
The Commissioner, Hindu Religious Endowments, Madras vs Sri Lakshmindra Thirtha Swamiar of Sri Shirur Mutt; , and Matthews vs Chicory Marketing Board, 60 Com.
L.R. 263, referred to.
A case is an authority only for what it actually decides and not for what may logically follow from it.
Every judgment must be read as applicable to the particular facts proved, or assumed to be proved; since the generality of the expressions which may be found there are not intended to be expositions of the whole law but governed or qualified by the particular facts of the case in which expressions are to be found.
In Kewal Krishan Puri 's case there are certain observations which were really not necessary for purposes of that decision and go beyond the occasion and therefore they have no binding authority though they may have a persuasive value.
[871 H, 872 A B] The traditional view that there must be actual guid pro quo for a fee has undergone a sea change.
The distinction between a tax and a fee lies primarily 846 in the fact that a tax is levied as part of a common burden, while a fee is for payment of a specific benefit or privilege although the special advantage is secondary to the primary motive of regulation in public interest.
If the, element of revenue for general purpose of the State predominates, the levy becomes a tax.
In regard to fees there is, and must always be, correlation between the fee collected and the service intended to be rendered.
In deter mining whether a levy is a fee or a tax, the true test must be whether its primary and essential purpose is to render specific services to a specified area or class; it may be of on consequence that the State may ultimately and indirectly be benefited by it.
The power of any legislature to levy a fee is conditioned by the fact that it must be "by and large" a quid pro quo for the services rendered.
However, correlationship between the levy and the services rendered is one of general character and not of Mathematical exactitude.
All that is necessary is that there should be a reasonable "relationship" between levy of the fee, and the service rendered.
[872 D G] The Commissioner, Hindu Religious Endowments, Madras vs Sri Lakshmindra Thirtha Swamiar of Sri Shirur Mutt, supra; H. H. Sundhundra Thirtha Swamiar vs Commissioner for Hindu Religious & Churitable Endowments, Mysore, [1963] Suppl.
2 SCR 302; The Hingir Rampur Coal Co. Ltd. vs State of Orissa Mutt etc.
vs The Commissioner, Hindu Religious & Charitable Endowments Department & Ors.
, ; ; Southern Pharmaceuticals & Chemicals, Trichur & Ors. etc.
vs State of Kerala & Ors. etc.
; , and Municipal Corporation of Delhi & Ors., vs Mohd. Yasin, AIR , referred to.
There is no generic difference between a tax and a fee: both arc compulsory exactions of money by public authorities.
Compulsion lies in the fact that payment is enforceable by law against a person inspite of his unwillingness or want of consent.
A levy in the nature of a fee does not cease to be of that character merely because there is an element of compulsion or coerciveness present in it, nor is it a postulate of a fee that it must have direct relation to the actual service rendered by the authority to each individual who obtains the benefit of the service.
It is now increasingly realized that merely because the collections for the services rendered or for grant of a privilege or licence arc taken to the consolidated fund of the State and not separately appropriated towards the expenditure for rendering the service is not by itself decisive.
Presumably, the attention of the Court in the Shirur Mutt case was not drawn to article 266 of the Constitution.
The Constitution nowhere contemplates it to be an essential element of fee that it should be credited to a separate fund and not to the consolidated fund.
The element of quid pro quo in the strict sense is not always a sine qna non for a fee.
The element of quid pro quo is not necessarily absent in every tax.
[873 B F] There is no force in the contention that the increase in, the rate of market fee from 50 paise to 1 rupee was illegal on the ground that there was no correlation between the increase in the services rendered.
The levy of market fee under section 12(1) of the Act is co related to the purposes mentioned in section 15 that all the monies received by a market committee from tho traders on sale of agricultural produce have.
to be paid into a fund called 847 the Market Committee Fund, and all expenditure incurred has to be defrayed out of that fund and any surplus has to be invested in the proscribed manner.
The purposes mentioned in section 15 are all purposes which are extremely beneficial to the growers and the traders.
[874 F H, 875 A.B] In the instant case, there was no allegation that expenditure incurred by the Market committee was not authorised by the Act.
When the petitioners had not challenged the increase of the market fee from 25 paise to 50 paise in 1972 there could be no basis for challenging the increase in the rate of fee to Re. 1 in 1978.
Apparently, the cost of rendering services has correspondingly increased over the years.
Moreover, the Market committees are rendering services some of which are obligatory duties.
[875 C E] It is not always possible to work out with mathematical precision the amount of fee required for the services to be rendered each year and to collect only just that amount which is sufficient for meeting the expenditure in that year.
In some years, the income of a market committee by way of market fee and licence fee may exceed the expenditure and in another year when the development works are in progress for providing modern infra structure facilities, the expenditure may be far in excess of the income.
It is wrong to take only one particular year or a few years into consideration to decide whether the fee is commensurate with the services rendered.
An overall picture has to be taken in dealing with the question whether there is guid pro quo i.e. there is correlation between the increase in the rate of fee from 50 paise to rupee one and the services rendered.
[852 D F] On the plain language of section 12(1) of the Act the market fee is leviable both on purchase of paddy by a rice miller from a purchaser and also on purchase or sale of rice by a miller to a trader or by a trader to a trader because there is service rendered by market committee at each of the stages.
Rice and paddy are not the same commodity.
There is distinction between the two although paddy is milled into rice by the process of de husking, they arc two separate and distinct commercial commodities and have been separately specified as individual agricultural produce in schedule of the Rules.
[879 G H, 880 A] On a reasonable construction of r. 74(1), the legal consequences as set forth must ensue.
IF paddy is subjected to levy of a market fee on purchase or sale by the producer to a rice miller in a notified market area by a market committee within the State and is taken into the notified market area of another market committee of being processed i.e. de husked into rice and sold by a rice miller to a trader or by a trader to a trader in the course of a commercial transaction, there cannot by any levy of market fee on such purchase or sale of rice in another notified market area.
If that be so then it must logically follow that the subsequent sale of rice in the notified area of the market committee cannot be subjected to levy of market fee on purchase or sale of rice by a miller to a trader or by a trader to a trader, if sale or purchase of paddy within such notified market area has suffered the levy of market fee.
