The respondent challenged the order of his detention under the National Security Act on the ground that since the detaining authority did not specify in the order of detention as to which particular supplies and services he had in mind while making it, the order of detention was vitiated.
The High Court set aside the order of detention.
In appeal it was submitted that it would be impossible for the detaining authority to specify any of the 16 items of services and supplies included in the notification in regard to the future conduct of the detenu.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: Under the Act the detenu is entitled to make a representation against the order of detention.
It is manifest from the statutory scheme that his right to represent is after the grounds are served on the detenu.
The right of the detenu to make a representation should be without fetters and as wide as possible.
Since the citizen is detained without trial and on the basis of satisfaction of a notified authority the right to represent assumes importance.
The detenu would be in a position to effectively represent only when specific particulars are provided to him and the grounds are intended to provide that material to him.
A full disclosure made in the grounds of detention in no way prejudices the right guaranteed to the detenu to make an effective representation challenging his detention.
Therefore, non specification of the required particulars in the order of detention would not vitiate the order as long as the particulars are provided in the grounds in support of the order of detention which in quick succession of the detention order are served on the detenu.
[960 B E] It is open to the detaining authority to take note of the past conduct of a detenu.
If past conduct confined to any or all of the 16 items in the notification could be satisfied, the detaining authority could also on the basis of reasonable apprehension of repetition of such conduct in future make an order of detention for its prevention.
[960 H; 961 A] Debu Mahto vs State of West Bengal, AIR 1974 SC 816, referred to. 958
