The respondents in this batch of appeals had obtained licences to sell liquor by offering highest bids at auctions held far sale of liquor vends.
On their failure to make payments due under the terms of auction, the State Government resold the liquor vends in some cases, either by re auction or by private negotiations and called upon the respondents to pay the difference between the amount which they were liable to pay and the amount realised by the resale of the vends.
In other cases, the respondents were called upon to pay the amounts due under the terms of the original auction.
The respondents filed writ petitions contesting the State Government 's power to demand the various amounts which they had defaulted in paying and the High Court allowed the petitions.
In appeals filed by the State Government, this Court held that since the rights in regard to manufacture and sale of intoxicants were vested in the State as a privilege, it was open to the State to part with those rights for consideration, and remanded the matter to the High Court calling for its findings on whether in cases in which the liquor vends had been resold by re auction it was necessary to give publicity to the same; and, if so whether such publicity had in fact been given.
The High Court found that r. 36(3) of the Punjab Liquor Licence Rules, 1956, which was applicable in these cases, required publicity to be given to an auction sale and this rule had been substantially complied with in all cases in which re auction had been held.
Dismissing the appeals in which liquor vends had been resold either by re auction or by private negotiations and allowing the appeals in which liquor vends had not been resold.
^ HELD: 1.
When a rule requires 'publicity ' to be given to an auction sale, what is necessarily implied is that due steps must be taken to give sufficiently advance intimation of the intended sale and its material terms to the members of the public or, at least, to that section of the public which normally engage in the kind of business which is the subject matter of the auction sale.
[924 B] In the instant case, no notice as required by r. 36(3) was given to the public at all.
Neither the time nor the date of the re auction, nor the location 918 or description of the vend which was to be put to re auction, nor the conditions of the re auction were ever published by the Excise authorities prior to the re auction.
What was done by the concerned authorities was to send telegrams to Excise officers of five districts with a request that they should give publicity to the re auction and those officers did not take any steps to publicise the re auction.
Since the re auctions were not held in accordance with the rules, and since, especially, due publicity was not given to the re auctions, the respondents cannot be held liable to make good the difference between the amount which was payable by them and the amount which was fetched at the re auction.
[923 F H, 924 A] 2.
By r; 36(24) power has been conferred to re sell a vend by public auction or by private contract.
But this latter power has to be exercised with great care and circumspection.
Public auction has to be the normal mode of selling public property.
It is open to public gaze and eschews many temptations to which private contracts are subject.
It is only when a public auction is not feasible or has failed to attract bidders after due publicity, that a private contract can be negotiated for disposing of public property or rights in such property.
[27 B C] In cases in which re auctions though commenced as scheduled were withdrawn and licences were granted by private negotiations on the spot even if there were valid reasons were for revoking the decision to hold the re auctions, the re auctions should have been postponed and due publicity given to the decision to grant licences by private negotiations.
The Excise authorities could not have abruptly decided to jettison the original intention of holding a public auction and grant licence by private negotiations on the spur of the moment.
The decision smacks of arbitrariness, is unfair and unreasonable and cannot be allowed to stand.
[926 C D] 3.
The question whether the State has the power to charge the particular amounts to the licensees of liquor vends is concluded by judgments of this Court affirming such a power in the State Government.
Judgments of the High Court to the contrary in all those cases in which no question of re auction of liquor vends arises must therefore be set aside and to that extent the appeals filed by the State have to be allowed.
[925 F G] Har Shankar vs Deputy Excise and Taxation Commissioner, ; ; State of Haryana vs Jage Ram, ; ; & State of Punjab vs Ajudhia Nath, ; ; referred to.
