The first respondent in civil appeal No. 2005 of 1982 had a parcel of land measuring 2530 sq. metres with a building constructed on a small portion of it, in an urban agglomeration falling within category specified in Schedule I of the Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1976.
As the aforesaid first respondent wanted to sell some portion of the open land, he sought permission from the competent authority for that purpose.
The competent authority refused to give permission on the ground that the total area of land in his possession exceeded the cieling limit of 2000 sq. metres prescribed by the Act for that area.
In appeal the District Judge held that the first respondent was entitled to exclude 500 sq. metres in view of the bye laws prevailing in that area and another 500 sq. metres for the beneficial and convenient enjoyment of the building to satisfy the requirement of the town planning and environmental purposes and since after excluding these portions of the areas there was no excess and the land was not covered by the Act, the refusal of permission by the competent authority was not legally valid.
In a writ petition filed by the State the High Court strongly relied on the provisions of section 4(9) read with section 2.
2(q)(ii) of the Act and upheld the decision of the District Judge.
The State challenged the High Court 's interpretation of the principles laid down in the Act for computing the ceiling area.
The facts of other appeals and petitions were similar.
Allowing the appeals and petitions; disapproving the view taken by the District Judge and the High Court; laying down the method of computing the ceiling area and sending back the cases to competent authority to get fresh computations done.
^ HELD: It is clear that there can be only three categories of Urban lands (1) land which is entirely open in the sense that it does not contain any construction of building, 898 (2) where the entire land is covered by building or dwelling house, and (3) land on a part of which there is a building with or without a dwelling unit thereon ant the rest of the land is vacant.
[907 F H] So far as the first category is concerned, no complexity is because any open area in excess of 2000 sq. metres in category States will be taken over by the Government.
For instance, if an open land without construction consists of 6000 sq. metres, the computation of the ceiling area would present no difficulty because 4000 sq. metres will be taken over by the Government and 2000 sq. metres will be left to the landholder.
Secondly, if the entire land is covered by a building, such an area would completely fall outside tho ambit of the Act and no question of computation would arise.
Thirdly, a question arises as to what would happen if there is a land on a part of which there is a building with a dwelling unit and an area (open land) which is appurtenant thereto is vacant.
Section 4(9) of the Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1976 provides for meeting such a contingency.
[907 H, 908 A C] Section 4(9) contemplates that if a person holds vacant land as also other portion of land on which there is a building with a dwelling unit, the extent of land occupied by the building and the land appurtenant thereto shall be taken into account in calculating the extent of the vacant land.
This sub section has to be read in conjunction with section 2 (q) (ii) and (iii), which defines 'vacant land '.
[908 D G] The plain language in which sub section
(9) of section 4 had been expressed clearly shows that when the legislature used the word 'appurtenant ', it meant to qualify the land which was occupied by the building.
The words 'appurtenant thereto ' qualify the building which precedes the land.
The expression appurtenant ' shows that the legislature intended that in taking into consideration the land, it must be the land not contiguous or close to the building but the very land on which the building stands.
Similarly, the words 'other land occupied by the building ' also lead to the same conclusion.
[909 H, 910 A B] Taking the legal and dictionary meaning of the word 'appurtenant ' or 'appurtenances ' the inescapable conclusion is that the words 'either other land or appurtenances ' are meant to indicate that the land in question should form an integral part of the main land containing the building in question.
[911 E P] Words & Phrases, Legally Defined (Vol.
1 2nd Edn.) at p. 105; Words & Phrases, Judicially Defined (Vol. I); Words Stroud 's Judicial Dictionary Third Edn., at p. 176 referred to.
Bearing in mind the well settled rule of construction that the language of a beneficial statute must be construed so as to suppress the mischief and advance its object there could be no other interpretation of the words "appurtenant or other land" than that the land appurtenant means not a land contiguous 899 to some other land but the very land which is a part of the same plot or area which contains the building or dwelling house.
This also seems to be the avowed object of section 4(9).
[911 G H] The scheme of the Act seems to be that if there is a constructed building with a dwelling unit, the structure thereon cannot be treated as open land for the purpose of declaring it as an excess land beyond the ceiling limit.
Similarly, the land kept open under the municipal regulations (upto 500 sq. metres) and an additional 500 sq. metres appurtenant to the land would not be available for being declared as excess land beyond the ceiling limit.
[912 G H] The High Court was absolutely wrong in importing the concept of contiguity on the assumption that section 4(9) was attracted only if the person concerned held a distinct parcel of land which was vacant land.
The argument that once a plot contains a building, the whole of the plot would be exempt from the ceiling area cannot be countenanced on a plain and simple interpretation of section 2 (q) ii) read with section 4(9).
Section 4(9) would be attracted regardless of whether the landholder owned a distinct part of land on which there is no construction along with any other parcel of land where there is some construction.
[913 D F] A combined reading of section 4(9) and section 2 (q) (ii) and (iii) would lead to the irresistible inference that in cases which fall within the third category mentioned above for determining the ceiling area the (1) total area of the land of a landholder is first to be determined and if the total area, built or unbuilt, falls below 2000 sq. metres in category areas, there would be no question of any excess land, (2) where, however, there is a building and a dwelling unit then the area beneath the building and the dwelling unit would have to be excluded while computing the ceiling.
Further if there are any bye laws requiring a portion of the land to be kept vacant, the landholder would be allowed to set apart the said land to the maximum extent of 500 sq. metres.
Ho would also be allowed to retain an additional area of 500 sq. metres for the beneficial use of the building so that he may enjoy the use of a little compound also for various purposes.
[912 B E] After excluding these items if the land falls below the ceiling limit there would be no question of excess but if there is excess that is beyond the ceiling limit, the same would have to be taken over by the Government.
[912 E] Where, however, it is found that any person holds vacant land in two or more categories of urban agglomerations specified in Schedule I, the computation and determination of ceiling area is to be done in accordance with the formula laid down in cl.
(a) to (d) of g. 4(1) of tho Act.
[915 E F] 900 Where a person has several plots, some completely vacant and some partly built and partly vacant, for computation of the ceiling area the competent authority will have to total the entire area of the lands in various places, completely vacant or partly built and partly vacant and permit the landholder to retain 2000 sq. metres or less as provided in clauses (a) to (d) of section 4(1) and give the landholder the option (as provided under section 6) to select the area which he desires to retain provided that does not exceed the ceiling limit.
[915 H, 916 A C] M/s. Eastern Oxygen & Acetylene Ltd. vs State of Madhya Pradesh, A.I.R. 1981 MP 17, approved.
State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
vs L. J. Johnson & Anr.
(1979) All.
LJ 1222, overruled.
