While deciding a writ petition relating to the dispute regarding performance of religious rights, practices and observances by members of Shia sect on a plot of land in a mohalla, the Court permanently restrained the Sunni community of that mohalla by an injunction from interfering with the exercise of such rights of Shia community.
However, the Court found that in an earlier litigation the Sunni community had been given the liberty to read Fathia over the grave of Maulana Hakim Badruddin only found to be existing in the plot and that the other two graves had come up contrary to the Court 's injunction in the earlier litigation.
Notwithstanding the above decision the members of Shia community apprehended breach of peace and disturbance of public order and the Court had to give directions on each occasion with a view to ensure that all the ceremonies went off smoothly.
The Court, with a view to find some permanent solution to this perennial conflict between the two sects, appointed a committee to go into the question, inter alia, whether the two other graves now found in that plot could be shifted to some other convenient place.
The Chairman of the Committee opined that the suggestion to shift the two graves located on the northern side of the plot to the south of the grave of Maulana Hakim Badruddin was quite feasible as there was sufficient space in the suggested area and that such shifting of the two graves will totally separate the places of worship of Shias and Sunnis.
The petitioners (Shias) filed the present petition for issuance of directions to implement the above suggestion.
Allowing the petition, HELD: The suggestion to shift the two graves cannot be regarded as irreligious or destructive of any fundamental rights of the Sunnis.
[69G; 71E] Articles 25 and 26 of the Constitution undoubtedly guarantee (a) to all persons freedom of conscience and free profession, practice and propagation of religion and (b) to every religious denomination or any section thereof freedom to manage its own affairs in matters of religion but both these fundamental rights have been expressly made "subject to public order, morality and 65 health".
The impugned suggestion was mooted by the Court and has now been found to be feasible by the Chairman of the Committee in the larger interest of the society for the purpose of maintaining public order on every occasion of the performance of their religious ceremonies and functions by members of both the sects.
Over several years in the past experience has shown that such performance of their religious ceremonies and functions was and has been invariably accompanied by ugly incidents of violence, damage or destruction to life and property putting public order in great jeopardy or that the performance by members of both the sects was required to be prohibited by orders under section 144 Cr.
The latter course benefits neither and obviously members of neither community could be permitted to exercise their fundamental rights under articles 25 and 26 so as to put public order in jeopardy.
[69 H, 70 A D] The religious rights of every person and every religious denomination are subject to "public order", the maintenance whereof is paramount in the larger interest of the society.
The ecclesiastical edict or right not to disturb an interred corpse is not absolute as will be clear from sec.
176(3) of Criminal Procedure Code which permits its exhumation for the purpose of crime detection and this provision is applicable to all irrespective of the personal law governing the dead.
The edict clearly implies that it may become necessary to shift graves in certain situations and exigencies of public order would surely provide the requisite situation, especially as the fundamental rights under Articles 25 and 26 expressly made subject to public order.
[71 B D] The impugned suggestion merely seeks to shift those two graves from their present location to the southern side of the grave of Moulana Hakim Badruddin and if taken in proper spirit it would in a sense amount to respecting the sentiments of the Sunni Muslims, for, after placing them to the south of the grave of Maulana Hakim Baddruddin, the Chaddar functions and recitation of Fathia could be undertaken by them at all the three graves instead of only at the grave of Maulana Hakim Badruddin.
[70 F H] The main decision rendered by this Court and the directions issued by it have to be implemented and removal of any impediment or obstruction in that behalf cannot be said to be beyond the powers or jurisdiction of this Court and since the acceptance and implementation of the impugned suggestion of the Chairman of the committee would facilitate the carrying out of the main judgment of this Court the issuance of directions sought by the petitioners would obviously fall within the scope of the present proceedings.
[71 F G]
