In the General Elections to the Tamil Nadu Assembly held in May 1980, the appellant contested for the llayangudi Assembly Constituency seat and was duly elected as he polled 34437 votes.
The first respondent who had polled 34381 votes and missed by a narrow margin of 56 votes filed an election petition before the High Court of Madras on three grounds viz., (a) improper rejection by the Returning Officer of valid votes cast in favour of the respondent; (b) improper reception of invalid votes cast in favour of the appellant and (c) improper treatment of valid votes cast in favour of the first respondent and the 3rd respondent as votes cast in favour of the appellant.
The High Court accepted the petition on its finding on the first ground in favour of the Ist respondent and ordered rescrutiny of the votes rejected as invalid.
Hence the appeal by special leave.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court HELD: 1:1 The pamphlet issued in Tamil titled "A pamphlet showing illustrative cases of valid and invalid postal and ordinary ballot papers "(Ex P3) issued by the chief Electoral Officer, Tamil Nadu is misleading and therefore should be withdrawn.
[111 D] 1:2.
In the illustration of invalid papers appearing at page 40 of the Book (Ex P3), the major portion of the marking is in the shaded area and a small portion of the mark is in the column of the candidate.
Apparently what was intended to be printed was an illustration showing a ballot paper in which the whole of the marking was in the shaded area only without any portion of it being in the column of the candidate.
The illustration as printed in the pamphlet obviously conveys the erroneous impression that a ballot paper where the marking is partly in the column of the candidate and partly in the shaded area is to be rejected by the Returning Officer as invalid.
This is 105 directly contrary to the intendment of the relevant rule and also the express wording of the instructions issued by the Election Commission.
[110 H; 111 A B] In the instant case the Returning Officer was obviously misled by the aforesaid illustration contained in the pamphlet, exhibit P 3 and that was the sole reason why he rejected as invalid the ballot papers where the marking was contained partly in the column of the first respondent and partly on the demarcating line or shaded area.
Had the Returning Officer taken the trouble to study the instructions contained in the "Handbook for the Returning Officer" it should have been apparent to him that the illustration aforementioned contained in exhibit P3 did not correctly reflect the position laid down in the rules and instructions.
[111 C D] 2:1 The essence of the principle in Rule 39(2) (b) of the Conduct Rules, 1961, is that so long as the ballot paper bears a mark made with the instrument supplied for the purpose, the ballot paper shall not be rejected as invalid, if it is reasonably possible to gather a definite indication from the marking as to the identity of the candidate in favour of whom the vote had been given.
[109 C D] 2:2.
Nearly 90% of the electorate in this country consists of illiterate and uneducated rural folk totally unacquainted with the intricacies of the rules and technicalities of procedure pertaining to elections.
Even if the best of endeavour is made to explain to them such complicated rules and procedures they may not be capable of grasping and fully understanding all the implications and actually carrying them into effect while exercising their franchise.
If the right conferred on the people to choose their representatives to the State Legislatures and the Parliament through the process of free and fair elections is to be meaningful the will of the illiterate and unsophisticated voter expressed through a marking on the ballot paper which though not strictly inside the column of the particular candidate is clearly indicative of the identity of the candidate for whom the vote is cast has to be respected and given its full effect.
The Election Commission has manifested due awareness of this stark reality while issuing instructions to the Returning Officers regarding the principles to be adopted for rejection of ballot papers in the "Handbook for Returning Officers" published by the Commission in 1982, and also a "Handbook for candidates ' for election to the House of People, Legislative Assemblies of States and Union Territories etc.
[109 D G] Observation: In order to avoid a recurrence of such unfortunate instances of illegal rejection of votes on the basis of misleading illustration contained in the pamphlet, exhibit P3, it is essential that immediate action should be taken by the Chief Electoral Officer, Tamil Nadu to withdraw the said pamphlet containing illustrations correctly reflecting the legal position under relevant rules and instructions relating to the scrutiny acceptance or rejection or ballot papers.
[111 F G]
