There was a complaint from an account holder of the respondent bank that his account was wrongly debited with a big sum of money even though he had never issued a cheque for that sum.
The appellant, a clerk cum cashier, was apparently suspected to be responsible for the presentation of the cheque.
The bank lodged a complaint with the police but the appellant was eventually, discharged.
In the meanwhile, the bank placed him under suspension.
An enquiry as to the genuineness of the customer 's complaint was ordered.
The appellant was advised to be present at the enquiry but no charge sheet was ever served on him.
In his report, the enquiry officer stated that "there lies the possibility that the complaint of the applicant may be genuine.
" But there was no indication in the report that the appellant had anything to do with the presentation of the cheque.
Yet, on basis of this report the appellant 's services were terminated.
Thereafter the appellant raised an industrial dispute.
The Industrial Tribunal, rejecting the appellant 's contention that principles of natural justice had not been observed upheld the order of termination of his services.
In the workman 's appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the respondent that the appellant ought to have pursued the remedy of appealing to the Board of Management against the order of termination and his failure to do so disentitled him from raising any industrial dispute.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: The order terminating the services of the appellant was wholly unsustainable.
The appellant is entitled to be reinstated with continuity of service from the date of termination of his services.
There was total non application of the mind by the Tribunal.
[161 G; 164 D; 162 H] There was a total breach of the principles of natural justice: the appellant was never asked to answer any charge; there was no enquiry against him; no 159 notice was issued to him to show cause why his services should not be terminated and even the order terminating his services failed to mention any reason.
The Bank should have led necessary evidence to prove the charge against the appellant.
None of the three witnesses examined by the Bank could either prove that the cheque was a forgery or that it had been presented by the appellant.
The enquiry was not directed against the appellant but was held with a view to find out whether there was any truth in the customer 's complaint.
The enquiry officer did not say that the appellant was guilty or had anything to do with the presentation of the bogus cheque.
The complainant, who would have been the most crucial witness, was not examined.
[161 F; H; 162 A; C E] Notwithstanding all this, by a curious process of reasoning the Industrial Tribunal upheld the order of termination, dismissing the appellant 's contention that principles of natural justice had not been observed.
The Tribunal 's observation that strict rules of evidence were not applicable to domestic enquiries and that "not too much legalism was expected in such matters from the enquiry officer" was far from correct.
In short, the Tribunal, without applying its mind to the facts of the case and without bothering to peruse the records, gave a findings that the termination of his services was justified.
The Tribunal 's findings and conclusion were therefore worthless.
[162 B C; H; 163 B C] Raising an industrial dispute is a well recognised and legitimate mode of redress available to a workman, which has achieved statutory recognition under the Act and there is no reason why a statute recognised mode of redress should be denied to a workman because of the existence or availability of another remedy.
Nor has an industrial tribunal, to which a dispute had been referred for adjudication, the power to refuse to adjudicate upon it and surrender its jurisdiction to some other authority.
While the Government may exercise its discretion to refer or not to refer a dispute for adjudication, once a dispute is referred to it, the Tribunal has no discretion to decide whether to adjudicate or not.
The Tribunal has to resolve the dispute.
The Tribunal cannot avoid it on the ground that the workman had failed to pursue some other remedy.
[163 G H; 164 A B] The attempt to connect the order terminating the appellant 's services with his absence from the bank on two days was an attempt made for the first time before this Court.
It cannot be allowed to be raised now.
The letter dated 17th September, 1974 addressed to the appellant had nothing to do with the presentation of the cheque or withdrawal of money, but related to his absence from duty on two days in August 1974 and his signature said to have been found in the attendance register on those days.
[164 B C;163 A B] The workman has awarded half back wages from the date of termination of service to the date of judgment and full wages thereafter to the date of reinstatement on the ground that he raised the dispute after a considerable delay without doing anything in the meanwhile.
[164 E]
