From 1968, the Haryana State Electricity Board has been collecting security from every consumer to ensure timely clearance of energy bills and in the case of industrial consumers the security was worked out at Rs. 30 per KW.
With effect from 1st April 1981, the amount was changed to Rs. 100 per KW.
Similarly in regard to the industrial meter a different basis has been adopted and from April 1, 1981 the security deposit now varies between Rs. 5,000 and Rs. 10,000 in regard to industrial consumers.
The petitioners have therefore, challenged the said unilateral increase on the ground that the enhancement is without any justification.
Dismissing the petitions, the Court HELD: 1.
To contend that the and the Rules made thereunder do not contemplate any provision for security for the timely payment of energy charges is not correct.
Sub para (a) of the first proviso to clause VI of the schedule to the would be applicable and what would be sufficient security should be left to the Electricity Board to decide.
[171 E F] Krishna Cement Works vs The Secretary APSEB, AIR 1979 AP 291 approved.
M/s. B. R. Oil Mills vs Assistant Engineer (D) (RSEB), Bharatpur & Anr., ; and M/s. Goodyear India Ltd. vs H.S.E.B. & Ors.
4765/81 dated 9.4.82 Pb. & Haryana H.C. referred to Modi Industries Ltd. (Steel Section) vs U.P. State Electricity Board AIR 1979 All. 375; M/s. Devidayal Metal Industries vs The Municipal Corporation for Greater Bombay & Anr.
distinguished.
2:1 Section 49(1) of the Indian clearly indicates that the Board may supply electricity to any person upon such terms and conditions as the Board thinks fit.
In exercise of this power the Board 166 had initially introduced the condition regarding security and each of the petitioners had accepted the term.
The Board has been conferred statutory power under section 49(1) of the Act to determine the conditions on the basis of which supply is to be made.
This Court in Bisra Stone Lime Company Ltd. & Anr.
vs Orissa State Electricity Board & Anr., ; , took the view that enhancement of rates by way of surcharge was well within the power of the Board to fix or revise the rates of tariff under the provisions of the Act.
What applied to the tariff would equally apply to the security, that being a condition in the contract of supply.
Each of the petitioning consumers had agreed to furnish security in cash for payment of energy bills at the time of entering into their respective supply agreements.
There was no challenge in these writ petitions that the demand of security at the time of entering into supply agreements has to be struck down as being without jurisdiction.
[172 G H; E F] 2:2 Under clause 31 of the Agreement the Board reserved to itself the right to amend, cancel or add to any of the schedules and conditions at any time.
The provisions of this clause are similar to clause 13 of the agreement which came to be considered in Bisra Lime Stone Company 's case (supra).
Therefore, the Board had authority under the agreement itself to amend the conditions.
In exercise of that power the Board has now raised the additional demand.
[173 A B] 2:3.
It is true that the affairs of the Boards in the different States of the country are not upto the expectation of the consumers and there have been instances which give rise to genuine anguish and dissatisfaction.
The scheme of the Act clearly indicates a legislative mandate that the Board should manage its commercial activities in such a way that it does not make any loss.
It is also clear that the Board being a public utility organisation is not expected to make any undue profit by abusing its monopoly position.
An inbuilt system of control and supervision has been set up and the State Governments have been given power to give policy directions.
Situation seems to have arisen when stricter control and supervision are called for and if organisational changes and provision for greater control appear necessary, to improve the functioning of the Boards, steps should be taken without delay in this regard.
The Board should always remember that it is a public utility service and not a governmental agency enjoying wide powers and expected to have a share in the governance of the country.
On the facts placed that the stand of the Board that a demand equal to the energy bill of two months or a little more is not unreasonable,) when the Board has the power to unilaterally revise the conditions of supply, it must follow that the demand of higher additional security for payment of energy bills is unassailable, provided that the power is not exercised arbitrarily or unreasonably.
[173 E H; 174 A B] 3:1.
The argument that the security should be in the shape of Bank guarantee does not call for consideration, in view of the acceptance of the court 's, suggestion to increase the interest @ 10% per annum on per with the interest payable by the Scheduled Banks.
174 E; C] 3:2.
In regard to the enhanced security for the meter the explanation advanced by the Board is that the meters are required to be replaced or many 167 costly parts have to be substituted by way of repair.
In view of the High cost of the meters the Board is justified in enhancing the security.
Petitioners have not disputed their obligation to furnish security for the meter.
But the challenge is to the enhancement.
Indisputably all the meters to the petitioning consumers have been supplied prior to the decision to enhance the security.
Keeping in view the likelihood of replacement or substantial repair, the court suggested that the escalation may be reduced by 50% to which the Board has accepted.
The Board under took to evolve a new formula accordingly and introduce it from 1 10 83 and not to enforce the rates impugned.
[174 E G; H; 175 A]
