The appellant who had taken the premises in question on lease while he was serving as an employee of the Telephone Department, continued to be in possession of the same after his retirement in 1967.
Respondent No. 1 who was allegedly in need of accommodation, filed an application before the House Allotment Officer praying for allotment of the said premises in his favour on the ground that the appellant had occupied the premises in contravention of cl.
22(2) of the Central Provinces and Berar Letting of Houses and Rent Control Order, 1949 and that respondent No. 4 who had inherited the premises from the original landlord was conspiring with the appellant by letting him continue to live in the premises.
Respondent No. 4, after having once appeared through advocate, withdrew from the proceedings.
The appellant contended that he had not contravened any provision of the Rent Control Order as he had occupied the premises on the assurance given by the then landlord that the house was being permitted to be occupied in accordance with cl.
23(2) thereof, that the deceased landlord who had tried to obtain possession of the premises during his lifetime on the ground of bona fide personal requirement had failed in the attempt and that he had been accepted as the tenant even after his retirement.
The House Allotment Officer rejected the contention and directed the appellant to deliver possession of the premises to respondent No. 4 holding that the appellant was liable to be evicted as the letting out of the premises to him by the landlord and his occupation of the same in 1954, were in contravention of cl.
22(1) (b) and cl.
22(2) respectively of the Rent Control Order and further, that having occupied the premises while holding an office of profit under the Union of India the appellant was not entitled to continue to remain in occupation of the premises after his retirement from service.
The High Court having dismissed in limine the Special Civil Application filed by him under article 227, the appellant approached this Court.
Allowing the appeal, HELD:1.
According to cl.
22(1) of the C.P. and Berar Letting of Houses and Rent Control Order, 1949, a landlord is under a statutory duty to intimate the Collector any existing or impending vacancy in the premises of which he is the landlord.
The object underlying the provision is to make 140 residential accommodation available to a specified class of persons mentioned in cl. 23 which includes a person holding an office of profit under the Union or State Government or a displaced or an evicted person.
The Collector can allot the premises in respect of which he has received an intimation of vacancy under cl. 22, to anyone belonging to this specified class and none else.
The very enumeration of the class would show that these are persons who cannot be left to the vagaries of the law of demand and supply of residential accommodation.
It may be that, at any given point of time, no one from the specified class may be on the waiting list, and therefore cl.
23(2) permits the landlord to let out such premises to any person if, after 15 days from the date of intimation of vacancy to the Collector, an order of allotment is not served upon the landlord.
As a sequel to the right to obtain allotment on the ground of being the holder of an office of profit under Union or State Government, a corresponding obligation is cast by cl. 25 upon such person to vacate the premises as soon as he ceases to hold the office or the post which enabled him to obtain the order of allotment.
The legal liability of giving intimation of vacancy is squarely on the landlord and if he has given such intimation and the statutory limit of 15 days for making an allotment order has expired, the landlord can proceed to let out the premises to anyone.
In such a situation, the only duty cast on the tenant is to seek an assurance from the landlord that the premises are being permitted to be occupied in accordance with cl.
23(2).
[145 E H; 146 A B; 147 B C] In the instant case the order of the House Allotment Officer is conspicuously silent on the most relevant question why the allegation of assurance put forward by the appellant was not examined by him and why it was rejected sub silentio.
It was incumbent upon him to enquire whether the deceased landlord had given intimation of vacancy and whether any allotment order had been issued within the period of 15 days from the date of receipt of such intimation.
The non application of mind by the quasi judicial authority to this relevant point goes to the root of the matter and vitiates the order.
It was obligatory upon respondent No. 4, who was the successor in interest of the landlord, to prove that no such assurance had ever been given to the appellant.
Instead, the respondent No. 4 remained absent.
Even assuming that the landlord gave a false assurance in 1954 to the appellant, if the appellant bona fide relied upon such assurance and it was not shown that the appellant was in league with the landlord, he cannot be accused of entering the premises in contravention of cl.
23(2).
The High Court was in error in rejecting in limine the petition under article 227.
The points raised by the appellant merited a reasoned decision or, at least, a speaking order briefly indicating why the contentions put forward by the appellant did not find favour with the High Court.
[148 G; 147 D; 148 H; E; 147 F G; 143 G H] 2.
In order to attract cl. 25 which obligates the holder of an office of profit to vacate the premises on his ceasing to hold the office of profit, it must be shown that he entered the premises under an order of allotment made by the Collector either under cl. 23 or under cl.
24 A. [149 B] In the instant case, in the absence of an allotment order, it was not open to the House Allotment Officer to draw an inference that, the premises were allotted to the appellant because he was holding an office of profit.
[149 D] 141 3.
Where power is conferred to effectuate a purpose, it has to be exercised in a reasonable manner and the reasonable exercise of power inheres its exercise within a reasonable time.
[150 F] In the instant case, power is conferred on the Collector by cl. 28 to see that the provisions of the Rent Control Order, which disclose a public policy, are effectively implemented and, therefore, if he comes across information that there is a contravention, he is clothed with adequate power to set right the contravention by ejecting anyone who comes into the premises in contravention of the provisions.
No limitation prescribed in this behalf.
But, even if the House Allotment Officer were to reach the affirmative conclusion that the initial entry of appellant into the premises 22 years back was an unauthorised entry and that failure to vacate premises till nine years after retirement was not proper, yet it was not obligatory upon him to pass a peremptory order of eviction in the manner in which he has done.
It was open to him not to evict the tenant.
[150 E F; G H] Murlidhar Aggarwal & Anr.
vs State of U.P. & Ors.
, ; and State of Gujarat vs Patel Raghav Natha and Ors.,[1970] 1 S.C.R. 335; referred to.
The appellant had entered the premises in 1954 and there had been numerous proceedings between him and the deceased landlord; but no one had ever raised the question whether the appellant had entered the premises in contravention of cl.
22(2).
This would permit an inference that the then landlord had accepted the appellant as his tenant and his tenancy did not suffer from any infirmity.
Respondent No. 4 who is the successor in interest of the deceased landlord did not raise any controversy about the occupation of the premises by the appellant and rent was accepted without question before and after the death of the original landlord.
[149 G H; 150 A C]
