The respondent workman entered service as a coolie in 1945 under the Kanpur Electricity Supply Corporation Limited.
When the time the company had no rules as to the age of retirement for its employees and therefore his date of birth was not entered in the service card.
When the Corporation was nationalised the new management, without asking him as to his date of birth, showed his age as 20 years 9 months.
From the village records it was found that he was born on 24.6.1924.
Meanwhile, the new management got the Standing Orders certified without making any provision for the age of retirement.
When the Electricity Board constituted under the , took over the management of the Administration in 1949 it was made clear that conditions of service of workmen would not be adversely affected.
But on 31st January, 1979 the workman was retired from service on the ground that he had completed 58 years of age.
The workman complained that he was retired in contravention of his conditions of service according to which there was no age of retirement.
The labour court held that even after framing the regulations under section 79C of the , fixing the age of retirement at 58 and notifying them under section 13B of the Industrial Employment (Standing orders) Act, 1946, the new management made it clear to the employee that old service conditions of the employees would continue to operate and that a similar assurance was given to the respondent in writing that the new regulations would not apply to him.
In this view the respondent 's retirement was held to be invalid.
Allowing the appeal.
HELD: The workman is bound by the regulations fixing the age of retirement at 58 and therefore his retirement on attaining the age of superannuation was correct.
[287 C] The is a special law in regard to matters enumerated in the schedule.
The regulations made by the Electricity Board with respect to any of those matters are of no effect unless 283 they are either notified by the Government under section 13B or certified by the Certifying Officer under section 5 of the Standing Orders Act.
In regard to matters in respect of which regulations made by the Board have not been notified by the Governor or in respect of which no regulations had been made by the Board, the Standing Orders Act would continue to apply.
Since, in the instant case, the regulations framed by the Board with regard to the age of retirement under section 79C have been notified by the Government under section 13B of the Standing Orders Act, the respondent is bound by those regulations and his retirement on attaining the age of 58 years was correct.
[286 F H; 287 A B] U.P. State Electricity Board and others vs Hari Shanker Jain and others, [1979]1 S.C.R. 355, applied.
