The appellant filed a suit as an indigent person in the Subordinate Court questioning the validity of an order dismissing him from service.
The said suit was dismissed after contest.
He filed an appeal in the High Court as a pauper along with an application under Rule 1 of order 44 Code of Civil Procedure requesting that he may be allowed to appeal as an indigent person.
The application was dismissed by a Single Judge by a one word order "dismissed".
The appellant thereupon made an application praying for permission to pay the requisite court fee and to prosecute the appeal.
That application was also dismissed by the same Judge on the ground that as the application for leave to appeal as an indigent person was dismissed on merits, and not on the ground that the applicant was not an indigent person, there was no question of granting time to the applicant to pay court fee.
Allowing the Appeal to this Court: HELD: 1 (i) The order of the High Court is, clearly, unsustainable.
What was rejected in the instant case was the application under Rule 1 of order 44 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
The High Court should have therefore made an order as required by Rule 2 granting time to the appellant to pay the requisite court fee and permit him to prosecute the appeal.
The High Court failed to do so even when an application was made for that purpose.
[280 G H] (ii) The High Court has lost sight of the effect of the amendment of Rule 1 of order 44 of the Code of Civil Procedure by the omission of the former sub rule (2) of Rule 1.
[280 D] 2.
After the amendment of the Code of Civil Procedure by the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act 1976, (Act No. 104 of 1976) which came into force with effect from February 1, 1977 the rejection of the application 276 made under Rule 1 of order 44 of the Code of Civil Procedure can only mean, that the Court is not satisfied about the claim of the applicant that he is an indigent person and nothing more.
It does not, however, amount to a finding that the appeal is not a fit one for admission on merits.
Otherwise Rule 2 of order 44 which permits payment of court fee after the application under Rule 1 is rejected, would become meaningless.
[277 G; 280 D E] 3 (i) By the amendment made in the year 1976 sub rule (2) of Rule 1 of order 44 of the Code of Civil Procedure was deleted.
The result is that when an application under Rule 1 of order 44 of the Code of Civil Procedure comes up for hearing, the only question to be considered is whether the applicant is an indigent person or not.
Any question relating to the merits of the case does not arise for consideration at that stage.
If the application is granted, then the memorandum of appeal would have to be registered as an appeal and disposed of in accordance with law.
When the appeal is posted for admission the appellant has to satisfy the Court that the appeal merits admission.
At that stage the appellant may draw the attention of the Court not merely to the judgment and decree appealed from but also to all the relevant records in the case to substantiate his claim that the appeal deserves to be admitted.
[279 G H; 280 A B] (ii) Rule 2 of order 44 as it now stands requires that where an application is rejected under Rule 1 thereof, the Court may while rejecting the application, allow the applicant to pay the requisite court fee within such time as may be fixed by the Court or extended by it from time to time and upon such payment, the memorandum of appeal in respect of which such fee is payable shall have the same force and effect as if such fee had been paid in the first instance.
If the requisite court fee is paid the appeal has to be registered and posted for admission.
[280 B C]
