Certain lands were notified for acquisition in the years 1962 and 1963 under s.4(1) of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894.
On the question of payment of compensation the Land Acquisition Officer, relying on an earlier award in respect of similar lands acquired for the very same public purpose adopted the same criteria and fixed the compensation.
He adopted the principal of capitalisation and determined the compensation at Rs. 650 per kanal, as the value of the best category of land and awarded compensation equivalent to 13 times the net annual income.
On reference under Sec.18 the District Judge determined the market value of the land adopting the capitalisation principle, and determined the compensation by multiplying the net annual income from each category of land by 20.
The Union of India and the State Government preferred appeals and contended before the High Court that if the principle adopted by the authorities below was used the Government would suffer.
These appeals were however dismissed.
In the meanwhile the High Court in appeals arising out of similar awards set aside the orders of the District Judge and remanded the cases for fresh disposal for failure to determine whether the exemplars on the record could serve as a guide for determining the market value.
After remand the District Judge arrived at the very same valuation and this was confirmed by the High Court.
In the appeals to this Court on the question as to what should be the multiplier to be adopted in determining the compensation payable in respect of land acquired in the year 1962 63 where the market value of the land is fixed on the basis of the capitalisation principle.
Allowing the appeals in Part, HELD: 1.
The High Court and the District Court erred in applying the twenty years purchase rule in the case of these lands which were acquired 218 in the years 1962 and 1963.
The proper principle was fifteen years ' purchase rule.[228 H] 2.
The relevant date for determining compensation of a property acquired under the Act, is the date on which the notification under s.4(1) is published.
The capitalised value of a property is the amount of money whose annual interest at the highest prevailing rate of interest at any given time will be its net annual income.
The net annual income from a land is arrived at by deducting from the gross annual income all outgoings such as expenditure on cultivation, land revenue etc.
The net return from landed property, reflects the prevalent rate of interest on safe money investments.
[225 G H; 228 A] 3.
(i) In India the multiplier which is adopted in determining the compensation by the capitalisation method has varied from time to time.
The number of years purchase has gradually decreased as the prevailing rate of interest realisable from safe investments has gradually increased, the higher the rate of interest, the lower the number of years purchase.
This method of valuation involves capitalising the net income that the property can fairly be expected to produce and the rate of capitalisation is the percentage of return on investment that a willing buyer would expect from the property during the relevant period.[227 G H; 228 A] (ii) In the years 1962 and 1963 an investor in agricultural land expected annual net return of at least 8%.
If the land yielded a net annual income of Rs. 8 a willing buyer of land would have paid for it Rs.100 i.e. a little more than 12 times the annual net income.
The multiplier for purposes of capitalisation would be about thirteen.[228 D E] (iii) In these cases there was no evidence about the potential value of the lands.[228 F] (iv)In the instant cases neither the Land Acquisition Officer nor the High Court nor the District Court has adopted the other well known methods of valuation of land namely, the price paid within a reasonable time in bona fide transactions in respect of the land acquired or adjacent lands which possess similar advantages, the price which a willing buyer was prepared to pay to a willing seller of such land or the opinion of valuers or experts.
In the absence of any reliable evidence to adopt the other methods of valuation the very same capitalisation method was applied and the Court adopted fifteen years ' purchase rule for determining compensation has to be adopted.[225 C E] The Collector, Raigarh vs Dr. Harisingh Thakuar and An. and Vice Versa; , ; State of Kerala vs Hassan Koya; , ; The State of West Bengal vs Shyamapada etc.
, A.I.R. 1975 S.C. 1723; Oriental Gas Ltd. referred to.
