The respondent and his mother granted a lease in respect of an open site of land for a period of 20 years in favour of a person, who constructed a theatre thereon and who later assigned his rights to the appellant and the appellant was accepted as a tenant by the respondent.
The respondent subsequently served notice upon the appellant calling upon it to vacate the property and to surrender vacant possession of the site.
The appellant refused, and set up can oral agreement entitling it to an extension of the lease for a further period of 20 years.
The respondent filed a suit for ejectment against the appellant and the appellant filed a suit for specific performance of an agreement to extend the lease.
The subordinate Court decreed the respondent 's suit for possession with mesne profits and dismissed the appellant 's suit.
The appellant appealed to the High Court against the two decrees, and during their pendency the Madras City Tenants ' Protection Act, 1921 was extended to the town where the suit property was situated.
The appellant thereupon filed a Civil Miscellaneous Petition in the appeal arising out of the suit for ejectment, for directions under section 9 of the Act for sale of the site.
This application was resisted by the respondent on the ground that section 9 was void.
The High Court upheld the validity of the section, declared the appellant entitled to purchase the site under section 9 and remitted the matter to the subordinate Court for appointment of a Commissioner to fix the market value of the site.
Against that order the respondent preferred a Letters Patent Appeal which was dismissed and this order was confirmed by the Supreme Court.
During the pendency of the appeal in this Court, section 9 of the Madras City Tenants ' Protection Act was amended by Madras Act No. XIII of 1960.
The respondent filed two Civil Miscellaneous Petitions in the High Court praying for review and modification of the earlier order in view of the amended section 9, and for stay of the valuation proceedings.
330 After the dismissal of the respondent 's appeal in the Supreme Court, the High Court dismissed the pending appeals as withdrawn transferred the two Civil Miscellaneous Petitions to the trial court and directed it to fix the market value of the site and pass final orders.
The subordinate Court held that the respondent was entitled to the benefit of the amended section 9, and directed the Commissioner to determine the minimum extent of land necessary for convenient enjoyment and fix the price on the basis of the average market value of the land during the three years immediately preceding the date of its order.
The appeal to the District Court and the Civil Revision Petition in the High Court against this order were dismissed.
In the appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that the amended section 9 of the Madras City Tenants ' Protection Act, could not be invoked, and that section 9, as it stood before the amendment, governed the rights of the parties, and that in any event the amended section 9 should have been invoked in the appeal pending in the Supreme Court, and that relief not having been sought there, it was not open to the respondent to seek relief after the appeal had been disposed of by the Supreme Court.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court.
HELD: 1 (i) If the suit was pending on the date when the amendments in the principal Act (Madras City Tenants ' Protection Act, 1921) were brought into force, the amended provisions of the Act will govern the disposal of the suit.
[337 D] (ii) The suit continued pending on the date when the principal Act was amended by Act XIII of 1960.
Consequently, it was governed by the provisions of the amended section 9.
As the scheme under the original section stood superseded by the scheme enacted under the amended section, the order of July 28, 1958 stood aborted and pursuant to the amended section fresh proceedings had to be taken by the Court to dispose of the suit.
[338 A B] (iii)When the Amendment Act XIII of 1960 amended the principal Act, it amended not only section 9 thereof but section 10 also.
Section 10 was amended in order that the amended provisions should apply to pending ejectment suits and proceedings.
The provisions of the amended section 9 (1) reveal that the scheme respecting the tenant 's right to purchase, and the landlord 's obligation to sell, the land stood modified.
Whereas the original section 9 (1) provided for the making of an application by the tenant within a specified period to the court for an order directing the landlord to sell the land for a price to be fixed by the court, and court was required to fix the price according to the lowest market value prevalent within seven years preceding the date of the order, and to order, within a period to be determined by the court, the tenant to pay into court or otherwise as directed the price so fixed, the amended section 9 (1) is divided into two clauses.
Clause (a) entitles the tenant within an identical period, to apply to the court for an order requiring the landlord to sell, for a price to be fixed by the court, the whole, or part of, the extent of the land specified in the application.
Clause (b) provides that the court will first decide the minimum extent of the land necessary for convenient enjoyment by the tenant, and thereafter the 331 court will fix the price of such minimum extent of land or of the extent of the land specified in the application, whichever is less.
[336 F H; 336 H 337 C] In the instant case, the appellant had already filed Civil Miscellaneous Petition No. 1835 of 1958 praying for directions under section 9 for the sale of the site.
On that application the High Court passed an order dated July 28,1958 holding the appellant entitled to purchase the site on paying the full market value current on that date and had directed the trial court to appoint a Commissioner to fix the value of the site.
That order did not dispose of the application and the suit, for under the original section 9(3) the statute contemplated an order by the Court, after it was satisfied that the tenant had paid the price determined by it, directing the conveyance of the land by the landlord to the tenant.
It was only after such an order was made that the application and the suit would stand concluded.
[337 E G] 2.
The scope of the earlier appeal filed in the Supreme Court was restricted to the validity of section 9 and 12 of the unamended Madras City Tenants ' Protection Act, and the Court declined to consider the operation of the amendments brought about in 1960.
It was, therefore, open to respondent after the disposal of the appeal to apply to the court below for an order in terms of the amended section 9.
[338 F H; 339 A]
