The petitioner who was detained by an order passed under sec.
3 (3) of the challenged the validity of his detention on the ground that there had been inordinate delay on the part of the detaining authority in forwarding the petitioner 's representation to the State Government and that there had been violation of the mandatory provisions of sec.
10 of the Act which enjoins the State Government to take steps to see that the case of the detenu is considered by the Advisory Board within three weeks from the date of detention.
Dismissing the writ petition, HELD: The question whether the representation submitted by a detenu has been dealt with all reasonable promptness and diligence is to be decided not by the application of any rigid or inflexible rule or set formula nor by a mere arithmetical counting of dates, but by a careful scrutiny of the facts and circumstances of each case; if on such examination, it is found that there was any remissness, indifference or avoidable delay on the part of the detaining authority/State Government in dealing with the representation, the Court will undoubtedly treat it as a factor vitiating the continued detention of the detenu; on the other hand, if the Court is satisfied that the delay was occasioned not by any lack of diligence or promptness of attention on the part of the authority concerned, but due to unavoidable circumstance or reasons entirely beyond his control, such delay will not be treated as furnishing a ground for the grant of relief to the detenu against his continued detention.
[344 C F] The instant case falls under the latter category inasmuch as the court is satisfied on its perusal of the original file pertaining to this case maintained in the office of the District Magistrate and the averments contained in the counter affidavit filed on behalf of the respondents that the petitioner 's representation has been dealt with all the promptness that was reasonably possible 341 under the circumstances then obtaining and that there was no avoidable delay on the part of the District Magistrate in forwarding the petitioner 's representation.
[344 B; G] Under sec.
10 of the Act a duty is cast on the appropriate Government to "place before '; the Advisory Board constituted under sec.
9 within three weeks from the date of detention the grounds on which the order of detention has been made and the representation, if any, made by the person affected by the order.
It is wholly wrong to interpret the words "place before" as meaning anything more than 'forward to ' cr submit before ' the Advisory Board the relevant papers relating to the detention of the detenu.
It is entirely for the Advisory Board to regulate its schedule of holding meetings and conducting its business in accordance with the procedure laid down under sec.
11 of the Act which has specified a time limit of seven weeks from the date of detention for the submission of the Board 's report to the appropriate Government.
[345 G H; 346 A B] In the present case the Advisory Board had disposed of the petitioner 's case well within the period of seven weeks specified in sub sec.
(1) of sec.
11, of the Act.
[346 C]
