This batch of appeals arose out of admissions sought by several candidates to post graduate courses in the Medical Colleges of Uttar Pradesh.
While in some of them the candidates were the appellants and the State the respondent, in others it was vice versa.
By an order dated 3 12 1980 the State Government had laid down that admissions were to be made purely on the basis of merit, the criterion being the total percentage of marks obtained by the candidate in the M.B.B.S. examination.
In as many as 9 out of the 20 appeals, the candidates who had been given provisional admissions pursuant to interim orders made by the Court had completed their courses and only their results were to be declared.
In all those cases, the State, realising the futility of forcing the candidates to complete the course all over again, conceded that the results of such candidates may be declared and on passing the same they would be admitted to the courses concerned though the candidates in question were lacking in merit and their original rejection was justified.
In one of the appeals filed by the State, the candidate in question had obtained only 43 percent marks at the M.B.B.S. examination and happened to be the last candidate in the list of persons who had applied for admission to the post graduate course.
Although the candidate had merely prayed for a writ directing the State or the college to consider his case for admission, the High Court, relying mainly on the fact that the candidate had a diploma to his credit, straightway issued a writ of mandamus directing the college to admit him to the course applied for, thereby granting a relief which the candidate himself had not prayed for.
HELD: The practice of forcing the authorities to grant provisional admissions has been evolved keeping in view the fact that on account of huge accumulation of arrears in courts it takes a long time for petitions to be disposed of.
By the time the cases come up for hearing, the rejected candidates might have completed their course and become eligible for admission to the higher course although the court may ultimately find that their initial rejection was justified and they did not deserve to be admitted to the course.
Such a situation becomes a sort of fait accompli for those in charge of the institutions 303 as a result of which the candidates are admitted in due deference to the desire of the court by increasing or creating vacancies even in the absence of proper facilities to train the extra candidates.
Unless the institutions can provide complete facilities for the training of each candidate admitted in the various disciplines, the medical education will be incomplete and the universities would be turning out doctors not fully qualified which would adversely affect the health of the people in general.
Therefore, the practice of lightly granting provisional admissions should be discontinued in future.
Whenever a writ petition is filed, provisional admission should not be given as a matter of course on the petition being admitted unless the court is fully satisfied that the petitioner has a cast iron case which is bound to succeed or the error is so gross or apparent that no other conclusion is possible.
In order to test this fact, even a short notice may be given to explore as to what the other side has to say and thereafter if the court is satisfied that there is a strong prima facie case and the matter needs thorough examination, provisional admission may be given.
The State Government order dated 3 12 1980 prescribing the criteria for admission to post graduate courses in Medical Colleges made under s.28(5) of the U. P. State Universities Act, 1973, is fully consistent with the tenor and spirit of the rules framed by the Medical Council of India.
The rules framed by the Medical Council of India have a statutory effect under s.33 of the and are binding on all the colleges and universities providing for medical education in the country.
The High Court had made a very arbitrary, casual and laconic approach to the case of the candidate who had obtained 43 per cent marks and based its judgment purely on speculation and conjectures swept away by the consideration that the candidate possessed a diploma to his credit when, in fact, other candidates also had obtained diploma and that could not be taken into consideration under the prescribed rules.
