Respondent No. 1 was alleged to have been making repetitive orders under s.144 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 from August 1979 directing that no member of a procession or assembly of five or more persons should carry any fire arms, explosives, swords, spears, knives, tridents, lathis or any article which may be used as weapon of offence or any article likely to cause annoyance to the public, for example skulls.
A writ petition was filed in the High Court for a direction on the respondents not to impose such restraints on the followers of Ananda Marga.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition.
The respondent No. 1 made a similar order on March 29, 1982.
An application for permission to take out a procession in the public streets by the followers of Ananda Marga accompanied with Tandava dance was rejected.
The petitioner filed writ petition under article 32 of the Constitution for a direction to the respondent No. 1 and the State to allow procession to be carried in the public streets and meetings to be held in public places by the followers of the Ananda Marga accompanied by the performance of Tandava dance within the State of West Bengal.
The petitioner submitted that Ananda Marga was a socio spiritual organisation dedicated to the service of humanity in different spheres of life such as physical, mental and spiritual, irrespective of caste.
creed or colour; one of the prescriptions of the religious rites to be 448 performed by an Ananda Margi was Tandava dance which was to be performed with a skull, a small symbolic knife, a trishul, and a damroo; and at intervals processions were intended to be taken out in public places accompanied by the Tandava Dance as a religious practice.
The petitioner contended that Tandava Dance was an essential part of the religious rites of Ananda Margis and that they were entitled to practice the same both in private as also in public places and interference by the respondent was opposed to the fundamental rights guaranteed under articles 25 and 26 of the Constitution.
The petitioner also contended that repetitive orders under s.144 of the Code of Criminal Procedure were not contemplated by the Code and, therefore, making of such orders was an abuse of the law and should not be countenanced.
Dismissing the writ petitions, ^ HELD: The Ananda Marga is not a separate religion by itself.
Therefore, application of article 25 of the Constitution is not attracted.
The petitioner asserted that Ananda Marga was not an institutionalised religion but was a religious denomination.
The writings of the founder of the Ananda Marga are essentially founded upon the essence of the Hindu philosophy.
The test indicated in ; and the admission in para 17 of the writ petition that Ananda Margis belong to the Shaivite order lead to the clear conclusion that Ananda Margis belong to the Hindu religion.
[455 E.456 C] Sastri Yagnapurushadji & Ors.
vs Muldas Bhudar das Vaishya & Anr., ; , referred to.
The words 'religious denomination ' in article 26 of the Constitution must take their colour from the word 'religion ' and if this be so, the expression religious denomination ' must also satisfy three conditions: (1) It must be a collection of individuals who have a system of beliefs or doctrines which they regard as conducive to their spiritual well being, that is, a common faith; (2) common organisation; and (3) designation by a distinctive name.
In the instant case Ananda Marga appears to satisfy all the three conditions.
Ananda Marga, therefore, can be appropriately treated as a religious denomination within the Hindu religion.
[456 G 457 C] The Commissioner, Hindu Religious Endowments, Madras vs Sri Lakshmindra Thirtha Swamiar or Sri Shirur Mutt; , at 1021; The Durgah Committee Ajmer & Anr.
vs Syed Hussain Ali & Ors., ; ; and S.P. Mittal etc.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; at 774 referred to.
449 Article 26 of the Constitution provides that subject to public order, morality and health, every religious denomination or any section thereof shall have the right to manage its own affairs in matters of religion.
Courts have the power to determine whether a particular rite or observance is regarded as essential by the tenets of a particular religion.
[457 C D, 458 H] Ratilal Panachand Gandhi vs The State of Bombay & Ors., [1954] S.C.R. 1055; and Tilkayat Shri Govindlalji Maharaj vs The State of Rajasthan & Ors., [1964] 1 S.C.R. 561 referred to.
In the instant case the Tandva dance was not accepted as an essential religious rite of Ananda Margis when in 1955 the Ananda Marga order was first established.
It is the specific case of the petitioner that Shri Ananda Murti, founder of Ananda Marga, introduced Tandva as a part of religious rites of Ananda Margis later in 1966.
Ananda Marga as a religious order is of recent origin and Tandva dance as a part of religious rites of that order is still more recent.
It is doubtful as to whether in such circumstances Tandva dance can be taken as an essential religious rite of the Ananda Margis.
Even conceding that Tandva dance has been prescribed as a religious rite for every follower of the Ananda Marga it does not follow as a necessary corollary that Tandava dance to be performed in the public in a religious procession is a matter of religious rite.
In fact, there is no justification in any of the writings of Shri Ananda Murti that Tandava dance must be performed in public.
Therefore, performance of Tandava dance in procession in the public streets or in gatherings in public places is not an essential religious rite of the followers of the Ananda Marga.
Thus, the Claim that the petitioner has a fundamental right within the meaning of articles 25 or 26 to perform Tandava dance in public streets and public places has to be rejected.
[459 E 460 E] An order made under s.144 of the Code of Criminal Procedure is intended to meet an emergent situation.
The order is not intended to be either permanent or semi permanent in character.
The order is to remain valid for two months from the date of its making as provided in sub s.(4) of s.144.
The proviso to sub s.(4) of s.144 which gives the State Government jurisdiction to extend the prohibitory order for a maximum period of six months beyond the life of the order made by the Magistrate is clearly indicative of the position that Parliament never intended the life of the order under s.144 of the Code to remain in force beyond two months when made by a Magistrate.
The scheme of that section does not contemplate repetitive orders and in case the situation so warrants steps have to be taken under other provisions of the law such as s.107 or s.145 of the Code when individual disputes are raised and to meet a situation such as in this case, there are provisions to be found in the Police Act.
If repetitive orders are made it would clearly amount to abuse of the power conferred by s.144 of the Code.
[461 D 462 D] Gopi Mohun Mullick vs Taramoni Chowdhrani, ILR 5 Cal. 7; Bishessur Chuckerbutty & Anr.
vs Emperor, A.I.R. 1916 Cal.
47; Swaminatha Mudaliar vs Gopalakrishna Naidu, A.I.R. ; Taturam sahu vs The State of Orissa, A.I.R. 1953 Orissa 96; Ram Das Gaur vs The City Magistrate, Varanasi, 450 A.I.R. 1960 All. 397; and Ram Narain Sah & Anr.
vs Parmeshwar Prasad Sah & Ors., A.I.R. 1942 Pat.
414, approved.
Babulal Parate vs State of Maharashtra & Ors., ; at 437; and Gulam Abbas & Ors.
vs State of U.P. & Ors.
,[1981] at 1862, referred to.
