The appellant filed a suit in the District Munsiffs ' Court for demarcating the boundaries of his property from that of the respondents and for a mandatory injunction directing the respondents to remove the eaves protruding on the northern side by reason of which the 'eaves ' water was falling into his property.
The respondents denied that they encroached upon any portion of the appellants property and contended that the appellant had with ulterior motive removed the survey stones in the north eastern and north western side of the respondents ' property and had encroached upon some portion of their land.
It was further contended that the eaves ' water fell only on their own land and that the mandatory injunction claimed was not sustainable in law.
An Advocate Commissioner who was directed to make a local inspection filed his report.
The Trial Court passed a decree for demarcation of the property by putting up of a boundary wall within the appellant 's property and also issued a mandatory injunction directing the removal of portions of the eaves of the respondents ' buildings.
The Trial Court Judgment was confirmed by the Subordinate Judge in appeal.
In the second appeal to the High Court, a Single Judge rejected the contention of the respondents that the measurements in the Commissioner 's report and the markings contained in his plan were not correct, and dismissed the second appeal.
When a review petition was filed by the respondents, the Single Judge noticed that there was an error of measurement in the Government survey plan and the plan filed by the Commissioner and opined that there should be a fresh consideration of the question, set aside his judgment and the concurring judgments of the first two courts, and remanded the matter to the Trial Court.
Allowing the appeal to this court, 498 ^ HELD: 1.
The single Judge was not fully justified in allowing the review petition and setting aside not only his own judgment which had confirmed the concurring judgments of the first two courts, but also erred in setting aside the judgments of the first two courts and remanding the suit to the court of first instance.
He should have adopted the more equitable and just method of framing some additional issues and calling for findings on those issues from the Trial Court with liberty to both the parties for adducing evidence.
[501 H; 502 A B] 2.
The Single Judges ' order in so far as it relates to setting aside his own judgment in the second appeal is set aside.
The judgment and decrees of the first two courts are kept in tact.
The High Court will frame such additional issues as may legally arise on the pleadings of the parties and call for findings thereon from the Trial Court and dispose of the second appeal after taking into consideration the findings and the objections of the parties to the findings.
[502 C D]
