The Respondent Dr. Vishan Kumar Agarwal passed the M.B.B.S. Examination of the Lucknow University in July 1971, completed his one Year 's rotating compulsory internship and got his name registered as a medical graduate by the State Medical Council.
In August 1972 he was appointed as a Medical Officer in the Civil Hospital which is approved by the Medical Council for compulsory internship.
In October 1974 he applied to the Principal, King George 's Medical College, Lucknow for admission to the M.D. Course in Physiology which was due to commence in January 1975.
The Principal of the College, inspite of the recommendation of the head of the Department, rejected his application on the ground that he did not fulfil the qualifications prescribed in para (i) of the second proviso to clause (c) of the Ordinance I Chapter II of the Lucknow University.
On April 4, 1975, the respondent filed a writ petition, and obtained an interim order under which he was admitted to the course and continued his studies.
The respondent was due to appear for his examination in December 1976 but he was refused an admission card.
The suit filed by him against the refusal to grant admission card was admitted but the interim order obtained was got vacated by the college authorities.
So he appeared for the December, 77 examination and by way of abundant caution got the writ petition amended so as to include a prayer for issuance of a mandamus to declare his result.
In the writ petition he has also alleged discrimination shown by relaxing the rules in favour of two other women candidates.
The writ petition was allowed and hence the appeal by the Principal after obtaining special leave.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1:1.
The requirement of every one of the clauses in Ordinance I has to be fulfilled by the candidate on the date on which he applies for 504 admission to the M.D. or M.S. Course of studies.
It is not sufficient that he fulfills the requirements of these clauses on the date of the examination.
[510 A C] 1:2.
Though ordinance I begins with the words "No candidate shall be eligible to appear at the examination for the degree of the Doctor of Medicine or Master or Surgery, unless. . .", it cannot he said that the material date for determining whether the conditions of eligibility are fulfilled is the date of examination and not the date of application.
[509 B C] 1:3.
Clauses (a) to (e) of Ordinance I are parts of an Integrated Scheme and, therefore, it will be wrong to apply different criteria to the interpretation of those clauses.
The verbs used in clauses (a) to (d) are: "has obtained", "has completed", "has done", and has put in" respectively.
Giving to those words their natural meaning, the requirement of everyone of these clauses has to be fulfilled by the candidate on the date on which he applied for admission to the M.D. or M.S. courses of studies.
It is not sufficient that he fulfills the requirements of these clauses on the date of the examination.
[509D, E G] 1:4.
There is no justification for applying to the interpretation of this clause a different test that the one which has to be applied to the interpretation of clauses (a) and (b).
Neither the language of clause (c) nor the requirement of justice and fairplay warrants such a course.
Therefore, the condition prescribed by clause (c) must also be shown to have been fulfilled by the candidate on the date on which he applies for admission to the M.D. Course of studies and not later.
[509 G H, 510 A] 2.
Whether the rules contained in the Ordinance governing admission to the post graduate course of studies are mandatory or directory is a matter which the University shall have to consider after taking all relevant factors into account like the nature of the requirement, its purpose and the consequences of its relaxation on educational excellence.
However, if the University considers that any provision is not mandatory, its relaxation in particular cases has to be governed by objective considerations.
No public authority, least of all a University which is entrusted with the future of the student community, can pick and choose persons for receiving the benefit of relaxation of the rules.
In the first place, the rigour of a rule can be relaxed provided such relaxation is permissible under the rules or if the rule is directory and not mandatory.
Secondly, even if it is permissible to relax a rule, such relaxation must be governed by defined guidelines.
The University and the College authorities must apply the same yard stick to all the students who apply for admission to the post graduate course of studies.
[512 B D] 3:1.
It is not open to the University, in the absence of any counter affidavit having been filed to the amended writ petition, to contend that the relaxation in form of the two candidates was inadvertent or that it was made under a mis conception.
[511 G] 3:2.
The University did grant the concession to both the women candidates, though under clause (c), no power is conferred upon it to relax the requirement of the period of one year which is permissible under the third 505 proviso to clause (d).
When the requirement of clause (c) was not invariably insisted upon by the University or by the College and they did not regard that requirement as mandatory, it is unfair that the respondent should be picked up for differential treatment, though situated similarly in the matter of the application of clause (c).
If the requirement of clause (c) could be relaxed in the case of the other two candidates in regard to their admission to the M.D. course of studies, it would not be permissible to the University to regard that requirement as mandatory in the case of the respondent when he applied for admission to the very same course of studies.
Clause (c) does not apply differently to men and women.
[511 B E]
