Bye law 29 of the Bihar Co operative Society Rules, 1959 provided that the management of a Co operative Bank shall vest in the Board of Directors, and that the first Board of Directors shall be nominated by the Registrar for a period not exceeding one year at a time and not exceeding three Co operative years in the aggregate, and that the Registrar could modify the nomination if and when required.
The Registrar, Cooperative Societies in exercise of the power conferred by the aforesaid bye law nominated a Committee of Management of 17 members to the first Board of Directors of the District Co operative Bank.
The Committee was directed to get the election of the Board of Directors completed within six months of the date of their nomination.
The appellant who was a political person was nominated to be the Secretary of the first Board.
The appellant got the period of the first Board of Directors extended from time to time and the election of the Board postponed without any lawful justification.
Between October 1981 and November 1983 at the instance of the appellant, the Chief Minister gave directions to the Minister (Co operation), that the Registrar be asked to extend the term of the Board, and the Registrar 647 in turn extended the term with the direction that the Committee of Management should call a general meeting and get the Board of Directors elected.
When the Chief Minister demitted office, the third respondent, who was the Minister for Industries issued a direction to the Commissioner of the Co operative Department, marked as 'unofficial '.
It was stated therein that if the Committee was reconstituted the Board shall legally consist of seven members only.
For this purpose seven names were sent If the Committee was superseded it was to consist of fifteen members.
On a separate sheet the Minister indicated the first set of seven names and second set of eight names.
In compliance with the Minister 's directive the Registrar by his impugned order in supersession of all earlier orders reconstituted the first Board of Directors with immediate effect and directed that the tenure of the office of the reconstituted Board shall be for the remainder of the term i.e. till November 30, 1983.
Being aggrieved, the appellant assailed the order by a writ petition in the High Court, which was dismissed.
On appeal to this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellant that the Registrar had no power to reconstitute the Board under bye law 29 and that in any event the Minister could not issue any direction to the Registrar as to the reconstitution of the Board.
The respondents, however, contended that the Chief Minister had illegally usurped the statutory functions of the Registrar and passed several orders and that the Minister was justified in issuing the requisite orders.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
Neither the Chief Minister nor the Minister for Cooperation or Industries had the power to arrogate to himself the statutory functions of the Registrar under bye law 9.
Under the Cabinet system of Government, the Chief Minister occupies a position of pre eminence and he virtually carries on the governance of the State.
The Chief Minister may call for any information which is available to the Minister in charge of any department and may issue necessary directions for carrying on the general administration of the State Government.
Presumably, the Chief Minister dealt with the question as if it were an executive function of the State Government and thereby exceeded his powers in usurping the statutory functions of the Registrar under bye law 29 in extending the term of the first Board of Directors from time to time.
[655 A, 654 C D] 2.
The executive power of the State vested in the Governor under article 154(1) connotes the residual or governmental functions that remain after the legislative and judicial functions are taken away.
The executive power includes acts necessary for the carrying on or supervision of the general administration of the State including both a decision as to action and the carrying out of the decision.
Some of the functions exercised under "executive powers" may 648 include powers such as the supervisory jurisdiction of the State Government under section 65A of the Act.
The action of the Chief Minister cannot however be supported by the terms of section 65A of the Act inasmuch as there was no proceeding pending before the Registrar in relation to any of the matters specified in section 65A of the Act nor had the Registrar passed any order in respect thereto.
[654 E G] For the same reasons, it must be held that the Minister for Industries also exceeded his own authority in directing the manner in which the new Board of Directors was to be constituted by the Registrar under bye law 29 by forwarding a list of 7 names to be nominated by him in the reconstituted Board and a further list of 8 names indicating that if the Committee of Management was superseded under another provision, it should consist of those 15 persons.
[655 C D] 3.
Under bye law 29, the Registrar had the power to reconstitute the first Board of Directors or to curtail the extended term.
Proviso to bye law 29 lays down that the first Board of Directors shall be nominated by the Registrar for a period not exceeding one year at a time and not exceeding three cooperative years in the aggregate.
It however does not entail the consequence that when the term of the first Board of Directors is extended from time to time, it must necessarily extend to three cooperative years.
That apart, the extended term of the first Board of Directors was to enure "till further orders" and therefore the Registrar had reserved to himself the right to curtail the extended term by reconstituting the Board, at any time.
[655E 656A] Upon this view, the Court directed (i) the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, to take over the District Central Cooperative Bank and exercise all the powers and perform all the duties vested in the Committee of Management which under the Bihar & Orissa Cooperative Societies Act, 1935 and the Bihar Cooperative Societies Rules, 1959 and the bye laws thereunder are vested in the Committee of Management.
And (ii) the Registrar, either himself or through an Officer in the Cooperative Department designated by him, shall call a general meeting of the Society and require the society to elect a new Board of Directors.[656 C D]
