Forasol, a French Company having its principal office in Paris, France, entered into a contract on February 17, 1964 with Oil and Natural Gas Commission (ONGC), a Government of India undertaking, for carrying out structural drilling in relation to the exploration for oil in India.
Article IX 3 of the contract provided that the amount payable to Forasol on account of operational fee, standby fee, and equipment charges shall be computed in French Francs and ONGC shall pay 80% of that amount in French Francs in Paris, France, and the remaining 20% in Indian rupees using a fixed conversion rate of FF. 1.033=Re. 1.000.
Art IX 3.2 provided that certain other charges, e.g., insurance, freight, etc., incurred by Forasol were to be reimbursed to Forasol by ONGC in Indian rupees if the expenditure was initially incurred by Forasol in Indian rupees, otherwise in French Francs.
Article X 2, X 3 and X 4 of the contract set out estimates of the payments to be made to Forasol in French Francs, the invoicing rules and the rate of payment.
Under article X 3.3, Forasol was to indicate in each of its invoices, the amount payable to it in French Francs and the amount payable to it in Indian rupees under the contract.
article XI provided for payments to be made to Forasol in Indian rupees.
The contract which was initially for a period of one year was extended twice and Addendum Nos. 1, 2 & 3 were added to the Contract.
During the extended period of the contract the Indian rupee was devalued in June 1966 and consequently Forasol made a claim for conversion of Indian rupees into French 527 Francs at a rate higher than the rate specified in article IX 3.
The disputes and differences which arose between the parties were referred to arbitration.
The Umpire who made the award directed certain payments to be made in French Francs, but did not specify the rate of exchange at which the French Francs were to be converted into Indian rupees.
The award further directed that from November 30, 1966, the rupee portion should be converted at the higher rate of FF. 1,000 equal to rupees 1,517.80.
The award was filed in the Delhi High Court and the High Court passed a decree in terms of the award simpliciter without fixing any date for conversion of the French Francs into Indian rupees, with interest at the rate of 6% per annum from the date of the decree till the date of payment Neither party raised any objection to the said award or to the form in which the said decree was passed.
Forasol filed an application in the High Court for execution of the decree.
ONGC contended that the enhanced rate of exchange specified in the award was applicable only with respect to the interest payable to Forasol from November 30, 1966 and that to the rest of the payments to be made under the award either in French Francs or in Indian rupee, the contract rate of exchange was applicable.
A single Judge of the High Court held that the contract rate of exchange applied only to the rupee part of the payment in respect of the items specified in article IX .3.1 and that in respect of the other payments to be made to Forasol in French Francs the rate of exchange prevailing at the date of the decree would apply.
In appeal, a Division Bench of the High Court held that the enhanced rate of exchange specified in the award applied only to the interest payable to Forasol and that with respect to the rupee amount the contract rate of exchange applied.
It further held that as the award was in French Francs, by reasons of the provisions of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973, before executing the award the French Francs would have to be converted into Indian rupees at the rate of exchange prevailing on the date of the said award.
This judgment and order of the Division Bench was challenged in these cross appeals.
The questions which arose for consideration were: (1) Whether the rate of conversion mentioned in the contract applied to all the payments to be made under the contract whether in Indian rupees or in French Francs, or only to 20 per cent of the amount in French Francs, payable by ONGC to Forasol in Indian rupees in respect of Forasol 's operational fee, standby fee and equipment charges; (2) whether the enhanced rate of exchange specified in the award was applicable to all the payments in Indian rupees under article IX 3.1 of the contract to be made by ONGC to Forasol or only to the interest on the amount in French Francs payable to Forasol by ONGC; and (3) which was the proper date to be selected for converting into Indian rupees the French Francs part of the award in respect of which no rate of exchange had been fixed either by the contract or by the award ? Two further questions which were inextricably linked with question No. (3) above were: (1) whether an arbitrator or umpire can make an award in a foreign currency; and (2) whether a court can simpliciter pass a decree in terms of such an award without specifying the rate of exchange at which the foreign currency amount will have to be converted into Indian rupees.
Allowing the appeal of Forasol and dismissing that of ONGC, 528 ^ HELD: 1.
Under article IX 3.1 of the contract Forasol had agreed to accept 20 per cent of its operational fee, standby fee and equipment charges in Indian rupees but wanted that the remaining 80 per cent of these fees and charges as also the other amounts which were payable to it under the contract should be paid to it in French Francs only.
If Forasol were to indicate separately in its invoices the payment to be made to it in French Francs and in Indian rupees and if the payment of such Francs was to be made in Paris, France, in French Francs, the question of providing for a rate of exchange in the said contract for converting French Francs into Indian rupees cannot arise.
Such conversion rate could only be in respect of the amount payable to Forasol in Indian rupees.
It is thus only the 20 per cent of the said fees and charges computed in French in Forasol 's invoices but payable in Indian rupees which was to be converted at the rate of exchange specified in the contract.
This interpretation receives further support from article 2.2 of Addendum No. 2 and article 2.5 of Addendum No. 3 under which amounts refundable by Forasol to ONGC were to be refunded in the same currency in which ONGC had paid them earlier.
[544 C F] 2.
The Division Bench of the High Court was in error in holding that the enhanced rate of exchange specified in the award applied only to the amount of interest payable to Forasol.
The enhanced rate of exchange applied to the payments in Indian rupees under article IX 3.1 of the contract to be made by ONGC to Forasol from and after November 30, 1966.
[548 D E] 3.
In an action to recover an amount payable in a foreign currency, five dates compete for selection by the Court as the proper date for fixing the rate of exchange at which the foreign currency amount has to be converted into the currency of the country in which the action has been commenced and decided.
These dates are: (1) the date when the amount became due and payable; (2) the date of commencement of the action; (3) the date of the decree; (4) the date when the court orders execution to issue; and (5) the date when the decretal amount is paid or realized.
In a case where a decree had been passed by the court in terms of an award made in a foreign currency a sixth date also enters the competition, namely, the date of the award.
[548G 549B] The question which one out of the dates mentioned above is the proper date to be selected by the Court does not appear to have been decided in this country.
The question, however, has formed the subject matter of decisions in England.
The English decisions are of Courts of a country from which we have derived our jurisprudence and a large part of our laws and in which the judgments were delivered by judges held in high repute.
Undoubtedly, none 529 of these decisions are binding upon this Court but they are authorities of high pursuasive value to which we may legitimately turn for assistance.
Whether the rule laid down in any of these cases can be applied by our Courts must, however, be judged in the context of our own laws and legal procedure and the practical realities of litigation in our country.
[549G; 568G] Miliangos vs George Frank (Textiles) Ltd., ; Tomkinson and Anr.
vs First Pennsylvania Banking & Trust Co., ; ; Sub nom in re United Railways of Havana and Regla Warehouses Ltd., ; ; Jugoslavenska Oceanska Plovibda vs Castle Investment Co. Inc., Beswick v Beswick; , ; ; Dr. Mann, The legal Aspect of Money, 3rd Edn. [1971], p. 363; Schorsch Meier G.m.b H. vs Hennin, ; Miliangos vs George Frank (Textiles) Ltd., ; Practice Statement (Judicial Precedent), (1966) 1 W.L.R 1234; Owners of M.V. Eleftherotria vs The owners of M.V. Despina R The Dispina R and Services Europe Atlantique Sud (Seas) of Paris vs Stockholms.
Redriaktiebolag Svea of Stockholm, ; Practice directions, ; ; The Zafuo, John Carllom & Co. Ltd vs Owners of S.S. Zafiro, L.R. (1960) p. 1 at 14; [1959] 2 All F.R. 537 at 544; E.D. & F. Man vs Socite Annonyme Tripolitiane Das Usines De Raffinage De Sucre, [1970] 2 Lyod 's L.Rep. 416 and Russel on Arbitration 20th edn.
page 375, referred to.
When a foreigner has to receive a sum of money which should justly be payable to him in a foreign currency and because of the default of the paying party, seeks to recover its payment through the court, the first question which arises is whether a court in India would have jurisdiction to pass a decree for a sum expressed in a foreign currency.
Though on principle there is no reason why a court should not be able to do so, no court can pass a decree directing a defendant to do an impossible or an illegal act and in view of the provisions of our Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973, and the restrictions contained therein on making payments in a foreign currency, if a decree were to be passed simpliciter for a sum expressed in a foreign currency, it would be to direct the defendant to do an act which would be in violation of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973.
Such a decree can, therefore, only be passed by making the payment in foreign currency subject to the permission of the foreign exchange authorities being granted.
If, however, the authorities do not grant permission for payment of the judgment debt in foreign currency, it would not be possible for the defendant to make such payment, resulting in the decree becoming infrutuous and the plaintiff getting nothing under it.
The court must, therefore, provide for the eventuality of the foreign exchange authorities not granting the requisite permission or even if such permission is given, the defendant not paying the decretal debt, or not wanting to discharge the decree by making payment in foreign currency or in Indian rupees.
This can only be done by the decree providing in the alternative for payment of a sum of money in Indian rupees, which will be equivalent to the sum decreed in foreign currency.
It is but just that a man, who is in law entitled to receive a sum of money in a foreign currency, should either receive it in such currency or should receive its equivalent in Indian rupees.
It is here that the question 530 of the date which the court should select for converting foreign currency into Indian rupees arise.
The court must select a date which puts the plaintiff in the same position in which he would have been had the defendant discharged his obligation when he ought to have done, bearing in mind that the rate of exchange is not a constant factor but fluctuates, and very often violently fluctuates, from time to time.
The date when the amount became due and payable, does not have the effect of putting the plaintiff in the same position in which he would have been had the defendant discharged his obligation when he should have done because between that date and the date when the suit is decreed the rate of exchange may have fluctuated to the plaintiff s prejudice, resulting in the amount decreed in rupees representing only a fraction of what he was entitled to receive.
Equally, the possibility of the plaintiff getting more than what he had bargained for in case the rate of exchange had fluctuated in his favour cannot be ruled out.
To select the date when the amount became due or the "breach date", as the English courts have termed it, is thus to expose the parties to the unforesecable changes in the international monetary market.
The selection of the "breach date" cannot, therefore, be said to be just, fair or equitable.
[568H 569D] The date of the commencement of the action or suit, is equally subject to the same criticism.
The selection of the date of the filing of the suit would, therefore, leave the parties in as uncertain and precarious a position as the selection of the date when the amount became payable or the "breach date".
[569 E H] To select the date of the decree as the conversion date would be to adopt as unrealistic a standard as the "breach date" because a money decree and the payment by the judgment debtor of the judgment debt under it are two vastly different matters widely separated by successive execution applications and objections thereto unless the judgment debtor chooses to pay up the judgment debt of his own accord which is generally not the case.
In the vast majority of cases a money decree is required to be enforced by execution.
[570 A E] The selection of the date when the court orders execution to issue is equally beset with difficulties.
[570 G] In selecting the date of payment as the proper date of conversion there are three practical and procedural difficulties, namely, payment of court fees, the pecuniary limit of the jurisdiction of courts and execution.
[572 B E] This then leaves the court with only three dates from which to make the selection, namely, the date when the amount became payable, the date of the filing of the suit and the date of the judgment, that is, the date of passing the decree.
It would be fairer to both the parties for the court to take the latest of these dates, namely, the date of passing the decree, that is, the date of the judgment.
Under section 17 of the Arbitration Act, 1949 the judgment which the court pronounces is to be "according to the award".
Where the award directs a certain sum of money to be paid and the court, in a case where it has not modified or corrected the award under section 15, pronounces judgment for a different sum, the judgment cannot be said to be "according to the award".
In the same way, where an award directs payment of a sum of money in foreign currency and the court while pronouncing judgment provides for its rupee equivalent at the rate of exchange prevailing on the date of the award, the court will not be pronouncing judgment "according to the award" if in the meantime the rate of exchange has varied, because at the date of the judgment the foreign currency equivalent of the amount in rupees provided in the judgment would be different from the foreign currency sum directed to be paid by the award.
The judgment, therefore, can only be said to be "according to the award" if it directs payment of the rupee equivalent at the rate of exchange prevailing on the date of pronouncing the judgment which date is the same as the date of the passing of the decree.
[584G 585B] 6.
The Division Bench of the High Court has committed an error in equating section 26 (1) of the English Arbitration Act with section 17 of our Arbitration Act.
The reason for this error is that the Division Bench has proceeded upon a wrong assumption that the procedural scheme of the English Arbitration Act is the same as that of our Arbitration Act.
The provisions for enforcing an award under the English Act and under our Act are different.
Granting leave under section 26 of the English Act and pronouncing judgment according to the award and passing a decree under section 17 of our Act mean different things and have different results.
A judgment according to the award under s 17 of our Act will speak only from the date of the judgment which will not be the case under section 26 (1) of the English Act, for while in the first case what will be enforceable by the processes by law, namely execution, will be the decree passed in terms of the award, in the second case it will be the award itself, unless the applicant desires to have judgment entered in terms of the award.
[585C, 585E] Satish Kumar and ors.
vs Surinder Kumar and ors.
, , distinguished.
The practice, which ought to be followed in suits in which a sum of money expressed in a foreign currency can legitimately be claimed by the plaintiff and decreed by the court is as follows.
In such a suit, the plaintiff, who has not received the amount due to him in a foreign currency and, therefore, desires to seek the assistance of the court to recover that amount, has two courses open to him.
He can either claim the amount due to him in Indian currency or in the foreign currency in which it was payable.
If he chooses the first alternative, he can only sue for that amount as converted into Indian rupees and his prayer in the plaint can only be for a sum in Indian currency.
For this purpose, the plaintiff would have to convert the foreign currency amount due to him into Indian rupees.
He can do so either at the rate of exchange prevailing on the date when the amount became payable for he was entitled to receive the amount on that date or, at his option, at the rate of exchange prevailing on the date of the filling of the suit because that is the 532 date on which he is seeking the assistance of the court for recovering the amount due to him.
In either event, the valuation of the suit for the purposes of court fees and the pecuniary limit of the jurisdiction of the court will be the amount in Indian currency claimed in the suit.
The plaintiff may, however, choose the second course open to him and claim in foreign currency the amount due to him.
In such a suit, the proper prayer for the plaintiff to make in his plaint would be for a decree that the defendant do pay to him the foreign currency sum claimed in the plaint subject to the permission of the concerned authorities under the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973, being granted and that in the event of the foreign exchange authorities not granting the requisite permission or the defendant not wanting to make payment in foreign currency even though such permission has been granted or the defendant not making payment in foreign currency or in Indian rupees, whether such permission has been granted or not, the defendant do pay to the plaintiff the rupee equivalent of the foreign currency sum claimed at the rate of exchange prevailing on the date of the judgment.
For the purposes of court fees and jurisdiction the plaintiff should, however, value his claim in the suit by converting the foreign currency sum claimed by him into Indian rupees at the rate of exchange prevailing on the date of the filing of the suit or the date nearest or most nearly preceding such date, stating in his plaint what such rate of exchange is.
He should further give an undertaking in the plaint that he would make good the deficiency in the court fees, if any, if at the date of the judgment, at the rate of exchange then prevailing, the rupee equivalent of the foreign currency sum decreed is higher than that mentioned in the plaint for the purposes of court fees and jurisdiction.
At the hearing of such a suit, before passing the decree, the court should call upon the plaintiff to prove the rate of exchange prevailing on the date of the judgment or on the date nearest or most nearly preceding the date of the judgment.
If necessary, after delivering judgment on all other issues, the court may stand over the rest of the judgment and the passing of the decree and adjourn the matter to enable the plaintiff to prove such rate of exchange.
The decree to be passed by the court should be one which orders the defendant to pay to the plaintiff the foreign currency sum adjudged by the court subject to the requisite permission of the concerned authorities under the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973, being granted, and in the event of the Foreign Exchange authorities not granting the requisite permission or the defendant not wanting to make payment in foreign currency even though such permission has been granted or the defendant not making payment in foreign currency or in Indian rupees, whether such permission has been granted or not, the equivalent of such foreign currency sum converted into Indian rupees at the rate of exchange proved before the court as aforesaid.
In the event of the decree being challenged in appeal or other proceedings and such appeal or other proceedings being decided in whole or in part in favour of the plaintiff, the appellate court or the court hearing the application in the other proceedings challenging the decree should follow the same procedure as the trial court for the purpose of ascertaining the rate of exchange prevailing on the date of its appellate decree or of its order on such application or on the date nearest or most nearly preceding the date of such decree or order.
If such rate of exchange is different from the rate in the decree which has been challenged, the court should make the necessary modification with respect to the rate of exchange by its appellate decree or final 533 order.
In all such cases, execution can only issue for the rupee equivalent specified in the decree, appellate decree or final order, as the case may be.
These questions, of course, would not arise if pending appeal or other proceedings adopted by the defendant the decree has been executed or the money thereunder received by the plaintiff.
[587D 589C] 8.
Just as the courts have power to make a decree for a sum of money expressed in a foreign currency subject to the limitations and conditions set out above, the arbitrators or umpire have the power to make an award for a sum of money expressed in a foreign currency.
The arbitrators or umpire should, however, provide in the award for the rate of exchange at which the sum awarded in a foreign currency should be converted in the events mentioned above.
This may be done by the arbitrators or umpire taking either the rate of exchange prevailing on the date of the award or the date nearest or most nearly preceding the date of the award or by directing that the rate of exchange at which conversion is to be made would be the date when the court pronounces a judgment according to the award and passes the decree in terms thereof or the date nearest or most nearly preceding the date of the judgment as the court may determine.
If the arbitrators or umpire omit to provide for the rate of conversion, this would not by itself be sufficient to invalidate the award.
The court may either remit the award under section 16 of the , for the purpose of fixing the date of conversion or may do so itself taking the date of conversion as the date of its judgment or the date nearest or most nearly preceding it, following the procedure outlined above for the purpose of proof of the rate of exchange prevailing on such date.
If, however, the person liable under such an award desires to make payment of the sum in foreign currency awarded by the arbitrators or umpire without the award being made a rule of the court, he would be at liberty to do so after obtaining the requisite permission of the concerned authorities under the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973, 9, In the instant case the party entitled to receive the money Forasol was a foreign party.
Under the said contract, the currency of account was a foreign currency and so was the currency of payment except for a portion thereof.
Forasol was, therefore, entitled, on payment not being made to it by ONGC, to receive in French Francs the amounts which became payable to it in that currency.
The Umpire was, therefore, justified in providing that the amounts payable under the said award to Forasol in French Francs should be paid in French currency.
The Umpire has, however, neither provided that such payment would be subject to the permission of the foreign exchange authorities being obtained nor specified the conversion rate to be applied in the eventualities set out above.
That, however, does not make any difference because neither party has objected to the said award on this ground.
On the contrary, both parties have accepted the said award as binding and conclusive, As mentioned above, this omission on the part of the Umpire could have been corrected by the High Court when it came to pronounce judgment according to the said award and pass the said decree in terms thereof.
The decree passed in terms of the said award, however, does not specify either the rupee equivalent of the amount in French Franch payable to Forasol or the rate of exchange at which the conversion of such amount into Indian rupees should be made.
To that extent, the decree passed in terms of the said award by the High Court was not 534 a proper decree.
Both the parties have, however, accepted the said decree and have not challenged it on this ground in any proceedings.
In any event, the aforesaid mistake in the said decree was one which could have been got corrected by an application for review or by an application under section 152 or, in any event under section 151, of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
The decree has now become final and binding upon the parties.
Both the parties have accepted the said decree and the said decree cannot, therefore, be said to be invalid on the ground of the above omission to specify either the rupees equivalent of the French Franc portion of the said award or the rate of exchange at which such French Franc portion was to be converted into its rupee equivalent.
For these reasons we hold that the learned Single Judge rightly took the date of the decree as the date of conversion.
[590C 591B]
