Respondent No. 2 who was one of 28 candidates participating in an election to a Lok Subha seat was declared elected.
One of the contenders, (Respondent No. 1) filed an Election Petition for setting aside the election of Respondent No. 2, under section 100 (1) (b) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, and declaring Respondent No. 5 of the Election Petition as the duly elected candidate, and also for an order declaring Respondent Nos. 2, 3 and 4 as been quilty of corrupt practices under sections 123.
The returned candidate as also all other contesting candidates and 3 outsiders were impleaded as 688 respondents.
Respondent No. 29 of the Election Petition filed his written statement as also a petition of recrimination under section 97 against Respondent No. 5.
Respondent No. 19 in the Election Petition (Appellant in the appeal) filed his written statement.
The Election Petitioner (Respondent No. 1 in the appeal) applied to the court for deleting prayer (c) in the election petition regarding the declaration of Respondent No. 5 as the returned candidate, and the court allowed the deletion.
Later Respondent No. 29 filed a memorandum for withdrawal of the prayer of recrimination against Respondent No. 5.
After the court allowed withdrawal of the recrimination petition the appellant objected to the request.
Written statement was filed on behalf of Respondent No. 1, issues were settled, documents directed to be filed and the case adjourned for trial.
The election petitioner wanted an adjournment on the date the case was posted for trial.
The court gave a last chance and fixed the trial peremptorily having regard to the statutory mandate under section 86 (7) requiring an election petition to be disposed of within 6 months from the date of presentation.
On the date when the case was fixed for trial the election petitioner neither filed his list of witnesses nor list of documents and prayed for an adjournment.
The court refused the adjournment and dismissed the Election Petition.
On the same day, Respondent No. 19 made an application praying for recall of the order of dismissal and also for permission to prosecute the election petition, submit his evidence, and that he may be substituted to continue the proceedings of the Election Petition.
The original Respondent No. 1 objected and contended that the application was not maintainable and that Respondent No. 19 had no locus standi to ask for restoration.
It was further contended that there was no provision for transposition when an election petition was dismissed and Respondent No. 19 who could have filed an independent Election petition within the time admissible under the Act, and not having done so, could not ask for transposition.
The High Court rejected the application.
In the appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that: (1) the earlier order of the High Court by which prayer (c) was allowed to be deleted and the order by which Respondent No. 29 was allowed to withdraw his prayer for recrimination as against original Respondent No. 5 were in the nature of partial withdrawal of the election petition and the statutory provision for withdrawal having not been followed, the order was a nullity and no party would be entitled to rely on them; (2) an election petition once filed does not mean a contest only between the parties there to but continues for the benefit of the whole constituency and cannot come to an end merely by withdrawn by the petitioner or by his death or by the death or withdrawal of opposition of the respondent, but is liable to be continued by any person who might have been a petitioner.
An election petition cannot be dismissed for default and when the appellant applied for permission to continue the case, the High Court should have given the opportunity to continue the election petition; and (3) that the view taken in some cases by this Court that except in cases of withdrawal and abatement, the special provision contained in the Act for 689 notifying to the constituency so that any other person may apply for being allowed to continue the election petition, are not applicable.
Dismissing the appeal: ^ HELD: 1 (i) An election petition is liable to be dismissed for default in situations covered by Order IX or Order XVII of the Code of Civil Procedure and for its restoration an application under Rule 9, Order IX of the Code would be maintainable but such application for restoration can be filed only by the election petitioner and not by any respondent.
[705 E F] In the instant case, at the instance of the appellant the application for restoration was not maintainable.
[708 B] (ii) Elections and election disputes are a matter of special nature and though the right to franchise and right to office are involved in an election dispute, it is not a lis at common law nor an action in equity.
Election disputes are strictly statutory proceedings.
[694 H, 697 A] N.P. Ponnususami vs Returning Officer Nanmakkal Constituency & Ors.[1952] S.C.R. 218; Jagan Nath vs Jaswant Singh & Ors. ; at 895; Charan Lal Sahu vs Nand kishore Bhatt & Ors. ; at 296; Jyoti Basu & Ors vs Debi Ghosal & Ors ; at 326 327; Arun Kumar Bose vs Mohl.
Furkan Ansari & Ors. ; referred to.
(iii) An election petition once filed does not remain a contest only between the parties there to but becomes a dispute in which the whole constituency is interested.
The Representation of People Act makes provisions to meet certain eventualities in the course of trial of election petitions in Chapter IV of Part VI.
Two situations which have been covered by the statute are withdrawal and abatement of election petitions.
Sections 109 and 110 deal with withdrawal of election petitions, and Sections 112 and 116 deal with the eventuality of death and non substitution leading to abatement.
Even in the case of death and non substitution, the Court is required to publish a notice, in the official gazette.
[693 C 698 E, 699 F] (iv) Sub section (1 of section 109 provides that an election petition can be withdrawn only by leave of the High Court.
Omitting a prayer from the election petition strictly would not amount to withdrawal of the election petition.
[700 B] In the instant case, prayer (c) in the election petition was concerned with the declaration of Respondent No. 5 as duly elected from the constituency.
This relief was asked to be deleted.
No objection was raised to its deletion and in due course the Court allowed this prayer to be omitted.
In opposition to the claim made in this prayer, recrimination was filed by one of the respondents in the election petition.
But once prayer (c) was dropped, the relief of recrimination could no more stand.
[799 G 700 A] 690 2(i) Non prosecution or abandonment is certainly not withdrawal Withdrawal is a positive and voluntary act while non prosecution or abandonment may not necessarily be an act of volition.
It may spring from negligence, indifference, inaction or even incapacity or inability to prosecute.
In the case of withdrawal steps are envisaged to be taken before the Court in accordance with the prescribed procedure.
In the case of non prosecution or abandonment, the election petitioner does not appear before the court and obtain any orders.
[701 H 702 A] (ii) The Act is a self contained statute strictly laying down its own procedure and nothing can be read in it which is not there nor can its provisions be enlarged or extended by analogy.
The terms of sec.
87 clearly prescribe that if there by no provision in the Act to the contrary, the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure would apply and that would include Order IX Rule 8, under which an election petition would be liable to be dismissed if the election petitioner does not appear to prosecute the election petition.
[702 B] (iii) Dismissal of an election petition for default of appearance of the petitioner under the provisions of Order IX or Order XVII of the Code would be valid and would not be open to challenge on the ground that these provisions do not apply.
[704 D] Jugal Kishore vs Dr. Baldev Parkash.
AIR 1968 Punjab & Haryana 152 at 158 159; Duryodhan vs Sitaram & Ors.
AIR 1970 All.
1. approved.
Sunderlal Mannalal vs Nandramdas Dwarkadas & Ors.
A.I.R. 1958 M.P. 260 Rajendra Kumari Bajpai vs Ram Adhar Yadav & Ors at 260; referred to.
(iv) Order IX, Rule 9 (and not Rule 13 relied upon by the appellant) would be the relevant provision for restoration of an election petition, and it can be invoked in an appropriate case by the election petitioner only and not by a respondent.
[704 E] In the instant case the election petitioner and not the appellant could have asked for the relief of restoration.
[704 G] 3.
The consensus of judicial opinion in this Court has always been that the law in regard to elections has to be strictly applied and to the extent provision has not been made, the Code would be applicable.
The Court had occasion to point out that the Legislature had not thought it fit to make any provision in the Act permitting intervention of an elector of the constituency in all contingencies of failures of the election petition either due to the collusion or fraud of the original election petitioner or otherwise.
The legislature could have removed the lacuna by amending the Act, particularly when many amendments have been made.
The fact that has been done leaves an impression that the Court had not misread the situation.
It is not for the Court to fill up any lacuna in the legislation.
[707 B C; F G] Dhoom Singh vs Prakash Chandra Sethi & Ors. ; at 599; Sheodhan Singh vs Monan Lal Gautam.[1969] 3 S.C.R 416 at 421. referred to. 691
