On expiry of the term of the committee known as Board of Directors of a specified society under the Maharashtra Cooperative Societies Act, 1960 the Collector notified the election programme without specifying that the two seats on the committee would be reserved seats; one for the members belonging to the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes and one for the weaker section of the members of the society.
Pursuant to that election programme the poll was held and the result was declared.
The said election was challenged by a member of the society belonging to Scheduled Tribe on the ground that the whole of the election programme is vitiated on account of its non compliance with the mandatory statutory provision enacted in sec.
73B which prescribed reservation of seats; one in favour of Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes and another in favour of weaker section from the members of the society.
The Additional Commissioner who heard the election petition declared the election of the elected members as void and ineffective.
On a writ petition filed by some of the elected members the High Court held that it was not imperative that the reserved seats must be filled in only by election and the mandate of sec.
73B would be adequately complied with if reserved seats are filled in by co option and there was no error in conducting the election.
In these appeals the appellants submitted that sec.
73B proceeded to make a statutory reservation of two seats and declared its preference in favour of filling in the reserved seats by 768 election failing which alone the reserved seats were to be filled in by appointment or co option.
The respondent submitted that the filling of the reserved seats was a sine qua non; the method of filling reserved seats was directory and therefore any of the three modes could be adopted.
Allowing the appeals, ^ HELD: The election in question is ex facie illegal, invalid and contrary to law.
[781 F] Section 73 of the Act requires the Collector to hold election in accordance with the Act including sec.
73B. The failure to hold election in accordance with the Act including sec.73B would vitiate the whole election programme from commencement till the end.
It would all the more be so because the failure to hold election according to the provisions of the Act which denies an opportunity to the persons who are eligible to get elected to the reserved seats would certainly vitiate the whole election programme.
Therefore, the Collector must specify in the election programme inter alia that there are reserved seats to be filled in by election and the class in whose favour reservation is made.
This will be notice to the members eligible for contesting election to reserved seats so that they may fill in their nomination.
In the instant case there is not even a whisper in the election programme whether any of the seats were reserved.
The omission is glaring and fatal.
Therefore, it can be safely concluded that the election is held in violation of sec.
73B. [781 D F] Any provision making for reservation must receive such construction as would advance the purpose and intendment underlying the provision making reservation and not thwart it.
In the past a method of construction was used to extend a remedial statute called proceeding upon 'the equity of the statute '.
Now a days even though that method of construction has fallen into disuse, it is still in vogue in somewhat similar from in that if it is manifest that the principles of justice require something to be done which is not expressly provided for in an Act of Parliament, a court of justice will take into consideration the spirit and meaning of the Act apart from the words.
[775 G H; 776 B] Hay vs Lord Provost of Perth, [1863] 3 Macq.
H.L. (S.C.) 535 at 544; Re Bethlem Hospital [1875] L.R. 19 Eq.
457 and Craies Statute Law, Seventh Edition P. 101 103 referred to.
No canon of construction can be said to be more firmly established than this that the legislature uses appropriate language to manifest its intention.
In the instant case, the use of the expression 'shall ' in sec.
73B clearly mandates obligation to reserve.
The section itself clearly manifests legislative intention when it says that 'if no such persons are elected or appointed, ' the reserved seats may be filled in by co option.
The language and the chronology of the methodology of filling in reserved seats employed in sec.
73B provide a clue to its correct construction and there should be no doubt that opportunity must be provided for filling in seats by election.
It is the failure of the election machinery to fill in the seats by election which would enable the concerned authority to fill in seats by appointment or co option.
[776 G H; 777 A B] 769 The bye laws of a cooperative society framed in pursuance of the provision of the relevant Act cannot be held to be law or to have the force of law.
They are neither statutory in character nor they have statutory flavour so as to be raised to the status of law.
If there is any conflict between a statute and the subordinate legislation, the statute prevails over subordinate legislation and the bye law if not in conformity with the statute in order to give effect to the statutory provision the rule or bye law has to be ignored.
The statutory provision has precedence and must be complied with.
[780 B C] In the instant case sec.
73B provides a legislative mandate.
Rule 61 has a status of subsidiary legislation or delegated legislation.
[779 H] Co operative Central Bank Ltd. and Ors.
vs Additional Industrial Tribunal, Andhra Pradesh and Ors.
[1970] 1 S.C.R. 205 referred to.
A view of law or a legal provision expressed by a Government Officer cannot afford reliable basis or even guidance in the matter of construction of a legislative measure.
It is the function of the Court to construe legislative measures and in reaching the correct meaning of a statutory provision, opinion of executive branch is hardly relevant.
Nor can the Court abdicate in favour of such opinion.
In the instant case the opinion of the Deputy Registrar as expressed in his letter and circular has no relevance.
[780 F G; D]
