Disposing off the petition, making certain observations and expressing its inability to issue any directions, except awarding costs, the Court. ^ HELD: 1.
Giving directions in a matter like this, where availability of resources has a material bearing, policy regarding priorities is involved, expertise is very much in issue is not prudent to issue any directions.
Ordinarily the powers of the court to deal with a matter such as this, which prima facie appears to be wholly within the domain of the Executive must be examined.
[723 H, 724 A] The Govt.
have limitations, both of resources and capacity.
Yet, it is hoped that the Government and the Administration would rise to the necessity of the occasion and take it as a challenge to improve this great public utility (Railways) in an effective way and with an adequate sense of urgency.
If, necessary, it shall set up a high powered body to quickly handle the many faced problems standing in the way.
[723 G H] 2.
As the present case is a public interest litigation, the petitioner is entitled to consolidated costs of Rs. 5,000 recoverable from the Railway Ministry of the Union Government.
[724 F G] 3.
There is hardly any scope to doubt that the guarantees provided in Part III of the Constitution are Fundamental and it is the paramount obligation of the State to ensure availability of situations, circumstances, and environments in which every citizen can effectively exercise and enjoy these rights.
The right to life has recently been held by the Supreme Court to connote not merely animal existence but to have a much wider meaning to include the finer graces of human civilization.
If these rights of the citizens are to be ensured, 710 it is undoubtedly the obligation of the Union of India and its instrumentalities to improve the established means of communication in this country.
[722 E G] 3.2.
The Railways are a public utility service run on monopoly basis.
Since it is a public utility, there is no justification to run it merely as a commercial venture with a view to making profits.
It is not known if a monopoly based public utility should ever be a commercial venture geared to supply the general revenue of the State but there is no doubt that the common man 's mode of transport closely connected with the free play of his fundamental right should not be.
[722 H, 723 A] 3.3.
The Union Government should be free to collect the entire operational cost which would include the interest on the capital outlay out of the national exchequer.
Small marginal profits cannot be ruled out.
The massive operation will require a margin of adjustment and, therefore, marginal profits should be admissible.
[723 B C] 3.4.
On the other hand, it is of paramount importance that the services should be prompt.
The quality of the service should improve.
Travel comforts, facilities in running trains and quality of accommodation and availability thereof should be ensured.
The Administration should remain always alive to the position that every bonafide passenger is a guest of the service.
Ticketless travelling has to be totally wiped out.
It is this class of passengers which is a menace to the system without any payment, these law breakers disturb the administration and genuine passengers.
Stringent laws should be made and strictly enforced to free the Railways from this deep rooted evil Security both of the travelling public as also to the travelling citizens must be provided and this means that accidents have to be avoided, attack on the persons of the passengers and prying on their property has to stop.
Scientific improvements made in other countries and suitable to the system in our country must be briskly adopted.
The obligations cast by the Railways Act and the Rules under it must be complied with.
[723 C F] 3.5.
At the same time, no purpose is served by placing the blame at the doors of the Government of the day.
All of us should have realism and condour Independence has been secured at great cost and sacrifice.
It is every citizen 's obligation to maintain it and create an environment in which its fruits can be harvested and shared.
[719 D E] 3.6 Freedom brings responsibility.
There can be no rights without responsibilities.
In our country unfortunately individual rights have received disproportionate emphasis without proper stress on corresponding social obligations and responsibilities.
In a welfare State like ours the citizen is for ever encountering public officials at various levels, regulators and dispensers of social services and managers of State operated enterprises.
It is of utmost importance that the encounters are as just and as free from arbitrariness as are the familiar encounters of the rights.
What is, therefore, of paramount importance is that every citizen must get involved in the determined march to resurrect the society and subordinate his will and passion to the primordial necessity of order in 711 social life.
If is only in a country of that order that the common man will have his voice heard.
The dream can become a reality if every citizen becomes aware of his duty and before asking for enforcement of his right, volunteers to perform his obligation.
[719 E F, 720 B C, D, 724 E]
