The appellant Corporation terminated the employment of some of its employee respondents who were probationers on the ground of unsatisfactory service, some during the period of their probation and others during the extended period of probation.
The Labour Court, to which the dispute was referred, held that section 25F of the had no application, and that for this reason the discharge was invalid.
Dismissing the employer 's writ petition a Single Judge held that the orders of discharge amounted to retrenchment as defined in S.2 (oo) of the Act and were bad for non compliance of s.25F. A Division Bench of the High Court upheld this decision.
In the appeal to this court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that the services of the respondents had been terminated on the ground of their unsuitability and it was not a case of disbanding surplus labour force and, therefore, such termination did not amount to retrenchment.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
Once the conclusion is reached that retrenchment as defined in section 2 (oo) of the covers every case of termination of service except those which have been embodied in the definition, discharge from employment or termination of service of a probationer would also amount to retrenchment.
[794 E] In the instant case the requirements of section 25F had not been complied with.[794 F] 784 2.
The stage has come when the views indicated in State Bank of India vs N. Sundara Money ; has been "absorbed into the consensus" and there is no scope for putting the clock back or for an anti clockwise operation.
[794 D] Hariprasad Shivshanker Shukla vs A.D. Divikar, 1957 S.C.R. 121; Hindustan Steel Ltd. vs The Presiding Officer, Labour Court; Orissa & Ors.
; ; Santosh Gupta vs State Bank of Patiala, ; ; Indian Hume Pipe co. Ltd. vs The Workmen, ; Mohan Lal vs Management of M/s. Bharat Electronics Ltd. ; ; Surendra Kumar Verma etc.
vs The Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court, New Delhi and Anr.[1981] 1 S.C.R. 789; L. Robert D ' Souza vs The Executive Engineer, Southern Railway & Anr.
[1982] 3 S.C.R. 251 referred to.
