The appellant was the Chairman of an autonomous cooperative society under the control and supervision of the State Government.
On receipt of complaints about the financial management of the Society, the Registrar of Cooperative Societies appointed a special auditor to audit the Society 's accounts.
On the basis of the audit report a charge sheet was filed against all the accused for entering into a conspiracy to commit criminal breach of trust.
The conspiracy charge having failed, all the accused except one were acquitted by the Sessions Judge.
On appeal by the State, the High Court convicted the appellant in respect of three items, namely, purchase of fertilisers involving two transactions and missing of certain oil engines, on the ground that as Chairman of the Managing Committee he must be held to be vicariously liable for any order given or misappropriation committed by the other accused.
In appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that no case of defalcation had been made out against the appellant.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
There was no justification for the High Court to interfere with the appellant 's acquittal.
The case against the appellant had not been proved beyond reasonable doubt and he was wrongly convicted by the High Court.
[802 D E] 798 2.
In a case where there was serious defalcation of the properties, unless the prosecution proved that there was a close cohesion and collusion between all the accused which formed the subject matter of a conspiracy, it would be difficult to prove the charges against the appellant.
The charge of conspiracy having failed, the most material and integral part of the prosecution story against the appellant disappeared.
[801 B C] 3.
In a criminal case of such serious nature mens rea cannot be excluded.
Once the charge of conspiracy has failed the onus lay on the prosecution to prove affirmatively that the appellant was directly and personally connected with acts or omissions pertaining to the items purchased.
[801 E] 4.
In the absence of a charge of conspiracy the mere fact that the appellant happened to be the Chairman of the Committee would not make him liable in a vicarious sense.
There is no evidence either direct or circumstantial to show that apart from approving the purchase of fertilisers he knew that the firms from which the fertilisers were purchased did not exist.
If the Chairman was to be made liable then all members of the Committee, viz Tehsildar and other nominated members would be equally liable because all of them participated in the deliberation of the meetings of the Committee.
The appellant as Chairman of the Sangh, had to deal with a large variety of matters and it would not be humanly possible for him to analyse and go into the details or every small matter in order to find out whether there has been any criminal breach of trust.
[801 G H; 802 A B]
