The transport industry can be nationalised by two methods: (i) where the Government acts under Chapter IV A, (section 68 (b) and (c) of the ), after formulating the scheme for taking over a route or routes, and (ii) the more effective method, to take over the running of the entire transport services by nationalising them, along with their units, (Vehicles, workshops etc.) either by one stroke or by stages spread over a short time.
The Karnataka State adopted the second method and the legislation viz., the Karnataka Contract Carriages (Acquisition) Act, 1976 was upheld by this Court in State of Karnataka and Anr.
vs Ranganatha Reddy and Anr., ; The Tamilnadu State passed, the Tamil Nadu Stage Carriages and Contract Carriages (Acquisition) Ordinance, 1973 which later took the shape of the Tamil Nadu Stage Carriages and Contract Carriage (Acquisition) Act, 1973.
The intention of the Act was to start the nationalisation scheme in one district of the State first and then extend it to other districts.
Section 1 provided 726 that the policy of nationalisation shall come into force on the 14th January, 1973.
Clause (iii) of sub section (4) (b) of section I laid down that with respect to stage carriages in any other district in the State, the Act will come into force on such dates as the Government may by notification appoint.
Section 2 codified one of the clauses of the preamble by enacting a declaration that the Act was meant for giving effect to the policy of the State towards securing the principles specified in clauses (b) and (c) of Article 39 of the Constitution and the acquisition in respect of the stage carriages and contract carriages and other properties referred to in section 4.
Section 4, the pivotal section provided that on and from the date as may be specified by the Government in respect of any stage carriage or contract carriage operator, the permit issued to the operator shall vest in the Government absolutely free from all encumbrances and stage carriages or contract carriages which vest in the Government, shall by force of such vesting be freed and discharged from any trust, obligation and encumbrances etc.
It was further provided that any person interested shall have no claim in relation to such carriages or contract carriages taken over by the State in pursuance of the nationalisation policy and the claim, if any, would be limited to the amount payable under the Act.
Sub section (3) of section 4 contained a declaration that the vesting of the stage carriages and other properties shall be deemed to have been acquired for a public purpose and in public interest.
Section 6 provided for a reasonable amount of compensation to be paid to the operators on their properties vesting in the Government.
Where the amount can be fixed by agreement, the same shall be determined in accordance with the agreement and in other cases by an arbitrator appointed by the Government.
Section 12 provided for an appeal to the High Court against the award of the arbitrator.
The schedule to the Act fixed the scale of compensation enunciated the principles on which it was to be awarded and contained the guidelines for its payment.
The operators whose stage carriages were taken over by the State Government assailed the constitutional validity of the Act in their writ petitions in the High Court.
The High Court held that the Act was ultra vires Articles 14 and 19 of the Constitution as it did not fall within the scope of Articles 31 C, and that by virtue of the Act the financiers who were the owners of the stage or contract carriages would be completely wiped out of their business and that therefore Article 19 was clearly violated.
It further held that the objects of Article 30 (b) & (c) have not been subserved and since the vehicles taken over by the State under the Act were moveable properties Article 39 was not applicable.
In appeals to this Court it was contended on behalf of the State that the Act squarely fell within the protective umbrella of Article 31 inasmuch as 727 in pith and substance, the Act sought to subserve and secure the objects contained in clauses (b) and (c) of Article 39 and was, therefore, fully protected from the onslaught of Articles 14,19 and 31.
The provisions of the Act are almost in pari materia with the Karnataka Contract Carriages (Acquisition) Act, 196, which has been upheld by this Court.
On the other hand, it was contended on behalf of the operators (Respondents in the appeals and petitioners in the writ petition) that the manner in which the transport services had been nationalised under the Act did not fall within the ambit of Article 39 (b) and (c) as the buses or the vehicles were not an integral part of the policy of nationalisation.
If the Act had nationalised the transport services without taking over the units and the workshops, etc, then the operators could have had something to fall back upon to earn their livelihood.
Complete deprivation of livelihood by the Act amounted to a confiscatory piece of legislation and therefore void.
Allowing the appeals and dismissing the writ petitions: ^ HELD: The Tamilnadu Stages Carriages and Contract Carriages (Acquisition) Act 1973 is constitutionally valid.
[766 A] 1.
By and large the provisions of the two Acts viz. the Karnataka Contract carriage (Acquisition) Act, 1976 and the Tamil Nadu Stages Carriages and Contract Carriages (Acquisition) Act, 1973 appear to be identical in many respects and the general structure and the fundamental features of the two Acts are almost same.
In view of the clear decision of this Court regarding the constitutional validity of the Karnataka Act, very little survives so far as the arguments in this case, advanced on behalf of the respondents are concerned.
Further the three important decision in Minerva Mills, Waman Rao and Sanjeev Coke Manufacturing cases, reinforce and reiterate the conclusions reached in the Karnataka case.
D E] 2.
(i) There appears to be complete unanimity of judicial opinion on the point that although the directive principles are not enforceable yet the court should make a real attempt at harmonising and reconciling the directive principles and the fundamental rights and any collision between the two should be avoided as far as possible.
[736 B] (ii) Whereas in the 25th Amendment, the protective umbrella given by Constitution was restricted to laws passed only to promote objects in Cls.
(b) & (c) or article 39, by virtue of the 42nd Amendment the limitations which were confined to Cls.
(b) and (c) of article
39 were taken away and the Article was given a much wider connotation by legislating that Acts or laws giving effect to all or any of the principles laid down in part IV of the Constitution would be protected by the umbrella contained in article 31C and would be immune from challenge on the ground that they were violative of article 14 or 19.
[738 C D] (iii)From a combined reading of Bharati 's and Minerva Mills ' cases as also of the subsequent decisions, the undisputed position is that article 31C, as introduced by the 25th Amendment, is constitutionally valid in all respects.
[738 G H] 728 3.
An important facet of Act 31C, is that there should be a close nexus between the statute passed by the legislature and the twin objects mentioned in clauses (b) and (c) of article 39.
The doctrine of nexus cannot be extended to such an extreme limit that the very purpose of article 39 (b) and (c) is defeated.
By requiring that there should be nexus between the law and article 39 (b) what is meant is that there must be a reasonable connection between the Act passed and the objects mentioned in article 39 (b) and (c) before the said Article can apply.
If the nexus is present in the law then protection of article 31C becomes complete and irrevocable.
[739 F 740 A] State of Kerala & Anr.
vs N.M. Thomas & Ors., ; at 993 to 996; His Holiness Kesavananda Bharati Sripadagalaveru vs State of Kerala,[1973] Supp.
S.C.R. 1; Minerva Mills Ltd. & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; at 261; Waman Rao & Ors. etc. etc.
vs Union of India & Ors.
[1981]2 S.C.R. 1 at 41; and Sanjeev Coke Manufacturing Co. vs M/s. Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. & Anr. , referred to. 4.
In a case where article 31C applies, whether compensation is necessarily to be given, has the following facts: (a) if article 31C is taken, to exclude article 31 (2) the question of compensation becomes irrelevant and otiose, ,[741 D] (b) nationalisation of transport service by the State is unobjectionable and unexceptionable and can be accomplished in three different methods: (i) nationalisation of services and not units thereof, [741 E] (ii) nationalisation of the services alongwith the entire assets of the units, and [741 F] (iii) nationalisation of the services and part of the assets of the units of the operators.
[741 G] In the instant case, the State of Tamil Nadu has taken recourse to method (iii) above, i.e. it has nationalised the entire transport service as also a part of the entire assets of the units thereof.
As nationalisation is a policy decision, an enquiry into the policy of the legislature or the considerations governing the same, cannot be made by the courts unless the policy is so absurd as to violate the provisions of the Constitution.
In view of article 31C, the court cannot strike down the Act merely because the compensation for taking over the transport services or its units is not provided for.
The reason for this is that article 31C was not merely a pragmatic approach to socialism but imbibed a theoretical aspect by which all means of production, key industries, mines, minerals, public supplies, utilities and services may be taken gradually under public ownership, management and control.
[741 H 742 B] Akadasi Padhan vs State of Orissa [1963] Supp.
(2) S.C.R. 691, referred 729 5.
From a perusal of Bharati 's as also Karnataka cases the following principles for assessing compensation after the amendment of article 31 (2) by substitution of the word 'amount ', emerge: (1) that compensation should not be arbitrary or illusory, (2) that the amount fixed as compensation should not be unprincipled, (3) that the compensation sought to be paid should not be so arbitrary or illusory as to be unconscionably shocking, and (4) it is not necessary that compensation must represent the actual market value or be adequate for even if compensation is inadequate but not illusory, the requirement of article 31 (2) is fully complied with.
[755 E H] In the instant case, on the question of compensation the relevant sections of the Act are completely in accordance with the principles enunciated above and hence the argument of the counsel for the respondents that the compensation is wholly inadequate or illusory must be overruled.
[756 A] 6.
(i) The compensation awarded or the principles contained in the various sections of the Act are not illusory but amount to a just and sufficient compensation to the operators whose properties are taken away.
In fact, it was to meet such situations that article 31C was introduced so that any obstacle resulting in evil consequence to the operators or persons whose properties are taken over is completely removed.
[757 B] In the instant case, the State has nationalised the stage and contract carriages for the purpose of providing a general and expeditious transport at reasonable rates to the members of the public and such a policy is undoubtedly in public interest and involves an important public purpose.
[758 F] (ii) article 39 (b) does not mention either moveable or immovable property.
The actual expression used is 'material resources of the community ' "Material resources" are wide enough to cover not only natural physical resources but also moveable or immovable properties.
[759 E] 7.
(i) If the State chooses to monopolise trades in certain essential commodities or properties, the purposes mentioned in article 39 (b) & (c), article 31 (2) would be completely excluded; otherwise no State monopoly is ever possible.
It was for this reason that Parliament thought it advisable to protect the objects contained in Article 39 (b) (ii) Article 31(2) by virtue of the 25th Amendment omitted the word 'compensation ' and had substituted the word 'amount ' which gives ample discretion to the State to fix a reasonable amount if the property of an individual is taken over for a public purpose.
The court in such matters cannot 730 interfere with the amount so fixed unless it is shown to the court 's satisfaction that the amount fixed is so monstrous as to shock its conscience.
[761 G 762 A] 8.
The persons whose properties are taken over cannot be heard to complain that the compensation awarded to them should be according to the market value which, if conceded, would defeat the very purpose and objective of Article 39 (b) & (c).
The principles that emerge are.
(1) that in view of the express provisions of article 31C which excludes article 31 (2) also, where a property is acquired in public interest for the avowed purpose of giving effect to the principles enshrined in article 39 (b) & (c), no compensation is necessary and article 31 (2) is out of the harms way, and (2) That even if the law provides for compensation, the courts cannot go into the details or adequacy of the compensation and it is sufficient for the State to prove that the compensation was reasonable and not monstrous or illusory so as to shock the conscience of the court.
[762 E; C D] In the instant case, both the conditions mentioned above are fully satisfied having regard to the provision of the Act.
[762 F] 9.
It will not be correct to construe the word 'distribution ' in a purely literal sense so as to mean only division of a particular kind or to particular persons.
The words, apportionment, allotment allocation, classification, clearly fall within the broad sweep of the word 'distribution '.
So construed, the word 'distribution ' as used in the article 39 (b) will include various facets, aspects, methods and terminology of a broad based concept of distribution.
The word 'distribution ' does not merely mean that property of one should be taken over and distributed to others like land reforms where the lands from the big landlords are taken away and given to landless labourers or for that matter the various urban and rural ceiling Acts.
That is only one of the modes of distribution but not the only mode.
[763 G 764 A] In the instant case, distribution is undoubtedly there though in a different shape.
So far as the operators were concerned they were motivated by making huge profits and were most reluctant to go to villages or places where the passenger traffic is low or the track is difficult.
This naturally caused serious in convenience to the poor members of the community who were denied the facility of visiting the towns or other areas in a transport.
By nationalising the transport as also the units the vehicles would be able to go to the farthest corner of the State and penetrate as deep as possible and provide better and quicker and more efficacious facilities.
This would undoubtedly be a distribution for the common good of the people and would be clearly covered by cl.
(b) of article 39.
[764 B C] 731
