The appellant, Gopinath Ghosh along with Bharat Ghosh @ Sadhu, and Jagannath Ghosh, was convicted and sentenced to life imprisonment under Section 302 read with Section 34 I.P.C. for having committed the murder of Rabi Ghosh, son of Kartik Ghosh on August 19, 1974.
The High Court in appeal, accepted the plea of the two other accused only and acquitted them, while confirming the conviction and sentence of the appellant.
The appellant for the first time in the Supreme Court raised the New Plea that as he was a "child" within the meaning of the expression in West Bengal Children Act, 1959, the entire trial was vitiated.
The court, by its order dated March 11,1983 directed the Session Judge Nadiar to give a finding on the age of the appellant on the date of the occurrence.
The Sessions Judge, in his report, after detailed examination of the evidence of Chief Medical officer of Health, Nadia, (PWI), Radiologist (PW2) orthopaedic Surgeon (PW3), another doctor Mr. R.B. ROY (PW4), the mother of the appellant (PW5) and the Headmaster of the School who brought records of the School, gave a finding that the appellant was aged between 16 and 17 years on the date of occurrence i.e. on August 19, 1974, which finding is not challenged by the State.
Allowing the appeal by Special leave, the Court, ^ HELD: 1.1 A combined reading of Sections 2(d), 2(h), 4 to 6, 22, 23, 24 (2) and 26 of the West Bengal Children Act, 1959 makes it clear that where a juvenile delinquent is arrested, he/she has to be produced before a juvenile court, and if no juvenile court is established for the area amongst others, the court of Session will have powers of a juvenile court; (b) such a juvenile delinquent ordinarily has to be released on bail irrespective of the nature of the offence alleged to have been committed unless it is shown that there appears reasonable grounds for believing that the release is likely to bring him under the influence of any criminal or expose him to moral danger or defeat the ends of justice; (c) Section 25 forbids any criminal or a juvenile delinquent and only an inquiry can be held in accordance with the provisions of the code of Criminal 804 Procedure for the trial of a summons case; and (d) the bar of Section 24 which had been given an over riding effect as it opens with the non obstante clause takes away the power of the court to impose a sentence of imprisonment unless the case falls under the proviso.
[808 A C 1.2 In the instant case, the entire trial of the appellant is without jurisdiction and is vitiated.
The report of the Sessions Judge unquestionably established by unassailable evidence that the appellant having been 16 to 17 years of age on the date of occurrence was a juvenile delinquent and therefore the Magistrate could not have committed his case to the court of Session.
Only an inquiry could have been held against him as provided in Section 25 of the Act unless the case of the appellant falls within the proviso to Section 24 (2).
[808 H, 809 A B] 1.3 ordinarily, the Supreme Court would be reluctant to entertain a based on factual averments for the first time before it.
However, the court is equally reluctant to ignore, overlook or nullify the beneficial provisions of a very socially progressive statute by taking shield behind the technicality of the contention being raised for the first time in court.
In view of the underlying intendment and beneficial provisions of the Act read with clause (f) of Article 39 of the Constitution which provides that the State shall direct its policy towards securing that children are given opportunities and facilities to develop in a healthy manner and in conditions of freedom and dignity and that child hood and youth are protected against exploitation and against moral and material abandonment, it would not be proper to allow a technical contention that the plea is being raised for the first time in the court and thereby thwart the benefit of the provisions being extended to the appellant, if he was otherwise entitled to it.
F H] Practice Directions: Whenever a case is brought before the Magistrate and the accused appears to be aged 21 years or below, before proceeding with the trial or under taking an inquiry, an inquiry must be made about the age of the accused on the date of occurrence.
This sought to be made so where special Acts dealing with juvenile delinquents are in force.
If necessary, the Magistrate may refer the accused to the medical Board or the Civil Surgeon, as the case may be, for obtaining credit worthy evidence about age.
The magistrate may as well call upon accused also to lead evidence about his age.
Thereafter, the learned Magistrate may proceed in accordance with law.
This procedure, if properly followed, would avoid, a journey upto the apex court, and the return journey to the gross root court.
[809 H; 810 A B] (The court suggested, that if necessary an found expedient, the High Court, on the administrative side may issue necessary instructions to cope with such situation).
[810 B]
