The respondent a liquor vending licensee defaulted to pay license fee inspite of repeated reminders.
Recovery proceedings under the Punjab Land Revenue Act, 1857 were initiated against him.
The Collector issued a proclamation prohibiting the transfer or creation of a charge by the respondent on his half share in an immovable property, consisting of a plot of land and a building thereon, and notified the property for auction.
The respondent, filed a suit for permanent injuction restraining the appellant State and the collector from auctioning his half share, on the ground that the building was being used by him tor his residence, and he had no other residential house, and that therefore the half share of the residential house was exempt from attachment under clause (ccc) of the proviso to sub section (1) of section 60 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
The trial court dismissed the suit and this order was confirmed in appeal by the District judge.
Allowing the respondent 's second appeal, the High Court upheld his contention.
and issued a permanent injunction only with regard to that portion of the building in which he was residing; Allowing, the appeal to this Court, ^ HELD: (1) The High Court was wrong both in its criticism of the subordinate courts and in allowing the respondent 's second appeal.
[847 E] 845 2.
Section 60 of the Code has no application to attachment and sale in any proceedings other than in execution of a decree of a civil court.
It applies only to execution of a decree of civil court.
It declares what properties are liable to be attached and sold in execution of such a decree and the proviso to sub section (1) of section 60 sets out the properties which are not ' liable to such ' attachment or sale.
The expression such attachment or sale" in the proviso refers to the attachment and sale mentioned in sub section (I) of section 60, that is to attachment and sale in execution of a decree of a civil court.
The section does not apply to an attachment and sale under any other statute unless made expressly applicable thereto.
[847 H; 848 A B] In the instant case the attachment and the auction sale were not in execution of any decree of a civil court but were in pursuance of an order made by an officer authorised adopt proceedings under the Punjab.
Land Revenue Act, 1887 for recovery of revenue due to the state.
There is no provision in this Act which makes the provisions of section 60 of the Code applicable to attachment and sale for recovery of revenue under the said Act.
[848 D E]
