The Board of Revenue on a consideration of the material on record as to the suitability or otherwise of the rival pairs of claimants upheld the grant of a liquor licence made by the Deputy Commissioner in favour of the appellants.
It held that respondent No. 1 was a mere benamidar of a prominent businessman and respondent No. 2 being still a student studying for his B.Sc.
degree could not be treated as an 'educated unemployed youth ' within the meaning of the note beneath r. 223 of the Assam Excise 'Rules, 1945.
The respondent Nos. 1 and 2 and the interveners separately moved the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution.
The High Court instead of taking up both the petitions together: took: the writ petition filed by respondents Nos. 1 and 2 and on a reappraisal of the evidence came to the conclusion contrary to that reached by the Board.
It accordingly quashed the order of the Board of Revenue and remanded the matter to the Board for a decision afresh, in the light of the directions made by it.
The Board took serious exception to certain observations made by the High Court and held that the directions issued were nothing but mere observations and therefore it was not bound by it.
After hearing the parties, the Board maintained its earlier order confirming the settlement of the liquor shop by the Deputy Commissioner with the appellants.
Respondents Nos. 1 and 2 again moved the High Court under article 226.
The High Court passed strictures on the Board of Revenue for not having complied with its directions and on a consideration of the facts appearing came to the same 826 conclusion as before and quashed the order of the Board but instead of remanding the matter to the Board for complying with its earlier orders issued a writ of mandamus directing him to settle the country liquor shop with respondents Nos. 1 and 2 on condition that the grant would be subject to an inquiry as to whether respondent No. 1 was a mere be subject and also subject to the result of earlier writ petition filed by the interveners which was still pending.
In appeal, the two questions which arose were :(1) whether it was impermissible for the High Court to have embarked upon an inquiry into facts and on a reappraisal of the evidence come to a finding contrary to that reached by the Board of Revenue and upon that basis issue a writ of certiorari under article 226 quashing the order of Board.
And (2) Whether it was a proper exercise of jurisdiction by the High Court under article 226 to have issued a writ of mandamus ordaining the Deputy Commissioner to settle the country liquor shop with respondents Nos. 1 and 2.
Answering the first question in the affirmative and the second in the negative.
^ HELD : 1.
The High Court clearly exceeded its jurisdiction while issuing a writ of certiorari under article 226 of the Constitution in quashing the impugned order of the Board of Revenue to have embarked upon an inquiry into the facts and upon a reappraisal of the evidence come to the conclusion contrary to that reached by the Board of Revenue viz. whether or not respondent No. 1 was a mere benamidar.
[837 F G] 2.
It was also not a proper exercise of jurisdiction under article 226 for the High Court to have issued a writ of mandamus directing the Deputy Commissioner to grant the liquor licence to respondents Nos. 1 and 2 in preference to the appellants.
Although a writ of mandamus may be a necessary adjunct to a writ of certiorari, if the High Court was satisfied that a writ of certiorari had to be issued to quash the impugned order of the Board of Revenue on the ground that its order was vitiated by an error apparent on the face of the record, the proper course for the High Court to adopt was to issue a writ of mandamus to the Board to hear and redetermine the appeal according to law.
[835 E F] HWR Wade 's Administrative Law, 5th edn., p. 638, referred to.
The construction placed by the High Court on the meaning of the expression 'educated unemployed youth ' appearing in the note beneath r. 223 of the Rules is apparently erroneous.
When a person is still pursuing his course of studies in a university, one fails to see any basis for creating him as an 'educated unemployed youth.
The expression 'educated unemployed youth, in the note beneath r. 223 has a definite legal connotation.
It denotes a class of citizens, who after completing their education, are faced with the growing problem of unemployment.
[837 B D] 827 4.
The direction made by the High Court while issuing a writ of mandamus to the Deputy Commissioner ordaining him to grant the liquor licence to respondents Nos. 1 and 2 that the grant would be subject to the result of an inquiry as to whether respondent No. 1 was a mere benamidar and also subject to the result of the writ petition which was filed by the interveners and still pending, appears to be unwarranted.
If that were to be so, it would affect the validity of the grant itself.
It was also irregular for the High Court to have taken an undertaking from respondent No. 2 who was a student still undergoing his studies for B.Sc.
degree in a university that he would give up his studies in case he was given the liquor licence.
The procedure adopted by the High Court in separately hearing the writ petition filed by respondents Nos. 1 and 2, while the writ petition filed by the interveners was still pending, and in not taking up both the writ petitions together, and directing the Deputy Commissioner to issue a liquor licence to respondents Nos. 1 and 2, was not in consonance with the procedure established by law and clearly in denial of rules of fairplay and justice.
The Board of Revenue was bound to comply with the directions made by the High Court and it was not open to it to say that they were mere observations and not directions issued.
The refusal of the Board to comply with the directions of the High Court issued under article 226 was in effect a denial of justice and also destructive of one of the basic principles in the administration of justice based as it is in this country on a hierarchy of Courts.
Bhopal Sugar Industries Limited vs Income tax Officer, Bhopal.
[1961] 1 S C.R. 474 relied on.
