After the Legislative Assembly of the State was dissolved by the President elections were held and after the results were declared the Election Commission issued a notification containing the names of the members elected for the constituencies on June 9, 1980.
The elected members were notified that they could take the oath as required by article 188 of the Constitution at the session of the Legislative Assembly which had been summoned to meet on June 27, 1980 and on subsequent days.
In the meanwhile, on June 17, 1980 the Election Commission issued a notification calling upon the elected members of the state Legislative Assembly to elect a person for the purpose of filling a vacancy in the Rajya Sabha.
For conducting the election the Secretary and Joint Secretary of the State Legislative Assembly were appointed respectively as the Returning Officer and the Assistant Returning officer.
The appellant and respondent No. 1 in Civil Appeal No. 1775 of 1981 were nominated as the candidates at that election.
At the time of scrutiny, respondent No. 1 filed objections to the nomination of the appellant raising two grounds: (1) that the appellant was disqualified as he was a Government 940 servant, and (2) that the proposer though an elected member of the Assembly, was not qualified to propose the appellant 's candidature as he had not yet taken the oath under Article 188 of the Constitution.
The appellant contended that as he had retired voluntarily from Government service he was not disqualified for being chosen as a member of the Rajya Sabha and that the proposer being an elected member of the Legislative Assembly was competent to propose even though he had not taken the oath as provided in article 188.
Overruling the objections the nomination papers of the candidates were accepted.
In the election the appellant was declared elected as a member of the Rajya Sabha.
Respondent No. 1 therefore filed an election petition.
The High Court set aside the appellant 's election on the grounds : (1) that as the Secretary of the Legislative Assembly was neither an officer of the Government nor of a local authority, he could not be appointed as the Returning Officer under s.21, and (2) that the proposer of the nomination paper had not made or subscribed the oath or affirmation as required by Article 188 of the Constitution on the date of nomination and consequently there was improper acceptance of the nomination of the appellant.
The appellant, the Election Commission of India, and the State preferred Appeals to this Court.
Allowing the Appeals, ^ HELD : 1 (i) The word `Government ' in Article 102 (1)(a) and in Article 191 (1)(a) of the Constitution and the word `Government ' in the expression an officer of Government in section 21 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 should be interpreted liberally so as to include within its scope the Legislature, the Executive and the Judiciary.
[951 G H] (ii) The finding of the High Court that the Secretary of the State Legislature could not be appointed as the Returning officer for the election to the Rajya Sabha is unsustainable.
[952 A] (iii) The expressions `Government ' and an officer of Government ' are not defined in the Constitution or in the Representation of the People Act 1951.
Article 367 of the Constitution provides that unless the context otherwise requires, the , shall subject to any adaptations and modifications that may be made therein under Article 372 apply for the interpretation for the Constitution.
Section 3 (23) of the gives an inclusive definition of `Government ' and suggests that there may be other organs of State which may be included within the meaning of expression `Government ', The expressions `Central Government ' and `State Government ' are defined in section 3 (8) and section 3 (60).
A general review of the constitutional provisions shows various expressions used in it to describe the several organs of the State.
In the expressions `the Union '`the States ' and `the Union Territories ' are used.
In Article 12 the expressions `Government and 941 Parliament of India ' and 'Government and the Legislature of each of the States ' are found suggesting that Government is different from the Union Legislature or the Legislatures of the States.
This is for purposes of In Article 102 (1) (a) and Article 191 (1) (a) the expression 'the Government of India ' and 'Government of any state ' are used and they provide that a person holding an office of profit under the Government of India or a State Government is disqualified for being chosen as a member of Parliament or of a State Legislature respectively.
Article 98 and Article 187 provide for appointment of separate secretariat staff of each House of Parliament and of the State Legislatures respectively.
[947 C H; 948 A] (iv) After the commencement of the Constitution, the Secretaries of the State Legislatures almost as a matter of rule were being appointed as Returning Officers for election to the Rajya Sabha and for election to the Legislative Councils of States, and Parliament had not thought it fit to amend suitably, section 21 expressly including the officers of the State Legislatures amongst the persons qualified to be appointed as Returning officers even though it had been amended once by specifically including officers of local authorities.
Parliament all along had treated the Secretaries of the State Legislatures as officers of Government for purposes of section 21, and had found it convenient to do so [951 C E] (v) Even though Article 98 and Article 187 contemplate the establishment of a separate secretariat staff for each House of Parliament and the State Legislature respectively, the salaries and allowances of the members of that staff are paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India or of the State, as the case may be after they are voted by the House or Houses concerned.
Their appointment and other conditions of service are regulated by Rules made by the President or the Governor, as the case may be, until an appropriate law is made by Parliament or the State Legislature.
[951 F G] (vi) In our Constitution, which has a federal structure there are both at the level of the Union and at the level of the State detailed provisions pertaining to the Legislature, the Executive and the Judiciary.
All the three organs are concerned with the governance of the country the first makes the laws, second enforces them and the third interprets them.
Sometimes their functions may be overlapping.
All the three organs together constitute the Government at their respective level.
[950 B C] (vii) The President is a part of the Parliament under Article 79 of the Constitution.
The executive power of the Union is vested in him under Article 53(1).
At the level of the State the position is analogous.
The Governor is a part of the Legislature of the State under Article 168 (1).
The Executive power of the State is vested in him under Article 154 (1) and he is consulted in the appointments of the judges of the High Court.
While under Article 235 the High Court is vested with the control over the subordinate Judiciary of the State, in the case of dismissal or removal of a judicial officer in the Subordinate Judiciary, the Governor has to issue the order though on the recommendation made by the High Court.
A study of these provisions shows that there is no water tight compartment between the three major organs of the State.
The Comptroller and Auditor General of India though he is assigned an independent status is an officer under the Union Government.
The Judges of the Supreme Court and of 942 a High Court are not servants of Government but hold a constitutional office.
But the Comptroller and Auditor General of India and the Judges of the Supreme Court and of a High Court are not eligible to contest elections to Parliament and the State Legislatures in view of Article 102 (1) (a) and Article 191 (1) (a) because they are serving in connection with the affairs of the Union and are therefore, holding offices of profit under the Central Government.
[950 C H; 591 A B] Pradyat Kumar Bose vs The Hon 'ble the Chief Justice of Calcutta High Court ; ; Gurugobinda Basu vs Sankari Prasad Ghosal & Ors. ; ; Union of India vs Sankal Chand Himatlal Sheth & Anr [1978] I. section C. R. 423; & Hargovind Pant vs Dr.
Raghukul Tilak & Ors. ; referred to.
(viii) The position of a person who works as an officer of the Legislature of a State is also the same.
Even though he belongs under Article 187 to the staff of the State Legislature, he is still an officer of Government in the broad sense in which the expression 'Government is used in Article 102 (1) (a) and Article 191 (1)(a).
If the expression 'Government used is construed as meaning the Executive Government only, then it would defeat the very purpose of these provisions.
Similarly he has to be treated as an officer of Government for purposes of section 21 of the Act also qualified for being appointed as the Returning officer for an election held under the Act.
[951 A C] 2(1) This is not a case where general elections to the Legislative Assembly had been held before the normal tenure of the existing Legislative Assembly was over.
The previous Legislative Assembly having been dissolved in February 1980, on the publication of the notification containing the names of the elected members of the Legislative Assembly on June 9,1980 under Section 73, the Assembly was deemed to be duly constituted.
[953 D; 954 D] (ii) An elected member who has not taken 'oath ' but whose name appears in the notification published under section 73 of the Act can take part in all non legislative activities of an elected member.
The right of voting at an election to the Rajya Sabha can also be exercised by him.
[957 G] In the instant case the name of the proposer had been included before the date on which he proposed the name of the appellant as a candidate in the notification published under sec.
73 of the Act and in the electoral roll maintained under section 152.
There is therefore no infirmity in the nomination.
[957 H; 958 A] (iii) The words 'sitting and voting ' in Article 193 of the Constitution imply the summoning of the house under Article 174 of the Constitution by the Governor to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit and the holding of the meeting of the House pursuant to the said summons or an adjourned meeting.
An elected member incurs the penalty for contravening Article 193 of the Constitution only when he sits and votes at such a meeting of the House.
Invariably there is an interval of time between the constitution of a house after a general election, and the summoning of the first meeting of the House.
During that 943 interval an elected member of the Assembly whose name appears in the notification issued under section 73 of the Act is entitled to all the privileges, salaries and allowances of a member of the Legislative Assembly, one of them being the right to function as an elector at an election held for filling a seat in the Rajya Sabha.
[955 B D] (iv) The election for filling a seat in the Rajya Sabha does not from a part of the Legislative proceedings of the House carried on at its meeting.
Nor the vote cast at such an election is a vote given in the House on any issue arising before the House.
The speaker has no control over the election.
The election is held by the Returning Officer appointed for the purpose.
All the steps taken in the course of the election fall outside the proceedings that take place at a meeting of the House.
[955 E F; 956 B] Bhupendra Nath Basu vs Ranjit Singh, I. L. R. 41 Cal.
384, approved.
