The appellant, the respondent and four other candidates contested the election to a legislative assembly from a constituency reserved for Scheduled Castes.
While the respondent was declared elected, the appellant secured the next highest number of votes and the difference in the number of votes secured by them was only 373.
The appellant challenged the election of the respondent on the ground that the result of the election had been materially effected by the improper acceptance of the nomination of a third candidate who had secured 6710 votes.
The Election Tribunal arrived at the finding that the candidate in question was not a member of the Scheduled Castes and hence is nomination had been improperly accepted, but nevertheless, refused to set aside the election of the respondent on the ground that the result of the election had not been shown to have been materially affected as a result of the improper acceptance of the nomination.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: Under section 100(1)(d) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, the election of a returned candidate shall be declared to be void if the High Court is of the opinion that the result of the election, in so far as it concerns the returned candidate, has been materially affected by the improper acceptance of any nomination and the burden of establishing the same is on the person impeaching the election.
Where the candidate whose nomination was improperly accepted has secured a larger number of votes than the difference between the number of votes secured by the successful candidate and the candidate securing the next highest number of votes, there is a possibility that a sufficient number of votes actually cast for the candidate whose nomination was improperly accepted might have been cast for the candidate who secured the highest number of votes next to the successful candidate so as to upset the result of the election.
In such a situation, the answer to the question whether the result of the election could be said to have been materially affected must depend on the facts, circumstances and reasonable probabilities of the case.
If the number of votes secured by the candidate whose nomination was improperly accepted is disproportionately large as compared with the difference 967 between the votes secured by the successful candidate and the candidate securing the next highest number of votes and if the votes secured by the candidate whose nomination was improperly accepted bears a fairly high proportion to the votes secured by the successful candidate, the reasonable probability is that the result of the election has been materially affected and one may venture to hold the fact as proved.
[968 F G; 969 D F] Under the Evidence Act, a fact is said to be proved when after considering the matters before it, the Court either believes it to exist or considers its existence so probable that a prudent man ought, under the circumstances of the particular case, to act upon the supposition that it exists.
If having regard to the facts and circumstances of a case, the reasonable probability is all one way, a court must not lay down an impossible standard of proof and hold a fact as not proved.
[969 G H] In the instant case, the candidate whose nomination was improperly accepted had obtained 6710 votes, that is, almost 20 times the difference between the number of votes secured by the successful candidate and the candidate securing the next highest number of votes.
Further, the number of votes secured by the candidate whose nomination was improperly accepted bore a fairly high proportion to the number of votes secured by the successful candidate it was a little over one third.
In such a situation the result of the election may safely be said to have been affected.
[969 H; 970 A B] Vashist Narain Sharma vs Dev Chandra, [1955] S.C.R. 509; and Samant N. Balakrishna vs George fernandes; , ; explained and distinguished.
