The assessee (Appellant No. 2) who was Karta of a Hindu Undivided Family was a partner of the family firm (Appellant No. 1) and was being assessed to wealth tax as a HUF.
For the purpose of evaluating the interest of the family 's interest in the firm, the assessee adopted the book value of buildings owned by the firm.
On the view that the market value of the buildings was much more than their book value, the Wealth Tax Officer (Respondent No. 1) referred, under section 16A on the Wealth Tax Act, 1957, to the Valuation Officers (Respondent Nos. 2 Valuation Officers issued notices under section 38A(1) (b) for inspection of buildings and records relating to them, and the assessees objections to such procedure were overruled.
The High Court dismissed the assessee 's writ petition holding: (1) having regard to section 29 of the Partnership Act which enables a partner to transfer his interest in the partnership firm and Section 2(e) and Section 4(1) (b) of the Act the interest of a partner in the partnership firm will have to be regarded as a part of his net wealth under the Act.
(2) Section 3 the charging provision expressly levied wealth tax on the net wealth of every Hindu undivided family, and consequently the interest of a H.U.F. in a partnership firm, which is property, could be regarded as a part of its assets liable to be charged under this Section.
(3) Rule 2, section 7 and section 16A (1) (i) (ii) had 36 to be read harmoniously and Rule 2 did not exclude the application of sections 7 and 16A for valuing an asset of a partner in a partnership firm.
(4) Section 7(2) was an enabling provision giving a discretion to the Wealth tax Officer either to value the assets of a business as a whole or valuing each asset thereof separately and in that behalf he had the power to refer such valuation to the Valuation Officer under Section 16A. (5) Appellant No. 2 as a partner could be regarded as an agent of appellant No. 1 firm and the Valuation Officers could issue notices requiring affording of facilities for inspection of buildings and production of books, documents and records.
In the Appeal to this Court it was contended that: (1) there was no provision for inclusion of a 'Karta 's interest in a partnership firm in the H.U.F. 's net wealth for wealth tax purposes under the Act, and (2) even assuming that appellant No.2 's interest (as a Karta of his H.U.F.) in the appellant No.1 's firm is eligible to tax under the Act, the valuation of such interest would be governed by section 7(2) (a) of the Act read with rule 2A of the Wealth Tax Rules 1957 and it was not open to the Wealth Tax Officer to refer the valuation to the valuation Officer under section 16A. Dismissing the Appeal, ^ HELD: 1(i) Section 3 of the Act read with the definitions of "net wealth" as given in Section 2(m) and "assets" given in section 2(e) clearly brings out the exigibility of a partner 's interest in a firm either in his individual capacity or his capacity as Karta of a H.U.F. to wealth tax under the Act.
[44 B C] (ii) There is no lacuna in the Act as regards the making of a Karta 's interest (representing his H.U.F.) in the partnership firm exigible to wealth tax.
[45 C] (iii) Section 4 (1) deals with the computation of the net wealth of an individual.
It enacts a deeming provision.
Certain assets which do not in fact or in reality belong to the individual (the assessee) but some one else are to be treated as belonging to that individual and are to be included in his net wealth.
Analysis of Clauses (a) and (b) of section 4(1) make it clear that there is a great difference between the cases covered by clause (b).
Clause (a) refers to five situations in all of which the asset is held by some one other than the individual concerned (the assessee).
It is provided that such asset held by that some one else shall be treated as belonging to the assessee.
Clause (b) provides that where the individual assessee is a partner in a firm it is the value of his interest in the firm determined in the prescribed manner that is to be treated as belonging to him and is includible in his net wealth.
[43 C F] (iv) It cannot be said that the interest of the partner in a firm does not belong to him.
The proper way to interpret clause (b) would be that the deeming part of it relates to the quantum of his interest in the firm determined in the prescribed manner which is to be treated as belonging to him and includible in his net wealth.
[43 F G] (v) A partner 's interest in a firm, either in his individual capacity or in his capacity as a Karta of a HUF, is property and is otherwise exigible to wealth tax under the other provisions of the Act.
[43 H] 37 2(i) Even where the Wealth tax Officer has resorted to section 7(2) for determining the value of assets of a business as a whole the written down values or book values of specific assets as appearing in the balance sheet are not sacrosanct and when the market value exceeds the written down value or book value by more than 20 per cent, the Wealth tax Officer has to adopt the market value of such assets for the purposes of the Act.
[49 C D] (ii) In order to determine the valuation of a partner 's interest in the firm, first the net wealth of the firm has to be determined under section 7 of the Act and Rule 2 provides that the net wealth of the firm so determined shall be allocated among the partners of the firm, which allocated amount will be the value of the interest of each partner in the firm.
[46 F G] (iii) The primary method of determining the value of the assets for the purposes of the Act is the on indicated in section 7(1), which provides that value of any assets, other than cash, shall be estimated to be its market price on the valuation date.
Sub section (2) provides that in the case of a business for which accounts are maintained by the assessee regularly the Wealth tax Officer may instead of determining separately the valuation of each asset held by the assessee in such business, determine the net value of the business as a whole having regard to the balance sheet of such business as on the valuation date and making such adjustment to therein as may be prescribed.
[48 D F] (iv) It is optional for the Wealth tax Officer to resort to either of the methods even in the case where the net value of a business carried on by the assessee is to be determined.
Even when he proceeds under sub section (2) he has to determine the net value of the business as a whole having regard to the balance sheet of such business as on the valuation date.
[48 G H] (v) The phrase "having regard to the balance sheet of such business" as judicially interpreted means that the Wealth tax Officer has to take into consideration or account the balance sheet of such business for such valuation and not that such balance sheet is conclusive or binding or decisive of the values of assets appearing therein.
[48 H;
