The first respondent was elected to the Lok Sabha from a constituency which was reserved for the Scheduled Castes, The appellant challenged the election of the first respondent on the ground that he was not a member of the Scheduled Castes.
The election Tribunal found that the first respondent belonged to the Scheduled Caste and upheld the election.
Hence this appeal.
The appellant urged that the parents and the sisters of the respondent were shown to be Christians and the respondent was born a Christian and there was no way he could acquire a caste and become an Adi Dravida on conversion to Hinduism.
Dismissing the appeal.
^ HELD: At all relevant time, the first respondent was a Hindu Adi Dravida and professed no religion other than Hinduism.
The precedents particularly those from South India, clearly establish that no particular ceremony is prescribed for reconversion to Hinduism of a person who had earlier embraced another religion.
Unless the practice of the Caste makes it necessary no expiatory rites need be performed and, ordinarily, he regains this caste unless the community does not accept him.
In fact, it may not be accurate to say that he regains his caste, it may be more accurate to say that he never lost his caste in the first instance when he embraced another religion.
The practice of caste however irrational it may appear to our reason and however repugnant it may appear to our moral and social sense, is so deeprooted in the Indian people that its mark does not seem to disappear on conversion to a different religion.
If it disappears, it disappears only to re 974 appear on reconversion.
The mark of caste does not seem to really disappear even after some generations after conversion.
[981A C] Administrator General of Madras vs Anandachari & Ors.
ILR 9 MADRAS 466, Muthusami Mudalia & Anr.
vs Masilamani & Ors.
ILR 33 MADRAS 342, Gurusami Nadar vs Irulappa Konar, , Ramayya vs Mrs. Josephine Elizabeth, AIR 1937 MAD 172, Goona Durgaprasad Rao vs Sudarsanaswami, ILR , Rajgopal vs Armugon & Ors.
[1969] I SCR 254, Rajgopal vs Armugam [1969] I SCR 254, Perumal Nadar v; Ponnuswami [1971] I SCR 49, Vermani vs Vermani AIR 1943 LAHORE 51 and Chatturbhuj Vithaldas Jasani vs Moreshwer Parashram & Ors.[1954] SCR 817, referred to.
In the instant case the birth extract of the first respondent shows his parents as Hindu Adi Dravidas.
Through out his educational career, he was treated as a Hindu student belonging to the Scheduled Castes and was awarded scholarships on that basis.
The school records relating to his children also show them as Hindu Adi Dravidas.
He never attended a church.
On the other hand there is acceptable evidence to show that he was offering worship to Hindu deities in Hindu temples and that his marriage was performed according to Hindu custom and rites.
Even assuming that the parents and sisters of the first respondent had become Christians and that the first respondent himself had been baptised when he was seven months old, there is no difficulty in holding, on the evidence in the case, that the first respondent had long since reverted to Hinduism and to the Adi Dravida Caste.
There is not a scrap of acceptable evidence to show that he ever professed Christianity after he came of age, On the other hand, every bit of evidence in the case shows that from his childhood, he was always practising Hinduism and was treated by everyone concerned as an Adi Dravida.
There is then the outstanding circumstance that the voters of the Constituency reserved for the Scheduled Castes accepted his candidature for the reserved seat and elected him to the Lok Sabha twice.
[891H; 892A E]
