The appellant is a manufacturer of spare parts and accessories of various aircrafts and has also established facilities for assembling, servicing, repairing, overhauling of aircrafts, their instruments and accessories.
The job done by the appellants were servicing, assembling, repairing and overhauling "Airforce planes" entrusted to them.
These works were done on the basis of contracts or job orders issued from time to time.
While on contract directly concerning the repairing servicing and overhauling of a specified aircraft, instrument or accessory in which the spare parts had been used in the execution of service contracts was on record, there was an agreement dated 23rd June 1951 described as "contract for the flight servicing and maintenance of the H.Q. Training Command I.A.F Communication Flight, "wherein the President of India has been described as the "owner" and the appellant as the contractor.
The agreement provided that the works would be carried out by the contractor and payment made by the owner "at cost plus 10% profit basis or at the contractor 's standard fixed rates, where applicable.
Under clause 3, the owner will provide the contractor with all the necessary spares and materials (other than expendable materials such as paints, dopes, cleaning rages etc.) and where however there was delay in the supply of the essential items, the contractor will provide those whenever possible by purchase or manufacture within expenditure authorised by the owner 's Deputy Financial Adviser at the contractor 's request from time to time.
The Sales Tax authorities sought to tax that portion of the total turnover of the appellant for the relevant years in question which was equivalent to the money value of the spare parts of the air crafts which it had supplied to the Indian Air Force as a result of their use in the process of repairing, servicing and overhauling of the aircrafts, their instruments and accessories which were sent to the appellant for the said purpose.
The Appellate Tribunal and the High Court held these to be composite contracts.
The High Court was of the view that sale of spare parts was clearly in contemplation of the parties and the documents in question constituted composite contracts, one relating to the remuneration for the services rendered and the other for the sale of goods.
Hence the appeals by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD : 1:1 It is well settled that the difference between contract of 249 service and contract for sale of goods, is, that in the former, there is in the person performing work or rendering service no property in the things produced as a whole notwithstanding that a part or even the whole of materials used by him had been his property.
In the case of a contract for sale, the thing produced as a whole has individual existence as the sole property of the party who produced it some time before delivery and the property therein passed only under the contract relating thereto to the other party for price.
[257 D E] 1:2 It is necessary, therefore, in every case for the courts to find out whether in essence there was any agreement to work for a stipulated consideration.
If that was so, it would not be a sale because even if some sale may be extracted that would not affect the true position.
Merely showing in the bills or invoices, the value of materials used in the job would not render the contract as one of sales.
The nature and type of the transactions are important and determinative factor.
What is necessary to find out, is the dominant object.
[257 F G] 1:3 A contract of sale of goods must be distinguished from a contract for work and labour.
The distinction is often a fine one.
A contract of sale is a contract whose main object is the transfer of the property in, and the delivery of the possession of, a chattel as a chattel to the buyer.
Where however the main object of work undertaken by the payee of the price was not the transfer of chattel qua chattel, the contract is one of work and labour.
The test, is, whether or not the work and labour bestowed end in anything that can properly become the subject of sale; neither the ownership of the materials, nor the value of the skill and labour as compared with the value of the materials, is conclusive, although such matters may be taken into consideration in determining, in the circumstances of a particular case, whether the contract was in substance one for work and labour and one for the sale of a chattel.
[258 G H; 259 A B] 2:1.
The tests indicated in several decisions of this Court to distinguish between a contract for sale and a contract for work and labour were not exhaustive and did not lay down any rigid or inflexible rule applicable alike to all transactions.
These did not give any magic formula by the application of which one could say in every case whether a contract was a contract for sale or a contract for work and labour.
These merely focussed on one or the other aspect of the transaction and afforded some guidance in determining the question, but basically and primarily, whether a particular contract was one for sale of goods or for work and labour depended upon the main object of the parties gathered from the terms of the contract, the circumstances of the transactions and the custom of the trade.
[259 C D] Sentinel Rolling Shutters & Engineering Company Pvt. Ltd. vs The Commissioner of Sales Tax, 42 Sales Tax Cases 409; referred to.
2:2 It cannot be said as a general proposition that in every case of works contract, there is necessarily implied the sale of the component parts which go to make up the repair.
That question would naturally depend upon the facts and circumstances of each case.
Mere passing of property in an article or commodity during the course of performance of the transaction in question does not render the transaction to be transaction of sale.
Even in a contract purely of works or service, it is possible that articles may have to be used by the person executing the work, and property in such articles or materials may pass to the other party.
That would not necessarily convert the contract into one of sale of those materials.
250 In every case, the Court would have to find out what was the primarily object of the transaction and the intention of the parties parties while entering into it.
It may in some cases be that even while entering into the contract of work or even service, parties might enter into separate agreements, one of work and service and the other of sale and purchase of materials to be used in the course of executing the work or performing the service.
But, then in such cases the transaction would not be one and indivisible, but would fall into two separate agreements, one of work or service and the other of sale.
In order to constitute a sale, it is necessary that there should be an agreement between the parties for the purpose of transferring title to goods, which of course pre supposed capacity to contract, that it must be supported by money consideration that as a result of transaction, the property must actually pass in the goods.
Unless all these elements were present, there would be no sale.
[260 C H] State of Himachal Pradesh & Others vs Associate Hotels of India Ltd, 29 Sales Tax Cases 474; State of Madras vs Gannon Dunkerley & Co., Madras Ltd, 9 Sales Tax Cases 353 ; ; Robinson vs Graves, ; referred to.
2:3 Whether a given transaction is a works contract pure and simple or it involves sale of goods also is of course a mixed question of law and fact depending upon the facts of each case.
It is true, that it cannot be said that parties did not contemplate and apply their minds to the question of spare parts and other materials necessary for the execution of the works.
[262 F H] 3:1 The High Court of Karnataka was not right in its conclusion on the taxability of the turnover of the spare parts and materials supplied in execution of appellant 's job works.
[266 D] 3:2 It is clear from clause 3 that it was the expenditure to be incurred for providing the materials for the jobs to be done were subject to the approval and sanction of the Government.
The expressions "All items provisioned by the contractor will be the property of the owner and will be issued on contract loan.
" are significant and indicative of the real intention of the parties.
"The expression "contract loan" is not an expression of article It has no generally accepted meaning in dictionary, legal or otherwise, as such.
There is no meaning of this expression provided in the contract between the parties or in the correspondence between the parties in connection with the execution of the works.
But these expressions indicate that the `provisions ' which would be required for carrying out the contracts, which could not be anticipated before the beginning or in execution of the contracts will be the property of the owner i.e. that though gathered and procured or manufactured by the contractor, the contractor will have no property in the said goods or spares or materials and would not be able to either dispose of or deal with those but these will be treated for the purpose of this contract to be the property of the owner and, then the contract stipulated that on fictional basis these will be lent out to the contractor for being used in the execution of the jobs entrusted to the contractor.
[263 G H; 264 A] 3:4 The idea was that the moment these spares and materials were required for the jobs entrusted to the appellant and there was delay in supplying these spare parts and materials, the contractor would be free to procure or obtain these spares 251 and materials either by manufacturing or by purchase from the market local or foreign, these goods to be identified and would be treated by the operation of the contract to be the goods of the owner of the planes.
It is true that in order to be given out on loan by the 'owner ' to the contractor, the owner must have property in the spares and materials in question.
But the 'owner ' i.e. the Government in the context of 1951 agreement, and it is indisputable that the transactions in this case were done on the basis of the agreement of 1951, became the owner of the property the moment the goods were identified and there was delay or inability on the part of the government in supplying spares and materials.
[264 C F] In the instant case, the property in the materials which are used in the execution of the jobs entrusted to the contractor became the property of the Government before it was used.
Further there was no possibility of any other materials to be used for the contract.
[265 H; 266 A] Commissioner of Commercial Taxes, Mysore vs Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd, ; ; Ram Singh & Sons Engineering Works v Commissioner of Sales Tax, U.P. 43 Sales Tax Cases 195; followed.
State of Gujarat v Variety Buildings, 38 Sales Tax Cases 176 distinguished.
