The appellant Municipality in its Appeal by Special Leave impugned the interlocutory order of the High Court restraining the Municipality from recovering a graduated consolidated rate on the annual value of the holdings in terms of the amended provisions in sections 123 and 124 of the Bengal Municipal Act, 1932 as amended by the Bengal Municipal (Amendment) Act, 1980.
Allowing the Appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
The High Court should not in proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution grant any stay of recovery of tax save under very exceptional circumstances.
The grant of stay in such matters, should be an exception and not a rule.
[345F] 2.
The levy or impost does not become become bad as soon as a Writ Petition is instituted to assail the validity of the levy.
There is no warrant for presuming the levy to be bad at the very threshold of the proceedings.
The main purpose of passing an interim order is to evolve a workable formula of a workable arrangement to the extent called for by the demands of the situation.
The only consideration at that juncture is to ensure that no prejudice is occasioned to the rate payers in case they ultimately succeed.
This object can be attained by requiring the authority levying the impost to give an undertaking to refund or adjust the levied amount against future dues, in the event of the entire levy or a part thereof being ultimately held to be invalid by the Court.
[345 G H; 346 A] 3.
The main purpose of passing an interim order is to evolve a workable formula or a workable arrangement to the extent called for by the demands of the situation keeping in mind the presumption regarding the constitutionality of the legislation and the vulnerability of the challenge, only is order that no irreparable injury is occasioned.
The Court has therefore to strike a delicate balance after considering the pros and cons of the matter lest larger public interest is not jeopardized and institutional embarrassment is eschewed.
[346H; 347A] 345 4.
The Court has to show awareness of the fact that in the case of the fact that in the case of a Municipality it cannot function or meet its financial obligations if its source of revenue is blocked by an interim order restraining it from recovering the taxes as per the impugned provision.
The Municipality has to maintain essential civic services, run public institutions, purchase supplies and pay the salaries of its employees etc.
The grant of an interlocutory order would paralyze the administration and dislocate the entire working.
These serious ramifications were lost sight of by the High Court in the instant case while making the impugned order.
[346 C D]
