Section 2 of the Uttar Pradesh Urban Buildings (Regulation of Letting, Rent and Eviction) Act, 1972 exempts from operation of the Act various kinds of buildings specified in sub section (1).
Sub section (2) of Section 2 contemplates that the new Rent Act will not apply to a building during a period of ten years, from the date on which its construction is completed.
Explanation I to sub clause (2) enumerates the dates on which the building shall be deemed to have been completed viz., the date of which the completion thereof is reported to or otherwise recorded by the local authority having jurisdiction;(ii) in the case of building subject to assessment that date on which the first assessment thereof comes into effect.
(iii) where the said dates are different, the earliest of the said dates and (iv) in the absence of any report record or assessment, the date on which it is actually occupied for the first time.
The respondent landlord filed a suit for eviction and for arrears of rent and damages for use and occupation pendent lite and future on the allegation that the appellant was inducted as a tenant of the premises in suit on a monthly rent of Rs. 250 on 7th February 1972, that the building in suit was constructed in 1971 under the Cooperative Housing Scheme of the State Bank of India for which the bank advanced loan, that the building was assessed to house, and water tax on 1st of October 1971 and as such the building was not covered by the U.P. Urban Buildings (Regulation of Letting, Rent and Eviction) Act, 1972 and that the appellant defaulted in the payment of rent despite notice dated 24th March 1977.
The appellant resisted the suit and contended that the new Act applied as the building in question was constructed in 1968, that he had cleared rent upto 6th April 77 and that as a matter of fact a sum of Rs. 1000 spent by him towards repairs etc was due from the Respondent landlord.
The Third Additional District Judge negatived the defence and decreed the suit for eviction as also for recovery of arrears of rent and damages for use and occupation.
The trial court found that not only both the conditions stated in Section 2(2) but also the 15 years ' exemption applied to the instant case.
The High Court in revision accepted the finding of the trial judge that the 334 building in question will be deemed to have been completed on 1st October 1971, the date of assessment of house tax and water tax and calculating from that date the building was not ten years old on the date of the suit and therefore, the new rent Act had no application to the building in suit and the appellant cannot get any protection of the Rent Control Act.
The High Court confirmed the findings of the trial court on all other points except the finding of the trial court on all other points except the finding about the amounts of rent and the allowed the appeal in part.
Allowing the appeal partially, the Court ^ HELD: 1:1.
The provision of the Uttar Pradesh Urban Building (Regulation of Letting, Rent and Eviction) Act 1972 will be attracted, if the building completes ten years during the course of litigation.[340 G H] 1:2.
In the instant case, the building will be deemed to have been completed on the date of assessment which was Ist October, 1971.
Reckoning from this date of completion, the new Rent Act would become applicable.
Admittedly the building was not ten years old on the date of suit.
But during the pendency of the litigation it completed ten years by 23rd February 1982 when the Additional District Judge decided the case, entitling the appellant to claim the benefit of Section 39 of the Act.
[340 B D] Om Prakash Gupta vs Dig Vijendrapal Gupta ; ; distinguished and held in applicable.
In the present case, the benefit of the new Rent Act should be given to the appellant who only seeks the protection of the new Rent Act which became applicable to the premises in question during the pendency of the litigation.[340 C D] Section 20 of the New Rent Act provides a bar to a suit for eviction of a tenant except on the specified grounds as provided in the section.(4) of s.20 stipulates that in any suit for eviction on the grounds mentioned in cl.(a) to sub s.(2), viz. the arrears of rent, if at the first hearing of the suit the tenant in default pays all arrears of rent to the landlord or deposits in court the entire amount of rent and damages for use and occupation of the building due from him, such damages for use and occupation being calculated at the same rate as rent together with interest thereon at the rate of nine per cent per annum and the landlord 's cost of the suit in respect thereof after deducting therefrom any amount already deposited by the tenant under sub s.(1) of s.30, the court may, in lieu of passing a decree for eviction on that ground, pass on order relieving the tenant against his liability for eviction on that ground.
Sections 39 and 40 of the new Rent Act also indicate that the benefit of the new Act will be given to the tenant if the conditions contemplated in those sections are satisfied.
Section 39 also indicates that the parties are entitled to make necessary amendment in their pleadings and to adduce additional evidence where necessary.[342 D G] 2:1.
Normally the Court has to decide the case on the basis of cause of action that accrued prior to the date of filing the suit and not on a new cause of action.
But it can and in many cases must take into account events and developments subsequent to the institution of the proceeding provided the rules of fairness to both sides are scrupulously obeyed".[341 A;F] 335 Pasupati Venkateswarlu vs Motor and General Traders,[1975] 1 S.C.C. 770; applied.
Normally amendment is not allowed, if it changes the cause of action.
But it is well recognised that where the amendment does not constitute an addition of a new cause of action or raise a new case, but amounts to no more than adding to the facts already on record, the amendment would be allowed even after the statutory period of limitation.[341 G] A.K Gupta & sons v Damodar Valley Corporation,[1966] 1.S.C.R. 796;; referred to.
