In the years 1971 and 1972, several thousand acres of agricultural lands in two villages were acquired by the State Government pursuant to different notifications issued under section 4(1) of the Land Acquisition Act 1894.
In response to notices under section 9(2), the respondents appeared before the Special Land Acquisition officer and claimed compensation varying between Rs. 15,000 to Rs 25,000 per acre for dry and wet lands depending upon the nature and the quality of the soil, and the income derived therefrom.
In some cases compensation was claimed at more than Rs. 1 lakh per acre for arecanut garden lands.
The Special Land Acquisition officer, by his various awards adopted a multiple of fifteen and awarded compensation at a flat rate of Rs 3,300 per acre for dry agricultural lands and Rs 5,000 per acre for wet agricultural lands.
On references under section 18, the Civil Judge adopted a multiple of fifty times the net annual profits as there was no other method of determining the market value of the land, and enhanced the amount of compensation to Rs. 19,500 per acre for wet agricultural lands and Rs 1,10,000 for arecanut garden lands.
On appeals by the Special Land Acquisition Officer, the High Court also adopted the capitalised value at 15 years ' purchase of the net annual profits but reduced the amount of compensation to Rs. 15,000 per acre for wet agricultural lands and Rs. 25,000 per acre for arecanut garden lands.
In the appeals to this Court by the Special Land Acquisition officer, it was contended relying on the unreported decision of the High Court dated November 21, 1977 in MFA Nos.
881 4/76: The Special Land Acquisition officer, Davangere vs B. Basavarajappa & Ors that the proper multiple for computation of the capitalized value should be 12/1/2 and that the High Court was wrong in adopting the multiple of 15 when the rate of return in the years 1971 and 1972 was 8 per cent per annum.
387 Allowing the Appeals; ^ HELD: 1.
The function of the Court in awarding compensation under the Land Acquisition Act 1894 is to ascertain the "market value" of the land at the date of the notification under section 4(1) of the Act, and the methods of valuation may be: (1) Opinion of experts (2) The price paid within a reasonable time in bona fide transactions of purchase or sale of the lands acquired, or of the lands adjacent to these acquired and possessing similar advantages, and (3) a number of years ' purchase of the actual or.
immediately prospective profits of the lands acquired.
[392 D E] 2.
The method of capitalising the actual or immediately prospective profits or the rent of a number of years purchase should not be resorted to if there is evidence of comparable sales or other evidence for computation of the market value.
It can be resorted to only when no other method is available.
[392 E] 3.
The meaning to be placed upon the phrase "Market Value" of the land under s.23 of the Act, is the price the land acquired could actually be sold at the relevant time i.e. on the date of the notification under s 4(1).
The owner is entitled to the value of the property in its actual condition at the time of expropriation, with all its advantages and with all its possibilities, excluding any advantage due to the carrying out of the scheme for the purpose for which the property is acquired.
Its value is measured by a consideration of the prices that have been obtained in the past for lands of similar quality and in similar positions.
[394 H; 392 B C) 4.
In valuing land or an interest in Land for purposes of land acquisition proceedings, the rule as to number of years ' purchase is not a theoretical or legal rule but depends upon economic factors such as the prevailing rate of return which a prudent investor in the class of properties in question would expect.
The return which an investor will expect from investment will depend upon the characteristic of income as compared to that of idle security.
The most important of such economic factors is the prevailing rate of interest at the relevant time i.e. on the date of the notification under s.4(1).
It is first necessary to ascertain the gross income from the acquired property.
The next step should be ascertain the net income.
Having ascertained the net annual income, it must be capitalized by computing the number of years ' purchase.
[395 B C] Vyricherla Narayana Gajapatiraju vs Revenue Divisional Officer, Vizagapatnam, LR (1939)66 IA 104; Rustom Cavasjee Cooper vs Union of India, ; ; Oriental Gas Co. Ltd & Ors vs State of West Bengal, ; ; Union of India & Anr vs Smt.
Shanti Devi etc.
etc ; ; referred to.
In regard to investment in agricultural lands there are many imponderables inasmuch as the investor runs a much greater risk than the risk that he runs in investment in housing which consists in vagaries of weather and other uncertainties.
There is no security of principal, no liquidity of investment nor any certainty of income.
The appreciation of principal or in come is also uncertain.
The reasons for these is that agricultural lands are not readily transferable under the various land reforms legislation, ex.
laws relating to ceiling on agricultural holding and tenancy laws.
In evaluating the rate of return which would ordinarily satisfy an investor in such a property, the risk factor has further to be evaluated.
There 388 may be total of partial failure of crops through the failure of rain or drought, or inadequate or excessive rainfall.
There may be failure of crops on account of locusts, insects or pests.
The cost inputs such as seeds, water, fertilizer etc.
vary from year to year.
The fluctuations in price of agricultural produce introduce a great deal of uncertainty in regard to income.
In view of these considerations, an investor would expect a much higher rate of return so that the risk factor is properly discounted.
[399 B E] In the instant cases, when the rate of return on investment was 8.25 per cent in the years 1971 and 1972, a person investing his capital in agricultural lands would ordinarily accept 2 per cent to 3 per cent more than what he could obtain from gilt edged securities or other forms of Safe investment and therefore the proper multiplier to be applied for the purpose of capitalization could not in any event exceeded "ten", but since the State Government in these cases contends that proper multiple for cover should be 12 1/2 [399 F G] 6.
The multiple of 12 1/2 should be applied in computation of the capitalized value of lands.
The judgments and crees of the High Court are modified.
The compensation awarded for acquisition of land reduced by one sixth wherever the amount of compensation had been determined by the method of capitalization.
The respondents shall get solatium 15% on the compensation computed as aforesaid and also interest.
[399 H; 400A B]
