By a press release, the Government of Maharashtra declared that the sale of lottery tickets of States other than the State of Maharashtra was unlawful and warned the public that no lottery ticket of other States should be sold within the State.
The petitioners who were agents for the sale of tickets for lotteries conducted by various State Governments other than the State of Maharashtra contended in their writ petitions, that the aforesaid ban that was sought to be imposed had no legal authority.
Under the Constitution lotteries organised by the Government of India or the Government of a State was a subject which was within the exclusive legislative competence of Parliament and that it was not open to the Government of any State purporting to Act in exercise of its executive power to impose such a ban.
On behalf of the State Government respondent it was contended that the Union Government 's executive power was co extensive with the power to make laws, that the President in exercise of his power under Article 258(1) had entrusted to the State Government the executive power of the Union through a Presidential order dated April 2, 1969 in respect of lotteries run by the State, and therefore it was competent for the State Government to impose the ban.
Allowing the writ petitions, ^ HELD: 1.
The Government of Maharashtra cannot purport to ban the 441 sale of lottery tickets of other State by virtue of the entrustment of power under Article 258(1) of the Constitution.
[447 D] 2.
Entry 40 of List I of the VIIIth Schedule to the Constitution is "Lotteries organised by the Government of India or the Government of a State".
Entry 34 of List II of VIIIth Schedule is, "Betting and gambling".
Since the subject 'Lotteries organised by the Government of India or the Government of a State ' has been taken out from the legislative field comprised by the expression "Betting and gambling" and reserved to be dealt with by Parliament, within its exclusive legislative competence it must follow, in view of Article 246(1) and (3) that no legislature of a State. can make a law touching lotteries organised by the Government of India or the Government of a State.
[444 D E] 3.
Article 73 extends the executive power of the Union to the matters with respect to which Parliament has power to make laws.
But the executive power of the Union, by the very opening words of article 73 is "subject to the provisions of the Constitution".
It therefore follows that the executive power of the Union with respect to lotteries organised by the Government of a State has necessarily to be exercised subject to the provisions of the Constitution, including article 298, which expressly extends the executive power of the State to the carrying on of any trade or business subject only to legislation by Parliament if the trade or business is not one with respect to which the State Legislature may make laws.
[447G H; 440A B] 4.
Reading and considering Articles 73 and 298 together, it is clear that the executive power of a State in the matter of carrying on any trade on business with respect to which the State legislature may not make laws is subject to legislation by Parliament but is not subject to the executive power of the Union.
The Government of a State is not required to obtain the permission of the Union Government in order to organise its lotteries, in the absence of Parliamentary legislation.
Even assuming that such permission is necessary, a condition imposed by such permission that lottery tickets of one State may not be sold in another State cannot be enforced by the other State.
The other State has no power to make any laws in regard to lotteries organised by the first State.
Its executive power, by virtue of Article 298, extends to lotteries organised by itself but not to lotteries organised by the other State.
[448C E] 5.
If a State acts in breach of the condition imposed by the President while entrusting power under Article 258 it is open to the President to revoke the permission or to take such further or other action as may be constitutionally permissible but it cannot possibly enable the Government of the other State to do anything about it except to complain perhaps to the Union Government.
[448 E F] In the instant case the source of power for the ban is claimed to be the entrustment of power by the President under Act 258(1) through the Residential order Dated April 2, 1969.
But the terms of the entrustment do not justify the claim The entrustment of power is only 'in respect of lotteries organised by that Government '.
The expression 'that Government ' in the context of the entrustment of power to the Government of Maharashtra can only mean the Government of Maharashtra and no other.
[447 B C] L.B. Paradise Lottery Centre vs State, AIR 1975 AP 50 Shri Indravadan Chaman Lal Thacker vs State of Gujarat, S.C.A. 1309/70 approved.
442 Komal Agency vs State, AIR 1971 Bombay 332 and H.G. Jain vs State of Tamilnadu, AIR 1973 Madras 402; over ruled.
