The appellant Textile Mills is a company duly incorporated under the Indian having its mills located at Village Ektaji under the Jharsuguda police station in district Sambalpur, Orissa.
The company mainly carries on spinning of Cotton which in the manufacturing process is transformed from loose fibres into finished yarn The area under the Ektaji village in which the appellant 's factory was located was earlier constituted as a Grama by a declaration made under Section 3 of the Orissa Grama Panchayat Act 1964.
On or about March 25, 1970 Jharsuguda Municipality passed a resolution for the inclusion of the Ektaji and other villages within its jurisdiction.
After considering the objections and representations against the inclusion of Ektaji village in the Municipal Limit and after following once again the other statutory requirement of further notice etc.
, the State Government published in the Orissa Gazette dated 12.8.1975 a notification approving the inclusion.
Soon thereafter on September 1, 1975 the said Jharsuguda Municipality sent a letter to the appellant directing it to pay octroi duty at the rate of I percent ad valorem on cotton as soon as it entered the Municipal check post for the purpose of its being spun into yarn.
The levy of octroi was challenged by filing a petition under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution on various grounds, but the writ Petition was dismissed.
Petition seeking permission for issuance of a certificate under Article 133(1) of the Constitution was also dismissed.
Hence the appeal after obtaining Special Leave of the Court.
Dismissing the appeal the Court.
^ HELD: 1.
Considering the case from any aspect the imposition of Octroi duty under section 5 of the Orissa Municipal Act, 1950 does not suffer from any infirmity [413 H] 2.
The levy, being neither an unreasonable one nor also excessive, cannot .
be challenged on the ground that there is violation of Article 19(1)(e) of the Constitution.
[413 a] 402 3.
It is true that when a duly constituted Grama under sub section (I) of section 3 of the Grama.
Panchayat Act is to go out of existence an order of the Magistrate cancelling the Notification in terms of sub section (2) of Section 3 of the said Act is a pre requisite.
But in the instant case the Gram Panchayat never challenged the Notification of inclusion of the Village Ektaji in Jharsuguda ' Municipality.
Rather on the other hand the Gram panchayat was consulted before the impugned notification dated 12th August 1975 was issued.
[406 H; 407 A] 4.
The proviso to sub section 1 of Section 4 of the Orissa Municipal.
Act, 1950 has no application to the present case and that cannot be taken to be a ground for challenging the Notification for inclusion of Village Ektaji hl the Jharsuguda Municipality.
A bare perusal of the proviso clearly indicates that the requirement is that two thirds of the adult, male population of the town to which it refers should be engaged in non agricultural pursuits The proviso applies not to all the clauses of sub section (I) of section 4 but it.
applies only to clause (a) of sub section (1) of Section 4, because it is clause (a) of section 4 (1) which talks of town.
[408 E F] 5.
The contention that the objection raised by the appellant against the inclusion of the village in question into Municipality has not been considered by the State has no force.
The objection is required to be made through the Magistrate of the District.
Naturally the District Magistrate.
while forwarding the objection to the State Government made his comment.
The Revenue Divisional officer who intervenes in the channel of communication between the District Magistrate and the State Government had an occasion to process the matter.
The State Government while dealing with the matter consulted the Panchayat Raj Department and ultimately notified in terms of the notification dated August 12, 1975.
[408H; 409A B] 6.
Section 131(1) of the Municipal Act empower the Municipal Council to impose various kinds of taxes which includes octroi as provided in Clause (kk) with the sanction of the Government since the goods are brought into the municipal limits at least for the purpose of use" one of the three conditions laid down in clause (kk the imposition of Octroi is valid.
Burmah Shell Oil Storage & Distribution Co. vs The Belgam Borough Municipality ' [1963] Supp 2 SCR 216 referred to and held inapplicable.
[409 D E] 7:1.
There is a statutory presumption under section 392 of the Orissa Municipal Act, 1950 that the publication of the rules or regulations or bye laws in the Gazette shall be evidence that the rule pr regulation or bye law has, been mad as required by the section Therefore the court will assume that the bye law has been made in accordance with law in the absence of anything more from the site of the appellant.
1410 F G] 7 :2; The argument that even assuming that the bye laws when initially enforced might be presumed to be in accordance with law in the absence of similar steps being taken at the time of extension of bye laws to the newly added area, the bye laws are not enforceable in the new areas is not correct as it has, proceed in utter oblivion of the provisions of section 5 of the Municipal Act.
[410H; 411 A] Vishakhapatanam Municipality vs Kandregula Nukarajau & Ors. ; ; Atlas Cycle Industries Ltd. vs State of Haryana and Anr. ; ; Bagalkot City Municipality v Bagalkot Cement [1963] 2 Supp S.C.R. 710; distinguished 403
