The appellant Union and the respondent company through their communications dated January 24,1957, April 24,1957 and May 1,1957 concluded an agreement relating to various items of industrial disputes which inter alia provided that the employer had agreed not to contest the issue whether field force including salesmen were not 'workmen ' within the meaning of the expression in the and that disputes of an All India nature could be raised only at Delhi.
Two employees of the Respondent company who were salesmen and protected workmen with the meaning of the expression in the and who were office bearers of the union, were charge sheeted and after a disciplinary enquiry their services were terminated.
The appellant union raised an industrial dispute contending that the termination of services of these two workmen were illegal and invalid, and that the enquiry was equally illegal, and improper, and that the action of the employer was an act of reprisal and victimization, because of their trade union activities.
The Government referred the industrial dispute to the Industrial Tribunal.
The employer contended that the two workmen were not 'workmen ' within the meaning of the expression in the Act and that the Government had no jurisdiction to refer the dispute to the Industrial Tribunal.
It was further contended that the services of the workmen were terminated not by way of punishment but under the contract of service and that the disciplinary enquiry which was commenced was subsequently dropped.
The appellant union however contended that the employer was estopped from challenging the status of the two workmen within the meaning of the expression 308 in the Act on account of the subsisting, valid, concluded agreement between the parties and that in view of the award of the Industrial Tribunal, Delhi in I.D. No. 46/66.
The contentions about the existence of the agreement and the status of salesmen were res judicata and could not be reopened so long as the agreement was in force and operative.
The Tribunal rejected the preliminary objections raised on behalf of the union and came to the conclusion that the three communications dated January 24,1957, April 24,1957 and May 1, , W 3, W 4 respectively did not spell out a complete, concluded agreement between the parties on the points mentioned therein but it was an inchoate agreement in the stage of negotiations and the employer was not bound to stand by its offer made in the communication dated January 24,1957 denying itself the right to contest the status of the field force including salesmen as not being workman within the meaning of the Act.
The award of the Industrial Tribunal, Delhi in I.D. No. 46/66 in which it was held that there was a concluded agreement between the parties and therefore the industrial disputes raised therein could not be adjudicated at Delhi did not operate as res judicata because the issue in that award was not directly and substantially in issue in the present reference.
The Tribunal set down the reference for further hearing.
Allowing the Appeal: ^ HELD: 1.
The Tribunal committed a serious error, apparent on record in holding that there was no concluded agreement between the parties as emerging from Exs.
W 2, W 3, and W 4.
[329 F] In the instant case, having meticulously examined various references pertaining to various industrial disputes between the parties at different centres in India since the agreement in 1957 it unquestionably emerges that the employer till the present reference never once even whispered that the agreement was not a concluded agreement or that it was an inchoate one left hanging at the stage of negotiations.
It was only in the present reference the contention raised was that the agreement was not a concluded agreement.
The employer which swore by the agreement and repeatedly succeeded in getting thrown out certain references at the threshold on account of the agreement contended that there was no concluded agreement, and ignoring the whole history, the Tribunal fell into an error in accepting this contention.
The Tribunal wholly ignored the fact that it was a solemn agreement, of which effective and wholesome advantage had been taken by the employer and when it did not suit it, it wanted to turn round and not only repudiate it but disown it.
No court of justice can ever permit such a thing to be done.
[324 E 325 B] Hindustan Lever Ltd. vs Ram Mohan Ray & Ors., ; Western India Match Co. vs Their Workmen ; at 566; and Aluminium Factory Workers, Union vs Indian Aluminium Co. Ltd. , referred to 2.
The Tribunal is directed to proceed to determine the dispute on merits without concerning itself with the consideration of the question whether the concerned workmen were workmen within the meaning of the expression under the Act.
[332 E] 3.
The concept of compulsory adjudication of industrial disputes was statutorily ushered in with a view to providing a forum and compelling the parties 309 to resort to the forum for arbitration so as to avoid confrontation and dislocation in industry.
A developing country like India can ill afford dislocation in industrial production.
Peace and harmony in industry and uninterrupted production being the demands of the time, it was considered wise to arm the Government with power to compel the parties to resort to arbitration and as a necessary corollary to avoid confrontation and trial of strength, which were considered wasteful from national and public interest point of view.
A welfare State can ill afford to look askance at industrial unrest and industrial disputes.
[326H 327B] Dahyabhai Ranchhoddas Shah vs Jayantilal Mohanlal.
,[1973] Lab.
& Industrial Cases 967 referred to.
The Act did not confer till the introduction of Chapters V A and V B, any special or enforceable benefits on the workmen.
The Act was designed to provide a self contained Code to compel the parties to resort to industrial arbitration for the resolution of existing or apprehended disputes without prescribing statutory norms for varied and variegate industrial relation, so that the forums created for resolution of disputes may remain unhampered by any statutory control and devise rational norms keeping place with improved industrial relations reflecting and imbibing socioeconomic justice.
If this is the underlying object behind enactment of the Act, the Court by interpretative process must strive to reduce the field of conflict and expand the area of agreement and show its preference for upholding agreements sanctified by mutuality and consensus in larger public interest, namely to eschew industrial strife, confrontation and consequent wastage.
[327 C E] 5.
It is inappropriate to usher in the technical concept of res judicata pervading the field of civil justice into the field of industrial arbitration.
The principle analogous to res judicata can be availed of to scuttle any attempt at raising industrial disputes repeatedly in defiance of operative settlements and awards.
But this highly technical concept of civil justice may be kept in precise confined limits in the field of industrial arbitration which must as far as possible be kept free from such technicalities which thwart resolution of industrial disputes.
[326 D G] Shahdara (Delhi) Sharanpur Light Railway Co. Ltd. vs Shahdara(Delhi) Sharanpur Railway Workers Union, at 742; and Workmen of Straw Board Manufacturing Co. Ltd. vs M/s Straw Board Manufacturing Co. Ltd. ; referred to.
Unilateral repudiation is distinct from termination and an agreement/settlement remains in force and binding till terminated and does not come to an end by unilateral repudiation.
[328 E] In the instant case, the parties entered into a solemn agreement.
It is not suggested that the agreement has been terminated.
The only argument put forward on behalf of the employer was that the union has repudiated the agreement by raising disputes of an all India nature at a regional level and thereby committed breach of the agreement.
This contention is entirety without merits.
What has happened is that the Union raised certain disputes which according to the Union were of a regional nature and which it was not estopped from raising in the teeth of the terms of the binding agreement between the parties.
On the other hand the employer contended that the disputes so raised were of an all India nature.
Both sides swore by the agreement, the difference in approach being whether the dispute was of an all India nature or of regional nature.
The divergence in approach 310 was as to the interpretation, the coverage, the ambit and the width of the agreement Both the parties swore by the agreement but differed in their approach and interpretation and the forum namely the Industrial Tribunal consistently upheld at the instance of the employer that there was a binding valid agreement subsisting between the parties.
This constitutes adherence to agreement, performance of the agreement, implementation of the agreement and being bound by the agreement.
This conduct in no sense can be said to constitute repudiation.
[327 F 328 C] 7.
The Tribunal derives its jurisdiction by the order of reference and not on the determination of a jurisdictional fact which it must of necessity decide to acquire jurisdiction.
[330 G] 8.
In industrial adjudication, issue are of two types: (i) those referred by the Government for adjudication and set out in the order of reference, and (ii) incidental issues involving mixed questions of law and facts.
The Tribunal may frame preliminary issues if the point on which the parities are at variance, go to the root of the matter.
But the Tribunal cannot travel beyond the pleadings and arrogate to itself the power to raise issues which the parties to the references are precluded from raising.
If the employer does not question the statues of the workmen, the Tribunal cannot suo motu raise the issue and proceed to adjudicate upon the same and throw out the reference on the sole ground that the concerned workman was not a workman within the meaning of the expression under the Act.
[331 G 332 A] 9.
Whether a particular person is a workman or not depends upon factual matrix.
Workman is defined in Sec.
2(s) of the Act.
The ingredients and the incidents of the definition when satisfied, the person satisfying the same would be a workman.
Negatively if someone fails to satisfy one or other ingredient or incident of the definition, he may not be held to be workman within the meaning of the expression in the Act.
[330 C] 10.
There is no provision in the Act which obliges the Industrial Tribunal or other forums set up under the Act to decide even in the absence of a contention from the employer, a preliminary issue whether the person who has invoked its jurisdiction is a workman or not.
There is no such obligation cast statutorily on the Tribunal.
If the employer does not raise the contention about the status of the workman approaching the Tribunal, the Tribunal has no obligation to decide.
The status of the person whether he is a workman or not.
The Tribunal must proceed on the assumption that no such contention is raised and is required to be adjudicated upon.
[330 D F]
