The appellant was a State Judicial Service officer in the grade of Additional District & Sessions Judge.
Consequent upon the decision of the State Government to reorganise the Higher Judicial Service it was decided that a number of posts of the cadre of Additional District & Sessions Judges be abolished and the incumbents of those posts be absorbed as District & Sessions Judges.
The High Court at one of the High Court meetings held to screen the officers in the cadre of Additional District & Sessions Judges, decided to retire the appellant compulsorily on his at tanning the age of SS years under Rule 56(3)(a) of the Fundamental Rules.
It was also decided not to recommend him for promotion to the cadre of District and Sessions Judges.
The appellant was served with an order of compulsory retirement dated August 28, 1981.
The Division Bench of the High Court dismissed the appellant 's writ petition impugning his compulsory retirement.
In the appeal to this Court, it was contended that the High Court had made the recommendation to retire the appellant compulsorily without applying its mind and that the decision was based on collateral considerations and was arbitrary.
On behalf of the High Court it was contended that the personal confidential records of the appellant were considered by the Full Court Meeting and the decision to retire the appellant under Fundamental Rule 56(3)(a) was taken after due consideration of the entire record.
Allowing the appeal: ^ HELD: 1.
It would be an act bordering on perversity to dig out old files to find out some material to make an order against an officer.
Dependence on entries about 20 years before the date on which the decision of compulsory retirement was taken cannot placed for retiring a person compulsorily, particularly when such person concerned has been promoted subsequent to such entries.
[474H; 475A] D.Ramaswami vs State of Tamil Nadu, [19811 2 S.C.R. 75 referred to. 2.
The power to retire a Government servant compulsorily in public interest in terms of a service rule is absolute provided the authority concerned forms 467 an opinion bona fide that it was necessary to pass such an order in public interest.
But if such decision was based on collateral grounds or if the decision was arbitrary, it is liable to be interfered with by Courts.
[469 B C] Union of India vs Col. J.N. Sinha Anr., [1971] 1 S.C.R. 791; Union of India vs M.E. Reddy & Anr., ; ; Swami Saran Saksena vs State of U.P., ; ; Baldev Raj Chadha Y. Union of India & ors ; ; and Brij Bihari Lal Agarwal vs High Court of Madhya Pradesh & Ors. ; referred to.
In the instant case the High Court relied on some adverse remarks relating to 1959 60 or thereabout.
It was true that in the early part of the appellant 's career the entries did not appear to be quite satisfactory.
Some were and some were not good and some were of a mixed kind.
But being reports relating to a remote period, they are not quite relevant or the purpose of determining whether he should by retired compulsorily or not in 1981.
The scrutiny should have been confined to the reports for about ten years prior to the date on which action was proposed to be taken.
All the reports except for 1972 73 and 1973 74 were good and quite satisfactory.
Even in the reports of the said years there was nothing to doubt his integrity.
He was punctual in attending to his work.
The reports for the years 1976 77 to 1980 81 speak in favour of the appellant and not against him.
A perusal of the said reports showed that there was nothing against him.
In these circumstances it was impossible to take the view that the appellant was liable to be compulsorily retired.
[470 E H] 3.
The resolution of the High Court recommending to the Government that the appellant should be compulsorily retired and the impugned order passed under Fundamental Rule 56(3)(a) are quashed.
The resolution of the High Court that the appellant was not fit for promotion to the cadre of District and Sessions Judges is also quashed.
[474 E]
