Paragraph 516 B of the Punjab Jail Manual provided inter alia that after a person sentenced to life imprisonment had undergone detention for the period specified in that paragraph together with remission earned, his case should be submitted to the State Government for consideration of his pre mature release.
In 1971 the State Government issued instructions laying down certain minimum period of actual detention to be undergone by a person sentenced to life imprisonment before his case for pre mature release could be considered by the State Government.
In 1976 the State Government issued further instructions that cases of life convicts whose death sentence had been commuted to life imprisonment should be considered for premature release only after completion of 14 years of actual imprisonment.
The petitioners, who claimed to have satisfied the requirements of para 516 B and thus become entitled to be considered for pre mature release under that paragraph, alleged that following the 1971 and 1976 instructions the jail authorities were not submitting their cases to the State Government for consideration of their pre mature release.
The petitioners contended that para 516 B was a statutory rule and the subsequent executive instructions issued in 1971 and 1976 could not amend or alter the statutory rule thereby adversely affecting their rights under Para 516 B. Dismissing the five petitions and allowing two petitions, ^ HELD: A sentence of imprisonment for life is a sentence for the remainder of the natural life of the convict and there is no question releasing such a convict earlier in the absence of a formal order of commutation passed by the State Government either under sec.
55, IPC.
or sec.
433 (b) of Cr.
P.C. 1973 and that even the Remission Rules, though statutory, cannot over ride the statutory provisions contained in the Penal Code.
Admittedly, in the case of none of the petitioners before the Court has any order of commutation been passed by the State Government under either of the said provisions.
[746E F] 742 Pandit Kishori Lal AIR 1945 PC.
64; Gopal Godse ; ; Maru Ram; , and Kartor singh ; ; referred to.
Para 516.B of the manual itself contained executive instructions and had no force of a statutory rule.
If that be so it would always be open to the State Government from time to time to alter or amend or even withdraw such executive instructions by issuing fresh instructions.
But once fresh instructions for processing the cases for lifers for pre mature release are issued these must be uniformly and invariably applied to all cases of lifers so as to avoid the charge of discrimination under article 14 of the Constitution.
[748E F] In Naranjan Singh 's case (which decision is subject matter of challenge in criminal appeal arising from leave being granted in SLP (Crl.) No. 499 of 1983) the fact that the State Government had issued the 1971 instruction which substituted Para 516 B of the manual was not properly placed before the High Court and in the absence of such proper material the High Court took the view that the convict 's case for pre mature release was required to be considered in the light of the provisions of Para 516 B.
The view of the High Court cannot obviously be accepted.
[748G H] The contention of the petitioners that the State had been erroneously making a distinction between cases of prisoners who had been sentenced to death but whose sentences, on mercy petitions, had been commuted to life imprisonment and prisoners who had been straightaway sentenced to life imprisonment in the matter of consideration of their cases for pre mature release, must fail in view of the admitted position that cases of prisoners who have been sentenced to death but whose sentence on mercy petitions has been commuted to life imprisonment (who constitute a distinct class) will now be governed by the 1976 Instructions.
The view of the High Court in the case of Mehar Singh vs State of Punjab (not reported) that the 1976 instructions will not be applicable to cases of prisoners convicted earlier to that date is not tenable.
Clearly existing cases of life convict 's falling within that category will be governed by those instructions.
[749A C]
