On February 2, 1966, the Respondent No. 1, B. A. Jayaram had been granted by the Regional Transport Authority, Bangalore, a stage carriage permit on the inter state route Guddapah in the State of Andhra Pradesh to Bangalore in the Karnataka State, which was duly countersigned by the State Transport Authority, Andhra Pradesh.
On 10.1 1968, the Mysore (Karanataka) State granted its approval under section 68(D)(2) of the Motor Vehicle Act, 1939, to a scheme, popularly known as the "Kolar Pocket Scheme", to nationalize passenger transport service between Bangalore and various places in the Kolar District, as also certain routes within the Kolar District, covering 87 inter state routes referred to in its appendix.
Under clause 4 of the "Kolar Pocket Scheme", the existing permit holders on the inter state routes, were permitted to continue to operate such inter state routes subject to the conditions that their permit shall be rendered ineffective for the overlapping portions of the notified routes.
The route between Bangalore and Royal pad in the State of Karnataka formed part of the route between Bangalore and Cuddapah and was covered by the Scheme, with the result that the First Respondent 's permit for the said portion of the Bangalore Cuddapah route became ineffective and consequent that the vehicles operated by him could not either pick up or set down passengers on the Bangalore Royalpad portion of the Bangalore Cuddapah route though they could traverse the said portion.
On January 24,1973, the first respondent made an application to the Second Respondent the Karnataka State Transport Authority for varying the conditions of the stage carriage permit granted to him by increasing the number of trips on the Bangalore Cuddappah route from one trip per day to two trips per day so as to eliminate one overnight halt at either of the two terminal.
The said application having been rejected, the First Respondent filed a writ petition No. 3360/74 which was allowed and a mandamus issued to the Second Respondent to dispose of the application in accordance with law holding that the said Scheme did not ope 769 rate as a bar to increasing the number of trips on an existing inter state route.
The Second Respondent accordingly invited representation in connection therewith.
In the meantime, the Appellant the Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation, filed on November 27, 1974 a writ petition No. 6399/74 to recall the order made in the said writ petition No. 3360/74 and to rehear it after impleading the Appellant as a respondent thereto.
The writ petition was dismissed holding that the appellant was not a necessary party to writ petition No. 3360/74.
On December 23/24, 1974, the Second Respondent granted to the first respondent the additional trip applied for by him.
Against the order of dismissal of the W.P. 6399/74, the Appellant filed, an appeal No. WA 949/1979 under section 4 of the Karnataka High Court Act, 1961 (Mysore Act V of 1962).
On a reference by the Division Bench, the Full Bench by its Judgment delivered on September 19, 1979, opined that "If the condition of a permit for operating a stage carriage over a route is altered by increasing the maximum number of trips over that route specified earlier in the permit such variation of the condition of the permit does not amount to grant of a ner permit".
The Third Respondent who had been granted three stage carriage permits on three different inter state routes, namely, Bangalore to Cuddapah, Bangalore Kalabasti, and Bangalore to Vellore applied on June 11, 1979 to the Second Respondent for varying the conditions of the said three permits by increasing the number of vehicles by an additional vehicle on each route and by increasing the number of trips from two to four on each route, that is for two round trips, which were granted.
The Fourth respondent who did not file any objection to the applications of the Third Respondent filed three writ petitions being writ petitions Nos.
16247 16249 of 1979 in the High Court against the said orders of variations of the Third Respondent 's permits.
The writ petitions having been dismissed he preferred three appeals being W.A. Nos.
1285 87/1979 and an application to implead himself as a respondent in WA No.949/74 filed by the appellant, though he had never objected to the grant of the variation to the First Respondent earlier.
The writ appeals were dismissed on 22.2.1980.
His application to implead himself as a respondent to the said Writ Appeal No. 949/79 was granted.
The Fourth Respondent thereafter filed three special leave petitions Nos.
5141 43 of 1979 against the order dated 22.2.1980 dismissing his appeals.
He has also filed another special leave petition No. 4771/80 against the Judgment in W.A. No. 949/74 by virtue of his having been allowed to be impleaded by the High Court of Karnataka as third respondent thereto though it was not all necessary since in the writ appeal No. 949 of 1974 which was dismissed on 22.2.1980, the Karnataka High Court granted to the appellant a certificate of fitness to appeal to the Supreme Court.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1: 1.
Section 57(8) of the does not create a legal fiction and grant of an application for variations in the conditions of a permit in respect of matter set out in section 57(8) does not result in the grant of a new permit.
Admittedly the language of sub section (8) is not one which is normally used by legislatures in creating a legal fiction for sub.s.
(8) does not state that an application of the nature referred in that sub section is to be deemed to be an application for the grant of a new permit.
[787D E] 1: 2.
Section 57 is a procedural section.
Its various sub sections form 770 an integral whole providing for the manner in which an application for variation of certain conditions of a permit is to be made, the mode of inviting objections thereto and the disposal of such applications and objections.
[787E F] 1: 3.
Reading sub section (8) in the context of sub sections (3) to (7) and in juxtaposition with them, it is clear that the legislative instant in enacting that sub section was to prescribe the procedure to be followed when an application for variation of the conditions of a permit referred to in that sub section is made, this procedure being the same as is laid down in sub sections (3) to (7) with respect to an application for a new stage carriage permit or a new public carrier 's permit.
It is for the purpose of providing that the procedure to be followed in the case of an application made under sub sections (8) is to be the same as the procedure to be followed in the case of an application for a new permit that sub section (8) uses the words "shall be treated as an application for the grant of a new permit.
" By the use of these words what sub section (8) does is to incorporate in it the provisions of sub sections (3) to (7).
This is a very different thing from enacting a legal fiction.
[787B D] East Eng.
Dwelling Co. Ltd. vs Finsbury Borough Council, [1951] 2 All.
E.R. p. 587, 589 H.L.; quoted with approval.
State of Bombay vs Pandurang Vinayak Chaphalkar and others.
[1953] S.C.R. p. 773, 778 9; M/s. Shivchand Amolokchand vs Regional Transport Authority and Anr.
[1984] I S.C.R. 288=A.I.R. ; followed.
Assuming that the application for variation of the conditions of a permit referred to in sub section (8) of section 57 is to be deemed to be by a fiction of law to be an application for a new permit, the question to be considered is for what purpose is such an application to be deemed to be an application for grant of a new permit.
Reading sub sections (3) to (8) of section 57 as a whole, it is clear that the only purpose is to apply to such an application for variation the procedure prescribed by sub sections (3) to (7) of section 57 and not for the purpose of providing that when the application for variation is granted, the permit so varied would be deemed to be a new permit.
If the permit so varied were to be deemed to be a new permit, the result would be anomalous.
[789A C] Ex parte Walton, In Re Levy ; 756 CA; Arthur Hill vs East and West Dock Co. , 456; The Bengal Immunity Co. Ltd. vs The State of Bihar and others, 647; The Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay City, Bombay vs Amarchand N. Shroff [1963] Supp.
I S.C.R. 699, 709; Maharani Madalasa Devi vs M. Ramnarayan (P) Ltd. and others; , , 424; Commissioner of Income tax, Gujarat vs Vadialal Lalubhai, ; , 1064; referred to.
In the case of an existing inter state permit exempted under the said Scheme an increase in the number of trips or the number of vehicles allowed to he operated under such a permit would not be inconsistent with the provision of the said Scheme.
There is no inconsistency between an increase in the number of vehicles or trips allowed under such a permit and the provisions of the said scheme.
So far as the portions of the interstate route covered by the said scheme are concerned, the permits of the existing permit holders have been 771 rendered ineffective.
Further by the said Scheme as notified by a notification dated January 10, 1980, the existing permit holders are not allowed to pick up or set down passengers on these portions of the notified routes.
Whether one vehicle or more traverse these portions or whether the same vehicle traverses such portion more than once cannot in any manner affect the services operated by the Appellant on such portions since no passengers are allowed to be picked up or set down on such portions All that would happen is that these vehicles, in the source of their inter state operation would traverse these portions of the notified routes without in any way operating as stage carriages for such portion .
[790C F]
