Eight officers including the appellants entered the class II service in accordance with tho Punjab Service of Engineers class II, P.W.D. (Buildings and Roads Branch) Rules, 1965.
They are all holders of diplomas in Engineering.
They were promoted alongwith nine others from the class II service to the class I service by an order dated May 7, 1981, passed by the Haryana State Government on a temporary basis subject to approval of the Haryana Public Service Commission.
In the case of these officers, the Government of Haryana passed an order relaxing the condition of degree qualification in public interest.
The above orders of promotion in so far as these persons were concerned were questioned by eleven officers in the class II service, who were below them in the gradation list of the class II service having entered that service in 1972 in the writ petition out of which these appeals arise.
The officers who filed the said petition were all holders of degrees in Engineering.
Their principal contention was that an officer in the class II service could not be promoted to the class I service unless he possessed a degree in Engineering as prescribed by Rule 6(a) of the Punjab Service of Engineers, class I, P.W.D, (Buildings and Roads Branch) Rules, 1960 which governed the recruitment to the class I service in the State of Haryana and the relaxation of that requirement alleged to have been ordered by the State Government in exercise of the power under the tho proviso to Rule 6 (a) in the case of the officers whose promotions had been challenged was illegal and void.
The Punjab & Haryana High Court accepted the said contention and dismissed the petition.
Hence the appeals after obtaining special leave of the Court, Allowing the appeals the Court, ^ HELD: 1.1.
A degree is not a pre requisite for being promoted from the class II service to the class I service.
[493 D] 477 1.2.
A comparison between the 1956 Rules and the 1964 Rules makes it A clear that there was no insistence upon the qualification of a degree in the said 1956 Rules in the case of the promotees from the class II service.
When the 1964 Rules of the Irrigation Branch, class I were promulgated, the pattern of the Rules was changed.
While doing so, in the new Rule 6, the word "directly" which was in the old Rule 7 was no doubt omitted but the new Rule 6 referred to both kinds of appointment namely direct recruitment and promotion from the class II service.
It was not a case of just reproducing the old Rule 7 and omitting one word therefrom, but the introduction of a new Rule 6 with a different structure.
[493A B] O.P. Bhatia & Anr.
vs State of Haryana & Ors.
, ILR[1980]1 Punjab & Haryana 470.
Overruled.
In these cases, the State Government having first consumed Rule 6 of the class I Rules required that a promotee should also have a degree, tried to relax that condition by making orders relaxing as it found that its construction had led to injust results.
In view of the fact that the question of interpretation of New Rule 6 of the class I Rules was raised, and service Rule 6 (a) of the class I Rules is not applicable to the class II officers who are to be promoted to the class I service, the question whether the order of relaxation made in the case of promotees is validly passed or not becomes non est.
[493 E; 494B] 2.1.
It is indisputable that if the Government wishes to appoint only holders or degrees to the class I service, it may do so by promulgating appropriate rules.
That power is beyond question, and classification on the basis of educational qualifications of officers belonging to a cadre for purposes of promotion to a higher cadre is permissible.
But, the class I Rules as they now exist do not debar the promotion of an Assistant Engineer in the class II service who does not possess a degree to the cadre of Executive Engineers even when he satisfies the requirements of clause (b) of Rule 6 of the class I Rules and is selected by the Public Service Commission.
[493 G H] 2.2.
Rule 6 of the class I Rules treats the possession of a degree plus the selection at the competitive examination and the passing of the departmental examination af ter appointment as sufficient for getting into the cadre of Assistant Executive Engineers or to the cadre of Executive Engineers when direct recruitment is made to those posts and the experience in the class II Service for a minimum period of eight years plus the passing of the departmental examinations before promotion of an Assistant Engineer in the Class II Service as sufficient qualification for promotion to the cadre of Executive Engineers.
[487 E F] 2.3 The distinction between the two methods of filling the posts of Executive Engineer by promotion is clear.
If that post is to be filled up by promoting an Assistant Executive Engineer, the Assistant Executive Engineer, concerned should possess five years experience and should have passed the Departmental Examination prescribed by Rule 15 of the Class I Rules.
If that post is to be filled up by promotion of an Assistant Engineer in the class II Service, the Assistant Engineer to be promoted should possess eight years experience in the Class II Service and should have passed the Departmental Examination prescribed by Rule 15.
That means that whereas an Assistant Executive Engineer who is a holder of a degree needs have only five years ' experience in the Public Works Department, an Assistant Engineer in the Class [ [ Service who may or may not possess a degree should have eight years ' experience in the Public Works Department for being promoted to the cadre of 478 Executive Engineers.
This extra experience of three years appears to have been treated as being sufficient to make good the deficiency, if any, that may arise by reason of the Assistant Engineer in the Class II Service possessing only a. diploma and nota degree.
[487 H; 488 A C] 2.4.
In the circumstances it could not have been the intention of the rule making authority that no person without a degree should be allowed to enter the Class I Service.
If the construction placed by the petitioners in the writ petition and the Government is accepted every diploma holder who is an Assistant Engineer would have to retire only as a Class II officer and cannot hope to become an Executive Engineer till his retirement.
If that was the intention, Rule 6 (b) of the Class I Rules would have contained necessary words conveying that meaning.
Clause (b) of Rule 6 appears to be exhaustive of the qualifications of the Assistant Engineers who can seek promotion from the Class II Service to the Class I Service So Rule 6 of the Class I Rules will read in so far as the promotees are concerned as 'no person shall be appointed to the Service unless in the case of an appointment by promotion has eight years completed service in Class II and has passed the professional Examination of the department as provided in Rule 1 S" and clause (a) of Rule 6 should be read as being applicable to the other mode of recruitment.
[490 B D] 3.
In such a case, it cannot be said that the expertness of the Class I Service would very much suffer if persons without degrees but with only diplomas are allowed to get into it.
In administrative and professional services a combination of high educational qualifications and long experience is always preferred so that the services may be efficient by each of them supplementing the other.
Experienced administrators have opined that in the higher cadres of services high educational qualifications alone or long experience alone would not be in the interests of the public.
In order to see that there is no lack of proficiency in the higher post in the Class I Service, Rule S(2) of the Class I Rules expressly provides that recruitment to the Service shall be so regulated that the number of posts filled by promotion from the Class IT Service shall not exceed fifty per cent of the number of posts in the Class I Service excluding the posts of Assistant Executive Engineers.
It provides for a healthy blend of the two classes.
The effect of Rule S(2) is that more than fifty per cent of the Class I Service posts would always be held by direct recruits because the strength of promotees from the Class II Service cannot be more than fifty per cent of the total strength of the class I Service minus the number of Assistant Executive Engineers.
The promotees from the Class II Service will, therefore, always be less than fifty per cent of the total strength of the Class I Service.
Even amongst them 26 out of 40 are graduates because of Rule 6 of the Class II Rules which prescribes the quota of direct recruits who should always be the holders of degrees.
So diploma holders who may get into the Class I Service by promotion will be only 14 out of 40 promotees.
Therefore it cannot be said that the 28 diploma holders with the minimum length of experience prescribed by clause (b) of Rule 6 of the Class I Rules who are selected by the Public Service commission on the basis of merit and suitability (see Rule 8 (43 of the Class I Rules) and with the educational qualifications they may possess as prescribed by the Class II Rules would dilute the Class I Service so much that the efficiency of the Class I Service would go down to such an extent that the Class I Service will become unequal to the tasks to be performed collectively by the entire service.
Further, if a Class II officer is found wanting in merit and is otherwise unsuitable, he would not be selected by the Public Service Commission.
This is not like a nurse in an operation the atre carrying out surgery.
Nor is it like a laboratory assistant teaching stro physics.
[488D H; 489A B;F G] 479
