The appellants and the petitioners were assessees registered as dealers under the Jammu and Kashmir General Sales Tax Act, 1962.
They filed their quarterly returns within the time prescribed by the Act but without paying the tax duo according to such returns.
Some of them also filed revised returns thereafter.
The tax due was paid by the assessees after several months and in some cases by instalments.
In a few cases, the full amount of tax was not paid even by the date the assessment orders came to be made.
In the case of most of the Assessees the Assessing Authority levied penalty under sub section (2) of section 8 of the Act before making any assessment.
In other cases, orders requiring interest to be paid were made along with the assessment orders.
The assessees who were appellants in this Court, had filed writ Petitions in the High Court challenging the validity of section 8 of the Act under which interest was sought to be recovered as also the demand for payment of interest.
The High Court dismissed the Writ Petitions.
In the Appeals and Writ Petitions to this Court the assessees were: (a) dealers who had filed their returns but had not deposited the full amount of tax due according to such returns, and the Assessing 859 Authority, having accepted the returns, had issued a composite notice of demand calling up them to pay the amount of tax along with interest due on it, (b) dealers who had filed their returns but had paid the tax due according to such returns after the expiry of the prescribed time and in whose cases the Assessing Authority had accepted the returns and had issued a notice of demand asking them to pay interest on the amount of tax for the period for which such payment was delayed, and (c) dealers who had filed their returns but had not paid the amount of tax due according to such returns by the prescribed time but had paid it later and notices were issued against them calling upon them to pay interest for the period of default before making any order of assessment.
It was contended on their behalf that: (1) The charging of interest from the assessees was violative of Article 265 of the Constitution as there was no legislative power in the State Legislature to make a law providing for payment of interest if the amount of tax was not paid by the prescribed time, and, for this reason, the provisions of section 8 of the Act in so far as they provide for payment of such interest are beyond the legislative competence of the State Legislature and, therefore unconstitutional.
(2) Sub section (2) of section 8 of the Act was void as infringing Article 14 of the Constitution because its provisions are discriminatory, arbitrary and unreasonable.
(3) The Assessees carried on business on credit basis and as by the dates when they filed their quarterly returns their customers had not paid to them the price of goods sold to them, the Assessees were not bound to pay tax along with their returns but were bound to pay tax in respect of these transactions of sales only when the amount of sale price was received by them from their customers.
(4) In some cases, the amount of interest claimed from the Assessees exceeded the amount of tax paid by them and, therefore, the demand for such excess amount of interest was bad in law.
(5) The Assessees were not liable to pay interest on the amount of tax not paid in time without a notice of demand for payment of tax being first issued.
(6) Interest was levied by the Assessing Authority for the entire 860 period of default at the maximum rate prescribed by sub section (2) of section 8 which was contrary to the provisions of that sub section.
^ HELD : The constitutionality of sub section (1), (2) and (3) of section 8 of the Jammu and Kashmir General Sales Tax Act 1962 upheld.
The State however restrained from recovering from the Assessees, interest on the amount of quarterly tax paid after the expiry of the date prescribed for payment by sub section (3) of section 8 of the Act at a rate other than the rate of one per cent per month for the first three months of default and at the rate of two per cent per month for the next three months of default and at the rate of three per cent for the period of default exceeding six months.
[881 G H; 882A] 1.
(i) The Constitution af India, does not apply in its entirety to the State of Jammu and Kashmir because that State holds a special position in the Constitutional set up of the country.
Article 370 makes special provisions with respect to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
Under sub clause (c) of clause (1) of Article 370 the provisions of Articles 1 and 370 apply in relation to the State of Jammu and Kashmir and under sub clause (d) of clause (1) of Article 370 such of the other provisions of the Constitution apply in relation to that State subject to such exceptions and modifications as the President may specify by an order issued with the concurrence of the Government of the State.
In exercise of the power conferred by clause (1) of Article 370 the President of India, with the concurrence of the Government of the State of Jammu and Kashmir, has made the Constitution (Application to Jammu and Kashmir) Order, 1954 (C. O. 48) which was amended from time to time.
The provisions of the Constitution of India as in force on June 20, 1964.
and as amended by the Constitution Amendment Acts set out in clause (2) of that Order apply in relation to the State of Jammu and Kashmir subject to the exceptions and modifications set out in the said clause.
By sub clause (6) (a) of clause (2) of the said Presidential Order, Clause (1) of Article 246 of the Constitution of India was made applicable to the State of Jammu and Kashmir with certain modifications, while clause (3) of Article 246 was not made applicable to the State.
Sub clause (22) of clause 2 of the said Presidential Order applies List I in the Seventh Schedule to the State of Jammu and Kashmir with the omissions and modifications mentioned in the said sub clause.
Entries 92 and 92A of List I apply to the State of Jammu and Kashmir in an unmodified form.
By the same sub clause, List II in the Seventh Schedule, namely, the State List, does not apply to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
[870G H; 871A B] (ii) Thus under section 5 of the Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir the executive and legislative power of the State extends to all matters with respect to which Parliament has power to make laws for the State under the provisions of the Constitution of India under the Constitutional provisions applicable to the State of Jammu and Kashmir, the power of the State Legislature to enact a law relating to taxes on intra State sale or purchase of goods is the same as that of the Legislatures of other States in India.
By sub clause (7) of clause 2 of the said Order, Article 265 is made applicable to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
Section 114 of the Constitution of 861 Jammu and Kashmir is in terms identical with Article 265 of the Constitution of India which provides that "No tax shall be levied or collected except by authority of law." [871B D] (iii) The power to make a law with respect to tax comprehends within it the power to levy that tax and to determine the persons who are liable to pay such tax, the rates at which such tax is to be paid and the event which will attract liability in respect of such tax.
This is done by the charging sections of the particular tax law.
The taxing power of the state will also comprehend within it the power to provide for quantification of the liability of persons made liable to pay the tax.
This is done by the provisions relating to assessment.
The taxing power will also comprehend within it the power to provide for collection of tax including prescribing the methods of recovery of the amount of tax due if the person liable to pay the tax does not voluntarily pay it.
The power to make a law with respect to a tax includes not only what has been set out above but also a power to make provisions in the relevant statute with respect to all matters ancillary and incidental to the levy, assessment, collection and recovery of tax.
Collection of tax by the State may be either after the liability is quantified by assessment or may be prior to actual assessment by requiring the assessee to pay before any assessment is made the amount of tax admitted to be due and payable by him.
[872B E] Whitney vs Commissioners of Inland Revenue, , T. C. 79, 110; Chatturam and others vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Bihar (1947) F.C.R.116, 126; , 308; Messrs Chatturam Horilram Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Bihar and Orissa, , 297 8; , 715 6 referred to.
(iv) One of the methods of collection of revenue adopted by the Act, is to require that tax due according to the quarterly returns should be paid before filing such returns and it was within the legislative competence of the Legislature of the State of Jammu and Kashmir to provide for recovery of the amount of tax due under quarterly returns if default is made in paying such amount by the prescribed time.
[872H; 873A] (v) Payment of interest in case of default in payment of tax is a means of compelling an assessee to pay the tax due by the prescribed date.
It is a mode of recovery of tax and well within the legislative power of the State.
[873C] 2.
(i) Inter State trade and commerce is a matter which affects all the States in India and thus the whole country.
It is for this reason that in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution the subject of taxes on the sale or purchase of goods taking place in the course of inter State trade or commerce has been put in List I and made a Union subject.
Taxes on the sale or purchase of goods taking place within the State affect only those who carry on the business of buying and selling goods within the State and, therefore, this subject has been put in List II of Seventh Schedule, namely the State List.
[874C D] 862 (ii) Sales tax is the biggest source of revenue for a State and it is for the State to decide how and in what manner it will raise this revenue and to determine which particular transactions of sale or purchase of goods taking place within that State should be taxed and at what rates.
and which particular transactions of sale or purchase of goods should be exempted from tax or taxed at a lower rate having regard to the subject matter of sale, as for instance, where particular goods constitute necessities for the poorer classes of people or where the goods in question are of such a nature as are required to be exempted from tax or taxed at a lower rate in order to encourage a local industry.
Consideration of these matters must, therefore, differ from State to State.
Similarly it is for the each State to determine the methods it will adopt to collect its revenue from this source and to decide which methods would be most efficacious for this purpose.
If the provisions of the legislation of every State on a particular topic are to be identical in every respect, there is no purpose in including that topic in the State List and it may as well be included in the Union List.
Merely because the provisions of a State law differ from the provisions of other State laws on the same subject cannot make such provisions discriminatory.
[874D G] (iii) Interest is payable under sub section (2) of section 8 on the amount of tax paid after the expiry of the prescribed date of payment.
The rate of two per cent per month and particularly the rate of three per cent per month can be said to be on the high side, but this would not render the provisions of that sub section void or unconstitutional.
Providing for payment of interest in case of delayed payment of tax is a method usually adopted in fiscal legislation to ensure that the amount of tax which is due is paid by the prescribed time and provisions in that behalf form part of the recovery machinery provided in a taxing statute.
It is for the State to provide by what means payment of tax is to be enforced and a person who does not pay the amount of tax lawfully and admittedly due by him can hardly complain of the measures adopted by the State to compel him to pay such amount.
[875A C] (iv) Under the Act, the same rates of interest apply both to the dealer who has made default in payment of tax due by him and to the State Government in case of default made by it in making payment of the amount of tax or penalty which has become refundable as a result of an appellate or revisional order.
The graduated rate of interest provided by sub section (2) of section 8 cannot, therefore be characterised as arbitrary or unreasonable.
[875F G] 3.
(i) Under the Act, the liability to pay sales tax is cast upon the dealer.
This is made clear by sections 4,6, and clauses (G), (L) (1), (L) (II), and (n) of section 2.
It is immaterial whether the price of goods has been paid to the dealer or is payable to him.
The fact that a dealer has sold goods on credit is, therefore, wholly immaterial.
This liability is irrespective of the fact whether the dealer has made profit or loss in his business and whether he has received the sale price or not.
[876H; 877A B] (ii) Section 64 A of the does not deal with the liability of the seller to pay sales tax to the Government.
[878E] 863 In the instant case, the Assessees were bound to pay the tax due according to the quarterly returns filed by them before filing such returns and the fact that their customers had not paid to them the sale price did not exempt them from their statutory liability.
[878G] 4.
The recovery provisions of the Act are meant for speedy and prompt collection of revenue.
These provisions are not meant for the benefit of defaulting tax payers and such defaulters cannot claim that the amount of interest payable by them on delayed tax payment should be scaled down as if they were entitled to claim relief under a debt relief law.
[879 B C] 5.
Under sub section 8 (1) the tax assessed or any other amount demanded is to be paid within the time specified in the notice of demand.
Under sub section (3), the quarterly tax is to be paid before furnishing the quarterly return but not later than the date prescribed under sub section (2) of section 7.
Accordingly the requirement of sub section (2) of section 8 that interest will be chargeable from the date specified for payment in the notice of demand cannot be applied to the payment of quarterly tax and necessary alterations as required by sub section (8) so section 8 will, therefore have to be made in the provisions of sub section (2) in their application to a default made in payment of quarterly tax and sub section (2) must be read as providing that interest under sub section (2) will become payable from the date prescribed by sub section (3) of section 8 for payment of quarterly tax.
[880B F] Messrs Royal Boot House etc.
vs State of Jammu and Kashmir and others.
C.M.P. Nos. 32413 and 32414 of 1983 decided on January 6, 1984 by P. N. Bhagvati, Ag.
C. J. and Venkataramiah and Varadarajan, JJ.
referred to.
Sub section (2) of section 8 of the Act provides for different rates of interest depending upon the length of the period of default.
[881D] In the instant cases, interest on the amount of quarterly tax not paid in time has been imposed at a uniform rate for the full period of default and not according to the scale of rates prescribed by sub section (2) of section 8.
[881 B]
