While computing the net wealth of the respondent assessee for purposes of wealth tax assessment under the Wealth Tax Act, 1957, the wealth tax officer included certain amount as the value of the assessee 's right to compensation which had accrue;! to him on vesting of his estate in the State of Bihar under the Bihar Land Reforming Act, 1950 on the basis of market value on the valuation date.
This was contested by the assessee on the ground that after adjusting his outstanding agricultural income tax liability the compensation payable to him was nil.
The assessee also produced Collector 's letter to show that the amount of compensation receivable by the assessee would be nil.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner agreed with the view of the Wealth Tax officer.
In appeal before the Tribunal the assessee contended that the unpaid agricultural income tax as a debt WAS deductible while computing his net wealth.
The Tribunal accepting the Revenue 's contention held that the amounts claimed by the assessee were not deductible as a debt under s.2(m) as the arrears of agricultural income tax were outstanding for more than twelve months.
On a reference being made, a Full Bench of the High Court was of the opinion that the market value of the right of the assessee to receive ad interim compensation should be determined in view of the provisions of s.4(c) of the Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950 and held that in the facts and circumstances of the case as nothing was receivable by the assessee from the State of Bihar in view of the arrears of agricultural income tax, the value of the asset to the assessee was nil.
635 Hence this appeal.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: For computing net wealth under s.2(m) of the Wealth Tax Act, 1957 there are two different steps.
The first and essential step would be to estimate the value of the assets in accordance with the provisions of the Act and the second step would be to deduct therefrom the debts owed by the assessee except the debts excluded by that section.
For estimating the value of the assets the material provision would be $7(1) of the Act which enjoins the Wealth Tax officer to estimate the price which, in his opinion, an asset other than cash would fetch if sold in the open market on the valuation date.
The Wealth Tax officer must take into account any factor which detracts from the value of an asset which a willing purchaser would Pay for buying that asset in open market.
[643 B C] C Section 4 of the Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950 deals with the consequences of the vesting of all estate or tenure in the State and stipulates different consequence Clause (c) of s.4 provides that the arrears of revenue and cesses remaining lawfully due in respect of the estate or tenure shall continue to be recoverable in spite of the vesting of the estate and shall without prejudice to any other mode of recovery, be recoverable, when so ordered by the Collector by the deduction thereof from the amount payable.
[643 G H] In the instant case , the possibility of deduction of the dues of the assessee for agricultural income tax under s.4(c) of the Bihar Land Reforms Act from the compensation money is a factor that affects price or value of the compensation money receivable by the assessee under the Bihar Land Reforms Act and until it has been finally determined that no arrears Of agricultural income tax is payable at all, will remain a hindrance and the value of which must be qualified and deducted before a proper estimate of the value of the asset money receivable by the assesses is prepared.
Except in cases where the question of arrears of agricultural income tax is settled, this is a factor which goes to the domination of the value of the asset.
To what extent that would affect the value of the asset is a matter of quantification.
The court is not concerned with the question of actual qualification.
The Court is concerned with the question whether 'that factor is a matter which has to be taken into consideration in estimating the value of the asset is a matter of qualification.
The court b. Of the opinion that it is a factor certainly to be taken into consideration in estimating what it would fetch in the open market.
[644 H; 645 A C] The contention that a debt which is not deductible because of provisions ' of s.2(m) should not be taken into consideration in estimating, the value of an asset is not acceptable in the facts and circumstances of this case.
[645 F]
