In connection with the execution of a World Bank Project on an emergency basis, which was required to be completed within a short time, the Public Works Department of the State needed a number of mechanical overseers.
Since at that time there was acute shortage of qualified overseers the Department had appointed, as overseers on provisional basis against the sanctioned posts, certain persons who were working in the department as sub overseers even though they had only appeared in the diploma examination in engineering but had not yet passed it.
In the meantime, the respondents (petitioners before the High Court) were selected by a Selection Committee constituted in accordance with he procedure laid down in Bihar Public Works Department Code.
After they passed the diploma examination the Chief Engineer had in 1964 appointed the appellants (contesting respondents before the High Court) as temporary overseers against the sanctioned posts from the date of publication of results of the diploma examination.
In 1973, a gradation list was prepared and some of the appellants were subsequently promoted to higher posts.
The respondents in a writ petition filed in the High Court had impugned the order of the Chief Engineer appointing the appellants reproductively as overseers on the ground that while they were appointed after following the procedure prescribed under the rules, the appellants at the time of their appointment as overseers were neither qualified to be appointed as overseers nor were they selected by a Selection Committee constituted under the rules and that in any event the appellants could not be appointed with retrospective effect.
Secondly, though the appellants shown as seniors to the respondents by the Chief Engineer 's orders of 1964, the appellants were in fact junior to them and that their later promotion was improper.
The High Court held that the Public Works Department Code in accordances with which the respondents were recruited directly contained merely departmental instructions and had not acquitted statutory force and that, therefore, the appointment of the appellants could not be held to be invalid on the ground that the department had no power to make retrospective appointments.
It however held that the revised gradation list, showing the appellants above the respondents, on the basis of the 1964 orders was bad in law.
Consequently, the High Court quashed that part of the two orders which had fixed the date of publication of the result of diploma examination as the commencement of length of service of temporary overseers.
599 In appeal to this Court is was contended on behalf of the appellants that since the executive power of the State is co extensive with its legislative power, in the absence of a statutory rule framed under Article 309 of the Constitution, it was open to the executive, in exercise of its executive power under article 162 of the Constitution, to make appointment to meet the exigencies of a situation.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: The impugned order of 1964 which purported to appoint the sub overseers as temporary overseers from the date of publication of their result of diploma examination are clearly violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution inasmuch as the respondents had already been appointed as overhears by a Selection Committee constituted under the rules contained in the public Works Department Code.
The 1964 order making the temporary appointments conferred national seniority on the appellants for the period they are actually working as sub overseers in the lower scales outside the cadre of overseers.
The impugned orders may not have resulted in reduction of rank but yet they did affect the seniority of the respondents which eventually might result in reducing their chances for promotion.
[613 D F] There is no gain saying the fact that the executive power of the State is co extensive with the legislative power and that it is not necessary that there should be a law in existence before the executive is enabled to function and the power of the executive is limited merely to the carrying out of the laws.
There is nothing in terms of Article 309 which abridges the powers of the executive to act under Article 162 of the Constitution without a law but yet if there is a statutory rule or an Act on a matter the exercise of its executive power under article 162, ignore or act contrary to that Rule or Act. [609 B C] B.N. Nagarajan & Ors.
vs State of Mysore & Ors.
; Ram Jawaya Kapur vs State of Punjab ; Rajendra Narain Singh & Ors.
vs State of Bihar & Ors.
; ; S.B. Patwardhan 's case ; and R.N. Nanjundappa vs T. Thimmiah & Anr.[1972] 2 SCR 799, referred to.
