The appellant tenant was inducted into the suit premises as for back as 1945.
The respondent landlord applied under section 19 (1) (a) of the Slum Areas Improvement and Clearance) Act 1956 before the Competent Authority for permitting him to institute a suit for eviction of the appellant but that application was dismissed, and the order was confirmed in appeal by the Financial Commissioner.
Thereafter the respondent field a suit for eviction in April 1979 under section 14 (1) (e) read with section 25B of the Delhi Rent Control Act 1958.
The tenant applied for leave to defend the suit but the same was rejected and an order of eviction was passed.
A revision filed by the tenant in the High Court was dismissed.
In the appeal to this Court as well as in the connected Special Leave Petition it was contended that: (1) under section 19 (1) (a) of the Slum Act it is incumbent on the landlord to obtain permission from the Competent Authority before institution of a suit for evicting a tenant and without such permission the suit was no maintainable, and (2) sections 25A and 25B were ultra vires of Article 14 of the Constitution and were inconsistent with the Slum Act which was an existing statute and, therefore, the procedure substituted under Chapter IIIA, particularly sections 25A and 25B should be invalidated.
Dismissing the Appeal and Special Leave Petition: 615 ^ HELD: A.(1) The High Court was correct in rejecting the applications of the tenants for setting aside the order of eviction.
[624F]] B.(1) Sections 14A, 25A, 25B and 25C of the Rent Act are special provisions so far as the landlord and tenant are concerned and in view of the non obstante clause these provisions override the existing law so far as the new procedure is concerned; [624A] (2) There is no difference either on principle or in law between sections 14 (1)(e) and 14A of the Rent Act even though these two provisions relate to eviction of tenants under different situations; [624B] (3) The procedure incorporated in Chapter IIIA of the Amending Act into the Rent Act is in public interest and is not violative of Article 14 of the Constitution; [624C] (4) In view of the procedure in Chapter IIIA of the Rent Act, the Slum Act is rendered inapplicable to the extent of inconsistency and it is not, therefore, necessary for the landlord to obtain permission of the Competent Authority under section 19 (1)(a) of the Slum Act before instituting a suit for eviction and coming within s.14 (1)(e) or 14A of the Rent Act.
[624D E] C.(1) The dominant object of the Amending Act of 1976 was to provide a speedy, expeditions and effect remedy for a class of landlords contemplated by sections 14(1)(e) and 14A and for avoiding unusual dilatory process provided otherwise by the Rent Act.
Suits for eviction under the Act take a long time commencing with the Rent Controller and ending up with the Supreme Court.
In many cases by the time the eviction decree became final several years elapsed and either the landlord died or the necessity which provided the cause of action disappeared.
It was this mischief which the legislature intended to avoid by incorporating the new procedure in Chapter IIIA.
It cannot therefore be said that the classification of such landlords would be an unreasonable one because such a classification has got a clear nexus with the objects of the Amending Act of 1976 and the purposes which it seeks to subserve.
[619D F; G] (2) The new sections 14A, 25A, 25B and 25C had been introduced for the purpose of meeting a particular contingency as spelt out in the object and reasons behind the new provisions.
Once it is recognised that the newly added sections are in the nature of a special law intended to apply to special classes of landlords, the inevitable conclusion would be that the application of the Slum Act stands withdrawn to that extent and any suit falling within the scope of sections 14(1)(e) and 14A would not be governed or controlled by section 19 (1) (a) of the Slum Act.
[621CD ] 616 (3) It is open to the legislature to pick out one class of the landlords out of several covered by section 14(1)(e) of the Rent Act so long as they formed a class by themselves and the legislature was free to provide the benefit of the special procedure to them in the matter of eviction of their tenants as long as the legislation had an object to achieve and the special, procedure had a reasonable nexus with such object to be secured.
[621F G] (4) The new provision in the Amending Act were intended to have overriding effect and all procedural laws were to give way to the new procedure.
[623D] Kewal Singh vs Lajwanti ; ; Sarwan Singh & Anr.
vs Kasturi Lal ; ; Vinod Kumar Chowdhry vs Narain Devi Taneja ; referred to.
Krishna Devi Nigam & Ors.
vs Shyam Babu Gupta & Ors. approved.
