The appellant, R.S. Nayak, filed a complaint against the respondent, A.R. Antualy, a public servant being the Chief Minister of Maharashtra State under sections 161, 165 I.P.C. and section 5 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 (1947 Act) alleging abuse of office of Chief Minister.
The complaint was rejected on account of absence of necessary sanction of the Governor of Maharashtra State under section 6 of the 1947 Act to prosecute the respondent.
After the Governor issued necessary sanction, the appellant filed a fresh complaint in the Court of Special Judge against the respondent on the same grounds.
However, on the date of filing fresh complaint the respondent had already resigned as Chief Minister.
The respondent contended that the Special Judge had no jurisdiction to try him under section 7 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952 and that no cognizance could be taken on private complaint.
The Special Judge rejected both the contentions.
In the meantime the State Government issued a notification under section 7(2) of the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1752 under which the case was transferred to another Special Judge.
In a criminal revision application filed by the respondent against the order of earlier 496 Special Judge, a Division Bench of the High Court held that the Social Judge had jurisdiction to try the respondent and that the private complaint was maintainable.
When the latter Special Judge proceeded with the case the respondent filed an application for his discharge on the grounds that the charge against him was baseless and that he being a Member of legislative Assembly (M.L.A) requisite sanction under section 6 of the 1947 Act was necessary.
The Special Judge discharged the respondent holding that the respondent being M.L.A was a public servant within section 21 (12)(a) of I.P.C. and hl the absence of the sanction of the Legislative Assembly he could not take cognizance of offence.
The Special Judge also held that.
the material date for deciding the applicability of section 6 of the 1947 Act was the date on which the Court was asked to take cognizance of the offence.
The appellant challenged the order of the Special Judge in this Appeal.
The questions which arose for consideration were: (a) That is the relevant date with reference to which a valid sanction is a pre requisite for the prosecution of a public servant for offences enumerated in section 6 of the 1947 Act ? (b) If the accuse holds several offices occupying each of which makes him a public servant, is sanction of each one of the competent authorities entitled to remove him from each one of the offices held by him necessary and if anyone of the competent authorities fails or declines to grant sanction, is the Court precluded or prohibited from taking cognizance of the offence with which the public servant is charged, or is it implicit in section 6 of the 1947 Act that sanction of that competent authority alone is necessary which is entitled to remove the public servant from the office which is alleged to have been abused or misused for corrupt motives ? (c) Is M.L.A. a public.
servant within the meaning of the expression in clauses 12(a), 3 and 7 of section 21 I.P.C. ? (d) Is sanction as contemplated by section 6 of the 1947 Act necessary for prosecution of M.L.A. and if so, which is the sanctioning authority competent to remove M.L.A. from the office of Member or the Legislative Assembly ? Allowing the appeal.
^ HELD: The provisions of the Act must receive such construction at the hands of the court as would advance the object and purpose underlying the Act and at any rate not defeat it.
If the words of the statute are clear and unambiguous, it is the plainest duty of the court to give effect to the natural meaning of the words used in the provisions.
In the event of an ambiguity of the plain meaning of the words used in the statute being self defeating, the court is entitled to ascertain the intention of the legislature to remove the ambiguity by construing the provision of the statute as a whole keeping in view what was the mischief when the statute was enacted and to remove which the legislature enacted the statute.
Whenever a question of construction arises upon ambiguity or where two views are possible of a Provision, it would be the duty of the court to adopt that construction which would advance the object underlying the Act.
[521 A C] The basic purpose underlying all canons of construction is the ascertainment 497 with reasonable certainty of the intention of Parliament in enacting the legislation.
A For this purpose why should the aids which Parliament availed of such as report of a special committee preceding the enactment, existing state of law, the environment necessitating enactment of legislation, and the object sought to be achieved, be denied to court whose function is primarily to give effect to the real intention of the Parliament in enacting the legislation.
Such denial would deprive the court of a substantial and illuminating aid to construction.
Therefore, departing from the earlier English decisions, the reports of the committee which preceded the enactment of a legislation, reports of Joint Parliamentary Committee report of a commission set up for collecting information leading to the enactment are permissible external aids to construction.
[527 A; D E] In construing a statute more especially the ancient statute, the court may look at the surrounding circumstances when the statute was enacted.
The construction of ancient statutes may be eludicated by what in the language of the courts is called contemporanea expositio, that is, by seeing how they were understood at the time when they were passed.
[528F G] Standard dictionaries as a rule give in respect of each word as many meanings in which the word has either been used or it is likely to be used in different contexts and connections.
While it may be permissible to refer to dictionaries to find out the meaning in which a word is capable of being used or understood in common parlance, the well known cannon of construction should not even for a minute be overlooked that the meaning to the words and expressions used in a statute ordinarily take their colour from the context in which they appear.
[539F G] Deputy Chief Controller of Imports & Exports New Delhi vs K.T. Kosalram Ors., ; at 517; and State Bank of India vs N. Sundara Money, ; , referred to.
Section 6 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 bars the courts from taking cognizance of the offences therein enumerated alleged to have been committed by a public servant except with the previous sanction of the competent authority empowered to grant the requisite sanction.
Therefore, when the court is called upon to take cognizance of such offences, it. must enquire whether there is a valid sanction to prosecute the public servant for the offence alleged to have been committed by him as public servant.
Undoubtedly the accused must be a public servant when he is alleged to have committed the offence of which he is accused because sections 161, 164, 165 I.P.C. and section 5(2) of.
the 1947 Act clearly spell out that the offences there in defined can be committed by a public servant.
A trial without a valid sanction where one is necessary under section 6 would be a trial without jurisdiction by the court.
It is well settled that the relevant date with reference to valid which a valid sanction is sine qua non for taking cognizance of an offence committed by a public servant as required by section 6 is the date when the court is called upon to take cognizance of the offence of which he is accused.
If, therefore, when the offence is alleged to have been committed, the accused was a public servant but by the time the court is called upon to take cognizance of the offence committed by him as public servant, he has cased to be a public servant, section 6 will not be attracted and no sanction would be necessary for taking cognizance of the offence against him.
This approach is in accord with the policy underlying s.6 in that a public servant is not to be exposed to harassment of a frivolous or speculative prosecution.
If he has ceased to be a public 498 servant in the meantime, this vital consideration ceases to exist.
[512D; H; 513 A E].
C.R. Bansi vs State of Maharashtra, [1971] 3 S.C.R. 236; R.R. Chari vs State of U.P., ; ; S.N. Bose vs State of Bihar, [1968] 3 S.C.R. Venkataraman vs The State. ; at 1052; K.S. Dharmaatan vs Central Government & Ors., ; , referred to.
In the instant case, long before the date on which the cognizance was taken by the Special Judge, the accused had ceased to hold the office of the Chief Minister and as such had ceased to be a public servant in his capacity as Chief Minister.
A fortiori no sanction as contemplated by section 6 was necessary before cognizance of the offence could be taken against the accused for offences alleged to have been committed in his former capacity as public servant.
[514 D E] The submission that if the accused has held or holds a plurality of offices occupying each one of which makes him a public servant, under section 6 sanction of each one of the competent authorities entitled to remove him from each one of the offices held by him, would be necessary and if anyone of the competent authorities fails or declines to grant sanction, the court is precluded or prohibited from taking cognizance of the offence with which the public servant is charged is not acceptable.
Such an interpretation of s.6 would render it as a shield to an unscrupulous public servant.
Someone interested in protecting may shift him from one office of public servant to another and there by defeat the process of law.
Such an interpretation is contrary to all cannons of construction and leads to an absurd end product which of necessity must be avoided.
[520G; 518F C] The State (S.P.E. Hyderabad) vs Anr Commodore Kailash Chand, ; , referred to and partly dissented from.
The expression 'office ' in the three sub clauses of s 6(1) clearly denotes that office which the public servant misused or abused for corrupt motives for which he is to be prosecuted and in respect of which a sanction lo prosecute him is necessary by the competent authority entitled to remove him from that office which he has abused.
The sanction to prosecute a public servant can be given by an authority competent to remove him from the office which he has misused or abused because that authority alone would be able to know whether there has been a misuse or abuse of the office by the public servant and not some rank outsider.
The authority entitled to grant sanction must apply its mind to the facts of the case, evidence collected and other incidental facts before according sanction.
A grant of sanction is not an idle formality but a solemn and sacrosanct act which removes the umbrella of protection of government servants against frivolous prosecutions and the aforesaid requirements must therefore, be strictly complied with before any prosecution could be launched against public servants.
Therefore, it is implicit in s.6 that sanction of that competent authority alone would be necessary which is competent to remove the public servant from the office which he is alleged to have misused or abused for corrupt motive and for which a prosecution is intended to be launched against him.
[516H; 517A D] Mohd. Iqbal Ahmed vs State of A. P., [1979] 2 S.C.R. 1007, referred to.
499 The finding of the Special Judge that the respondent being M.L.A. was a public servant within clauses (12)(a) (3) and (7) of s.21 I.P.C. and sanction of the Legislative Assembly to prosecute him was necessary, is not correct.
A person would be a public servant under clause (12)(a) of section 21 I.P.C. if he falls under any of the following three categories: (i) if he is in the service of the Government; or (ii) if he is hl the pay of the Government; or (iii) if he is remunerated by fees or commission for the performance of any public duty, by the Government.
Looking into the history and evolution of s.21 I.P.C. as traced and adopted as an external aid to construction, it is clear that M.L.A. was not and is not a 'public servant ' within the meaning of expression in any of the clauses of section 21 I.P.C. Assuming that it would not be legally sound or correct according to well accepted cannon of construction of a statue of construe section 21(12)(a) by mere historical evolution of the section, the constitutionally valid approach would be to look at the language employed in the section to ascertain whether M.L.A. is a public servant within the meaning of the expression in that section.
Depending upon the context, 'or '.
The use of the expression 'or ' in the context in which it is used in cl.(12) (a) does appear to be a disjunctive.
Therefore, those would be a public servant.
The question is whether M.L.A. falls in under any of the above three categories? It was concerned that M.L.A. is not the service of the Government but it was contended that M.L.A. is in the pay of the Government.
Undoubtedly, M.L.A. receives a salary and allowances his capacity as M.L.A. under the relevant statute.
But does it make him a person 'in the pay of the Government '? The word 'pay ' standing by itself is open to various shades of meaning and when the word is used in a phrase in the pay of ' it is more likely to have a different connotation than when standing by itself.
The phrase "in the pay of ' would ordinarily import the element of employment or paid employment or employed and paid by the employer.
The phrase does not import of necessity a master servant relationship between the person receiving the pay and the Government as payer.
Next what does the expression 'Government ' in cl.
(12)(a) of section 21 I.P.C. connote ? Section 17 I.P.C. provides that the word "Government ' denotes the Central Government or the Government of a State.
71 I.P.C. provides that 'every expression which is explained in any part of the Code, is used in every part of the Code in conformity with the explanation '.
Let it be noted that unlike the modern statute s.7 does not provide unless the context otherwise indicate ', a phrase that prefaces the dictionary clauses of a modern statute.
Therefore, the expression "Government ' in section 21(12)(a) must either mean the Central Government or the Government of a State.
The Central Government being out of considering the question is whether M.L.A. is the pay of the Government of a State or is remunerated by fees for the performance of any public duty by the Government of a State.
Even though M.L.A. receives pay and allowances, he is not in the pay of he state Government because legislature of a State cannot be comprehended in the expression 'State Government '.
This conclusion would govern also the third part of c. (12)(a) i.e. 'remunerated by fees for performance of any public duty by the Government.
Therefore, if M.L.A. is not in the pay of the Government in the sense of executive government or is not remunerated by fees for performance of any public duty by the exe 500 cutive government, certainly, he would not be comprehended in the expression 'public servant ' within the meaning sf the expression in cl.
(12)(a).
He is thus not a public servant within the meaning of the expression in cl.
(12)(a).
This conclusion rein forces the earlier conclusion reached after examining the historical evolution of cl.
(12)(a): [537 A B; 536G; E; H; 537 H;E; 539 E; 541 A; D F; 543 E; 551 A B] Evolution of Parliamentary Privileges by section K. Nag ; Legislative Bodies Corrupt Practices Act, 1925; Prevention of Corruption Act 1947 by Sethi and Anand P.60; Santhanam Committee Report dt. 31 3 1964; Lok Sabha Debates (Third Series Vol. 35, Cls. 729 and 731; The Anti Corruption Laws (Amendment) Bill, 1964 (enacted as Act 40 of 1964); G.A. Monerop vs The State of Ajmer, ; The State of Ajmer vs Shivji Lal [1959] supp.
2 S.C.R. 739; Prabhashanker Dwivedi and Anr.
vs The State of Gujarat, AIR 1970 Gujart, AIR 1970 Gujarat 97; State of Gujart vs Manshanker Prabhashanker Dwivedi, ; Green vs Premier Glynrohonwy State Co. Ltd, at 568; Babi Manmohan Das Shah & Ors.
vs Bishnu Das, ; at 839; Kamta Prasad Aggarwal etc.
Executive Engineer, Ballabgarh & Anr., ; ; M. Karunanidhi vs Union of India, ; ; Costituent Assembly debates, Vol.
VII p. 984; Rai Shib Ram jawaya Kapur & Ors.
vs The State of Punjab [1975] 1 S.C.R. 225 at p. 236; Shamsher Singh & Anr.
vs State of Punjab, ; Sardari Lalv.
Union of India & Ors. ; ; His Majesty the King vs Boston 7 Ors., [1923 24] 33 Commonwealth Law Report 386. .82; Earskine May Parhamentary Practice 20 edition, p. 149, referred to The Submission that the accused would be a public servant within the meaning of the expression any person empowered by law to discharge any adjudicatory functions, in cl.
(3) of s.21 I.P.C. must be rejected.
Participation in a debate on a motion of breach of privilege or for taking action for contempt of the House and voting thereon in a constitutional function discharged by the members and therefore, it cannot be said that such adjudicatory functions if it can be so styled, constitutes adjudicatory function undertaken by M.L.A. as empowered by law.
[554 E F] Special Ref.
No. 1 of 1966; , at pages 490, 491 and 472; I.C. Golaknath vs State of Punajab, ; Sripadangalavaru vs State of Kerala and Anr.; [1973] Supp.
S.C.R 1 referred to.
The submission that M.L.A. would be a public servant within cl.
(7) of s.21 I.P.C. must be rejected.
(7) takes within its ambit 'every person who holds any office by virtue of which he is empowered to place or keep any person in confinement.
Broadly stated the expression comprehends police and prison authorities or those under an obligation by law or by virtue of office to take into custody and keep in confinement any person.
To say that M.L.A. by virtue of his office is performing 'policing or prison officers ' duties would be apart from doing violence to language lowering him in status.
Additionally cl.(7) does not speak of any adjudicatory function.
lt appears to comprehend situations where as preliminary to or an end product of an adjudicatory function in a criminal case, which may lead to imposition of a prison sentence, and a Person in exercise of the duty to be discharged by him by virtue of his office places or keeps any person in confinement.
[554G, 555 F H] In view of the finding that M.L.A. is not a public servant under clauses (12)(a), (3) and (7) of s.21 I.P.C. and no sanction under s.6 of the Prevention of Corruption is necessary to prosecute him.
it is not necessary to ascertain which would be the authority competent to sanction prosecution of M.L.A. [557 C] In the instant case, the allegations in the complaint are all to the effect that the accused misused or abused his office as Chief Minister for corrupt motives.
By the time the Court was called upon to take cognizance of those offences, the accused had ceased to hold the office of Chief Minister.
The sanction to prosecute him was granted by the Governor of Maharashtra but this aspect is irrelevant for concluding that no sanction was necessary to prosecute him under s.6 on the offences alleged to have been committed by the accused.
Assuming that as M.L.A. the accused would be a public servant under s.21, in the absence of any allegation that he misused or abused his office as M.L.A. that aspect becomes immaterial.
Further s.6 postulates existence of a valid sanction for prosecution of a public servant for offences punishable under section 161, 164, 165 I.P.C. and s.5 of the 1947 Act, if they are alleged to have been committed by a public servant.
In view of the finding that M.L.A. is not a public servant within the meaning of the expression in s.21 I.P.C., no sanction under s.6 is necessary to prosecute him for the offences alleged to have been committed by him.
[556 G; 557 A B]
