By treaty and by international convention, India allows transit facilities to Nepal, its neighbour and a land locked country.
A company based in Kathmandu, Nepal imported a consignment of pre recorded cassettes from Singapore which was awaiting its despatch to Nepal at Calcutta Port.
As the 665 appellant company suspected those cassettes to be unauthorised reproductions of its records and cassettes, the import of which into India was prohibited, the appellant company moved the Registrar of Copyrights for action under s.53 of the which enables the Registrar, after making such enquiries as he deemed fit, to order that copies made out of India of a work which if made in India would infringe copyright, shall not be imported.
As the Registrar did not take expenditious action, the appellant company moved the High Court by a writ petition.
A single Judge made an interim order permitting the appellant company to inspect the consignment and if any of the cassettes were found to have infringed the appellant 's copyright, they were to be kept apart until further orders of the Registrar.
The Registrar was directed to deal with the application of the appellant company in accordance with law.
The consignee preferred an appeal against this order of the single Judge.
A Division Bench of the High Court allowed the appeal and dismissed the writ petition of the appellant company.
The Division Bench held that there was no importation when the goods entered India en route to Nepal.
The Division Bench was of the view that the word `import ' did not merely mean bringing the goods into India, but comprehended something more, that is, "incorporating and mixing, or mixing up of the goods imported with the mass of the property in the local area".
The company obtained special leave to appeal.
The questions which arose were : (i) whether international law is, of its own force, drawn into the law of the land without the aid of a municipal statute, (ii) whether, so drawn, it overrides municipal law in case of conflict; (iii) whether there is any well established rule of international law on the question of the right of land locked states to innocent passage of the goods across the soil of another state; and (iv) what is the meaning of the word `import ' used in s.53 of the .
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD : On questions (i) & (ii).
There can be no question that nations must march with the international community and the municipal law must respect rules of international law even as nations respect international opinion.
The comity of nations requires that rules of international law may be accommodated in the municipal law even without express legislative sanction provided they do not run into conflict with Acts of Parliament.
But when they do run into such conflict, the sovereignty and the integrity of the republic and the supremacy of the constituted legislatures in 666 making the laws may not be subjected to external rules except to the extent legitimately accepted by the constituted legislatures themselves.
The doctrine of incorporation also recognises the position that the rules of international law are incorporated into national law and considered to be part of the national law, unless they are in conflict with an Act of Parliament.
Comity of nations or no, municipal law must prevail in case of conflict.
National courts cannot say yes if Parliament has said no to a principle of international law.
National courts will endorse international law but not if it conflicts will national law.
National courts being organs of the national state and not organs of international law must perforce apply national law if international law conflicts with it.
But the courts are under an obligation within legitimate limits, to so interpret the municipal statute as to avoid confrontation with the comity of nations or the well established principles of international law.
But if conflict is inevitable, the letter must yield.
[673 E H] Per Lord Danning MR in Trend text Trading Corpn.
vs Central Bank, [1977] I All E.R. 881; West Rand Central Gold Mining Co. vs The King, [1905] 2KB 391; Lauterpacht in International Law (General Works); Latham CJ in Politics vs The Common wealth 70 Commonwealth Law Reports 60; Tractoro export, Mascow vs M/s. Tarapore & Company and Anr, ; referred to.
On question (iii).
As the leading authorities on international law expressed divergent views on the question of the transit rights of land locked countries, the result has been that the land locked countries have to rely on bilateral, regional or multi lateral agreements for the recognition of their rights.
They very existence of innumerable bilateral treaties, while on the one hand it raises a presumption of the existence of a customary right of transit, on the other it indicates the dependence of the right on agreement.
The most recent 1965 Convention on Transit Trade of Land Locked States, to which both Nepal and India are signatories, while providing for freedom of transit for the passage of goods between the land locked state and the sea, across the territory of a transit state emphasize the need for agreement between the land locked country and the transit country.
The bilateral Treaty of Trade and Treaty of Transit entered into between India and Nepal in order to expand trade between the two countries in practice mean a guarantee to Nepal to permit free and unhampered flow of goods needed by Nepal from India and a guarantee of freedom of transit for goods originating from outside India across the territory of India to reach Nepal.
But the Convention on Transit Trade of Land locked States and the Treaties between the two countries, leave either country free to impose necessary restrictions for the purpose of protecting industrial, 667 iterary or artistic property and preventing false marks, false indications of origin or other methods of unfair competition in order to further other general conventions.
It is clear that for this purpose, it is not necessary that the land locked country should be a party to the general conventions along with the transit country.
The interpretation placed by John H.B. Fried in the Indian Journal of international law that the provisions of the 1965 Convention permit the States of transit to enforce, say a Copyright or trade mark convention even if, for example, neither the country of origin nor of destination is party to it appears to be a correct interpretation.
[675 B H] An artistic, literary or musical work is the brain child of its author, the fruit of his labour, and so, considered to be his property.
So highly is it prized by all civilised nations that it is thought worthy of protection by national laws and international Conventions relating to Copyright.
The International Convention for the protection of literary or artistic works first signed at Berne on 9th September, 1886 and finally revised at Paris in 1971 provided for protection to the authors of literary and artistic works.
The Universal Copyright Convention first signed at Geneva on 6th September 1952 and revised in Paris in 1971 requires the contracting states to provide for the adequate and effective protection of the rights of authors and other copyright proprietors in literary, scientific and artistic works including writings, musical, dramatic and cinematograph works and paintings engraving and sculpture.
[684 G H] On question No. (iv) The word `import ' is not defined in the though it is defined in the Customs Act.
But the same word may mean different things in different enactments and in different contexts.
It may even mean different things at different places in the same statute.
It all depends on the sense of the provision where it occurs.
Reference to dictionaries is hardly of any avail particularly in the case of words of ordinary parlance with a variety of well know meanings.
Such word take colour from the context.
Appeal to the Latin root won 't help.
The appeal must be to the sense of the statute.
[689 C D] The submission that where goods are brought into the country not for commerce, but for onward transmission to another country, there can, in law, be no importation, is not acceptable.
In the first place, the language of section 53 does not justify reading the words `imported for commerce ' for the words `imported; Nor is there any reason to assume that such was the object of the legislature.
While interpreting the words`import ' in the , one must take note that while the positive requirement of the Copyright Conventions is to protect copyright, negatively 668 also, the Transit Trade Convention and the bilateral Treaty make exceptions enabling the tranait state to take measure to protect Copyright.
If this much is borne in mind, it becomes clear that the word `import ' in section 53 of the cannot bear the narrow interpretation sought to be placed upon it to limit it to import for commerce.
It must be interpreted in a sense which will fit the into the setting of the International Conventions.
[690 B E] The word `import ' in seces.
51 and 53 of the means bringing into India from outside India ', that it is not limited to importation for commerce only, but includes importation for transit across the country.
This interpretation, far from being inconsistent with any principle of International Law, is entirely in accord with International Conventions and the Treaties between India and Nepal.[691 H, 692A] The High Court thought that goods may be said to be imported into the country only if there is an incorporation or mixing up of the goods imported with the mass of the property in the local area.
In other words the High Court relied on the Original Package Doctrine ' as enunciated by Chief Justice Marshall in Brown vs State of Maryland Reliance was placed by the High Court upon the decision of this Court in the Central India Spinning and Weaving & Manufacturing Co. Ltd. The Empress Mills, Nagpur vs The Municipal Committee, Wardha ; That was a case which arose under the C.P. and Berar Municipalities Act and the question was whether the power to impose "a terminal tax goods or animals imported into or exported from the limits of a municipality" included the right to levy tax on goods which `were neither loaded or unloaded at Wardha but were merely carried across through the municipal area '.
We are afraid the case is really not of any guidance to us since in the context of a `terminal tax ' the words `imported and exported ' could be construed in no other manner than was done by the Court.
We must however say that the `original package doctrine ' on which reliance was placed was expressly disapproved first by the Federal Court in the Province of Madras vs Boddu Paidanna : and again by the Supreme Court in the State of Bombay vs F.N. Balsara, ; [690 G H, 691 A E] An order made under section 53 of the is quasi judicial.
The Registrar is not bound to make an order under section 53 of the so soon as an application is presented to him by the owner of the Copyright.
He has naturally to consider the context of the mischief sought to be prevented.
He must consider whether the copies would infringe the Copyright if the copies were made in India.
He must consider whether the applicant owns the copyright or the duly authorised agent of the Copyright.
He must hear those claiming to be affected if an order is made and consider any contention that may be put forward as an excuse for the import.
He may consider any other relevant circumstance.
Since all legitimate defences are upon and the enquiry is quasi judicial, no one can seriously complain.
[692 E G] 669
