The Respondent original plaintiff a doctor by profession was in occupation of a small cabin (admeasuring approximately 175 sq ft) which is a part of the premises of Dr. Amonkar hospital of which the appellants are the proprietors.
The Life Insurance Corporation of India is the owner of the building.
The appellants threatened the Respondents to evict him after issuing a notice dated March 20, 1973 informing the Respondent that his attachment as Honorary Surgeon was no longer required with effect from 1 4 1973 and that he should make his own arrangements for his private consultation.
The Respondent filed a suit in the Small Causes Court of Bombay seeking a declaration that he was a "protected licensee" (having become a deemed tenant) of the suit premises under section 15A of the Bombay Rent Act (Act 57 of 1947) as amended by the Maharashtra Act XVII of 1973 and for injunction restraining the appellant defendants from taking forcible possession of the suit premises and or disturbing or interfering with his use and employment thereof otherwise than in due course of law.
The suit was resisted by the appellant defendants on three grounds: (a) that the cabin was never given to the respondent defendant on leave and licence basis, that he was never in exclusive use and occupation thereof but the user of the cabin was given to him because of his attachment as Honorary Surgeon to Dr. Amonkar hospital through the good offices of one Dr. Rawalia and after obtaining a writing an stamp paper reflecting the true nature and character of the arrangement between the appellants and the Respondent plaintiff;(b) that the cabin in question was not "premises" within the meaning of Section 5(8)(b) of the Rent Act, in as much as the same could not be said to have been given on licence "separately" because the respondent plaintiff was permitted the user thereof only for 2 /2 hours in the evening on week days between 5 P.M. and 7.30 P.M. and for the rest of the time it was being used by the hospital staff and that one of the Key 's of that cabin always remained with the staff of the hospital and hence 647 disentitling to any protection of the Rent Act, and (c) that the cabin in question being admittedly" a room in the hospital" fell within the exclusionary part of the definition of the "licensee" given section 5(4A) and as such was outside the protection conferred on licensees by section 15A of the Rent Act.
The appellants also filed an Ejection Application against the respondent plaintiff seeking his eviction from the suit premises under section 41 of the Presidency Small Causes Courts Act on the ground that the respondent 's right to occupy the suit cabin had come to an end along with the termination of his attachment as Honorary Surgeon to Dr. Amonkar hospital.
The respondent plaintiff resisted the said suit.
Both the suits were therefore heard together and common evidence recorded.
On an appreciation of the oral and documentary evidence and the surrounding circumstances, the trial court came to the conclusion that the.
user of the suit cabin had been permitted to the respondent plaintiff not on leave and licence basis but because of his attachment as Honorary Surgeon to Dr. Amonkar Hospital and that exhibit No. 1 which was signed by him after fully realising its implications, was a genuine writing reflecting the true nature of the arrangement between the parties and so as such the respondent plaintiff was not entitled to the protection of section 15A of the Rent Act and that with the termination of his attachment as Honorary Surgeon to Dr. Amonkar hospital his right to occupy the suit cabin came to an end.
The Trial Judge decreed the suit.
In appeal preferred by the respondent plaintiff, the Appellate Bench of the Small Causes Court on reappraisal of the entire material on record confirmed the findings of the trial court both on the factual and on legal issued and dismissed the appeal.
The respondent plaintiff when approached the High Court under Article 227 of the Constitution the High Court interfered with the concurrent findings of fact found by the two lower courts and reversed the decisions both on the factual issue and the two legal issues.
Hence the appeal after obtaining the special leave of the Court.
Allowing the appeals, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
The High Court was not right in reversing the concurrent finding of fact recorded by both the courts below and even on merits, the High Court Judgment cannot be sustained.
[663 C] 2.1.
The opinion of the High Court that there were two disturbing features revealed in the respective proceedings and judgments of the courts below which were suggestive or non judicial approach, some bias and partiality (in favour of the appellant defendants and against the respondent plaintiff) on their part which necessitated a full and unrestricted exercise of its power of superintendence by going to the extent of reappreciating the evidence in depth as if it were a first Appellate Court was not rect.
[653 F G] The comments of the High Court that the rejection of an application to recall one of the witnesses viz. Dr. Rawalia and to direct him to produce his Income Tax 648 Returns by the trial court on 18 10 1976 was a disturbing feature suggestive of non judicial approach, some bias or some partiality shown by the Trial Judge, would have had been simply dismissed without giving any reason but the learned trial Judge passed a lengthy order giving three reasons for the rejection of the application: (a) that vague averments were made in the application about the receipt of the: information regarding Income Tax Returns of Dr. Rawalia on 8th October, 1976 without the occasion for receiving the information or the source of information being indicated and that when the Court made a query in that behalf his counsel was not willing to give particulars or disclose the, source of information and it was, therefore, difficult to believe that the respondent plaintiff came in possession of the said information after the cross examination of the witness was over and after the closure of appellant defendants ' case; (b) that under section 138(I)(b) of the Income Tax Act, 1961 the respondent plaintiff could have and should have obtained the necessary information or material from the Commissioner of Income tax by making an application in the prescribed form and since he had not done so it would not be proper to help him to get.
the information through the court; in other words, if he had attempted and failed to get the information by following the prescribed procedure the court could have helped him; and (c) that the Court 's power to recall and examine any witness at any stage of the suit under Order XVIII Rule 17 of CPC on which strong reliance was placed by counsel for the respondent plaintiff was to be exercised in exceptional circumstances and no exceptional circumstance had been made out by the respondent plaintiff inasmuch as these documents would have become available to him before he started the witness 's cross examination.
May be in the exercise its discretion another Court might have taken a different view and allowed the application.
But unless the reasons given by the learned trial Judge could be said to be moon shine, flimsy or irrational the rejection of the application cannot be dubbed as suggestive of non judicial approach or bias or partiality on his part.
It is also possible that the reasons for giving a ruling on a point or for rejecting an application may be wrong or disclose a non judicious exercise of discretion and open to correction in appeal, but non motive of non judicial approach or bias or partiality could be attributed unless the reason given are moon shire or so flimsy or irrational that there are unreal.
Considered dispassionately, such a thing could never be said about the reasons given by the trial Judge for rejecting the application.
In any case, the rejection of the application could not be regarded as having stemmed from any oblique motive purpose.
[656B H, 657 A C] Further, the so called disturbing feature noted by the High Court in the Judgment of the First Appellate Court is so innocuous and inconsequential that it could hardly afford any justification to re appreciate the whole evidence as done by it.
on the contrary, the broad features emerging from the evidence on record clearly support the appellant defendants ' case that the user of the suit cabin was allowed to the respondent plaintiff not on leave and licence basis but because of his attachment as Honorary surgeon to Dr. Amonkar hospital.
