The appellant applied to the Accommodation Department of the State Government for allotment of a flat.
The State Government urged down the request but requisitioned the flat by an order dated 9th April, 1948 under clause (a) of sub section(4) of section 6 of the Bombay Land Requisition Act, 1948.
This order of requisition, did not set out the public purpose for which the flat was requisitioned.
The Assistant Controller of Accommodation by an order dated 25th April, 1951 allotted the requisitioned flat to the appellant who entered into occupation and paid rent to the landlady from time to time but as he was irregular and committed several defaults the Controller of Accommodation sought to terminate the allotment.
The 3rd respondent, on 30th May, 1973 purchased the building in which the requisitioned flat was situated, and requested the State Government to de requisi 694 tion the flat, as the allotment of the flat in favour of the appellant could not be said to be for a public purposes.
The State Government did not pay any heed to this request.
The 3rd respondent, thereupon filed a Writ Petition in the High Court challenging the validity of the order or requisition, contending that it could not survive for such a long period of time and that the State Government was therefore bound to de requisition the flat.
The High Court allowed the Writ Petition and directed the State Government and the Controller of Accommodation to de requisition the flat, take steps to evict the appellant, and hand over vacant possession.
In appeal this Court, it was contended inter alia on behalf of the appellant tenant that even the order of requisition was invalid as having been made for a purpose other than a public purpose, the 3rd respondent was not entitled to challenge the order of requisition after a lapse of over 30 years and that the Writ Petition should have been dismissed by the High Court.
Dismissing Appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
The order of requisition even if it was valid when made, ceased to be valid and effective after expiration of a reasonable period of time What period of time must be regarded as reasonable for the continuance of an order of requisition depends on the facts and circumstances of each case.
[700 H] In the instant case, the order of requisition was made as far back as 9th April 1951 and even if it was made for housing a homeless person, and the appellant at that time, fell within that category, it cannot be allowed to continue for such an inordinately long period as thirty years.
[700 G] 2.
Requisitioning must be made for a public purpose, and so long as there is a public purpose for which an order of requisition is made, it would be valid irrespective of whether such public purpose is recited in the order of requisition or not.
But if the order is challenged, the State Government would have to satisfy the Court by placing the necessary facts showing the public purpose for which the order of requisition was made.
[698 B,G] 3.
There is a basic and fundamental distinction recognised by law between requisition and acquisition.
The Constitution itself in Entry 42 of List III of Seventh Schedule makes a distinction between acquisition and requisitioning of property.
The original Article 31 clause (2) of the Constitution and recognised this distinction 695 between compulsory acquisition and requisition of property.
The two concepts, one of requisition and the other of acquisition are totally distinct and independent.
Acquisiting means the acquiring of the entire title of the expropriated owner what ever the nature and extent of that title may be.
The entire of rights which was vested in the original holder passes on acquisition to the acquire leaving nothing to the former.
The concept of acquisition as an aim of permanence and finality in that there is a transference of the title of the original holder to the acquiring authority.
But the concept of requisition involves merely taking of "domain or control over property without acquiring rights of ownership" and must by its very nature be of temporary duration.
[699 F H] 4.
If the Government wants to take over the property for and indefinite period of the Government must acquire the property but it cannot use the power of requisition for achieving that object.
The power of requisition is exercisable by the Government only for a public purpose which is of a transitory character.
If the public purpose for which the premises are required is of a perennial or permanent character from the very inception, no order can be passed requisitioning the premises and in such a case the order or requisition, if passed, would a fraud upon the statute.
What ever be the public purpose for which an order of requisition made, it is by its very nature temporary in character and it cannot endure for an indefinite period time.
The period of time for which an order of requisition may be continued cannot be an unreasonably long period such as thirty years and it must therefore be held that the order of requisition, even if valid when made, ceased to be valid and effective.
The Writ Petition challenging the order of requisition after a lapse of over thirty years was therefore maintainable.[700 C F,701 A] 5.
The appellant was an allottee of the flat under the order of requisition and he was liable to pay compensation for the use and occupation of the flat to the State Government and the State Government was in its turn liable to pay compensation for the requisitioning of the flat.
If, instead of the appellant paying compensation to the State Government and the State Government and the State Government making payment of an identical amount to the owner, the appellant paid directly to the owner with the express or implied assent of the State Government, the order of requisition could not cease to be valid and effective.
It did not matter whether the appellant described the amount paid by him to the owner as rent, because whatever was done by him was under the order of requisition and so long as the order of requisition stood, his possession of the flat was attributable only to the order of requisition and no payment of amount described as rent could possible after the nature of his occupation of the flat or make him a tenant in respect of the flat.[701 F H] State of Bombay vs Bhanji Munji & Anr.
[1955] 1 S.C.R. 777; Chiranjital 's case [1950]S.C.R. 869; referred to. 696
