The appellants were tried along with one other person for offences under sections 302 and 323 read with section 34, I.P.C., as also under sections 218 and 302, I.P.C., on allegations that they had taken one Balwant Singh into custody, tortured him to death and thereafter created false evidence with a view to escape from legal punishment in connection with the murder of Balwant Singh.
The Sessions Judge acquitted all the accused after coming to the conclusion that the prosecution story was highly improbable.
He dealt with the prosecution evidence elaborately and gave substantial reasons for rejecting the same.
In the appeal preferred by the State, the High Court reversed the acquittal and convicted and sentenced the appellants without dealing with or discussing the reasons given by the Sessions Judge for acquitting them.
The High Court was principally influenced by the nature of injuries that had been noticed on the dead body at the time of autopsy.
Based on the injuries found on the soles and buttocks of the deceased the High Court came to the conclusion that the deceased had been given a sound bearing while he was in police custody.
The High Court mentioned that its conclusion had been strengthened by the fact that appellant No. 2 had, while preparing the inquest report, made a deliberate effort to minimise the number of injuries sustained by the deceased inasmuch as in column No. 10 thereof, injuries on file different parts of the body had been mentioned without giving the actual number of injuries in those parts, while according to the doctor 's post mortem report there were 33 external injuries.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: The duty of the High Court while dealing with the appeal against acquittal was quite clear.
It should have dealt with each one of the reasons which prompted the trial court to record the acquittal and should have pointed out how, if at all, those reasons were wrong or incorrect.
Without undertaking such exercise the High Court could not reverse the acquittal.
[267 A B] The High Court was clearly in error in solely relying upon the nature of some of the injuries for drawing the conclusion that the deceased must have 258 been assaulted by the appellant in custody.
In doing so, the High Court indulged in conjectures and surmises.
There were only two injuries which could properly be regarded as injuries on the soles of the two feet of the deceased which may be indicative of the police using third degree methods but the injuries on the buttocks could not be indicative of user of third degree methods.
Apart from injuries on the soles and the buttocks, there were other injuries on several other parts of the body which could not be regarded as being necessarily consistent with the assault on the deceased only in police custody.
The criticism made against appellant No. 2 that he made deliberate attempt to minimise the injuries sustained by the deceased while writing column No. 10 of the inquest report also cannot be accepted.
rt is quite possible that he may not have noticed all the injuries or, even after noticing them, he may not have mentioned in detail all the injuries that were present on the dead body at the time of the inquest.
In any event it cannot be forgotten that he has broadly indicated five parts of the body on which it has been stated several injuries were noticed.
His only fault is that the actual number of injuries were not mentioned but from this alone it will be difficult to impute the motive that he had deliberately done so with a view to minimise the number of injuries sustained by the deceased.
[266 B H]
