In the election held on 19.5.1982 for the election of a member of the Kerala Legislative Assembly from constituency No. 125 Eravipuram in the Quilon District of that State, there were eight candidates in all but the main contest was between the appellant and the respondent No. 1.
The appellant polled 37,073 while the respondent polled 37,862.
There was therefore an excess of 789 votes.
As per the result declared on 20.5.1982, the respondent was declared elected.
The appellant therefore, filed an election petition in the Kerala High Court alleging commission of corrupt practices within the meaning of sub sections 2, 4, and 7 of Section 123 of the Act and several irregularities in the course of counting leading to wrong conclusion regarding the result.
In paragraphs 4 to 8 of the election petition it had been alleged that election agent Azeez published a statement dated 13.5.1982 in the form of a hand bill making false but serious allegations against the appellant touching his personal character and conduct.
It was alleged that the appellant had caused the murder of one Omana, a lady worker supporting Respondent No. 1 because she refused to work for the appellant.
The oral evidence to this effect by PWs 7, 8,11 and 12 who were the workers of the appellants and the plea for nonsummoning the printer with the documents printed by him were not believed by the Election Judge.
The election petition having been dismissed, the petitioner has come in appeal.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1:1.
The High Court rightly negatived the challenge to the election of respondent No. 1 on grounds of corrupt practice.
[168E] 1: 2.
There is a total consensus of judicial opinion that a charge of corrupt practice under the Representation of People Act, 1951 has to be proved beyond reasonable doubt and the standard of proof is the same as in a criminal case.
When the High Court applied the right standard in the matter of appreciation of the material placed before it and has come to hold that the allegations of corrupt practice within the meaning of section 123(4) of the Act has not been proved, the Supreme Court would not re appreciate the evidence.
[167F H, 168A] 163 Mahant Shreenath vs Choudhry Ranbir Singh ; Boddepalli Rajagopala Rao vs N.G. Ranga, A.I.R. ; applied.
Want of proper steps at the right time and negligence or willful default at the trial to cause the summons and production of a document must only lead the Court to draw an adverse inference regarding non production of the relevant material.
[165G H] 1: 4.
Any report of a police officer which indicates that the information was gathered from the gossips in the locality is not admissible and it is hearsay of a type to which no credence could attach.
[166A B] 1: 5.
When an election was fought on party basis and there was sharp division of the electorate on the basis of political parties, workers at the election with party alignment would necessarily be political supporter of the respective candidates and when called as witnesses they would support their stand.
Instances are not uncommon where such witnesses support their respective candidates and their cases even though the same may be far from truth.
In such circumstances on the oral testimony of PWs 7, 8, 11 and 12 who are admittedly workers of the appellant the change of publication of objectionable materials can not be said to have been established.
[166B D]
