Appellant No. 1 was a company engaged in the business of manufacturing different types of glass, viz., figured glass, wired glass, coloured figured glass, rolled glass and coolex wired glass.
The Central Excise Department had levied and collected excise duty on the said goods on the basis that they belonged to the category of 'sheet glass ' and were therefore subject to payment of excise duty under Item 23A(1) of the First Schedule to the Central Excise and Salt Act, 1944.
On February 20, 1976, the appellants applied for the refund of excess duty paid by them from October 1, 1963 upto the date of the application on the ground that the items of glass in question could not be described as 'sheet glass ' mentioned in Item 23A and that since they did not fall under any of the Items ] to 67 in the First Schedule of the Act they could only be subjected to levy of excise duty under the residuary provision, Item 68.
The Assistant Collector of Central Excise rejected the claim for refund and the appellants there upon filed a Writ petition in the High Court on September 28, 1976, but the same was withdrawn as a Departmental Appeal filed by the appellants was pending with the Collector.
The said Departmental Appeal was however later dismissed and this order was confirmed in the appellants ' revision petition to the Government.
The appellants thereupon filed a Writ Petition in the High Court and assailed the order.
The High Court reversed the decision of the departmental authorities and held that the items of glass manufactured by the appellants did not fall within the scope of tariff Item 23A(I) of the First Schedule but that they came within tariff Item 68 thereof, liable to duty accordingly, and directed refund of excess duty paid after February 20, 1976, on which date the dispute was raised.
The claim for refund of excess 'duty paid during the period prior to February 20, 1976 was, however, rejected.
In the appeal to this Court on the question: (I) whether the appellants are resettled to claim refund of excess excise duty paid prior to February 20, 181 1976 and whether they are entitled to claim refund of such duty paid between A October 1, 1963 and February 20, 1976 or during any shorter period, and (2) whether the appellants are entitled to claim such refund in respect of all the goods.
Allowing the appeal in part. ^ HELD: 1.
(i) The excess amount paid by the appellants would have become refundable by virtue of section 72 of the if the appellants had filed a Suit within the period of limitation.
Section 1 1(1)(c) of the provides that where in the case of any suit or application for which a period of limitation is prescribed under that Act, the suit or application is for relief from the consequences of a mistake, the period of limitation shall not begin to run until the plaintiff or applicant had discovered it or could have with reasonable diligence discovered it.
[186F G] (ii) Under Article 113 of the a suit for recovery of excess duty had to be filed within three years from the date of payment to the Department.
[187B] (iii) The High Courts have power, for the purpose of enforcement of fundamental rights and statutory rights to make consequential orders for repayment of money realised by Government without the authority of law under Article 226 of the Constitution.
This is an alternative remedy provided by the Constitution in addition to, but not in supersession of the ordinary remedy by way of suit in the absence of any provision which would bar such a suit expressly or by necessary implication.
While there are different periods of limitation prescribed for the institution of different kinds of suits by the , there is no such period prescribed by law in respect of petitions filed under Article 226 of the Constitution.
Whether relief should be granted to a petitioner under Article 226 where the cause of action had arisen in the remote past is a matter of sound judicial discretion governed by the doctrine of laches.
Where a petitioner who could have availed of the alternative remedy by way of suit approaches the High Court under Article 226, it is appropriate ordinarily to construe that any unexplained delay in filing of the writ petition after the expiry of the period of limitation prescribed for filing a suit as unreasonable.
This rule.
however, cannot be a rigid formula.
Each case has to be judged on its own facts and circumstances touching the conduct of the parties, the change in situation, the prejudice which is likely to be caused to the opposite party or to the general public.
[187D H] In the instant case, the appellant had made excess payment on being assessed by the Department and such payment cannot be treated as voluntary payment precluding them from recovering the amounts.
The appellants should in the facts and circumstances of this case be deemed to have discovered the mistake on the date of making each payment of excise duty in excess of the proper duty payable under law.
All such excess payments made on or after September 28, 1973 which would fall within the period of three years prior to the date on which the first writ petition was filed should have been ordered to be refunded under Article 226 But the High Court declined to do so.
Though 182 the appellant should not be granted any relief in respect of payment made between October 1, 1963 and September 27, 1973 which would fall beyond the three years from the date of the first writ petition, it is not proper and just to negative the claim in respect of excess payments made after September 28, 1973.
Sales Tax officer, Banaras & Ors.
vs Kanhaiya Lal Mukundlal Saraf, , referred to.
In respect of wired glass, a dispute has arisen between the Department and the appellants earlier and in that case while the Department claimed that wired glass was subject to payment of duty under tariff Item 23A(4) the appellants pleaded that wired glass was liable to duty under tariff Item 23A(1).
The Government of India ultimately accepted the case of the appellants, .
and duty was paid on that basis till February 20, 1976.
While the earlier order may not be a legal bar to the contention raised by the appellants on February 20, 1976 that wired glass was not taxable under tariff Item 23A(l) but under tariff Item 68 after that date, it is certainly a circumstance which disentitles the appellants to claim refund of excess duty paid by them in a petition under Article 226.
The claim for refund of excess duty paid on wired glass during the period prior to February 20, 1976 is therefore liable to rejected.
[185G 186C]
