The appellant was employed as a Librarian under the Ist respondent.
His services were terminated for misconduct.
He laid a complaint before the Industrial Tribunal under section 33A of the .
The Tribunal came to the conclusion that though the charge of misconduct against the appellant was established, the punishment of termination of service was not warranted, ordered reinstatement with half of his back wages and other benefits from the date of termination.
The respondent employer applied to the High Court under Article 227 to quash the direction of reinstatement contending that as the Tribunal had found misconduct on the pa t of the workman, it was obligatory for the Tribunal to impose some punishment which it had railed to do.
It was further contended that as there was loss of confidence, reinstatement was not appropriate.
The High Court held that with holding of SO per cent of the back wages was a condition of reinstatement and was not by way of punishment,.
held that reinstatement was not called for, vacated the order of reinstatement, directed payment .
Of compensation to the respondent workman in lieu of reinstatement and quantified the compensation at Rs. 15,000.
Allowing the appeal.
224 ^ HELD: 1.
The order of the High Court is set aside and the award of the Industrial Tribunal is restored.
The High Court had no justification to interfere with the direction regarding reinstatement to service and in proceeding to substitute the direction by quantifying compensation at Rs. 150000 it acted without any legitimate basis. '[228D, 227H, 228A] 2.
Section IIA of the vests wide discretion in the Tribunal.
and in a given case on the facts established the Tribunal can vacate the order of dismissal or discharge and give suitable directions.
It is a well settled principle of law that when an order of termination of service is found to be bad and reinstatement is directed, the wronged workman is ordinarily entitled to full back wages unless for any particular reason the whole or a part of it is asked to be withheld.
The Tribunal while directing reinstatement and keeping the delinquency in view could withhold payment of a part or the whole of the back wages.
[226G, '227A] 3.
The High Court under Article 227 of the Constitution does not enjoy the wide discretion vested in the Tribunal under section IIA, though as a superior court, it is vested with the right of superintendence.
The High Court is in disputably entitled to scrutinise the orders of the subordinate tribunals within the well accepted limitations and it could in an appropriate case quash the award of the Tribunal aud thereupon remit the matter to it for fresh disposal in accordance with law and directions if any.
The High Court is not entitled to exercise .
the powers of the Tribunal and substitute an award in peace of the one made by the Tribunal as in the case of an appeal where it lies to it.
[227D]
