The appellant and the respondents entered into a contract for the construction of Building Dock.
Clause 40 of the General Conditions of Contract entered into between the parties, provided that "all questions and disputes relating to the meaning of the Specifications Estimates Instructions, Designs, Drawing and the quality of the workmanship or materials used in the work or as to another questions, claim, right, matter or thing whatsoever in any way arising out of or relating to the contract or otherwise concerning the execution whether arising during the progress of the work or after completion shall be referred to the Sole Arbitrator etc," During the implementation of the works contract.
disputes arose between the parties in respect of a claim for compensation on account of the increase in the cost of imported pile driving equipment and technical know how fees.
Correspondence was exchanged between the Appellant and Respondent No. 1 and the dispute was referred to the Sole Arbitrator.
The point referred were: (1) Whether the claim of compensation for increase in the cost of imported pile driving equipment and technical know how fees would fall within the purview of the first para of clause 40 of the General Conditions of Contract; and (2) if it does, the quantum of compensation, if any, to which the appellant would be entitled to.
The arbitrator entered upon the reference and after hearing the parties gave his award.
The 119 arbitrator held that the appellant was entitled to compensation for the increase in the cost of imported pile drawing equipment and technical know how fees by a sum of Rs. 99 lakhs which amount shall be payable with interest @ 9.1/2% The award was typed on stamp paper of the value of Rs.150/ The arbitrator forwarded the award to both the parties.
The appellant moved a petition under sections 14 and 17 of the , in the Court of the Subordinate Judge for filing the award and for making it a rule of the Court, while the respondent moved a petition under sections 30 and 33 for setting aside the award contending that: (1) the award was insufficiently stamped, and (2) the arbitrator had exceeded his jurisdiction by misconstruing clause 40.
The Subordinate Judge negatived both the contentions.
It was held that the respondent having submitted the question whether the dispute raised by the appellant was covered by the arbitration clause; could not controvert the jurisdiction of the Arbitrator to decide the dispute; and the award of the arbitrator was modified in the matter of interest from 9.1/2 per cent as awarded by the arbitrator to 6 per cent, and the award was made a rule of the Court.
The respondent preferred an appeal to the High Court, and a Division Bench, agreed with the Subordinate Judge on the question of insufficiency of stamp.
It however held that the question whether the dispute was arbitrable or not could not be finally decided by the arbitrator because it was a matter relating to his jurisdiction, and that the arbitrator cannot by an erroneous interpretation or construction of the clause confer jurisdiction on himself and that the court can go into the question whether the matter in dispute between the parties was covered by the arbitration clause.
It finally held that even though the arbitration clause was very wide, the dispute as to compensation for increase in the cost of imported pile driving equipment and technical know how fees could not be covered by the arbitration clause because under clause 26 every plant, machinery and equipment had to be provided by the contractor and any rise or escalation in the price of such equipment or machinery, cannot be the subject matter of compensation by the respondent.
The appeal was therefore allowed, and the trial court 's order, making the award a rule of the court was set aside and directed that the award be returned to the parties.
In the appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant, that though Sec. 16(1)(e) of the may permit the court to remit or set aside the award on the ground that there is an error of law apparent on the face of it, yet where a specific question of law has been referred to the arbitrator for decision, the fact that the decision is erroneous does not make the award bad on its face so as to permit its being set aside.
As a specific question of law touching upon the jurisdiction of the arbitrator was speficially referred to the arbitrator for his decision, the decision of the arbitrator is binding on the parties and the court cannot proceed to inquire whether upon a true construction of the arbitration clause, the dispute referred to the arbitrator for arbitration would be covered by the arbitration clause so as to clothe the arbitrator with the jurisdiction to arbitrate upon the dispute.
On behalf of the respondent, it was contended that the jurisdiction of the arbitrator cannot be left to the decision of the arbitrator so as to be binding on 120 the parties and it is always for the court to decide whether the arbitrator had jurisdiction to decide the dispute, and that the arbitrator cannot by a misconstruction of the arbitration agreement clothe himself with or confer upon himself the jurisdiction to decide the dispute.
Allowing the Appeal; ^ HELD: 1.
A specific question of law touching the jurisdiction of the arbitrator was specifically referred to the arbitrator and therefore the arbitrator 's decision is binding on the parties and the award cannot be set aside on the sole ground that there was an error of law apparent on the face of the award.
It is also established that the claim for compensation made by the contractor which led to the dispute was covered by the arbitration clause.
The quantum of compensation awarded by the arbitrator was never disputed nor questioned.
[170E F] 2.
A question of law may figure before an arbitrator in two ways.
It may arise as an incidental point while deciding the main dispute referred to the arbitrator or in a given case parties may refer a specific question of law to the arbitrator for his decision.
[137G H] Russel: Law of Arbitration Twentieth Edition p.22; Halsbury 's Laws of England Vol.
2 Para 623 4th Edition referred to.
Arbitration has been considered a civilised way of resolving disputes avoiding court proceedings.
There is no reason why the parties should be precluded from referring a specific question of law to an arbitrator for his decision and agree to be bound by the same.
This approach manifests faith of parties in the capacity of the tribunal of their choice to decide even a pure question of law.
If they do so, with eyes wide open, and there is nothing to preclude the parties from doing so, then there is no reason why the court should try to impose its view of law superseding the view of the Tribunal whose decision the parties agreed to abide by.
On Principle it appears distinctly clear that when a specific question of law is referred to an arbitrator for his decision including the one touching upon the jurisdiction of the arbitrator, the decision of the arbitrator would be binding on both the parties and it would not be open to any of the two parties to wriggle out of it by contending that the arbitrator cannot clutch at or confer jurisdiction upon himself by mis construing the arbitration agreement.[138 E G] 4.
If a question of law is specifically referred and it becomes evident that the parties desired to have a decision on the specific question from the arbitrator rather than one from the court, then the court will not interfere with the award of the arbitrator on the ground that there is an error or law apparent on the face of the award even if the view of law taken by the arbitrator does not accord with the view of the court.
[147F] Kelantan Government vs Duff Development Co. Ltd. Re King and Duveen, F.R. Absalom Ltd. vs Great Western (London) Garden Village Society Ltd., ; Durga Prasad Chamria 121 and Anr.
vs Sewkishen das Bhattar and Ors: AIR 1949 Privy Council 334; Seth Thawardas Pherumal vs The Union of India; ; M/s. Alopi Parshad & Sons Ltd. vs The Union of India, ; Champsey Bhara and Company vs Jivraj Balloo Spinning and Weaving Company Ltd .
: Law Report ; Union of India vs A.L. Rallia Ram.
, ; ; M/s.
Kapoor Nilokheri.
, Co op.
Dairy Farm Society Ltd. vs Union of India and Others.
, ; N. Chellappan vs Secretary, Kerala State Electricity Board & Anr., ; ; Produce Brokers Co. Ltd. vs Olympia Oil and Cake Co. Ltd., ; Attorney General For Manitoba vs Kelly and Others.
, (1922) H.E.R. 68; Hirji Muulji vs Cheong Yue Steamship Co. Ltd., ; Heyman & Anr.
vs Darwins Ltd., ; Jivarajbhai Ujamshi Sheth & Ors.
vs Chiniamanrao Balaji & Anr., [1954] 5 S.C.R. 480; Dr. S.B. Dutt vs University of Delhi.
, [1958] S.C.R. 1236; referred to.
The expression 'without prejudice ' carries a technical meaning depending upon the context in which it is used.
An action taken without prejudice to one 's right cannot necessarily mean that the entire action can be ignored by the party taking the same.
[148F G] In the instant case, in the context in which the expression 'without prejudice ' is used, it would only mean that the respondent reserved the right to contend before the arbitrator that the dispute is not covered by the arbitration clause.
It does not appear that what was a contention that no specific question was specifically referred to the arbitrator, On a proper reading of the correspondence, and in the setting in which the term 'without prejudice ' is used, it only means that the respondent reserved to itself the right to contend before the arbitrator that a dispute raised or the claim made by the contractor was not covered by the arbitration clause.
No other meaning can be assigned to it.
[148D E] 6.
In works contract of such magnitude, and which have been undertaken by an Indian contractor for the first time negotiations prior to the finalisation of the contact and the correspondence leading to the formation of contract supply the basis on which the contract was finally entered into.
Undoubtedly, if in the final written contract, there is something contrary to the basic understanding during the formative stage of the contract, the written contract would prevail.
But if the contract does not indicate to the contary and the assumptions appeared to be the foundation of the contract, that aspect cannot be overlooked while determining what were the obligations undertaken the formal contract.
[151H 152B] 7.
Over simplification of the clauses of the contract involving works of large magnitude is impermissible.
The whole gamut of discussions, negotiations and correspondence must be taken into consideration to arrive at a true meaning of what was agreed to between the parties.
[156F] In the instant case, there is no room for doubt that the parties agreed that the investment of the contractor under this head would be Rs. 2 crores and the tendered rates were predicated upon and co related to this understanding.[156G] 122 8.
When an agreement is predicated upon an agreed fact situation, if the latter ceases to exist the agreement to that extent becomes irrelevant of otiose.
[156G] 9.
Phrases such as 'claim arising out of contract ' or 'relating to the contract ' or 'concerning the contract ' on proper construction would mean that if while entertaining or rejecting the claim or the dispute in relation to claim may be entertained or rejected after reference to the contract, it is a claim arising out of contract.
The language of clause 40 shows that any claim arising out of the contract in relation to estimates made in the contract would be covered by the arbitration clause.
If it becomes necessary to have recourse to the contract to settle the dispute one way or the other then certainly it can be said that it is a dispute arising out of the contract.
[157F G] In the instant case, the arbitration clause is so widely worded as disputes arising out of the contract or in relation to the contract or execution of the works that it would comprehend, within its compass a claim for compensation related to estimates and arising out of the contract.
[157H] 10.
(i) A dispute, the determination of which turns on the true construction of the contract, would also seem to be a dispute under arising out of or concerning the contract.
The test is that if in settling a dispute, a reference to the contract is necessary, such a dispute would be covered by the arbitration clause.[158D E] A.M. Mair & Co. vs Gordhandas Sagarmull., [1950] S.C.R. 792; Ruby General Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Pearey Lal Kumar And Another; ; ; referred to.
Where the parties are at one in asserting that they entered into a binding contract, but a difference has arisen between them whether there has been a breach by one side or the other, or whether circumstances have arisen which have discharged one or both parties from further performance, such differences should be regarded as differences which have arisen 'in respect of ' or 'with regard to ' of 'under ' the contract, and an arbitration clause which uses these, or similar expressions should be contoured accordingly.
[159B C] Union of India vs Salween Timber Construction (India) & Ors.
, ; ; Heyman & Anr.
vs Darwins Ltd., at 366; Astro Vencedor Compania Naviora S.A. of Panama vs Mabanaft G.M.B.H.
The Diamianos.
, [1971] 2 Q.B. 588; Gunter Henck vs Andre & CIE. S.A., [1970] 1 Lloyd 's Law Reports 235; referred to In the instant case, from the pleadings, it clearly transpires that both the parties had recourse to the contract.
It is satisfactorily established that the claim made by the contractor would be covered by the arbitration clause.
[160B] 123
