In a departmental inquiry conducted by the second respondent U.P. Administrative Tribunal into certain charges levelled against the appellant a Deputy Superintendent of Police, the Tribunal dismissed the application of the appellant praying for summoning 8 witnesses for being examined in his defence.
The Tribunal relied upon rule 20A(1) of the Travelling Allowances Rules (Financial Handbook Volume III) and observed that the appellant had to deposit the expenses of the witnesses, who were private person, if he wanted to have them examined in his defence within a specified time.
The appellant did not deposit the amount and the witnesses were not summoned.
Pursuant to the finding of the Tribunal the appellant was removed from service.
The appellant filed a writ petition in High Court contending that in view of G.O. No. 4197 R/VIIIA/500(146)68 travelling allowance and diet money of witnesses to be examined before the Tribunal must have been paid by the State Government but he was asked to deposit a sum of Rs. 900 for the witnesses being summoned and this was in violation of the relevant provision relating to conduct of proceeding before the Tribunal.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition in limine.
In this appeal the question was whether on this account there was non compliance with the principles of natural justice., Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: There is no compliance with the principles of natural justice in this case.
[251C] Rule 20A(1) of the Travelling Allowances Rules (Financial Handbook Volume III) is not quite clear, for it does not say who should bear the expenses initially or whether the reference to be made by the inquiring authority under clause (c) should be made before or after the examination of the witnesses.
Clause (b) of this sub rule seems to have been considered 245 satisfied in the present case as the Tribunal had decided to summon the witnesses provided the amount was deposited by the appellant as directed.
[249B C] G.O. No. 4191 R/VIIIA 500(146) which was evidently intended to clarify Rule 20A of the Travelling Rules makes it clear that responsibility for payment of travelling allowance to defence witnesses produced in departmental inquiry conducted under section 7 of the Police Act is of the Government and that if a witness has been permitted to be produced in defence it is not open to the inquiry officer to lay down a condition that his travelling expenses should be first deposited by the delinquent officer before the witness is examined.
[250G H] In the present case, the Tribunal has considered the witnesses to be material but has insisted on the appellant depositing initially a sum of Rs. 900 for the travelling expense and daily allowance of the witnesses with an obligation to make good any shortfall in those allowances and loss of professional income of the witnesses.
The respondent State did not contend that this G.O. does not apply to the case of the appellant.
Moreover, the appellant was under suspension from 11 12 1967 and there is nothing on record to show that he was financially sound and in a position to deposit the sum of Rs. 900 and pay any further amount which may be required to next any shortfall in the travelling and daily allowances and the loss of professional income of the 8 more witnesses whom he wanted to be examined on his side.
The failure to cause the production of those witnesses at the expense of the Government might have caused prejudice to the appellant for it cannot be predicated what conclusion the Tribunal would have reached in regard to charges 1 to 3 if the evidence of those witnesses was available for its consideration.
[250H, 251 A C]
