The appellant who resigned from service of the respondent company after serving for over 29 years was not paid retiring gratuity by the respondent, even when the appellant had become eligible for it under the relevant gratuity rules styled as the Retiring Gratuity Rules, 1937 (Gratuity Rules for short).
The appellant filed a suit in the Court of Subordinate Judge for recovering the amount of gratuity.
The Subordinate Judge decreed the suit.
The High Court allowed the appeal filed by the respondent.
Hence this appeal.
The respondents submitted; (1) that since the appellant did not retire from the service but left the service by resigning the post, he was not eligible for gratuity under Rule 6 of the Retiring Gratuity Rules, 1937; (2) that under Rule 10 the retiring gratuity was payable at the absolute discretion of the respondent and could not be claimed as a matter of right by the appellant even if he had become eligible for it; and (3) that claim to gratuity could not be enforced in the civil court.
Allowing the appeal ^ HELD: Rule 6(a) which prescribed the eligibility criterion for payment of retiring gratuity provides, inter alia, that every permanent uncovenanted employee of the Company, will be eligible for retiring gratuity.
The expression `retirement ' has been defined in Rule 1(g) to mean `the termination of service by reason of any cause other then removal by discharge due to misconduct '.
It is admitted that the appellant was a permanent uncovenanted employee of 326 the Company paid on monthly basis and he rendered service for over 29 years and his service came to an end by reason of his tendering resignation which was unconditionally accepted.
It is not suggested that he was removed by discharge due to misconduct.
Unquestionably.
therefore, the appellant has within the meaning of the expression, thus retired from service of the respondent and he is qualified for payment of gratuity in terms of Rule 6.
[ 332D F] According to the High Court, the service conditions of the appellant were.
governed by the Works Standing orders of the respondent.
No exception has been taken to this finding.
These Works Standing orders were framed and certified under the Industrial Employment (Standing orders) Act, 1946.
The Act was a legislative response to the laissez faire rule of hire and fire at sweet will.
It was an attempt at imposing statutory contract of service between two parties unequal to negotiate, On the footing of equality.
The intendment underlying the Act and the provisions of the Act enacted to give effect to the intendment and the scheme of the Act leave no room for doubt that Standing orders certified under the Act become part of the statutory terms and conditions of service between the employer and his employee and they govern the relationship between the parties.[333E 334G] Western India Match Company Ltd. vs Workman; [1974] I SCR 434.
Work man of Messrs Firestone Tyre & Rubber Co of India (P) Ltd. vs Management and ors; ; at 612.
Workman in Buckingham and carnatic Mills Madras vs the presiding Officer, labour Court, Meerut & Ors; [1984] 1 SCC 1.
Agra Electricity Supply co. Ltd. vs Sri Alladin & Ors;[1970] 1 SCR 806, referred to Upon a combined reading of Standing order (S.O) 54 along with Rule 5 and 6(a) of the Gratuity Rules, it becomes distinctly clear that payment of gratuity was an express or statutory conditions of service governing the relationship between the appellant and the respondent.
Therefore, it would be obligation upon the respondent to pay gratuity on retirement to the appellant.
If the respondent refuses to pay or discharge its statutory obligation, the claim can be enforce by a civil suit.
The High Court was of the opinion that in view of Rule 1 of the Gratuity Rules, recovery of gratuity cannot be enforced by a civil suit.
But upon an Industrial dispute being raised, the Industrial Tribunal may be in a position to award the gratuity as a matter or right even under the existing rules.
In reaching this conclusion the High Court overlooked the effect of the certified Standing orders and the inter relation between the Gratuity Rules and S.O 54, When under 1946 Act, an obligation is cast on the employer to specifically and precisely lay down the conditions of service, Sec.
13(2) subjects the employer to a penalty if any act is done in contravention of the Standing orders certified under the.
A face of collective bargaining is that any settlement.
arrived at between the parties would be treated as incorporated in the contract of service of each employee governed by the settlement.
Similarly, certified standing Orders which statutorily prescribe the conditions of service shall be deemed to be incorporated in the contract of employment of each employee with his employer.
If the employer commits a breach of the contract of employment the same can be enforced or remedied depending upon the 327 relief sought by a civil suit.
The jurisdiction of civil court amongst others is determined by the nature of relief claimed.
If the relief claimed is a money decree by enforcing statutory conditions of service, the civil court would certainly have jurisdiction to grant the relief.
[335F 337B] Labour Law Text and Materials by Paul Davies and Mark Freedland p 233 and system of Industrial Relations in Great B itain p. 58 59, referred to.
In the instant case, the appellant filed the suit alleging that he was entitled to payment of gratuity on completion of service for the period prescribed.
He alleged it and the High Court accepted it as a condition of service.
Its breach would give rise to a civil dispute and civil suit would be the only remedy.
In the case of workmen governed by the may provide an additional forum to recover monetary benefit.
It is not suggested that appellant was a workman governed by the .
The High Court was, therefore, in error in holding that the remedy was only by way of an industrial dispute and not by a civil suit.
[337C D] The Court while interpreting and enforcing the relevant gratuity rules will have to bear in mind the concept of gratuity.
The fundamental principle under lying gratuity is that it is a retirement benefit for long service as a provision for old age.
Demands of social security and social justice made it necessary to provide for payment of gratuity.
On the enactment of the a statutory liability was cast on the employer to pay gratuity.
Pension and gratuity which have much in common are well recognised retiral benefits as measures of social security.
It is now well settled that pension is a right and payment of it does not depend upon the discretion of the employer, nor it can be denied at the sweet will or fancy of the employer.
If pension can be recovered through civil suit, there is no justification in treating gratuity on a different footing.
Pension and gratuity in the matter of retiral benefits and for recovering the same must be put on par [339G H; 340A] Burhanpur Tapti Mills Ltd. vs Burhanpur Tapti Mills Mazdoor Sangh; , Deokinandan Prasad vs State of Bihar & Ors.
,[1971] Supp SCR 634, State of Punjab & Anr. vs Iqbal Singh, ; , D.S. Nakara & Ors vs Union of India; , ; referred to.
If the rules for payment of gratuity become incorporated in the Standing orders and thereby acquired the status of the statutory condition of service, an arbitrary denial referable to whim, fancy or sweet will of the employer must be, rejected as arbitrary.
Sec. 4 of the 1946 Act which confers power on the certifying officer or the appellate authority to adjudicate upon the fairness or reasonableness of the provisions would enable this Court to reject that part of Rule 10 which confers absolute discretion on the employer to pay gratuity even if it is earned, at its absolute discretion, as utterly unreasonable, ineffective and unenforceable.
That part of Rule 10 must, therefore, be treated as ineffective and un enforceable.
[340C D] 328 The claim to absolute discretion not to pay gratuity even when it is earned is a hang over of the laissez faire days and utterly inconsistent with the modern notion of fair industrial relations and, therefore, it must be rejected as ineffective and hence unenforceable.
[340H] Western India Match Company Ltd. vs Workmen, ; referred to.
Our Constitution envisages a society governed by rule of law.
Absolute discretion uncontrolled by guidelines which may permit denial of equality before law is the anti thesis of rule of law.
Absolute discretion not judicially reviewable inheres the pernicious tendency to be arbitrary and is, therefore, violative of article 14.
Equality before law and absolute discretion to grant or deny benefit of the law are diametrically opposed to each other and cannot co exist.
Therefore also the conferment of absolute discretion by Rule 10 of the Gratuity Rules to give or deny the benefit of the rules cannot be upheld and must be rejected as unenforceable.
[341A C]
