In both Civil Appeal No.41 of 1979 and Civil Appeal No. 379 of 1980, the appellants are the unsuccessful house owners to get an eviction order against their tenants from the portions of their respective houses from the court 's below.
In the first case, the questions arose whether the portion of the premises sought to be vacated by the landlady was one single unit or two separate units.
In the second case, the point involved was whether the word " occupation" included actual residence of the landlord even though the may not have been residing there.
Allowing the appeals, by special leave, the Court, ^ HELD: (C.A. No. 41/1979) In view of the Trial Court 's finding basing its decision on the report of the Commissioner appointed for the purpose, that the entire building constituted one single unit, the appellant being in occupation of a portion of the same, she is entitled to get release of the other portion occupied by the tenant.
[323F G] In C.A. No. 379/1980.
The case of the appellant is clearly covered by the provisions of Explanation (iv) to section 21(1)(b) of the Uttar Pradesh Urban Buildings (Regulation of Letting, Rent and Eviction), Act 1972.
[323C] 1:2.
The policy of the law was to give a facility to the landlord so to secure the entire building where he is in occupation of a part of the same and wants to occupy the whole house.
[321D] 316 1:3.
In Babu Singh Chauhan vs Rajkumari Jain & Ors.
; , the Supreme Court, while construing the word "occupation" occurring in section 21(1)(b) of the 1972 Act, used the word "possession", treating the word "possession" as synonym of "occupation" and since the word "possession" or "occupation" may take various forms held that even keeping the house hold effects by the owner is an act of occupation.
[319H, 320D G] Therefore, even if a landlord is serving outside or living with his near relations but makes casual visits to his house and thus retains control of over the entire area or a portion of the property, he would in law be deemed to be in occupation of the same.
To accept the contention that Explanation IV required actual physical occupation by the landlord of the portion retained by him would destory the very concept of constructive or actual possession or occupation.
[320H; 321A B] 2:1.
All the Rent Control Acts try to deprive and curtail the right of an owner of his property and have put constraints and restraints on his right by giving substantial protection to the tenants in public interest, otherwise if Rent Acts were to be abolished or were not there, the landlord could get a tenant evicted only by a notice after expiry of the tenancy in accordance with the provisions of the Transfer of Property Act.[321E F] 2:2.
The words "shall be conclusive to prove" in Explanation (iv) clearly indicate that it is a substantive right which belongs to the landlord and which has been affirmed and recognised if a part of an accommodation is retained by the landlord.
The words "conclusive to prove that the building is bona fide required by the landlord" does not constitute a rule of evidence.
[321F G] 2:3.
The right to ejectment having accrued to the appellant under Explanation (iv) was a vested right as an owner and could not be affected by the 1976 amendment unless it was couched in a language which was either expressly or by necessary intendment meant to be operative retrospectively.
Explanation (iv) deals not merely with a particular procedure but with the substantive rights of the parties.
The said Explanation has asserted and affirmed the substantive right of a landlord to get portion of a building vacated where he is in occupation of a part of it.
Such a substantive right cannot be taken away merely by a procedural amendment nor does the language of the amendment introduced the 1976.
Act envisage or contemplate such a position.
Section 14 of the 1976 Act merely recites that Explanation (ii) and (iv) of s.21(1)(b) shall be omitted.
There is nothing to show that the legislature intended to give any retrospective effect to the deletion of Explanation (iv).
[321H, 322A D] 3.
The argument that merely because the landlord was living with his son or his relation after retirement and, therefore, was not in occupation of the house cannot be accepted because it was not for the tenant to dictate to the landlord as to how he should use his own premises.
A tenant to has got no right nor any business to interfere with the mode or manner in which a landlord may choose to use his property or live therein.
[323 A B] 317
