On the basis of the investigation made on a First Information Report that one Brindaban the deceased son of PW 1 was kidnapped in a jeep from village Budha to the village Rampura where he was done to death, five persons were put on trial in Sessions Trial No. 107 of 1973.
but they were acquitted by Judgment dated 29.1.1974.
The trial court held that the investigation was defective and the real accused had not been brought on trial.
After a lapse of three years in 1977 a fresh investigation was undertaken and it resulted in the prosecution of the present appellants in the Court of Sessions as killers of Brindaban.
Prosecution examined seven eye witnesses.
The Trial Court assessed the evidence in a fair way and was not prepared to rely on it and therefore directed acquittal of the appellants.
In the State appeal against acquittal, the High Court heavily relying upon two documents The first being exhibit
P. 1 a letter sent by PW 1 Sunderlal to the Superintendent of Police on 29.4.1973 and the second being exhibit P 9 a confidential letter of the Superintendent of police to the Deputy Inspector General of the Department found support for the prosecution case as corroborative evidence with the ocular evidence, and reversed the acquittal, by convicting the appellants under section 148 and 367 IPC.
Hence the appeals by special leave.
Allowing the appeals, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
When in the first trial on the charge of murder and abduction the prosecution had alleged that the deceased had been murdered by a set of five persons different from the present appellants and let in evidence of three eye witnesses being PWs.
1, 3 and 24 of the Second Trial and who are pamittedly close relations of deceased to the effect that those five accused 94 persons and no others including the appellants were responsible for the death of the deceased, acceptance of the evidence of the very same three eye witnesses in the second trial conducted after a lapse of three years implicating the present appellants as murderers will be highly improper.
The fact that these alleged eye witnesses were prepared to implicate the five persons who were acquitted on the earlier occasion and the present appellants on the subsequent occasions in a serious charge like murder is indicative of the fact that no credence can be given to the evidence of these witnesses and they were willing to lend their oath to any story that the prosecution advanced.
Therefore, in an appeal against acquittal the High Court in whose hands there has been a reversal of the acquittal ought not to have found the remaining evidence to be good basis for conviction of the appellants.[96H; 97A D] 2.
The High Court fell into error in relying on the letter of PW 1 Sunderlal to the Superintendent of Police dated 29.4.1973 which is subsequent to the commencement of the investigation of the basis on the First Information Report.
Such a letter written by PW 1 who stood in the place of the prosecutor would not at all be admissible in evidence.
[97E F] Kali Ram vs State of Himachal Pradesh. ; ; followed.
To rely on the contents of the letter exhibit P. 9 written by the Superintendent of police to his superior officer, without examining the writer of the letter and without affording an opportunity to the defence to cross examine the writer, is totally misconceived.
The document was not available to be relied upon for any purpose and the High Court in the instant case was wrong in seeking support from it by way of corroboration of the oral evidence.
[97G H] 4.
In view of the express words in the definition of "abduction" in Section 362 of the I.P.C., the offence of abduction against the accused has not been fully proved, since the name of Vinod the leader of the party has not been mentioned at all during the investigation and even according to the majority of witnesses, on the persuation of the accused (appellants) he went inside his house and came properly dressed and to accompany the group to village Rampura.
[98C D] 5.
The appellants were not liable to be convicted under section 367 of the Penal Code because from the non acceptance by the High Court of the story of murder of the deceased by the appellants and non recording a finding that the grievous hurt leading to death was caused by them, it will be clear that the act of picking of the deceased from his village was unconnected with what happened later.
[98F G] 6.
The charge under section 148 I.P.C. has been conceded by the counsel for the State to relate to what followed at Rampura and is not connected with the accusation of abduction.
The common object as stated by the prosecution would not be available for sustaining the conviction under section 148 I.P.C. in that background.
[98G H] 95
