Appellant and Respondent No.1 were married in 1975 at Bodni Kalan District Faridkot, Punjab according to Sikh rites.
Soon after the marriage, they left for England, where a boy named Pritpal Singh was born to them on October 24, 1976.
Soon thereafter, their relationship came under a strain with the result Respondent 1 was trying to negotiate with a hitman to have the appellant run over by a car.
The Berkshire Police got scent of it resulting in the Respondent 's conviction and sentence for a period of three years.
Ironically the appellant wife intervened and succeeded in obtaining a probation order for the man who had attempted to procure her murder.
The husband was released on probation on February 4, 1982.
The period of probation expired on December 24, 1982.
On January 31, 1983, while the wife was away at work, Respondent No. 1 removed the boy from England and brought him to India.
On the same date, the appellant wife obtained an order under section 41 of the Supreme Court Act, 1981 under which the boy became the ward of the Court with effect from that date.
This order was confirmed on July 22, 1983.
In the meantime the appellant came to India in April, 1983 and on 5.5.1983 filed a petition under section 97 of the Code of Criminal Procedure in the Court of the learned Judicial Magistrate first class Jagraon praying for the custody of the child.
The Respondent No. 1 contested and took an objection that under section 6 of the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956 he was the natural guardian of the minor boy.
The contention was accepted and the petition was dismissed.
The appellant went back to England to resume her work and obtained the confirmation order dated 22.7.1983 referred to above.
Armed with the said order she returned to India and filed a writ Petition in the High Court of Punjab and Haryana.
The Writ Petition was dismissed on the grounds inter alia that her status in England is that of a foreigner, factory worker and a wife living separately from the husband and having no relatives and as such the child would have to live in lonely and dismal surroundings in England, while it would grow in an atmosphere of self confidence and self respect, if it was permitted to live with its father and grand parents: 423 Hence the appeal after obtaining special leave of the Court.
Allowing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: 1.
Section 6 of the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956 constitutes the father as the natural guardian of a minor son.
But that provision cannot supersede the paramount consideration as to what is conducive to the welfare of the minor.
As the matters are presented to the Court the boy, from his own point of view, ought to be in the custody of the mother.
[427A B] 2:1 The modern theory of conflict of laws recognises and, in any event, prefers the jurisdiction of the State which has the most intimate contact with the issues arising in the case.
Jurisdiction is not attracted by the operation or creation of fortuitous circumstances such as the circumstance as to where the child, whose custody is in issue, is brought or for the time being lodged.
To allow the assumption of jurisdiction by another State in such circumstances will only result in encouraging forum shopping.
Ordinarily, jurisdiction must follow upon functional lines.
That is to say, for example, that in matters relating to matrimony and custody, the law of that place must govern which has the closest concern with the well being of the spouses and the welfare of the offsprings of marriage The spouses in this case.
had made England their home where this boy was born to them.
The father cannot deprive the English Court of its jurisdiction to decide upon his custody by removing him to India, not in the normal movement of the matrimonial home but, by an act which was gravely detrimental to the place of that home.
The fact that the matrimonial home of the spouses was in England, establishes sufficient contacts or ties with that State in order to make it reasonable and just for the Courts of that State to assume jurisdiction to enforce obligations which were incurred therein by the spouses.
[427 CG] 2:2 The spouses had set up their matrimonial home in England where the wife was working as a clerk and the husband as a bus driver.
The boy is a British citizen, having been born in England, and he holds a British passport.
It cannot be controverted that, in these circumstances the England Court had jurisdiction to decide the question of his custody.[427B C] International Shoe Company vs State of Washington, ; [1945] quoted with approval.
3:1 In the instance case; (i) The welfare of the boy does not require that he should live with his father or with the grand parents; (ii) the "traumatic experience of a conviction on a criminal charge" is not a factor in favour of the father especially when his conduct following immediately upon his release on probation shows that the experience has not chastened him, and (iii) The father is a man without a character who offered solicitation to the commission of his wife 's murder.
The wife obtained an order of probation for him but, he abused her magnanimity by running away with the boy soon after the probationary period was over.
Even in that act, he displayed a singular lack of respect for law by obtaining a duplicate passport for the boy on an untrue representation that the original passport was lost.
The original passport was, to his knowledge, in the Keeping of his wife.
In this background, the 424 affluence of the husband 's parents cannot be regarded as a circumstance of such overwhelming importance as to tilt the balance in favour of the father on the question of what is truly for the welfare of the minor.
At any rate it will not be less for the welfare of the minor if the lived with his mother.
He was whisked away from her and it cannot be said that there are any circumstance to support the view that the new environment in which he is wrongfully brought is more conducive to his welfare.
He is about 8 years of age and the loving care of the mother ought not to be denied to him.
The father is made of coarse stuff.
The mother earns an income of $100 a week, which is certainly not large by English standards, but is not so low as not to enable her to take reasonable care of the boy.
[426E H] 3:2 It is the duty and function of the court to protect the wife.
against the burden of litigating in an inconvenient forum which she and her husband had left voluntarily in order to make their living in England, where they gave birth to this unfortunate boy.
[427H] (The court directed the custody of the child to the mother forthwith and awarded cost of Rs. 3000) [428B]
