In the election to the Assembly constituency No 31 Jullundur Cantt., which was held on 31.5.1980, the total votes polled from the constituency were 47650, out of Which the appellant polled 19710, whereas the respondent Yash secured 418 votes more i.e. 20128 votes; Therefore, the appellant sought to challenge the election of Respondent No. 1 on various grounds consisting of corrupt practises committed by respondent No. 1 which materially affected the result of the election.
According to the appellant, Respondent No. 1 through speeches either made by him or his friend carried out a vilifying campaign to show that the appellant was directly connected with the murder of one Asa Ram a harijan and one of Supporters of Congress (l) party, so as to wean away the votes of the harijans of the locality and members of the Congress (l) party.
The Punjab and Haryana High Court disbelieved the oral evidence and found no nexus with the news items etc.
and dismissed the election petition.
Hence the appeal by special leave.
^ HELD 1.1 It is well settled that where the doctrine of inuendo is applied, it must be clearly proved that the defamatory allegation was made in respect of a person though not named yet so fully described that the allegation would refer to that person and that person alone.
Inuendo cannot be proved merely by inferential evidence which may be capable of two possibilities.[386F G] 1.2 In the instant case, the evidence statement of witnesses and the documents produced, do not call for any inference of any close connection or direct link between the imputations made against the appellant in 1978 and those made in 1980.
In none of the documents produced by the appellant which refer to the activities of the first respondent, there is the slightest possible hint that the appellant had anything to do with the murder of Asa Ram.
Further more, the allegations made in 1978 being far too remote and there being no continuous link between those allegations and the allegations made in 1980, the first category of the charge against the respondent cannot be sustained, more particularly because in 384 1978 a fresh election was not in the offing because the Janata Government came into power in 1977 and in normal course would have completed its full term in 1982.
Thus, at that time no body could have predicted that the election would be held only two years later which happened by a sudden spurt of events.
[386E F; G H] N. Vimala Devi vs K. Madhusudhana Reddy [1975] 3.
S.C.R. 128 followed.
2.1 It is now well settled by several authorities of the Supreme Court that an allegation of corrupt practice must be proved as a strictly as a criminal charge and the principle of preponderance of probabilities would not apply to corrupt practices envisaged by the Act because if this test is not applied a very serious prejudice would be caused to the elected candidate who may be disqualified for a period of six years from fighting any election, which will adversely affect the electoral process.[387F G] 2.2 In the instant case, the evidence both oral and documentary led by the appellant falls short of the standard of proof required to bring his case within the four corners of section 123(4) of the Representation of the People Act 1951(1).
About the speech made on May 18, 1980, the deposition of PW8 cannot be relied on inasmuch as it is impossible to conceive of contradictions made by him.
If the witness apart from being interested and partisan, had been present in the meeting throughout, he would not forget who spoke first.
Even P.W 13 cannot be believed since, while admitting in his cross examination that he did not make a noted of what Yash had spoken, yet he was able to give full and grotesque details of the speech, that too, when he was examined in the court after more than a year and half.
[390C D, 388B D] 3.
It is very difficult for a Court to rely on news items published in any newspaper on the basis of information gives by correspondents because that may not represent the true state of affairs.
It is at best a second hand secondary evidence.
[388F G] Samant N. Balakrishna vs George Fernandez & Ors. ; , reiterated.
