The Petitioner in a writ petition sought relief in respect of Veterinary Assistant Surgeons working in the Delhi Administration, alleging that the Veterinary Assistant Surgeons have been denied the benefit of the principle of`equal pay for equal work ' incorporated in Article 39 (d) of the Constitution and that there has been violation of the fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles 14 and 16, because their scale of salary (Rs. 550 990) was lower than the pay scale of Veterinary Assistant Surgeons employed by the Union Territory of Chandigarh (850 1700), or by the Central Government in the Indo Tibetan Boarder Police and by the Border Security Force (Rs. 650 1200).
The writ petition was opposed by the Union of India denying many of the allegations in the petition, while the Development Commissioner, while the Delhi Administration contested the writ petition by justifying the impugned pay scale and also by pleading that the matter should be allowed to be examined by the Fourth Pay Commission.
Dismissing the writ petition, ^ HELD: 1.
The question of the fixation of pay scale for Veterinary Assistant Surgeons should be left to be decided by the Government on the basis of the recommendation of the Fourth Pay Commission.
The question of discrimination cannot be decided in isolation.
Having regard to the long delay in approaching this Court after the fixation of the pay scale, no relief can be granted in respect of the period between 1973 and 1984.
The petitioner is at liberty to make its representation before the Fourth Pay Commission.
[434 H E] 430 2.
In addition to the principle of `equal pay for equal work ', the pay structure of the employees of the Government should reflect many other social values.
Apart from being the dominant employer, the Government is also expected to be a model employer.
It has, therefore, to follow certain, basic principles in fixing the pay scales of various posts and cadres.
The degree of skill, strain of work, experience involved, training required, responsibility undertaken, mental and physical requirements disagreeableness of the task, hazard attendant on work and fatigue involved are some of the factors which should be taken into consideration in fixing pay scales.
The method of recruitment, the level at which the initial recruitment is made in the hierarchy of service or cadre, minimum educational and technical qualification prescribed for the post, the nature of dealings with the public, avenues of promotion available and horizontal and vertical relativity with other jobs in the same service or outside are also relevant factors.
[432F H; 433A] 3.
Wile fixing the pay scales, the paying capacity of the Government, the total financial burden which has to be borne by the general public, the disparity between the incomes of the Government employees and the incomes of those who are not in government service and the net amount available for government at the current taxation level, after paying the salaries and allowances to the Government servants have also to be borne in mind.
[433B C] 4.
It is imperative that there should be an evolution and implementation of a scientific national policy of incomes, wages and prices which would be applicable not merely to Government services but also to the other sectors of the national economy.
As far as possible the needs of a family unit have to be borne in mind in fixing the wage scales.
The `needs ' are not static.
They include adequate nutrition, medical facilities, clothing, housing, education, cultural, activities etc.
Care should also be taken to see that what is fixed today as an adequate pay scale does not become inadequate within a about period by providing an automatic mechanism for the modification of the pay scale.
[433E G]
