The business of the appellant consisted in the purchase of copra, manufacture of cocoanut oil and cake therefrom and sale of oil and cake to parties inside the State of Travancore Cochin and sale of oil to parties outside the State.
Before the coming into force of the Constitution of India, under the provisions of the Travancore Cochin General Sales Tax Act, 1125, and the rules made thereunder, for the purposes of assessment to sales tax, the appellant wag entitled to include in his gross turnover the total value of the oil sold by him whether inside the State or outside the State and to deduct therefrom the whole of the value of the copra purchased by him.
Subsequently, in 1951, the Act was amended by the addition of section 26 which, inter alia, provided: "Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act. a tax on the sale or purchase of any goods shall not, after the 31st day of March, 1951, be imposed where such sale or purchase takes place in the course of inter ,State trade. .
For the year 1951 1952, the Sales Tax Officer assessed the appellant to sales tax on a net assessable turnover by taking the value of the whole of the copra purchased by him, adding thereto the respective values of the oil and the cake sold inside the State and deducting only the value of the copra corresponding to the oil sold inside the State.
It was contended for the appellant that in the calculation of the net turnover he was entitled to include the total value of the oil sold by him, both inside and outside the State, and deduct therefrom the total value of the copra purchased by him, and further that, under the overriding provision of the Act under section 26, he was entitled to have the value of the oil sold outside the State deducted.
Held, that the calculation made by the Sales Tax Officer of the net turnover was correct.
The non obstante provision contained in section 26 of the Act has the effect of taking transactions relating to inter State trade out of the purview of the Act and they are excluded in the calculation 108 838 of the gross turnover as well as the net turnover on which sales tax can be assessed.
Aswani Kumar Ghosh vs Arabinda Bose, ; , relied on.
