Four workmen of the appellant company in Civil Appeal No. 209/73 were charged for mis conduct as defined in Standing order No. 16.
The enquiry officer found them guilty of the charges.
On the basis of the Enquiry officer 's report and after looking into the previous record of the workmen, the General Manager dismissed them.
On a dispute having been raised it was referred to the arbitrator, first respondent, under section 10A of the .
The arbitrator held that the enquiry which was otherwise fair and valid was vitiated because no second opportunity was given to the workmen before dismissing them as required by the Standing order No. 17.
The Arbitrator set aside the dismissal of two workmen and confirmed that of the other two.
The management and the workman challenged the award in the High Court by two writ petitions.
The High Court confirmed the award and dismissed both the writ petitions.
Hence these appeals by management and the workmen.
Allowing the appeal of the management and dismissing that of the workmen.
^ HELD: Under Standing order No. 17 no second opportunity of showing cause on the question of punishment is contemplated.
[367D] Neither under the ordinary law of the land nor under industrial law a second opportunity to show cause against the proposed punishment is necessary.
This of course, does not mean that the standing order may not provide for it but unless the Standing order provide for it either expressly or by necessary implication, no enquiry which is otherwise fair and valid will be vitiated by non affording of such opportunity.
[369B D] Standing Order No. 17 provides that a worker may be suspended, fined or dismissed if found guilty of mis conduct as defined in Standing Order No. 16.
Para 3 of Standing Order No. 17 says that "all dismissal orders shall be passed by the Manager or Acting Manager who shall do so after giving the accused an opportunity to offer any explanation.
" The question is whether para 3 provides for such second opportunity being given to the delinquent ? The words "all dis 362 missal orders shall be passed by the Manager after giving, the accused an opportunity to any offer explanation" in para 3 of Standing Order No. 17 are wholly inappropriate to convey the idea of a second hearing or opportunity on the question of punishment but appropriate in the context of seeking an explanation ' in regard to the alleged mis conduct charged against him.
An 'explanation ' is to be called from the 'accused ' which suggests that the same is to be called for prior to the recording of a finding that the delinquent is guilty of mis conduct; it is the alleged mis conduct that is to be explained by him and not the proposed punishment.
On a plain reading of the relevant words no second opportunity of showing cause against the proposed punishment is contemplated either expressly or by necessary implication.
In other word, it is clear that the opportunity spoken of by para 3 of Standing Order No. 17 is the opportunity to be given to the delinquent to meet the charges framed against him.
Further, since the instant Standing Order was certified prior to the enunciation of the law by Courts regarding the observance of the principles of natural justice such as issuance of a charge sheet, holding of an inquiry, opportunity to lead evidence, etc.
It merely contains a bald provision for 'giving the accrued an opportunity to offer any explanation '.
In other words.
different stages in domestic inquiry were never in the contemplation of the framers of the Standing Order.
That being the position it would be difficult to attribute any intention to the framers thereof to provide for a second opportunity being given to the delinquent of showing cause against the proposed punishment.
[368A E; 369C H; 370A B] The view of the Arbitrator as also the view of the High Court proceed on an assumption the Standing Order No. 17 deals with two different stages concerning disciplinary proceedings against a delinquent, first holding of a departmental inquiry into the charges where principles of natural justice must be implied and second the infliction of graver punishment before awarding which opportunity to show cause has been provided for; but the plain reading of the Standing Order read as a whole does not warrant any such assumption and, therefore, the construction placed on Standing order No. 17 by the Arbitrator or the High Court is not possible much less reasonably possible.
[373H; 371A B] In the instant case, admittedly, opportunity to offer explanation in regard to the alleged mis conduct was not only afforded but was availed of by the concerned foul workers by submitting their written explanations to the Manager whereafter the departmental inquiry was held.
In other words Standing Order No. 17 was fully complied with and what is more the Arbitrator has held that the inquiry was otherwise fair and valid.
[371D]
