In a suit filed in the High Court for a declaration and relief in respect of several properties, the Official Receiver of the High Court was appointed Receiver.
On the request of the parties, the official Receiver, decided to sell one of the properties with the permission of the Court.
The price of the property was fixed at Rs. 3.5 lakhs.
The appellant offered a sum of Rs. 4 lakhs for purchase of the property, and by his advocate 's letter enclosed a draft for Rs. 1 lakh, being 1/4 of the amount.
A meeting was held in the presence of the plaintiff and their counsel, and at the meeting the offer received from the appellant was considered and it was decided that the offer of Rs. 4 lakh by bank draft.
The Official Receiver accepted the offer of the appellant, communicated the acceptance and requested the appellant to deposit the balance amount.
The Official Receiver, thereafter moved the High Court for directions to remove respondents 1 to 4 on the ground that they had trespassed into the property a few months earlier.
Respondents 1 to 4 moved an application for being impleaded in the suit and contended that they were residing with their families under a licence since 1975 and had constructed pucca huts thereon and that with the knowledge of this continuous possession, the parties to the suit have filed the suit among themselves without impleading them (respondents 1 to 4).
583 The Single Judge rejected the aforesaid contentions of respondents 1 to 4 and held that though they were prepared to offer the sum of Rs. 1 lakh more than the appellant the property could not be sold to them.
The Division Bench, however allowed their appeal, directed respondents 1 to 4 to pay to the Official Receiver a sum of Rs. 1.25 lakhs immediately and the balance of Rs. 3.75 lakhs thereafter and on such payment ordered sale of the disputed property to respondents 1 to 4 and their 34 nominees on the ground that the Court should do social justice and in doing such justice no technicality of law would stand in its way.
Dismissing the Appeal to this Court, ^ HELD: [Per Fazal Ali & Sabyasachi Mukharji, JJ Majority] In administering justice social or legal jurisprudence has shifted away from finespun technicalities and abstract rules to recognition of human beings as human beings.
The Division Bench of the High Court had adopted the above approach, and no law is breached by the view taken by it.
It is improper for this Court in exercise of the discretion vested under article 136 of the Constitution to interfere with that decision.
[595 FG; 622A B] [Per Fazal Ali, J.] 1.
In our opinion, there appears to be some misapprehension about what actually social justice is.
There is no ritualistic formula or any magical charm in the concept of social justice.
All that it means is that as between two parties if a deal is made with one party without serious detriment to the other, then the Court would lean in favour of the weaker section of the society.
Social justice is the recognition of greater good to larger number without deprivation of accrued legal rights of anybody.
If such a thing can be done then indeed social justice must prevail over any technical rule.
It is in response to the felt necessities of time and situation in order to do greater good to a larger number even though it might detract from some technical rule in favour of a party.
Living accommodation is a human problem for vast millions in our country.[595B D] 2.
Call it social justice or solving a socioeconomic problem or give it any other name or nomenclature, the fact of the matter is that this was the best course in the circumstances that could have been adopted by the court.
Justice social, economic and political is preamble to our Constitution.
Administration of justice can no longer be merely protector of legal rights but must whenever possible be dispenser of social justice.
[595H 596A] 4.
The Division Bench of the High Court has done substantial justice by throwing aboard the technicalities particularly for the reason that courts frown over a champartous litigation or agreement even though the same may be valid.
The Division Bench by its decision got more 584 money for the owners on the one hand and one the other sought to rehabilitate the 38 families of the respondent who had already built permanent structures.
[597G H] In the instant case, the Division Bench was perfectly justified in accepting the offer of the respondents because: (a) the respondents were prepared to pay Rs. 1 lakh more than the appellant and the appellant did not pay the balance of Rs. 3 lakhs, (b) possession being 9/10th of title, the respondents being in actual possession would have no difficulty in becoming the owners, (c) respondents were prepared to purchase the property notwithstanding litigation, because if they became owners no one could challenge their title or possession.
The Single Judge completely ignored two material aspects: (a) that a bulk of the consideration money viz. Rs. 3 lakhs out of Rs. 4 lakhs was not paid by the appellant, and (b) that an owner also has right to impose certain conditions, and in exercise of that, the condition that the purchase would have to buy the land subject to the pending litigation was imposed [579C F; 5 6A D] (Per Varadarajan, J. dissenting) 1.
The Division Bench had no right or justification to alter or modify the earlier order made for the sale of the property which had become final, or to hold that a subsequent offer made by respondents 1 to 4 to purchase the property for Rs. 5 lakhs should be accepted merely because it appears to be advantageous to the owners of the property in the name of social justice.
[612F] 2.
The benefit claimed on behalf of respondents 1 to 4 which cannot called a right, for there is no corresponding obligation cannot be equated with or even brought anywhere near the social justice mentioned in the preamble of the Constitution.
[612G] 3.
Respondents 1 to 4 are trespassers in respect of the property which is in custodia legis and they are in contempt of the Court.
They cannot be allowed to continue to be in contempt and urge it as a ground for obtaining the benefit of the sale of the property in their favour.
If the appellant has not complied with any condition it may be ground for the owners and the Official Receiver not to accept his offer and refuse to sell the property to him and not for respondents 1 to 4 to raise any objection.
The offer has been accepted rightly or wrongly more than once and there fore the appellant may have a right to sue for specific performance of the contract on the basis of that acceptance by the official Receiver given with the approval of the parties.
The same is the position in regard to the delay of about a month in paying the balance of Rs.3 lakhs by the appellant.
[611D F] In the instant case, the property has been agreed to be sold by private treaty and the Official Receiver has been authorised to sell the property either by public auction or by private treaty.
The Court does not come into the picture in such a case and there is no need for the Court to approve 585 or confirm such sale.
The parties who are sui juris must be deemed to have known their interest best when they chose to approve the sale of the property for Rs. 4 lakhs in favour of the appellant notwithstanding the fact that respondents 1 to 4 had offered to purchase the property for Rs.5 lakhs.
The appeal has therefore to be allowed.
[612E; 613B] Everest Coal Company (P) Ltd vs State of Bihar & Others, [1974] 1 SCR P. 571 at P. 573, Kayjay Industries (P) Ltd. vs Asnew Drums (P) Ltd & Others, [1974] 3 SCR P. 678, Jibon Krishna Mukherjee vs New Bhee bhum Coal Co. Ltd. & Apr., [1960] 2 SCR P. 198.
Tarinikamal Pandit & Others vs Prafulla Kumar Chatterjee, [1979] 3 SCR P. 340, referred to.
(Per Sabyasachi Mukherji, J) 1.
The pendency of the proceedings under Section 145 of the Code of Criminal procedure and order, if any, passed thereon does not in any way affect the title of the parties to the disputed premises though it reflects the factum of possession.
[616D] Bhinka and Others vs Charan Singh, [1959] Supp. 2 S.C.R. P.798 referred to.
When the property is in custody of a receiver appointed by the court, the property is in the custody of the court and interference with such possession should not be encouraged and no party can acquire any title or right by coming in or over the property which is in the possession of the receiver or sanction of the court[618F] Halsbury 's Laws of England, 4th Edn., Vol, 39 pages 451,452 paragraph 890,891: Kerr On Receivers 16th Edn.
pages 121 referred to.
The concept to social justice is not foreign to legal justice or social well being or benefit to the community rooted in the concept of justice in the 20th century.
The challenge of social justice is primarily a challenge to the society at large more than to the court immediately.
Social justice is one of the aspirations of our Constitution.
But the courts, are pledged to administer justice as by law established.[620F] In the instant case, in formulating the concept of justice, however, the inarticulate factor that large number of human beings should not be dislodged from their possession if it is otherwise possible to do so cannot but be a factor which must and should influence the minds of judges.
It is true that the persons who were alleged to be in possession are with unclean hands, but they came for shelter and built in hutments.
They do not want to be rehabilitated at competitive bargain price.
In the circumstances they should not be denied rehabilitation on the ground of their original illegitimacy.
The felt necessities of time and in this case the convenience of the situation and the need for adjusting the rights of a larger number of 586 people without deprivation of any accrued right of anybody would be justice according to law.
Before social justice as something alien to legal justice, is rejected, it should be remembered that a meaningful definition of the rule of law must be based on the realities of contemporary societies and the realities and the realities of the contemporary societies are men are in acute shortage of living accommodation and if they are prepared to bargain and rehabilitate themselves on competitive terms, they should be encouraged and no technical rules should stand in their way.
That would be justice by highways ' and not infiltration 'by bye lanes '.
[621H 622B]
