The respondent landlord filed a suit for ejectment in the year 1971 and obtained a decree for ejectment against the appellant tenant.
By virtue of the provisions of the U.P. Urban Buildings (Regulation of Letting, Rent and Eviction) Act, 1972, the case was transferred to the court of the Judge, Small Causes, who tried the case and passed a decree in favour of the respondent.
No appeal or revision was filed against the said judgment.
Thereafter, the decree holders filed an execution petition.
The appellant, raised a jurisdictional objection on the basis of the judgment of the Allahabad High Court, (K.K. Saksena vs S.N. Misra to the effect that the transfer of the suit before conferment of the jurisdiction to the Judge, Small Causes Court was not competent and therefore, the decree was not executable.
The respondent 's counsel contended that the suit would have to be tried all over again and the Court held that the decree was without jurisdiction.
Tho decree remained inexecutable, but by virtue of the U.P. Urban Buildings (Regulation of Letting, Rent and Eviction) (Amendment) Act, 1976 section 9 of the 1972 Act was made applicable with retrospective effect to remove The injustice and remedy the mischief which had been caused to the decree holders.
As a result of the amendment, the aforesaid judgment of the Allahabad High Court stood over ruled and effaced.
In view of the aforesaid amendment, the respondents filed an application before the Executing Court for revival of the suit and the decree, which was accepted by the Court, and a Civil Revision filed against the said order was dismissed by the High Court.
744 In the appeal to this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellant, that in view of the Allahabad High Court decision and the 1972 Act, the decree stood set aside and could not be received or made executable even by the 1976 Amendment Act.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
The courts below have rightly decided that after the 1976 Amendment Act the decree became legally executable.
[747A] 2.
By virtue of the 1972 Act the decree could not have been set aside or invalidated and the only consequence which would ensue is that the decree would be lying dormant and could not be executed.
Once the bar placed by the 1972 Act is removed, by virtue of the doctrine of eclipse the decree will revive and become at once operative and executable.
[750H; 751A] 3 Even if the 1972 Act were to apply, the utmost consequence would be that the decree would remain inexecutable but could not be struck off from the records of the case.
This is clear case where the doctrine of eclipse would apply, and in view of the 1976 Amendment Act, the decree will revive and become executable.
This principle has been applied by this Court in several cases and flows from the well known doctrine of eclipse which has been enunciated not only in India but in other countries also.
[747G H] Bhikaji Narain Dhakras & Ors.
vs Stats of Madhya Pradesh & Anr; ; , Deep Chand vs State of U.P of Uttar Pradesh & Ors; [1963] 1 Supp.
SCR 912, section Anbalagan vs B. Devarajan; , Kailash Sonkar vs Smt.
Maya Devi; , referred to.
