The first respondent joined M.B.B.S. course of the appellant Punjab University in 1965.
At that time Regulation 25 of the Punjab University framed under section 31 of the Punjab University Act required a minimum of 50 per cent of marks to pass in each subject and Rule 7.1 relating, inter alia, to M.B.B.S. course provided that a candidate who fails in one or more papers/subjects/or aggregate may be given grace marks upto 1 per cent of the total aggregate marks excluding for practical and internal assessment to his best advantage in order to have him declared to have passed the examination.
In 1970, Rule 7.1 was amended by the addition of an exception to Rule 2.1 which provided that in the case of M.B.B,S. examination however the grace marks shall be given upto 1 per cent of the total marks of each subject and not upto 1 per cent of the aggregate marks of all the subjects.
The first respondent who appeared for the final M.B.B.S. examination in 1974 was declared to have failed in one subject because he could not secure 50 per cent in that subject even after being awarded the grace marks according to the new rule.
This was challenged before the High Court by the first respondent on the ground that the old Regulation 25 read with the old Rule 7.1 which was in force when he joined the course in 1965 should be made applicable to him and he should be declared to have passed in that subject.
The Punjab University contended that there was no element of retrospectivity in the application of the amended rule and that students were bound to secure marks as per the regulation in force at the time of commencement of the examination concerned and they had no vested right to claim the benefit of any regulation or rule which was in force when they were admitted to the course.
Confirming the judgment of a single Judge, a Full Bench of the High Court in a Letters Patent appeal opined that there was nothing in section 31 of the Punjab University Act which would clothe the Senate, explicitly or impliedly 823 with the power to frame regulations retrospectively and held that the regulation, as amended in 1970, had retrospectively altered the condition of the first respondent taking the examination to his detriment and ' could not be applied to him and that he was governed only by Regulation 25 read with Rule 7.1 as it was in force when he joined the course in 1965.
The High Court observed that M.B.B.S. was a single integrated composite course and the change in the regulations was a change in the course of that single integrated course and was retrospective in nature.
Hence this appeal.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: The Senate of the Punjab University had the necessary power under section 31 of the Act to fix, from time to time, the percentage of marks required for passing the examination and to grant or to refuse to grant grace marks or to enhance or reduce the quantum of grace marks.
[830 B] There is no element of retrospectivity in the change brought] about by the addition of the exception to Rule 2.1 of the Calendar for the year 1970.
"Retrospective" according to the Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, Third Edition, in relation to Statutes etc. means "Operative with regard to past time".
The change brought about by the addition of the exception to Rule 2.1 does not say that shall be operative with effect from any earlier date.
It is obviously prospective.
It is not possible to hold that it is retrospective in operation merely because though introduced in 1970 it was applied to the first respondent, who appeared for the final examination in 1974, after he had joined the course earlier in 1965.
No promise was made or could be deemed to have been made to him at the time of his admission in 1965 that there will be no alteration of the rule or regulation in regard to the percentage of marks required for passing any examination or award of grace marks and that the rules relating thereto which were in force at the time of his admission would continue to be applied to him until he finished his whole course.
[830E G] Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, Third Edition, referred to, There is no question of the change in the rule made in the year 1970 having retrospective operation merely because it was applied in 1974 to the first respondent who had joined the M.B.B.S. course in 1965 when the rule regarding award of grace marks was different.
[832C] The University was right in holding that the first respondent was not entitled to grace marks under the old rule but was entitled to grace marks under the new rule and had therefore not passed the examination.
[832D] Sewa Ram vs Kurukshetra University, LPA 97 of 1967 decided on 17.7.1968 by Punjab and Haryana High Court, upheld.
B.N. Mishra vs State, , referred to. 824
