The petitioners in their writ petitions to this Court assailed the detention of a member of the Sikh Community under the . ^ HELD: 1.
These are not ordinary criminal cases involving a few individuals coming from a small locality.
These are extraordinary cases involving serious questions of great public importance touching the security of the nation as well as personal liberty of a sizeable section of the community.
These cases have to be dealt with differently from the usual cases which come up before this Court.[927 C D] 2.
In handling these cases the highest judicial talent and statesmanship are needed and hence these cases cannot just be rejected reserving liberty to the applicants to approach a Judicial Magistrate, a Sessions Judge or even the High Court.
Every step taken in these cases should serve as a healing touch bringing solace to all concerned and lessening by some degree the pain and suffering through which the country and its peace loving people have passed and are passing.
These proceedings should have the effect of assuaging the outraged feelings of many who till now may not be aware of what has actually happened.
[927 F G] 3.
The questions involved are too large and complex for the shoulders of a Single Judge to bear.
These and other cases of like nature should be heard by at least seven learned Judges of this Court whose unquestioned judicial authority, erudition and acumen would be of great assistance in the restoration of peace in one of the States known for valour, devotion, spirit of sacrifice and sense of duty towards the country of the people residing in it.
[927 H; 928 A] 4.
Even if allegations of serious offences against the State may be forthcoming against the arrested persons, the Court may still consider whether it is not possible enlarge at least some of them, who may be in a repentant mood, on bail to facilitate early restoration of normalcy in the State.
There may be many other things which may be done and they are within the domain of the Judges, who may hear these cases.
If this Court in the end can succeed in establishing peace and harmony in the country, it would be its finest hour.
[928G H; 929 A] (Cases referred to Larger Bench.)
