The facts are that the respondent made a representation dated June 18, 1983 against an order of detention passed by the District Magistrate, Moradabad dated November 6, 1982 for his detention under sub section
(3) of section 3 of the , and the same was duly forwarded by the District Magistrate to the Advisory Board on June 21.
The State Government had in the mean while on June 13, 1983 made a reference tn the Advisory Board under section 10 of the Act i.e. within three weeks from the dale of detention together with the order of detention and the grounds therefor for its opinion.
On June 23, 1983 the representation was examined by the Joint Secretary, Home Department who marked the file to the Home Secretary on June 27, 1983 who on his turn placed the file before the Chief Minister for his comments on June 27, 1983.
The Chief Minister took to days to study the file and ultimately passed an order rejecting the representation.
On July 2, 1983 the State Government forwarded the representation made together with the comments to the Government of India and the Central Government rejected the same on July 19, 1983.
It appears that on July S, 1983 the respondent through his counsel simultaneously addressed two representations for revocation of his detention under section 14 of the Act, one addressed to the Prime Minister of India and the other to the State Government.
The representation made to the Central Government addressed in the name of the Prime Minister was received in the Prime Minister 's Secretariat on July 7, 1983 and the grievance of the respondent before the High Court was that the Central Government had not dealt with his application for the revocation of the order of detention under section 14 of the Act.
The High Court observed that the right of the detenu to make a representation to the Central Government for revocation of the order of detention under section 14 of Act was intended to be an additional check or safeguard against the improper exercise of its power of detention by the detaining authority or the State Government and therefore the failure on the part of the Central Government to consider the same was tantamount to a denial of the constitutional safeguard as contemplated by article 22(5) 790 of the Constitution.
It accordingly held the continued detention of the respondent to be illegal.
Aggrieved by the order, the State preferred an Special Leave.
Allowing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: (1) The constitutional imperatives of article 22(5) enjoin that where a detenu simultaneously makes representation to the detaining authority as well as an application under section 14 of the Act, they must not be dealt with by the appropriate Government at the same time and there was no question of any conflict of jurisdiction.
If the Central Government were to revoke the order of detention under section 14 of the Act, there would be no representation for the State Government to consider, or refer to the Advisory Board under section 8(b) of the Act nor will there arise any question of Advisory Board making a report to it, or on receipt of such a report, confirming the order of detention under section 8(f).
The other type of cases can be where notwithstanding that the order of detention has been confirmed under section 8(f) the appropriate Government may, at any time, revoke the same under section 14.
The power of revocation conferred on the appropriate Government under section 14 is independent of the power of confirming or setting aside an order or detention under section 8(f) [795H; 796A D] 2.
The power of revocation conferred on the Central Government under section 14 of the Act is a statutory power which may be exercised on information received by tile Central Government from its own sources including that supplied by tile State Government under sub section
(5) of section 3, or from the detenu in the form of a petition or representation.
It is for the Central Government to decide whether or Dot it should revoke the order of detention in a particular case.
[796G H] Any lapse on the part of State Government in forwarding the representation made by the detenu to the Central Government for revocation of the order of detention under section 14 of the Act or non consideration of the same by the Central Government makes the continued detention of the detenu bad.
[793B C] In the present case, however, the detenu was not deprived of the right of making a representation to the detaining authority under article 22(5) of the Constitution read with section 8(1) of the Act.
Although the detenu had no right to simultaneously make a representation against the order of detention to the Central Government under article 22(5) and there was no duty cast on the State Government to forward the same to the Central Government, nevertheless the State Government forwarded the same forthwith.
The Central Government duly considered that representation which in effect was nothing but a representation for revocation of the order of detention under section 14 of the Act.
That being so.
it was not obligatory on the parr of the Central Government to consider a second representation for revocation under section 14 of the Act.
[797A D] 791
