On the basis of a simple mortgage executed in his favour in the year 1948, the appellant obtained a decree on 4 9 1967, brought the mortgaged property to sale, purchased it himself on 24 7 1968 and got the sale confirmed by court on 28 8 1968.
The first respondent who held a promissory note executed in his favour by the owner of the said property in 1961, instituted a suit for recovery of the sum on 24 9 1964 and got the property attached before judgment on the same day and thereafter obtained a money decree on 30 3 1967, and filed an execution petition for realising the money due under the decree by bringing the property to sale.
Thereupon the appellant filed a claim petition under O.21, r. 58 C.P.C., for getting the attachment raised.
The claim petition was resisted by the first respondent inter alia on the ground that it was incompetent as the appellant had neither any interest in the equity of redemption nor was he in possession of the property.
The trail court allowed the claim petition holding inter alia that what was attached on 24 9 1964 was the entire property and not the equity of redemption alone.
The Civil Revision Petition filed by the first respondent against the order of the trial court was allowed by the High Court which held that the appellant having failed to prove that he had an interest in the property on the date of the attachment and was in possession of the property, either actual or constructive, on that date he was not entitled to have the attachment raised.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: The trial court erred in observing that what was attached before judgment on 24 9 1964 was not the equity of redemption but the entire property.
There could be no doubt that on 24 9 1964 when the property was attached before judgment long after the mortgage dated 31 7 1948 and two years before the suit was filed on the mortgage in 1966, the mortgagor had the equity of redemption and that what could have been attached in law on 24 9 1964 was the equity of redemption alone and not the entire interest in the property.
The property.
The appellant had no doubt an interest in the property as mortgagee, but he could not have been in possession of the property as he was only a 113 simple mortgagee.
He was a secured creditor as he had a mortgage in his favour, and any attachment effected after the date of the mortgage and during its subsistence could only be subject to that mortgage.
Since he had no interest in the equity of redemption on the date of attachment, he could not have had any objection to that right of the mortgagor being attached by the first respondent.
Therefore, he was not a person who could, in law, file any claim petition under O. 21; r. 58 objecting to the attachment of the equity of redemption.
[116 A; C D; F H] The attaching creditor can bring the property to sale only subject to the mortgage as long as it is subsisting.
That is to say, he could bring only the mortgagor 's equity of redemption to sale if it had not already been extinguished by it sale in execution of any decree obtained on that mortgage.
But if the equity of redemption has already been sold after the date of the attachment, the attaching decree holder could proceed only against the balance, if any, of the sale price left after satisfying the mortgagee decree holder 's claim under the decree.
The mortgagee 's right is thus not affected all.
[117 B C]
