In regard to admission to M.B.B.S. and post graduate medical courses, a somewhat uniform and consistent practice had grown in almost all the States and Union Territories to give preference to those candidates who had their domicile or permanent residence within the State for a specified number of years ranging from 3 to 20 years and to those who had studied in educational institutions in the State for a continuous period varying from 4 to 10 years.
Sometimes the requirement was phrased by saying that the applicant must have his domicile in the State.
The petitioners and the appellant who sought admission in M.B.B.S. and M.D.S. courses in different universities of different States and Union Territory of Delhi challenged the residential requirement and institutional preference on the ground of being violative of Constitution.
The question which arose for consideration was whether, consistently with the constitutional values, admissions to a medical college or any other institution of higher learning situate in a State could be confined to those who had their 'domicile ' within the State or who were resident within the State for a specified number of years or can any reservation in admissions be made for them so as to give them precedence over those 943 who do not possess 'domicile ' or residential qualification within the State, irrespective of merit.
Disposing of the writ petitions and the civil appeal.
^ HELD: (Per Bhagwati and Ranganath Misra, JJ.) The entire country is taken as one nation with one citizenship and every effort of the Constitution makers is directed towards emphasizing, maintaining and preserving the unity and integrity of the nation.
Now if India is one nation and there is only one citizenship, namely, citizenship of India, and every citizen has a right to move freely throughout the territory of India and to reside and settle in any part of India, irrespective of the place where he is born or the language which he speaks or the religion which he professes and he is guaranteed freedom of trade, commerce and intercourse throughout the territory of India and is entitled to equality before the law and equal protection of the law with other citizens in every part of the territory of India, it is difficult to see how a citizen having his permanent home in Tamil Nadu or speaking Tamil language can be regarded as an outsider in Uttar Pradesh or a citizen having his permanent home in Maharashtra or speaking Marathi language be regarded as an outsider in Karnataka.
He must be held entitled to the same rights as a citizen having his permanent home in Uttar Pradesh or Karnataka, as the case may be.
To regard him as an outsider would be to deny him his constitutional rights and to derecognise the essential unity and integrity of the country by treating it as if it were a mere conglomeration of independent States.
[954F H; 955A B] Article 15, clauses (1) and (2) bar discrimination on grounds not only of religion, race, caste or sex but also of place of birth.
article 16(2) goes further and provides that no citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place of birth, residence or any of them be ineligible for or discriminated against in respect of, any employment or office under the state.
Therefore, it would appear that residential requirement would be unconstitutional as a condition of eligibility for employment or appointment to an office under the State which also covers an office under any local or other authority within the State or any corporation, such as, a public sector corporation which is an instrumentality or agency of the State.
[955H; 956A C] Ramana Dayaram Shetty vs International Airport Authority of India & Ors., ; , referred to.
So far as admissions to an education institution such as a medical college are concerned, article 16(2) has no application.
If, therefore, there is any residence requirement for admission to a medical college in a State, it cannot be condemned as unconstitutional on ground of violation of Art, 16(2).
Nor can Article 15 clauses (1) and (2) be invoked for invalidating such residence requirement because these clauses prohibit discrimination on ground of residence and, as pointed out by this Court in D.P. Joshi vs State 944 of Madhya Bharat, residence and place of birth are "two distinct conceptions with different connotations both in law and in fact".
The only provision of the Constitution on the touch stone of which such residence requirement for admission to a medical college in a State can be required to be tested is article 14 and that is precisely the challenge which falls to be considered in these writ petitions.
[957C E] D.P. Joshi vs State of Madhya Bharat, ; , referred to.
The word 'domicile ' is to identify the personal law by which an individual is governed in respect of various matters such as the essential validity of a marriage, the effect of marriage on the proprietory rights of husband and wife, jurisdiction in divorce and nullity of marriage, illegitimacy, legitimation and adoption and testamentary and intestate succession to moveables.
[957F G] Halsbury 's Laws of England (Fourth Edition) vol.
8, paragraph 421 & 422 and Wicker vs Homes, [1858] 7 HL Cases 124, referred to.
Domicile is basically a legal concept for the purpose of determining what is the personal law applicable to an individual and even if an individual has no permanent home, he is invested with a domicile by law.
There are two main classes of domicile: domicile of origin that is communicated by operation of law to each person at birth, that is the domicile of his father or his mother according as he is legitimate or illegitimate and domicile of choice which every person of full age is free to acquire in substitution for that which he presently possesses.
The domicile of origin attaches to an individual by birth while the domicile of choice is acquired by residence in a territory subject to a distinctive legal system, with the intention to reside there permanently or indefinitely.
Now the area of domicile, whether it be domicile of origin or domicile of choice, is the country which has the distinctive legal system and not merely the particular place in the country where the individual resides.
[958B E] Whether there can be anything like a domicile in a state forming part of the Union of India ? The Constitution recognises only one domicile, namely, domicile in India.
article 5 of the Constitution is clear and explicit on this point and it refers only to one domicile, namely, "domicile in the territory of India.
"The legal system which prevails throughout the territory of India is one single indivisible system.
It would be absurd to suggest that the Legal system varies from State to State or that the legal system of a State is different from the legal system of the Union of India, merely because with respect to the subjects within their legislative competence, the States have power to make laws.
The concept of 'domicile ' has no relevance to the applicability of municipal laws, whether made by the Union of India or by the States.
It would not, therefore, be right to say that a citizen of India is domiciled in one state or another forming part of the Union of India.
The domicile which he has is only one domicile, namely, domicile in the territory of India.
When a person who is permanently resident in one State goes to another State with intention to reside there permanently or indefinitely, his domicile does not undergo any 945 change: he does not acquire a new domicile of choice.
His domicile remains the same, namely, Indian domicile.
Moreover to think in terms of state domicile with be highly detrimental to the concept of unity and integrity of India.
[958H; 959A; D;F H] The argument of the State Governments that the word 'domicile ' in the Rules of some of the State Governments prescribing domiciliary requirement for admission to medical colleges situate within their territories, is used not in its technical legal sense but in a popular sense as meaning residence and is intended to convey the idea of intention to reside permanently or indefinitely, is accepted.
Therefore, the Court would also interpret the word 'domicile ' used in the Rules regulating admissions to medical colleges framed by some of the States in the same loose sense of permanent residence and not in the technical sense in which it is used in private international law.
But even so the Court wishes to warn against the use of the word 'domicile ' with reference to States forming part of the Union of India, because it is a word which is likely to conjure up the notion of an independent State and encourage in a subtle and insidious manner the dormant sovereign impulses of different regions [959H; 960A D] D.P. Joshi v State of Madhya Bharat, ; and Vasundro vs State of Mysore, , referred to.
It is dangerous to use a legal concept for conveying a sense different from that which is ordinarily associated with it as a result of legal usage over the years.
Therefore, it is strongly urged upon the State Government to exercise this wrong use of the expression 'domicile ' from the rules regulating admissions to their educational institutions and particularly medical colleges and to desist from introducing and maintaining domiciliary requirement as a condition of eligibility for such admissions.
[960E G] As the position stands today, there is considerable paucity of seats in medical colleges to satisfy the increasing demand of students for admission and some principle has therefore, to be evolved for making selection of students for admission to the medical colleges and such principle has to be in conformity with the requirement of article 14.
Now, the primary imperative of article 14 is equal opportunity for all across the nation for education and advancement and that cannot be made dependent upon where a citizen resides.
The philosophy and pragmatism of universal excellence through equality of opportunity for education and advancement across the nation is part of our founding faith and constitutional creed.
The effort must, therefore, always be to select the best and most meritorious students for admission to technical institutions and medical colleges by providing equal opportunity to all citizens in the country and no citizen can legitimately, without serious deteriment to the unity and integrity of the nation, be regarded as an outsider in our constitutional set up.
Moreover, it would be against national interest to admit in medical colleges or other institutions giving instruction in specialities, less meritorious students when more meritorious students are available, 946 simply because the former are permanent residents or residents for a certain number of years in the State while the latter are not, though both categories are citizens of India.
Exclusion of more meritorious students on the ground that they are not resident within the State would be likely to promote substandard candidates and bring about fall in medical competence, injurious in the long run to the very region.[963G H; 964D H] Jagdish Saran v Union of India, ; , P. Rajendran vs State of Madras. ; and Periakaruppan vs State of Tamil Nadu, [1971]2 SCR 430, referred to.
What is merit which must govern the process of selection ? It undoubtedly consists of a high degree of intelligence coupled with a keen and incisive mind, sound knowledge of the basic subjects and infinite capacity for hard work, but that is not enough; it also calls for a sense of social commitment and dedication to the cause of the poor.
Merit cannot be measured in terms of marks alone, but human sympathies are equally important.
The heart is as much a factor as the head in assessing the social value of a member of the medical profession.
This is also an aspect which may, to the limited extent possible, be borne in mind while determining merit for selection of candidates for admission to medical colleges though concededly it would not be easy to do so, since it is a factor which is extremely difficult to judge and not easily susceptible to evaluation.[967E F; H; 968A] Jagdish Saran vs Union of India, ; , referred to.
The scheme of admission to medical colleges may depart from the principle of selection based on merit, where it is necessary to do so for the purpose of bringing about real equality of opportunity between those who are unequals.
[969F] Ahmedabad St. Xavier 's College Society and Anr.
v State of Gujarat.
[1974]1 SCR 717 at 799 and Jagdish Saran vs Union of India. ; referred to.
There are, in the application of this principle, two considerations which appear to have weighed with the Courts in justifying departure from the principle of selection based on merit.
One is what may be called State has by and large been frowned upon by the court and struck down as invalid interest and the other is what may be described as a region 's claim of backwardness.
[969G] D.P. Joshi vs State of Madhya Bharat ; , referred to.
Though intra state discrimination between persons resident in different districts or regions of a State as in Minor P. Rajendran 's case and Perukaruppan 's case the Court has in D.N. Chanchala 's case and other similar cases upheld institutional reservation effected through university wise distribution of seats for admission to medical colleges.
The Court has also by its decision in D.P. Joshi 's case and N. Vasundhara 's case sustained the constitutional validity of reservation based on residence requirement within a State for the purpose of admission to 947 medical colleges.
These decisions which all relate to admission to M.B.B.S. course are binding upon the Court and it is therefore not possible for the Court to held, in the face of these decisions, that residence requirement in a State for admission to M.B.B.S. course is irrational and irrelevant and cannot be introduced as a condition for admission without violating the mandate of equality of opportunity contained in article 14.
The Court is therefore of the view that a certain percentage of reservation of seats in the medical colleges on the basis of residence requirement may legitimately be made in order to equalise opportunities for medical admission on a broader basis and to bring about real and not formal, actual and not merely legal, equality.
The percentage of reservation made on this count may also include institutional reservation for students passing the PUC or pre medical examination of the same university or clearing the qualifying examination from the school system of the educational hinterland of the medical colleges in the State and for this purpose, there should be no distinction between schools affiliated to State Board and schools affiliated to the Central Board of Secondary Education.
[979C F; 981D F] P. Rajendran vs State of Madras, [1968]2 SCR 786, Periakaruppan vs State of Tamil Nadu, [1971] 2 SCR 430, D.N. Chanchala vs State of Mysore, [1971] Supp.
SCR 608, D.P. Joshi vs State of Madhya Bharat, ; , Vasundra vs State of Mysore, , Ahmedabad St. Xavier 's College Society and Anr.
vs State of Gujarat, ; at 799 and State of Uttar Pradesh vs P. Tandon; , , referred to.
What should be the extent of reservation based on residence requirement and institutional preference ? Wholesale reservation made by some of the State of Governments on the basis of 'domicile ' or residence requirement within the State or the basis of institutional preference for students who have passed the qualifying examination held by the university or the State excluding all students not satisfying this requirement, regardless of merit, must be condemned, and are unconstitutional and void as being in violation of article 14 of the Constitution.
[982G; 983E F] Jagdish Saran vs Union of India ; , referred to.
It is not possible to provide a categorical answer to this question for, as pointed out by the policy statement of the Government of India, the extent of such reservation would depend on several factors including opportunities for professional education in that particular area, the extent of competition, level of educational development of the area and other relevant factors.
But the Court is of the opinion that such reservation should in no event exceed the outer limit of 70 per cent of the total number of open seats after taking into account other kinds of reservations validly made.
The Medical Education Review Committee has suggested that the outer limit should not exceed 75 per cent but in the opinion of the Court it would be fair and just to fix the outer limit at 70 per cent.
This outer limit of reservation is being laid down in an attempt to reconcile the apparently conflicting claim of equality and excellence.
It may be made clear that this outer limit fixed by the Court will be subject to any reduction or attenuation which may be 948 made by the Indian Medical Council which is the statutory body of medical practitioners whose functional obligations include setting standards for medical education and providing for its regulation and coordination.
This outer limit fixed by the Court must gradually over the years be progressively reduced but that is a task which would have to be performed by the Indian Medical Council.
The Indian Medical Council is directed to consider within a period of nine months from today whether the outer limit of 70 per cent fixed by the Court needs to be reduced and if the Indian Medical Council determines a shorter outer limit, it will be binding on the States and the Union Territories.
The Indian Medical Council is also directed to subject the outer limit so fixed to reconsideration at the end of every three years but in no event should the outer limit exceed 70 per cent fixed by the Court.
The result is that in any event at least 30 per cent of the open seats shall be available for admission of students on all India basis irrespective of the State or university from which they come and such admissions shall be granted purely on merit on the basis of either all India Entrance Examinations or entrance examination to be held by the State.
Of course, it need not be added that even where reservation on the basis of residence requirement or institutional preference is made in accordance with the directions given in this judgment, admissions from the source or sources indicated by such reservation shall be based only on merit, because the object must be to select the best and most meritorious students from within such source or sources.
[983G H; 984A H; 985A B] But different considerations must prevail while considering the question of reservation based on residence requirement within the State or on institutional preference for admission to the post graduate courses, such as, M.S., M.D. and the like.
There excellence cannot be allowed to be compromised by any other considerations because that would be deterimental to the interest of the nation.
Therefore so far as admissions to post graduate courses, such as M.S., M.D. and the like are concerned, it would be eminently desirable not to provide for any reservation based on residence requirement within the State or on institutional preference.
But having regard to broaded considerations of equality of opportunity and institutional continuity in education which has its own importance and value, it is directed that though residence requirement within the State shall not be ground for reservation in admissions to post graduate courses, a certain percentage of seats may in the present circumstances, be reserved on the basis of institutional preference in the sense that a student who has passed M.B.B.S. course from a medical college or university may be given preference for admission to the post graduate course in the same medical college or university but such reservation on the basis of institutional preference should not in any event exceed 50 per cent of the total number of open seats available for admission to the post graduate course.
This outer limit which is being fixed will also be subject to revision on the lower side by the Indian Medical Council in the same manner as in the case of admissions to the M.B.B.S. course.
But even in regard to admissions to the post graduate course, it is directed that so far as super specialities such as neuro surgery and cardiology are concerned, there should be no reservation at all even on the basis of institutional preference and admissions should be granted purely on merit on all India basis.
[985C D; 987F H; 988 A B] 949 What has been said in regard to admissions to the M.B.B.S. and post graduate courses must apply equally in relation to admissions to the B.D.S. and M.D.S. courses.
So for as admissions to the B.D.S. and M.D.S. courses are concerned, it will be the Indian Dental Council which is the statutory body of dental practitioners, which will have to carry out the directions given to the Indian Medical Council in regard to admissions to M.B.B.S. and post graduate courses.
The directions given to the Indian Medical Council may therefore be read as applicable mutatis mutands to the Indian Dental Council so far as admissions to B.D.S. and M.D.S. courses are concerned.
[988C E] In the instant case, the provisional admissions given to the petitioners shall not be disturbed but they shall be treated as final admissions.
[988H] (Per Bhagwati, Amarendra Nath Sen and Ranganath Misra, JJ.) The judgment shall be implemented with effect from the next academic year 1985 86.
Whatever admissions, provisional or otherwise, have been made for the academic year 1984 85, shall not be disturbed on the basis of the judgment.
The judgment will not apply to the State of Andhra Pradesh and Jammu & Kashmir because there were special Constitutional provisions in regard to them which would need independent consideration by this Court.
[991G H; 992A] (Per Amarendra Nath Sen, J.) I agree with the orders passed by my learned brother Bhagwati J. and also the directions given by him.
[989A] The question of constitutional validity of reservation of seats within reasonable limits on the basis of residence and also the question of institutionalised reservation of seats clearly appear to be concluded by various decision of this Court, as has been rightly pointed out by my learned brother in his judgment in which he has referred at length to these decisions.
These decisions are binding on this Court and are to be followed.
Constitutional validity of such reservations within the reasonable limit must, therefore, be upheld.
[989H; 990A B] The real question is the question of the extent of the limit to which such reservations may be considered to be reasonable.
The question of reasonableness of such reservations must necessarily be determined with reference to the facts and circumstances of particular cases and with reference to the situation prevailing at any given time.
[990C] On the question of admission to post graduate medical courses I must confess that I have some misgivings in my mind as to the further classification made on the footings of super specialities.
Both my learned brothers, however, agree on this.
Also in a broader perspective this classification may serve the interests of the nation better, though interests of individual States to a small extent may be effected.
This distinction in case of super specialities proceeds on the basis that in these very important spheres the criterion for selection should be merit only without any institutionalised reservations or any reservation on the ground of residence.
I also agree that the orders and directions proposed in regard to admission to M.B.B.S. and post graduate 950 courses are also to be read as applicable mutatis mutandis in relation to admission to B.D.S. and M.D.S. courses, [990E G]
