section 33(2) of the Representation of the People Act requires that when a nomination paper is filed in respect of a reserved seat in any constituency there must be a clear specification by the candidate of the particular caste or tribe to which he belonged and the area in relation to which that caste or tribe was a scheduled caste or scheduled tribe of the State.
The appellant, in order to contest State assembly election filed his nomination paper without making the declaration in the nomination paper itself but filed as annexure thereto a certificate issued by the Sub Divisional Magistrate certifying that the appellant belonged to a scheduled caste namely 'Lohar '.
The nominating paper was accepted by the Returning Officer and the appellant successfully contested the election.
The respondent, who lost in the election, challenged the election of the appellant on the ground inter alia that in the absence of the requisite declaration prescribed by section 33(2), the nomination paper of the appellant was invalid and was wrongly accepted.
The High Court took the view that since section 33 of the Act required that the nomination paper must be in the prescribed form the filing of any enclosure or certificate along with form was not contemplated.
Hence this appeal.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: When the nomination paper has been made in the prescribed form, there is no legal prohibition against the other requisite particulars being furnished in a separate paper appended to the form instead of 64 writing them out in the form itself.
The annexure appended the form should be treated as part of the nomination paper.
[67 B C] While dealing with nomination papers pertaining to candidates belonging to scheduled castes and scheduled tribes, who, for well known historical reasons, are unfortunately, extremely backward socially, economically and educationally in comparison with other sections of our people, the Court has to place a liberal and benevolent interpretation on the provisions contained in section 33(2) of the Act rather than adopt a narrow, rigid, technical and purely literal construction.
[67 E F] section Sivaswami vs V. Malalkannan and other, [1984] 1 SCC 296, referred to.
In the instant case the requirement of section 33(2) is fully satisfied.
The certificate which was produced by the appellant as an annexure to the nomination paper has to be treated as forming part of the nomination paper and the declaration contained therein that the appellant belongs to the 'Lohar ' caste which is admittedly a scheduled caste in the entirety of the area concerned, must be understood and treated as a declaration by the appellant in the nomination form within the meaning of sub section
(2) of section 33.
Therefore the High Court was in error in holding that the nomination paper filed by the appellant was not valid and its acceptance by the Returning officer was improper.
[68D E; G]
