The appellants were workmen employee, of the first respondent company.
It was alleged that they assaulted another workman as a result of which he sustained bleeding injuries on his head.
A chargesheet was drawn up by the management was served on the appellants, which was followed by a composite domestic enquiry at the end of which all of them were dismissed from service.
The appellants moved five different applications before the Labour Court questioning the validity of the domestic enquiry as also the legality and propriety of the orders terminating their services.
The Labour Court finding that the domestic enquiry was held according to the relevant rules, and that there was evidence in support of the alleged misconduct, held that the management was justified in imposing the penalty of dismissal from service.
The appellants filed five Separate revision petitions before the Industrial Court under sections 66 and 67 of the Madhya Pradesh Industrial Relations Act, 1960.
The President of the Industrial Court finding that the entire approach of the Inquiry Officer Manager in arriving at the findings of mis conduct in the domestic enquiry appeared to be biased and unfair and that the conclusions neither fair nor reasonable, held that the dismissal could not be sustained.
All the revision petitions were therefore allowed, and the orders of the Labour Court dismissing the applications were set aside, and 773 the matters were remanded for a fresh decision after giving the parties due opportunity to adduce evidence in respect of the alleged misconduct.
The respondent company filed writ petitions before the High Court questioning the correctness of the order of the Industrial Court and a Division Bench held that the Industrial Court exceeded its jurisdiction by interfering with the findings of facts, and as this was an error apparent on the face of the award, quashed the decision of the Industrial Court.
Allowing the appeals to this Court, ^ HELD: 1.
(i) Times without number, it has been pointed out that article 226 is a device to secure and advance justice and not otherwise.
[787E] Sadhu Ram vs Delhi Transport Corporation, ; , referred to.
(ii) ordinarily, the Courts exercising extraordinary jurisdiction is loathe to interfere with an order remanding the matter to the authority directed to investigate facts.
[787F] D.P. Maheshwari vs Delhi Administration and Ors., , referred to.
In the instant case, the Industrial Court had made an order of remand.
The High Court was not justified in interfering with the same.
By this uncalled for interference, it has merely prolonged the agony of the unemployed workmen and permitted the jurisdiction of the High Court under article 226 to he exploited by those who can well afford to writ to the detriment of those who can ill afford to wait by dragging the latter from court to court for adjudication of peripheral issues more vital to them.
[787F G] 2.
(i) Dismissal from a service is an order made under the relevant standing orders.
A relief against such an order can be obtained by making an application under section 61 to the Labour Court.
Against the order made by the Labour Court under section 61, a revision would lie under section 66 to the Industrial Court.
[779H; 780C] (ii) If and when an application under section 61 is made the Labour Court will have jurisdiction to decide the legality and propriety of the order of dismissal or removal from service.
When jurisdiction is conferred upon the Labour Court, not only to examine the legality of the order as also the propriety of the order, the Labour Court can in exercise of the jurisdiction examine the propriety or impropriety of the order.
[781C] 3.
(i) The main part of Sec. 66 clearly spells out the jurisdiction of the Industrial Court to pass any order in reference to the case brought before it as it thinks fit '.
The expression 'as it thinks fit; confers a very 774 wide jurisdiction enabling it to take an entirely different view on the same set of facts: The expression 'as it thinks fit ' has the same connotation, unless the context otherwise indicates 'as he deems fit '.
[785B C] Raja Ram Mahadev Paranjype and ors.
vs Aba Maruti Mali and ors., [1962] Suppl.
1 SCR 739; referred to.
(ii) Sub cl.
(c) of the first proviso to Section 66 (1) will permit the Industrial Court to interfere with the order made by the Labour Court, if the Labour Court has acted with material irregularity in disposal of the dispute before it.
If the finding recorded by the Labour Court is such to which no reasonable man can arrive, the Industrial Court in exercise of its revisional jurisdiction would be entitled to interfere even if patent jurisdictional error is not pointed out.
[785E F] 4.
The expression propriety is variously understood; one meaning assigned to it being 'justice '.
Amongst various shades of meaning assigned to the expression, the dictionary sets out; 'fitness, appropriateness; aptitude; suitability etc. ' as some of them.
[781D E] 5.
If the justice or the justness in relation to a legal proceeding where evidence is led is questioned and the authority is conferred with jurisdiction to examine the propriety of the order or decision that authority will have the same jurisdiction as the original authority to come to a different conclusion on the same set of facts.
If any other view is taken, the expression 'propriety ' would lose all significance.
The expression 'legality and propriety ' has been used in various statutes where appellate or revisional jurisdiction is conferred upon a superior authority.
[781E G] Raman and Raman Ltd. vs The State of Madras and Anr., ; , Moti Ram vs Suraj Bhan and Ors.
, ; , Awdesh Kumar Bhatnagar vs The Gwalior Rayon Silk Mfg.
(Weaving) Co. Ltd and Anr.
[1972] Lab.
and IC. 842; referred to.
In the instant case, the Industrial Court while hearing the revision petitions found that the petitioners were trade union workers and that three of them were office bearers of the union, and that a material place of evidence clearly pointing to the contrary was wholly overlooked by the inquiry officer.
The Industrial Court also pointed out that report (Ex D/18) purporting to have been made by the assaulted worker to the factory Manager on the day following the date of occurrence when properly scanned appeared to be highly suspicious evidence because: 'it was not dated and did not bear the endorsement of the officer to whom it was presented.
After referring to other infirmities in the approach of the Labour Court, the Industrial Court concluded that the entire approach of the Manager in arriving at the findings of misconduct in his enquiry 'appeared to be biased and unfair ', and 'the conclusions neither fair nor reasonable and any order of dismissal based thereon could not be sustained. ' The Industrial Court was, therefore perfectly justified in interfering with the order of the Labour Court.
It merely set aside the award 775 of the Labour Court and did not proceed to re appraise the evidence but remitted the case to the Labour Court for fresh decision.
It was thus an eminently just order.
The High Court however, observed that the Labour Court could only interfere with the decision of the inquiry officer if the findings arrived at were perverse.
The High Court completely missed the ambit of jurisdiction of the Labour Court in that it had the jurisdiction to decide the legality and propriety of the order.
Impropriety as converse of propriety cannot be equated with perversity.
The High Court wholly, misread the relevant provision and interfered with the decision of the Industrial Court which was preeminently just and within the four corners of its jurisdiction.
[785G; 786A G; 787A D]
