The respondent, Secretary of the workers union of a construction company, D.W. 1, Vice President of the Union, the deceased and P.Ws.
5 and 7, officers of the company and P.W. 6, standing counsel of the company were all coming out of the office of an industrial tribunal after filing their written statements in a dispute raised by the workers.
The prosecution case was that at the main gate of the tribunal 's building the respondent suddenly star ted firing from a pistol and shot dead the deceased.
As firing was going on, a telephonic message conveying the fact that gunshots were being fired was sent to the nearby police station on receipt of the telephonic message the police arrived at the spot, seized the pistol and took the respondent and some of the witnesses to the police station where a formal FIR was registered.
The Session Judge convicted the accused under section 302 IPC and section 25 (1) (a) of Indian Arms Act and sentenced him to life imprisonment and one years ' rigorous imprisonment respectively.
On appeal the High Court reversed the judgment of the Sessions Judge.
The High Court observed that if P.W. 7 had given the telephonic message, as stated by D.W. 1. he would have mentioned the name of the assailant because he was a full fledged eye witness but since his name had not been mentioned it was the strongest Possible circumstance to discredit the prosecution case.
Hence this appeal.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: Normally this Court does not interfere against the judgment of 2 the High Court purely on appreciation of evidence.
But this Court would interfere with the decision of the High Court if there appear to be very special circumstances which have been either overlooked or not considered by the High Court or the High Court does not appear to have examined the intrinsic merits of the evidence of the witnesses but has proceeded to acquit the accused on general grounds which are wholly untenable.
[5B C] A cryptic information on telephone has been held by this Court to be of no value at all.
The mere fact that the information was the first in point of time does not by itself clothe it with the character of first information report.
Tapinder Singh vs State of Punjab, ; , referred to In the instant case the telephonic message was an extremely cryptic one and could not be regarded as a FIR in any sense of the term.
The High Court has applied two different standards to assess the evidence of the prosecution and that of the defence.
While the High Court accepts the uncorroborated evidence of D.W. 1, who is as much interested in the dispute as the deceased, if not more, being Vice President of the Union and also in possession of the brief case of the respondent, yet it disbelieves the evidence of P.Ws. 5 and 7 mainly on the ground that they were highly interested.
[7H, 8A B] The High Court completely lost sight of two important facts (1) that P.Ws.
5 and 7 were high officers of the company and were not likely to depose falsely on a matter like this, and (2) that r.
W. 6, who was the standing counsel of the company and other labour cases for more than 3 decades, fully corroborates the evidence of P.Ws. 5 and 7.
We have examined the evidence of P.Ws. 5 and 7 with very great care and caution but we are unable to find any discrepancy or defect in their evidence so as to lead any court to reject the same.
[8E F] The finding of the High Court that it is difficult to believe that after the respondent threw the pistol he continued to remain at the spot and did not make any attempt to escape is also most unrealistic.
There is clear evidence of P.Ws. 5, 6 and 7 that after the respondent threw down the pistol he was surrounded by the three witnesses so that he could not escape.
The High Court has failed to consider this important aspect of the matter.
Moreover, if a person commits a cold blooded murder in the premises of a court which is bound to be full of other litigants also, he cannot think of escaping and is bound to be caught by some one or the other.
[9A C] Relying on the evidence of D.W. 1, the conclusion reached by the High Court that it is extremely doubtful that the witnesses could see the incident from inside the court room as there was no door or window through which 3 the incident could be seen is purely speculative and against the weight of evidence on record.
The evidence of D.W. 1, who was a highly interested witness, should not have been acted upon in the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case unless corroborated by independent evidence.
[9D; F G] The High Court seems to have completely overlooked the fact that there was no reason for the three eye witnesses, one of whom was a standing counsel for about 30 years, to have falsely implicated the respondent merely because he was Secretary of the Union.
The consistent course of conduct of the respondent speaks volumes against his innocence.
He was caught red handed at the spot and was surrounded by the witnesses so that he could not escape, and the police arrived within fifteen minutes of the occurrence and took him to the police station.
[9H; 10A]
