The petitioner in their writ petitions to this Court contested the ban on sale within the State of Maharashtra, of tickets of lottories organised by the Indian Red Cross Society, Dadra and Nagar Haveli branch and authorised by the administration of Dadra and Nagar Haveli.
Dismissing the writ petitions, ^ HELD: (1) (i) The Bombay Lotteries (Control and tax) and Prize Competition (Tax) Act, 1958 is an Act to control and tax lotteries and prize competition in the State of Maharashtra.
The Act contains detailed provisions for the licensing, regulation and control of lottery within the State of Maharashtra.
Section 32(c), provides that nothing in the Act shall apply to "a lottery specially authorised by the State Government." [203G H] (ii) In the case of lotteries authorised by the Government of Maharashtra, the Government of Maharashtra may retain to itself all necessary powers for the regulation and control and the prevention of misuse of fund and exploitation of guileless members of the public.
In the case of lotteries authorised by the Government of other States it may be difficult and even impossible for the Government of Maharashtra to take adequate regulatory steps to prevent abuse of the authority given by Governments of other States to non Governmental agencies to organize lotteries.
It may be equally difficult for the Governments of other States to take 202 adequate measures for prevention of abuse of such authority within the State of Maharashtra.
[204C D] 2.
No hostile discrimination whatever is involved in not extending the exemption from the applicability of the Bombay Lotteries (Control and Tax) and Prize Competition (Tax) Act, 1958 'to lotteries authorised but not organized by the Government of other States '.
[204D] 3.
Lotteries organised by the Government of India or the Government of the State have been taken out from Entry 34 of List II of Schedule VII by Entry 40 of List 1.
There is, therefore no question about the competence of the Legislature of Maharashtra to legislate in respect of the sale or distribution, in the State of Maharashtra, of tickets of all lotteries organized by any agency whatsoever other than the Government of India or the Government of a State.
[203E F] H. Anraj and others vs State of Maharashtra, explained.
