The respondent along with three others were accused of having committed offences punishable under sections 3,5 and 9 of the Official Secrets Act, 1923 read with section 120 B of the Indian Penal Code and therefore committed to the Court of Sessions for the said offences which are of a serious nature.
During the investigation, the respondent made an application for bail before the Additional Sessions Judge, New Delhi and it was rejected in January, 1984.
Then again he made another application for bail before the Sessions Court.
Before the said application could be taken up he made an application under section 482 of the Criminal Procedure Code before the High Court of Delhi for bail.
The learned Judge of the High Court who heard the bail application went into the merits of the case and after holding that the material before the Court was insufficient to sustain the conviction of the respondent proceeded to enlarge him on bail subject to his furnishing a Personal bond in the sum of Rs. 5,000/ with one surety in the like amount.
However, the very same Learned Judge had dismissed earlier the bail application of Jasbir Singh who was the employee of the respondent.
Aggrieved by the order of the High Court enlarging the respondent on bail, the prosecution has filed this special leave petition for revoking the said order of bail: Allowing the petition, the Court.
^ HELD: 1:1.
The Court before granting bail in cases involving non bailable offences particularly where the trial has not yet commenced should 994 take into consideration various matters such as the nature and seriousness of the offence, the character of the evidence, circumstance which are peculiar to the accused, a reasonable possibility of the presence of the accused not being secured at the trial, reasonable apprehension of witnesses being tampered with, the larger undressed of the public or the State and similar other considerations.
Further, the Court should exercise a greater degree of care in enlarging on bail an accused who is charged with the offence punishable under section 3 of the Official Secrets Act when it relates to military affairs.
Here the offence punishable under section 3 of the Official Secrets Act, 1923 with which the respondent is charged relates to military affairs and it is punishable with imprisonment which may extend to fourteen years.
The State vs Captain Jagjit Singh, ; Gurcharan Singh & Ors vs State (Delhi Admn.), ; ; Gudikanti Narsaimhulu & Ors.
vs Public Prosecutor, High Court of Andhra Pradesh, [1978] 2 S.C.R. 361, referred to [998C D; 998A; 997H] 1:2.
The decision of the High Court that the material collected by the prosecution and the evidence to be adduced at the trial would not be sufficient to sustain a conviction appears to be a premature one in the circumstances of this case.
The allegations made by the prosecution which no doubt have still to be established at the trial suggest that the respondent and the persons accused alongwith him are persons of easy conscience in so far as the interests and security of the country is concerned.
The current situation in the country is such that it can easily be exploited by unscrupulous men to their own or to some foreign power 's advantage.
These aspects of the case do not appear to have been considered by the High Court.
Further, while dismissing the bail application of Jasbir Singh on April 24, 1984, the learned Judge of the High Court had relied on the decision of this Court in Captain Jagjit Singh 's case, he has not even referred to that decision while granting bail to the respondent on May 3, 1984.
Some of the observations made by the High Court against the sustainability of the case of criminal conspiracy alleged by the prosecution at this stage were not called for.
The circumstance of this case are such that the question whether the case of criminal conspiracy had been made out or not should have been left to be decided by the trial court at the end of the trial on a consideration of the entire evidence adduced in the case.
Therefore, the High Court should not have enlarged the respondent on bail in the larger interest of the State.
[998E; 999B F]
