The appellant, Rameshwar, Birdhichand Sarda, Ramvilas Rambagas Sarda, were accused 1, 2 and 3 respectively in Sessions Case No. 203 of 1982 on the file of the Additional Sessions Judge, Pune.
The appellant and the second accused are the sons of one Birdhichand of Pune whose family has a cloth business.
In addition, the appellant, a graduate in Chemical Engineering had 89 started a chemical factory at Bhosari, a suburb of Pune.
The third accused is uncle of the appellant and the second accused.
The appellant is the husband of Manjushree alias Manju while the second accused is the husband of Anuradha (P.W. 35).
Birdhichand 's family has its residential house at Ravivar Peth in Pune and owns a flat in a building known as Takshasheela Apartments in Mukund Nagar area of Pune.
All the three accused were charged for the alleged offence of murder by poisoning on the night of 11/12.6.1982 of Manju the newly married wife of the first accused and the appellant herein under section 302 I.P.C. read with section 120B.
Accused No, 3 was also charged under section 201 read with Section 120B I.P.C.
The whole case vested on the circumstantial evidence based on certain letters alleged to have been written by the deceased to some of the witnesses and other statements of the deceased to them and the medical report.
On an appreciation of the evidence the trial court found all the three accused guilty as charged, convicted them accordingly and sentenced the appellant to death under s.302 I.P.C. and all the three accused to rigorous imprisonment for two years and a fine of Rs. 2,000 each under s.120B I.P.C. but did not award any sentence under s.201 read with s.120B.
The appellant and the other two accused file Criminal Appeal No. 265/83 against their conviction and the sentences awarded to them.
The State filed a Criminal Revision application for enhancement of the sentence awarded to accused 2 and 3.
The appeal as well as Criminal Revision application was heard along with confirmation case No. 3 of 1983 together by the Division Bench of the Bombay High Court which allowed the appellants appeal in part regarding his conviction and sentence under s.120B I.P.C. but confirmed his conviction and sentence of death awarded under section 302 I.P.C., allowed the appeal of accused 2 and 3 in full and acquitted them and dismissed the Criminal Revision Application.
Hence the appellant alone has come up before the Supreme Court after obtaining Special Leave.
Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: (Per Fazal Ali, J.).
Normally, the Supreme Court does not interfere with the concurrent findings of the fact of the courts below in the absence of very special circumstances or gross errors of law committed by the High Court.
But, where the High Court ignores or overlooks the crying circumstance and proved facts, or violates and misapplies the well established principles of criminal jurisprudence or decision rendered by this Court on appreciation of circumstantial evidence and refuses to give benefit of doubt to the accused despite facts apparent on the face of the record or on its own finding or tries to gloss over them without giving any reasonable explanation or commits errors of law apparent on the face of the record which results in serious and substantial miscarriage of justice to the accused, it is the duty of this Court to step in and correct the legally erroneous decision of the High Court.
[174E G] 1:2.
Suspicion, however, great it may be, cannot take the place of legal proof.
A moral conviction however, strong or genuine cannot amount to a legal conviction supportable in law.
[174H] 1:3.
The well established rule of criminal justice is 'fouler the crime higher the proof '.
In the instant case, the life and liberty of a subject was at 90 stake.
As the accused was given a capital sentence a very careful cautious and meticulous approach necessarily had to be made by the Court.
[175A] 2:1.
The Indian law on the question of the nature and scope of dying declaration has made a distinct departure from the English law where only the statement which directly relate to the cause of death are admissible.
The second part of cl.(1) of s.32, viz, "the circumstances of the transaction which resulted in his death, in cases in which the cause of that person 's death comes into question" is not to be found in the English Law.
[107F G] 2:2.
From a review of the various authorities of the Courts and the clear language of s.32(1) of Evidence Act, the following propositions emerge: [108F] (1) Section 32 is an exception to the rule of hearsay and makes admissible the statement of a person who dies.
whether the death is a homicide or a suicide, provided the statement relates to the cause of death, or relates to circumstances leading to the death.
In this respect, Indian Evidence Act, in view of the peculiar conditions of our society and the diverse nature and character of our people, has thought it necessary to widen the sphere of s.32 to avoid injustice.
[108G H] (2) The test of proximity cannot be too literally construed and practically reduced to a cut and dried formula of universal application so as to be confined in a straitjacket.
Distance of time would depend or very with the circumstances of each case.
For instance, where death is a logical clumination of a continuous drama long in process and is, as it were, a finale of the story, the statement regarding each step directly connected with the end of the drama would be admissible because the entire statement would have to be read as on organic whole and not torn from the context.
Sometimes statements relevant to or furnishing an immediate motive may also be admissible as being a part of the transaction of death.
It is manifest that all these statements come to light only after the death of the deceased who speaks from death.
For instance, where the death takes place within a very short time of the marriage or the distance of time is not spread over more than 3 4 months the statements may be admissible under s.32.
[109B D] (3) The second part of cl.1 of s.32 is yet another exception to the rule that in criminal law the evidence of a person who was not being subjected to or given an opportunity of being cross examined by the accused, would be valueless because the place of cross examination is taken by the solemnity and sanctity of oath for the simple reason that a person on the verge of death is not likely to make a false statement unless there is strong evidence to show that the statement was secured either by prompting or tutoring.
[109E F] (4) Section 32 does not speak of homicide alone but includes suicide also, hence all the circumstance which may be relevant to prove a case of homicide would be equally relevant to prove a case of suicide.
[109 G] (5) Where the main evidence consists of statements and letters written by the deceased which are directly connected with or related to her death and 91 which reveal a tell tale story, the said statement would clearly fell within the four corners of s.32 and, therefore, admissible.
The distance of time alone in such cases would not make the statement irrelevant.
[109H] Hanumant vs State of Madhya Pradesh [1952] S.C.R. 1091; Dharambir Singh vs State of Punjab Criminal Appeal No. 98 of 1958 decided on 4.11.58 =AIR ; Ratan Gond vs The State of Bihar ; ; Pakala Narayana Swami vs Emperor AIR 1939 PC 47; Shiv Kumar & Ors vs The State of Uttar Pradesh Crl.
Appeal No. 55 of 1966 decided on 29.7.66 =(1966) Crl.
Appeal SC 281; and Protima Dutta & Anr.
vs The State, C.W.N. 713 referred to.
Manohar Lal & Ors.
vs State of Punjab ; Onkar vs State of Madhya Pradesh [1974] Crl.
L.J. 1200; Allijan Munshi vs The State AIR 1960 Bom. 290; Chinnavalayan vs State of Madras ; Rajindera Kumar vs The State AIR 1960 Punjab 310; and State vs Kanchan Singh & Anr.
AIR 1954 All.
approved.
Gokul Chandra Chatterjee vs The State, AIR 1950 Cal.
306, overruled.
It is well settled that the prosecution must stand or fall on its own legs and it cannot derive any strength from the weakness of the defence.
This is trite law.
However, where various links in a chain are in themselves complete, then a false plea or a false defence may be called into aid only to lend assurance to the Court.
In other words before using the additional link it must be proved that all the links in the chain are complete and do not suffer from any infirmity.
It is not the law that where there is any infirmity or lacuna in the prosecution case the same could be cured or supplied by a false defence or a plea which is not accepted by a Court.
[162C E] 3:2.
Before a false explanation can be used as additional link, the following essential conditions must be satisfied: [165E] 1.
Various links in the chain of evidence led by the prosecution have been satisfactorily proved; [165E] 2.
The said circumstance point to the guilt of the accused with reasonable definiteness and; [165G] 3.
The circumstances is in proximity to the time and situation.[165H] If these conditions are fulfilled only then a Court can use a false explanation or a false defence as an additional link to lend as assurance to the Court and not otherwise.
On the facts and circumstances of the present case this does not appear to be such a case.
There is a vital difference between an incomplete chain of circumstances and a circumstance, which, after the chain is complete, is added to it merely to reinforce the conclusion of the court.
Where the prosecution is enable to prove any of the essential principles laid down in Hanumant 's case the High Court cannot supply the weakness or the lacuna by taking aid of or recourse to a false defence or a false plea.
[166A; 166D E] 92 3:3.
Before a case against an accused vesting on circumstantial evidence can be said to be fully established the following conditions must be fulfilled as laid down in Hanumat 's vs State of M.P. [163C] 1.
The circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should be fully established; [163D] 2.
The facts so established should be consistent with the hypothesis of guilt and the accused, that is to say, they should not be explainable on any other hypothesis except that the accused is guilty; [163G] 3.
The circumstances should be of a conclusive nature and tendency;[163G] 4.
They should exclude every possible hypothesis except the one to be proved; and [163H] 5.
There must be a chain of evidence so complete as not to leave any reasonable ground for the conclusion consistent with the innocence of the accused and must show that in all human probability the act must have been done by the accused.
[164B] These five golden principles constitute the panchsheel of the proof of a case based on circumstantial evidence and in the absence of a corpus deliciti.
[164B] Hanumant vs The State of Madhya Pradesh [1952] SCR 1091; Tufail (Alias) Simmi vs State of Uttar Pradesh ; Ramgopal vs State of Maharashtra AIR 1972 SC 656; and Shivaji Sahabrao Babode & Anr.
vs State of Maharashtra ; referred to.
The cardinal principle of criminal jurisprudence is that a case can be said to be proved only when there is certain and explicit evidence and no pure moral conviction.
[164F] The King vs Horry [1952] N.Z.L.R. III quoted with approval.
Hanumant vs State of M.P. [1952] S.C.R. 1091; Dharambir Singh vs The State of Punjab (Criminal Appeal No. 98 of 1958 decided on 4.11.58); Chandrakant Nyslchand Seth vs The State of Bombay (Criminal Appeal No. 120 of 1957 decided on 19.2.58) Tufail (alias) Simmi vs State of U.P. ; Ramgopal vs State of Maharashtra AIR 1972 SC 656; Naseem Ahmed vs Delhi Administration Mohan Lal Pangasa vs State of U.P.
A.I.R. 1974 SC 1144/46; Shankarlal Gyarasilal Dixit v State of Maharashtra ; and M.C. Agarwal vs State of Maharashtra referred to.
Denonandan Mishra v The State of Bihar distinguished.
Some of the statements which have a causal connection with the death of Manju or the circumstances leading to her death are undoubtedly admissible 93 under section 32 of the Evidence Act but other statements which do not bear any proximity with the death or if at all very remotely and indirectly connected with the death would not be admissible.
[121H] 3.5.
In view of the close relationship and affection any person in the position of the witness would naturally have a tendency to exaggerate or add facts which may not have been stated to them at all.
This is human phychology and no one can help it.
Not that this is done consciously but even unconsciously the love and affection for the deceased would create a phychological hatred against the supposed murderer, the court has to examine the evidence of interested witnesses with very great care and caution.
Even if the witnesses were speaking a part of the truth or perhaps the whole of it they would be guided by a spirit of revenge or nemesis against the accused person and in this process certain facts which may not or could not have been stated may be imagined to have been stated unconsciously by the witnesses in order to see that the offender is punished.
[122C D] 3.6.
A close and careful scrutiny of the evidence of the witness (PWs 2, 3, 4 and 5) who are close relatives or deceased and conspicuously reveals a story which is quite different from the one spelt out from the letters (Exhs. 30, 32 and 33).
In fact, the letters have a different tale to tell particularly in respect of certain matters.
They are: [138D] (i) There is absolutely no reference to suicidal pact or the circumstances leading to the same; (ii) There is no reference even to Ujvala and her illcit relations with the appellant; (iii) There is no mention of the fact that the deceased was not at all willing to go to Pune and that she was sent by force; (iv) The complaints made in the letters are confined to ill treatment, loneliness, neglect and anger of the husband but no apprehension has been expressed in any of the letters that the deceased expected imminent danger to her life from her husband; (v) In fact, in the letters she had asked her sister and friend not to disclose her and plight to her parents but while narrating the facts to her parents, she herself violated the said emotional promise which appears to be too good to be true and an after thought added to strengthen the prosecution case; and (vi) If there is anything inherent in the letters it is that because of her miserable existence and gross ill treatment by her husband, Manju might have herself decided to end her life, rather than bother her parents.
Therefore, these witnesses are not totally dependable so as to exclude the possibility of suicide and to come to an irresistible inference, that it was the appellant who had murdered the deceased.
Though a good part of the evidence is undoubtedly admissible, its probative value is precious little in view of the several improbabilities, [138E H; 139A B] 4.1.
It is well settled that where on the evidence two possibilities are available or open one which goes in favour of the prosecution and the other which benefits an accused, the accused is undoubtedly entitled to the benefit of doubt.
[166H] 94 In the instant case, the evidence clearly shows that two views are possible one pointing to the guilt of the accused and the other leading to his innocence.
It may be very likely that the appellant may have administered the poison (potassium cyanide) to Manju but at the same time a fair possibility that she herself committed suicide cannot be safely excluded or eliminated.
Hence, on this ground alone the appellant is entitled to the benefit of doubt resulting in his acquittal.
[168B] 4.2.
In the cases of murder by administering poison, the Court must carefully scan the evidence and determine the four important circumstances which alone can justify the conviction: (1) There is a clear motive for an accused to administer poison to the deceased; (ii) that the deceased died of poison said to have been administered; (iii) that the accused had the poison in his possession; and (iv) that he had an opportunity to administer the poison to the accused.
[167F H] 4.3.
In the instant case, taking an over all picture on this part of the prosecution case the position seems to be as follows: [150D] 1.
If the accused wanted to give poison while Manju was wide awake, she would have put up stiffest possible resistance as any other person in her position would have done.
Dr. Banerjee in his postmortem report has not found any mark of violence or resistance even if she was overpowered by the appellant she would have shouted and cried and attracted persons from the neighbouring flats which would have been a great risk having regard to the fact that some of the inmates of the house had come only a short while before the appellant.
[150E F] 2.
Another possibility which cannot be ruled out is that potassium cyanide may have been given to Manju in a glass of water if she happened to ask for it.
But if this was so, she being a chemist herself would have at once suspected some foul play and once her suspicion would have arisen it would be very difficult for the appellant to murder her.
[150G] 3.
The third possibility is that as Manju had returned pretty late to the flat and she went to sleep even before the arrival of the appellant and then he must have tried forcibly to administer the poison by the process of mechanical suffociation, in which case alone the deceased could not have been in a position to offer any resistance but this opinion of doctor, has not been accepted by the High Court, after a very elaborate consideration and discussion of the evidence, the circumstances and the medical authorities, found that the opinion of the doctor that Manju died by mechanical suffocation had not been proved or at any rate it is not safe to rely on such evidence.
[150H; 151A C] 4.
The other possibility that may be thought of is that Manju died a natural death.
This also is eliminated in view of the report of the Chemical Examiner as confirmed by the postmortem that the deceased died as a result of administration of potassium cyanide.
[152B] 95 5.
The only other reasonable possibility that remains is that as the deceased was fed up with the maltreatment by her husband, in a combined spirit of revenge and hostility after entering the flat she herself took potassium cyanide and lay limp and lifeless.
When the appellant entered the room he must have thought that as she was sleeping she need not be disturbed but when he found that there was no movement in the body after an hour his suspicion was roused and therefore he called his brother from the adjacent flat to send for Dr. Lodha.
[152C D] In these circumstances, it cannot be said that a reasonable possibility of the deceased having committed suicide as alleged by the defence cannot be safely ruled out or eliminated.
It is clear that the circumstances of the appellant having been last seen with the deceased and has administered the opinion has not been proved conclusively so as to raise an irresistible inference that Manju 's death was a case of blatant homicide.
[152E F] Further, in a matter of this magnitude it would be quite natural for the members of the appellants family to send for their own family doctor who was fully conversant with the ailment of every member of the family.
In these circumstances there was nothing wrong if the appellant and his brother went to a distance of one and a half kilometer to get.
Dr. Lodha.
Secondly, Dr. Shrikant Kelkar was a skin specialist whereas Dr. (Mrs,) Anjali Kelkar was a Paediatrician and the appellant may have genuinely believed that as they belonged to different branches, they were not at all suitable to deal with such a serious case.
The High Court was, therefore, wrong in treating this circumstance namely not calling the two Doctors in the flat, as an incriminating conduct of the appellant.
[157B D] The circumstances which were not put to the appellant in his examination under section 313 of the Criminal Procedure Code must be completely excluded from considerating because the appellant did not have any chance to explain them.
Apart from the aforesaid comments there is one vital defect in some of the circumstances relied upon by the High Court namely circumstances Nos. 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 11, 12,13, 16 and 17.
[160B; 159B C] Fateh Singh Bhagat Singh vs State of Madhaya Pradesh AIR ; Shamu Balu Chagule vs State of Maharashtra and; Harijan Meha Jesha vs State of Gujarat AIR 1979 SC 1566 referred to.
Viewing the entire evidence, the circumstance of the case and the interpretation of the decisions of the Supreme Court the legal and factual position are (i) that the five golden principles enunciated by the Supreme Court in Hanumant vs The State of M.P. [1952] SCR 1091 have not been satisfied in the instant case.
As a logical corollary, it follows that cannot be held that the act of the accused cannot be explained on any other hypothesis except the guilt of the appellant nor can it be said that in all human probability, the accused had committed the murder of Manju.
In other words, the prosecution has not fulfilled the essential requirements of a criminal case which rests purely on circumstantial evidence; (ii) From the recital in the letters exhibit P30, Ex P32 and Ex P33 it can be safely held 96 that there was a clear possibility and a tendency on the part of the deceased Manju to commit suicide due to desperation and frustration.
She seems to be tried of her married life, but she still hoped against hope that things might improve.
She solemnly believed that her holy union with her husband bring health and happiness to her but unfortunately it seems to have ended in a melancholy marriage which left her so lonely and frustrated so much of emotional disorder resulting from frustration and pessimism that she was forced to end her life.
There can be no doubt that Manju was not only a sensitive and sentimental women was extremely impressionate and the letters show that a constant conflict between her mind and body was going on and unfortunately the circumstances which came into existence hastened her end.
People with such a psychotic philosophy or bent of mind always dream of an ideal and if the said ideals fails, the failure drives them to end their life, for they feel that no charm is left in their life; (iii) The prosecution has miserably failed to prove one of the most essential ingredients of a case of death caused by administration of poison i.e. possession with the accused (either by direct or circumstantial evidence) and on this ground alone the prosecution must fails.
(iv) That is appreciating the evidence, the High Court has clearly misdirected itself on many points, and has thus committed a gross error of law; (iv) That the High Court has relied upon decisions of this Court which are either in applicable or which, on closer examination, do not support the view of the High Court being clearly distinguishable; (vi) That the High Court has taken a completely wrong view of law in holding that even though the prosecution may suffer from serious infirmities it could be reinforced by additional link in the nature of false defence in order to supply the lacuna and has thus committed a fundamental error or law; (vii) That the High Court has not only misappreciated the evidence but has completely overlooked the well established principles of law and has merely tried to accept the prosecution case based on tenterhooks and slender tits and bits; (viii) It is wholly unsafe to rely on that part of the evidence of Dr. Banerjee (PW 33) which shows that poison was forcibly administered by the process of mechanical suffociation; (ix) There is no manifest defect in the investigation made by the police which appears to be honest and careful.
A proof positive of this fact is that even though Rameshwar Birdichand and other members of his family who had practically no role to play had been arraigned as accused but they had to be acquitted by the High Court for lack of legal evidence; (x) That in view of the findings two views are clearly possible in the present case, the question of defence being false does not arise.
[172E H; 173A H; 174A D] Per Varadarajan, J. (Per contra on facts.) 1:1.
The three letters Exh.
P 30, Exh.
P 32 and Exh.
P 33 and the oral evidence of PWs.
2, 3, 5, 6, and 20 are inadmissible in evidence under section 32(1) of the Evidence Act.
There is no acceptable evidence on record to show that either the appellant or his parents ill treated the desceased Manju and that the appellant had any illicit intimacy with PW 37 Ujvala.
The alleged oral statement of Manju and what she has stated in her letters Exh. 30, 32 and 33 may relate to matters perhaps having a very remote bearing on the cause or the circumstances of her death.
Those circumstances do not have any proximate 97 relation to the actual occurrence resulting in her death due to potassium cyanide poison though for instance in the case of prolonged poisoning they may relates to dates considerably distant from the date of the actual fatal dose.
They are general impressions of Manju indicating fear or suspicion, whether of a particular individual or otherwise and not directly related to the occasion or her death.
It is not the case of the prosecution either that the present case is one of porlonged poisoning.
[187B; 190D F] 1: 2.
The fact that the High court has rejected the case of the prosecution based on Dr. Banerjee 's report and evidence that it was also a case of mechanical suffocation is not one that could be taken into consideration as a mitigating circumstance in judging the conduct of the doctor who had conducted the autopsy in a case of suspicious death.
The conduct of the doctor in making certain later interpolations in the case of suspicious death in which the appellant has been sentenced to death by the two courts below deserves serious condemnations.
The doctor has tempered with material evidence in the case of alleged murder may be at the instance of somebody else, ignoring the probable consequences of his act.
In these circumstances Dr. Banerjee PW 33 is person who should not be entrusted with any serious and responsible work such as conducting autopsy in public interest.
In this case the appellant would have gone to gallows on the basis of the evidence of PW 33 as he would have the Court to believe it, and the other evidence, if they had been accepted.
[193D H] 1: 3.
Section 313 Criminal Procedure Code lays down that in every inquiry or trial for the purpose of enabling the accused personally to explain any circumstance appearing in the evidence against him, the court may at any stage without previously warning the accused, put such questions to him as the court considers necessary and shall, after the witnesses for the prosecution have been examined and before he is called for his defence, question him generally on the case.
Hence the evidence on the basis on which question Nos. 25, 30, 32, and 115 have been put to the appellant are wholly irrelevant as these questions do not relate to any circumstance appearing in the against the appellant.
The learned Additional Sessions Judge was bound to exercise control over the evidence being tendered in his court and to know the scope of the examination of the accused under Section 313 Criminal Procedure Code [195A C] Per Sabyasachi Mukharji, J. (Concurring) Though the test of proximity cannot and should not be two literally construed and be reduced practically to a cut and dried formula of universal application, it must be emphasised that wherever it is extended beyond the immediate, it should be explained and must be done with very great caution and care.
As a general proposition it cannot be laid down for all purposes that for instance where the death takes place within a short time of marriage and the distance of time is not spread over three or four months, the statement would be admissible under Section 32 of the evidence Act.
This is always not so and cannot be so.
In very exceptional circumstances such statements may be admissible and that too not for proving the positive fact, namely raising some doubt about the guilt of the accused [197D F] 98
