A dispute between an employer and a single workman does not fall within the definition of " industrial dispute " under the U.P. industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
But though the applicability of the Act to an individual dispute as opposed to a dispute involving a group of workmen is excluded, if the workmen as a body or a consicrerable section of them make common cause with the individual workman then such a dispute would be an industrial dispute.
755 Central Provinces Transport Service Ltd. v Raghunath Gopal Patwardhan, ; and D. N. Banerji vs P. R. Mukherjee; , , referred to.
Swadeshi Cotton Mills Co. Ltd. vs Their Workmen, (1953) I L.L.J. 757, in so far as it decided that a dispute raised by an, individual workman is within an industrial dispute, disapproved.
Case law reviewed.
The third respondent was employed as a lino typist by the appellant company but on allegations of incompetence he was dismissed from service.
His case was not taken up by any union of workers of the appellant company nor by any of the unions of workmen employed in similar or allied trades, but the U.P. Working journalists Union, Lucknow, with which the third respondent had no connection took the matter to the Conciliation Board, Allahabad, and ultimately the Government made a reference to the Industrial Tribunal by a notification in which one of the points for determination referred was as to whether the services of the third respondent were wrongfully terminated by the management.
The legality of the reference was challenged by the appellant and the question was raised as to whether a dispute between an employer and a single workman falls within the definition of "industrial dispute" under the U.P.
Held, that the reference was bad because the dispute was not between the employer on the one hand and his workmen on the other, nor could the U.P. Working journalists Union be called " his workmen ", within the meaning of the U. P.
Though the making of a reference by the Government under the Act is the exercise of its administrative powers, an aggrieved party can question the jurisdiction of the Industrial Tribunal to show that what was referred was not an industrial dispute.
State of Madras vs C. P. Sarathy, , referred to.
