In the year 1958 59 the State Government framed the Khandsari Licensing Scheme to regulate the supply of sugarcane to sugar factories.
Posts of Khandsari Inspectors initially designated as Licensing Inspectors were created in the pay scale of Rs. 120 250.
Petitioners in the writ petitions were appointed as Khandsari Inspectors between March and May, 1960.
Thereafter some of the respondents were recruited as Khandsari Inspectors and along with some others who were recruited departmentally were approved by Public Service Commission.
On March, 22, 1971 the third respondent the Sugar Commissioner circulated a provisional seniority list of Khandsari Inspectors.
71 The petitioners represented against the seniority list contending that they were assigned lower place in the seniority list even though they were recruited earlier and have been continuously in service.
The representations having been rejected, writ petitions were filed in this Court.
In their writ petitions to this Court, the petitioners contended that when recruitment was made in the year 1960, the post of Khandsari Inspector was not within the purview of the Public Service Commission and that they were regularly recruited to posts which were temporarily sanctioned but indefinitely continued and therefore, in reckoning their seniority, they must be given the benefit of the length of continuous officiation, and that once approval is granted by the Public Service Commission it would relate back to the date of their appointment and that the previous length of service cannot be ignored or denied in computing seniority in the absence of any statutory rule or administrative instruction.
It was further pointed out that petitioner Nos. 4 to 8, who were recruits of 1961 had been assigned places Nos.
34, 42, 35 and 31 respectively in the seniority list while recruits of 1963 had scored a march over them in the provisional seniority list.
The respondents contested the writ petitions contending that by a Government order temporary post of Licensing Inspectors were re designated as Khandsari Inspectors and that the post right from inception was within the purview of the Public Service Commission, that on the framing of the Khandsari Licensing Scheme, it became necessary to urgently appoint Inspectors to implement the scheme, and therefore the third respondent the Sugar Commissioner who was the appointing authority pending regular selection through open competition through Public Service Commission proceeded to make the appointments of the petitioners as stop gap or ad hoc nature and that their appointment created no right to the post.
The drawing up of the tentative seniority list was justified as being based on the recommendations of the Public Service Commission, and it was submitted that the service which can be taken into consideration for determining the length of continuous officiation must commence from the date of substantive appointment and that the provisional seniority list had been drawn up keeping in view the date of approval by the Public Service Commission in respect of each candidate and that there was no error in drawing up the seniority list.
It was further contended that promotions which were granted on the basis of the provisional seniority list were not questioned by the petitioners and they have acquiesced in it, and that the petitioners had moved the Court after a long unexplained delay and that the Court should not grant any relief.
Allowing the Writ Petitions, 72 ^ HELD: (1) The impugned seniority list dated March 21, 1971 in respect of Khandsari Inspectors is quashed.
Respondents 1 to 3 are directed to draw up a fresh seniority list based on the principle of length of continuous officiation reckoned from the date of first appointment if the appointment is followed by confirmation i.e. selection approval by the State Public Service Commission.
[87 F] (2) (i) The Memorandum of 1940 merely prescribed guidelines for the departments of the Secretariat either to frame statutory rules or executive instructions governing conditions of service in respect of existing services if there are no rules, or they may be modified or amended so as to bring them generally in conformity with the 1940 Order, and whenever a new post or a new cadre in a service is set up to frame rules in conformity with guidelines prescribed in the 1940 Order.
The 1940 Order does not purport to lay down conditions of service governing any cadre either specifically or generally.
It provides a model and unless the model is adopted it is not binding.
[82 D F] (ii) Assuming that the model principle set out in the 1940 order has a binding effect the impugned seniority list does not conform to the prescribed guidelines and is invalid.
[85 F] (3) (i) A fair rule of seniority should ordinarily take into account the past service if the stop gap arrangement is followed by confirmation.
[86 E] (ii) If a stop gap appointment is made and the appointee appears before the Public Service Commission when the latter proceeds to select the candidates and is selected, there is no justification for ignoring past service.
There is also no justification for two persons selected in the same manner being differently treated.
If once a person in a stop gap arrangement is confirmed in his post by proper selection, his past service has to be given credit and he has to be assigned seniority accordingly unless a rule to the contrary is made.
In the instant case, that has not been done to all the petitioners.
The error is apparent in the case of petitioner No. 1 and respondent No. 7.
[86 B D] (iii) When a seniority list is challenged as being violative of the guarantee of equality enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 and prima facie it appears that those who came into the cadre later on scored a march over those who were already in the cadre, it would be for the authority justifying the seniority list to plead and point out the rule for determining seniority on the basis of which the list is drawn up.
If any such rule is pleaded it would be for those impugning the seniority list to aver and establish that 73 the alleged seniority rule is violative of the fundamental rights guaranteed by Articles 14 and 16.
[78 G H; 79A] (4) (i) It is open to the Government to lay down general conditions of service governing all services in the State either by rules framed under Section 241 of the Government of India Act 1935, or on the advent of the Constitution under the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution.
In the absence of statutory rules, conditions of service in a particular cadre may be governed by executive instructions issued by the Government in exercise of its executive power.
[81 C E] (ii) In the absence of any other rule valid for determining seniority under Article 16, seniority being determined by the length of continuous officiation has been accepted as valid by the courts.
[82 H; 83 A] P.S. Mahal and Ors.
vs Union of India and Ors.
and Bishan Sarup Gupta vs Union of India, ; , referred to.
(5) Model Rule 11 suggests as guidelines two independent principles for determining seniority; namely (1) seniority should be reckoned from the date of substantive appointment, and (2) from the date of the order of first appointment if such appointment is followed by confirmation.
[84 A] In the instant case, recitals in the appointment order do not spell out that the appointees were to hold stop gap arrangement till a candidate selected by the Public Service Commission is made available.
On the contrary, the recitals clearly indicate that those appointees will have to face the approval test by the Public Service Commission.
If petitioner Nos. 1 and 2 came to be appointed in 1960 and respondent Nos. 4, 5 and 6 came to be appointed in 1961 and the appointment of each of them had to be approved by the Public Service Commission, once the approval is granted the same will relate back to the date of first appointment.
That is the meaning of the expression in Model No. 11; 'or from the date of the order of the first appointment if such appointment is followed by confirmation. ' [85 A C] (6) Where officiating appointment is followed by confirmation unless a contrary rule is shown, the service rendered as officiating appointment cannot be ignored for reckoning length of continuous officiation for determining the place in the seniority list.
[86 G] Baleshwar Dass and Ors. etc.
vs State of U.P. and Ors.
,[1981] 1 SCR 449, referred to.
74 In the instant case, respondents 1 to 3 have not finalised the seniority list for a period of more than 12 years and are operating the same for further promotion to the utter disadvantage of the petitioners.
Petitioners went on making representations after representation which did not yield any response, reply or relief.
Further, the petitioners belong to the lower echelons of service and it is not difficult to visualise that they may find it extremely difficult to rush to the court.
The contention that the writ petitions should be thrown out on the ground of delay, latches an acquiescence must therefore be rejected.
[87 C D]
