The third respondent Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak issued a prospectus on June 12, 1982, inviting applications for appearing at an Entrance Test for selecting candidates for admission to M.B.B.S./B.D.S. course 1982.
In this prospectus, besides reservation for other candidates, 25 seats were shown as reserved for "Rural Areas" and further clarifying the term as for deciding the eligibility of a candidate from "Rural Areas" the following criterion will be observed; a candidate must have received education from Class I to Class 8 and passed 8th Class examination from any Rural School situated in any village not having any Municipality or notified area or Town Area Committee".
The petitioners, therefore, challenged only the reservation of these 25 seats for candidates coming from the Rural Areas as being violative of Articles 14, 15 (4) and 29 (2) of the Constitution inasmuch as (1) the classification is arbitrary, unintelligible and unrelated to the objects sought to be achieved and not saved by Articles 15 (4) and (ii); to classify candidates on the basis of their education in a school in Rural Area and Urban Area is international in as much as before seeking admission to the Medical Faculty even the student coming from rural areas and having been educated in common rural school from 1st to 8th standard would have taken further education for a period of 4 years before seeking admission to the medical college and that even in respect of the earlier education from 1st to 8th standard in both the cases, there was identical syllabus and examination evaluation prescribed by a common authority Allowing the petitions, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
It is well settled that Article 14 forbids class legislation but 273 permits reasonable classification in the matter of legislation.
In order to sustain the classification permissible under Article 14, it has to satisfy the twin tests: (1) that classification is founded on an intelligible differentia which distinguishes persons or things that are grouped together from others left out of the proup and (2) the differentia must have a rational relation to the object sought to be achieved by the impugned provision.
[278H; 279A B] 2:1.
Classification based on students coming from common rural schools meaning thereby educated upto 1st to 8th standard in common rural schools vis a vis students educated in urban schools from 1st to 8th standard would not provide intelligible differentia for founding a classification thereon.
The classification in such a situation will be wholly arbitrary and irrational and therefore the reservation based on such a classification would be constitutionally invalid.
The knowledge acquired in the years spent from class 1 to class 8th is of a general nature exposing the student to reading, writing, understanding simple Arithmetics, General Knowledge of History, Geography and introductory Mathematics.
The introductory knowledge of these subjects could hardly be said to equip a student for admission to medical college.
The education imparted in class IX and X is little more than introductory.
In these classes, the student is being prepared for deeper study.
The selection of specialised subjects has to be made in classes XI and XII and in respect of education in classes IX to XII, all students being educated in all schools are similarly situated, similarly circumstanced and similarly placed with no differentiation.
The earlier handicap of education in classes I to VIII, if there be any, becomes wholly irrelevant and of no consequence and therefore, cannot provide an intelligible differentia which distinguishes persons say students seeking admission being grouped together as having been educated in common rural schools from those left out namely the rest.
[282F; C E] Arti Sapru vs State of Jammu and Kahmir & Ors., ; , followed.
Pradeep Tandon 's case followed.
Amar Bir Singh & Ors.
vs Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak & Ors.
ILR Punjab & Haryana [1980] 2 493, overruled.
The classification is not founded on intelligible differentia and at any rate, it has no rational nexus to the object sought to be achieved.
It does not take into account the following: (i) in order to take advantage of the reservation, students from nearby urban areas can join any rural school on the periphery agglomeration; (ii) All rural schools without an exception cannot be condemned as ill house, ill staffed and ill equipped.
Agriculture in Haryana has been a very profitable pursuit and standard of life of average farmer in rural area has gone up compared to middle class and industrial worker and the slum dwellers whose children will attend as a necessity urban schools.
And yet the better placed will enjoy reservation; (iii) The knowledge acquired by the students while taking instructions in class I to VIII has hardly any relevance to his being equipped for taking the test for entrance to 274 the Medical College.
The real challenge would come in standard XI and XII.
In this behalf all students those coming from any rural schools and urban school are similarly placed and similarly situated and yet by a reference to a past event wholly unrelated to the objects sought to be achieved, they are artificially divided; and (iv) There is no guarantee save a wishful thinking that the candidates classified as coming from rural areas that is with education from class 1 to VIII or otherwise would return to rural areas after the M.B.B.S. degree.
[285H; 284G; 285C D] Sukhvinder Kaur vs State of Himachal Pradesh & Ors., A.I.R. 1974 HP 35, distinguished.
