Regular recruitment after the initial recruitment to the Delhi Higher Judicial Service under Rule 7 of the Delhi Judicial Service Rules, 1970 is made by promotion on the basis of selection from members of the Delhi Judicial Service who have completed not less than 10 years of service and by direct recruitment from the Bar subject to the provision that not more than one third of the substantive posts in the service shall be held by direct recruits.
In the case of promoted officers, the appointment to the service shall be made by the Administrator in consultation with the High Court while the appointment of direct recruits shall be made on the recommendations of the High Court.
Rule 2(b) provides that cadre post means any post specified in the Schedule and includes a temporary post carrying the same designation as that of any of the post specified in the Schedule and any other temporary post declared as cadre post by the Administrator.
Under rule 16 the Administrator is empowered to create temporary post in the service and such temporary post shall be filled in consultation with the High Court from amongst the members of the Delhi Judicial Service.
Under rule 17 the Administrator may in consultation with the High Court fill substantive vacancies in the service by making temporary appointments thereto from amongst members of the Delhi Judicial Service.
Rule 8 speaks of seniority while the inter se seniority of members of the Delhi Judicial Service promoted to the service shall be the same as in the Delhi Judicial Service, the seniority of direct recruits vis a vis promotees shall be determined in the order or rotation of vacancies between the direct recruits and promotees based on the quotas of vacancies reserved for both categories by rule 7 provided that the first available vacancy will be filled by a direct recruit and the next two vacancies by promotees and so on.
352 The Administrator have appointed the writ petitioners and also the defendants by resorting to Rule 16 and Rule 7 respectively.
But when the seniority list was prepared some of the defendants who are direct recruits were ranked higher than the promoted officers who have been appointed several years earlier under Rule 16.
Hence the two writ petitions by the promoted officers contending that seniority between promotees and direct recruits must be determined in accordance with the respective dates of their continuous officiation as Additional District and Sessions Judges and that direct recruits who are appointed as Additional District and Sessions Judges after the promotees are so appointed cannot rank higher in seniority over the promotees and that promotees discharge identical functions and bear the same responsibilities as direct recruits and upon their appointments they constitute only common class and hence to give seniority to the direct recruits who are appointed later in point of time is violative of articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Allowing the petitions in part, the Court ^ HELD : (Per majority) Per Chandrachud, C. J. 1:1.
The impugned seniority list, which is challenged by the promoted officers has been prepared on the basis that the rule of quota and rota will continue to apply notwithstanding the fact that appointments are made to the service under rules 16 and 17 of the Delhi Judicial Service Rules and is violative of articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution since the rule of quota and rota prescribed by the proviso to rule 7 would cease to apply when appointments are made to service under rules 16 and 17.
[378B C] 1:2.
But the provisions contained in proviso to rule 7 and rule 8(2) of the Delhi Judicial Service Rules 1970 do not by themselves suffer from any infirmity and therefore constitutionally valid.
[380A] 2:1.
When a rule or a section is part of an integral scheme it should not be considered or construed in isolation.
One must have regard to the scheme of the fasciculus of the relevant rules or sections in order to determine the true meaning of any one or more of them.
An isolated consideration of the provision leads to the risk of some other inter related provisions becoming otiose or devoid of meaning [365H: 366A] 2:2.
The negative language of the proviso to rule 7 makes it clear that it merely prescribes, by way of imposing a ceiling that the direct recruits shall not hold more than one third of the substantive posts.
The language of the proviso to rule 7 is certainly not felicitous and is unconventional if its intention was to prescribe a quota for direct recruits.
But the proviso must be read along with rule 8(2) since the two provisions are inter related.
Their combined reading yields but one result, that the proviso prescribes a quota of one third for direct recruits.
Otherwise there would neither be any occasion nor any justification for rotating vacancies between direct recruits and promotees [366C E] 2:3.
In the process of reading the rules as parts of a connected whole, rules 16 and 17 are equally relevant.
The position which emerges from the provisions contained in rules 16 and 17 is that it is permissible to create 353 temporary posts in the service and, even substantive vacancies in the service can be filled by making temporary appointments.
The two fold restriction on this dual power is that the High Court must be consulted and such appointments must be made from amongst the promotees only.
If temporary appointments to the service either in temporary posts or in substantive vacancies can be made within the framework of the rules and have to be made, if at all from amongst the promotees and promotees only, the quota rule contained in the proviso to rule 7 must inevitably breakdown when such appointments are made, the simple reason being that direct recruits cannot be appointed either to temporary post in the service to substantive vacancies in the service which are filled in by making temporary appointments.
Thus even though the proviso to rule 7 prescribes a quota of one third for direct recruits, rules 16 and 17 permit the non observance of the quota rule in the circumstances stated in those rules.
[366F; 367A D] 3 : 1.
Normally, an ex cadre post means a post outside the cadre of posts comprised in a service.
Therefore all posts in the service whether permanent or temporary, are generally regarded as cadre posts.
But, regardless of the normal pattern of service rule rule 2 (b) has the limited effect of making every post in the service a cadre post, whether the post is permanent or temporary.
The inclusive clause contained in the second part of rule 2 (b) has to be read in the context of the first part of that rule and must take its meaning from what precedes it.
This provision is consequential to and in consonance with Rule 16.
Since it is permissible under Rule 16 to create temporary posts in the service, such posts are also regarded as cadre posts.
It would have been anomalous to treat a post in the service as an ex cadre post merely for the reason that the post is temporary.
[367H; 368A B; 367G] Therefore, every promotee who holds the post of an Additional District and Sessions Judge in the service is the holder of a cadre post, whether the post is permanent or temporary direct recruits hold cadre post in all events because, they can only be appointed to substantive post in the service on a permanent basis.
Rules 16 and 17 forbid their appointments to temporary post in the service or to substantive vacancies in the service on a temporary basis.
[368C D] 3 : 2.
Rule 2 (d) which provides that a member of the service means a person appointed in substantive capacity to the service under the provisions of the rules shows that two conditions must co exist in order that a person can become a member of the service.
Firstly, his appointment has to be in a substantive capacity and secondly, the appointment has to be to the service, that is to a post in the service.
Persons who hold appointments bearing designations similar to the designations of the posts comprised in the service cannot, for that reason alone become members of the service.
It is only when they are appointed in a substantive capacity to a post in the service, that they become members of the service.
[368E G] 3 : 3.
By the definition contained in rule 2 (d), the membership of the service is limited to persons who are appointed in a substantive capacity to the service.
By the second part of rule 2 (b), if read in an extended sense every temporary post which carries the same designation as that of any of the post 354 specified in the schedule is a cadre post whether such post is comprised in the service or not.
Such posts and the posts specified in the Schedule will together constitute the cadre under rule 2 (b).
[369B C] 4 : 1.
Whenever the rules provide for recruitment to a service from different sources, there is no inherent infirmity in prescribing a quota for appointment of persons drawn from those sources and in working out the rule of quota by rotating the vacancies as between them in a stated proportion.
Therefore rule 8 (2) cannot be held to be unconstitutional merely because it reserves one third of the vacancies in the service for direct recruits and provides that the first available vacancy in the service will be filled in by a direct recruit, the next two by promotees and so on.
[369G; 370B] Mervyan Coutinho vs Collector of Customs, Bombay, ; ; S.C. Jaisinghani vs Union of India, ; , Bishan Sarup Gupta vs Union of India, ; ; A.K. Subraman vs Union of India, [1975] 2 SCR 979 V.B. Badami vs State of Mysore, [1976] 2 SCC 901 and Paramjit Singh Sandhu vs Ram Rakha, ; ; referred to.
4 : 2.
However, there being instances wherein though the provision of rule or a section is not invalid, the manner in which that provision is implemented in practice leads to the creation of disparities between persons who, being similarly circumstanced are entitled to equal treatment.
The provisions of rule 8 (2) must therefore be applied carefully and in such a manner as not to lead to the violation of the guarantee of equality and equal opportunity contained in articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution by ascertaining as to which of the promotees can be regarded as belonging to the same class as the direct recruits.
[370C D] 4 : 3.
The pre requisite of the right to inclusion in a common list of seniority is that all those who claim that right must, broadly, bear the same characteristics.
The mere circumstance that they hold posts which carry the same designation will not justify the conclusion that they belong to the same class.
Persons who are appointed or promoted on an ad hoc basis or for fortuitous reasons or by way of a stop gap arrangement cannot rank for purposes of seniority with those who are appointed to their posts in strict conformity with the rules of recruitment, whether such later class posts are permanent or temporary.
The rules in the instant case do not require that persons belonging to former category have to satisfy any particular prescription like consultation with the High Court.
[370E F] 5 : 1.
There is no provision in the Rules which requires that ad hoc appointments must also be made in accordance with any set formula.
The courtesy shown by the authorities to the High Court when certain appointments are made is one thing and the obligation imposed by the rules on the authorities that the High Court shall be consulted when certain appointments are made is another.
Indeed, there is a distinction between the process of consultation with the High Court and the screening of the promotees done by the High Court, may be at the instance of the authorities, when their names are considered for appointment as Additional District and Sessions Judge on an ad hoc, fortuitous 355 or stop gap basis.
Thus, persons belonging to the Delhi Judicial Service who are appointed to temporary posts of Additional District and Sessions Judge on an ad hoc basis or for fortuitous reasons or by way of a stop gap arrangement constitute a class which is separate and distinct from those who are appointed to posts in the service in strict conformity with the rules of recruitment.
In view of this, the former class of promotees cannot be included in the list of seniority of officers belonging to the service.
[370H; 371A D] 5:2.
However, in the matter of seniority no distinction can be made between direct recruits who are appointed to substantive vacancies in the service on the recommendation of the High Court under rule 5 (2) and the promotees who are appointed in consultation with the High Court to posts in the service under rules 16 and 17.
Promotees who are appointed to the service under either of these two rules must be considered as belonging to the same class as direct recruits appointed under rule 5 (2).
They perform similar functions, discharge identical duties and bear the same responsibilities as direct recruits.
They are appointed on a regular basis to posts in the service in the same manner as direct recruit are appointed, the only distinction being that whereas the latter are appointed on the recommendation of the High Court, promotees are appointed in consultation with the High Court Exclusion from the seniority list of those promotees who are appointed to posts in the service, whether such appointment is to temporary posts or to substantive vacancies in a temporary capacity will amount to a violation of the equality rule since, thereby, persons who are situated similarly shall have been treated dissimilarly in a matter which constitutes an important facet of their career.
[371E H; 372A] 5:3.
In situations resulting in the suspension of the rule of 'quota and rota ', it is difficult to evolve an equitable rule for determining seniority between direct recruits on the one hand and promotees who are appointed under rules 16 and 17 on the other which will cause no hardship of any kind to any member of the service.
Therefore, the attempt has to be made to minimise, as far as possible, the inequities and disparities which are inherent in a system which provides for recruitment to the service from more than one source by keeping in mind one guiding principle, namely that the classification is gloss on the right to equality and to ensure that classification is made on a broad, though rational, basis so as not to produce the self defeating result of denying equality to those, who in substance, are situated similarly.[374C E] 6 Since the rule of quota and rota ceases to apply when appointments are made under rules 16 and 17, the seniority of direct recruits and promotees appointed under those rules must be determined according to the dates on which direct recruits are appointed to their respective posts and the dates from which the promotees have been officiating continuously either in a temporary post created in the service or in substantive vacancies to which they were appointed in a temporary capacity.
[375F G] S.B. Patwardhan vs State of Maharashtra, ; ; applied; Baleshwar Dass vs State of U.P., [1981] 1 SCR 449 distinguished; A. Janardhana vs Union of India, ; ; followed Joginder Nath vs Union of India, ; ; held inapplicable.
356 Per Sabyasachi Mukharji, J. 1:1.
The proviso to rule 7 merely provides that in case in an year there is vacancy for recruitments from the Bar as well as by promotion more than one third of substantive posts should not be filled in by direct recruitment, and nothing more and therefore it cannot be said that there is any quota of Bar recruits of one third.
The rule does not say that one third of direct recruits must for each year be one third of the recruitments made.
It puts a ceiling on number of Bar recruits in an year where Bar recruits are available and willing to be appointed.[384C E] 1:2.
Sub rule (2) or the makers of Sub rule (2) of Rule 8 presumed and assumed a factual position that quotas of vacancies have been reserved for both categories by Rule 7 which is really not a fact Rule 7 does not reserve any quota for either of the categories Rule 7, 0.4 provides for ceiling of direct recruits by providing that in case there were recruitments from the Bar as well as by promotions in such a case Bar recruits would not be more than one third of the substantive posts in the service.
[384H: 385A B] 2:1.
It is well settled that breft of anything where a service consists of recruitments made from two different sources and the rules and regulations provide for their recruitment and their rights, inter se, primarily and essentially those rights have to be adjusted within the scheme of the rules though it might in some cases lead to certain amount of imbalances or injustices because a service is built on various considerations and various factors induce the legislature or the rule making authority to induce different and diverse knowledge, diverse aptitudes and requirements needed for running of the service.
The legislature or the rule making authorities have better knowledge and better capacities to adjust those factors.[385D F] 2:2.
Rule 8 (2) proceeds on the misconception that there is quota fixed for direct recruits, which rule 7 does not.
Rule 8 (2) cannot on plain literal meaning also be construed or interpreted to mean that it was deemed by the legislature and the rule making body to engraft any quota.
There is no deemed quota, if that was the intention then the rule would have said so.
The rule is silent and proceeds on wrong assumption Therefore, the rule should be given effect to in so far as it can be without reading any quota for the subsequent years.[384E F] Mervyn Coutinho & Ors.
vs Collector of Customs Bombay & Ors ; ; S.C. Jaisinghani vs Union of India & Ors., [1967] 2 SCR p. 703, Chandra mouleshwar Prasad vs Patna High Court & Ors., ; ; V.B. Badamai Etc.
vs State of Mysore & Ors.
, [1976] 1 SCR 815=2 SCC 901; and Bishab Sarup Gupta vs Union of India & Ors., [1975] Suppl.
SCR 491; held inapplicable.
357 Joginder Nath and Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
,[1975] 2 SCR 553 referred to.
Service jurisprudence in India has developed in a peculiar way.
It has sought to infuse both fresh blood and old experience but somehow our administrators did not for a see the need for expanding administration and the personal necessary for this expansion, as a result in making appointments and even granting promotions, there has been a good deal of ad hoc arrangements crating in practically every branch of administration feeling of discontent and misunderstanding between promotees and direct recruits, and damaging the friendly atmosphere which should prevail among the members of the administration, if administration has to remain a vehicle of social progress and transformation which the Indian administration must, in view of the very great possibility and the transitory nature through which it is passing in spite of the severe personal and economic hardships that the member of the administration go through.
[388H; 389A C] 3:2.
In Baleshwar Dass & Ors.
vs State of U.P. & Ors.
[1981]1.
SCR. 449, the Supreme Court noted that a person is said to hold a post in a substantive capacity when he holds it for an indefinite period, especially of long duration in contradistinction to a person who holds it for a definite or a temporary period or holds that on probation and subject to confirmation.
If the appointment was to post and the capacity in which the appointment was to be made was of indefinite duration, if the proper authority had been consulted and had approved, if the tests prescribed have been taken and passed, if probation has been prescribed, and has been approved it can be said that the post was held by the incumbent in a substantive capacity.
Applying these tests to the facts and circumstances of this case dealing with the officers holding the post for a long time there is no doubt that the petitioners officers have held the positions in substantive capacities [392G H; 393A B] Further by reason of rule 2 (b) and rule 2 (d) the petitioners being holders of temporary post in substantive capacities are holding 'cadre posts ' and are also members of the Service.
Appointment in a substantive capacity is certainly different from appointment to a substantive post.
Therefore the holders of substantive posts i.e. the 12 posts originally at the inception of service and 22 posts now, alone are not members of the service.
All incumbents holding either substantive posts or temporary post in substantive capacities are members of the service in the context of the present rule.
[393C E] S.B. Patwardhan & Ors.
vs State of Maharashtra & Ors., [1977] 3 SCR p. 775; Rajendra Narain Singh & Ors.
vs State of Bihar & Ors,.[1980] 3 SCR 450; A. Janardhana vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; at 627; and Baleshawr Dass & Ors.
vs State of U.P. & Ors.
[1981] 1 SCR 449; referred to.
The principles of harmonious construction must be accepted so that all the rules are rendered operative and one does not make the other rule nuga 358 tory.
In the context of the present circumstances rule 7 can have only application to recruitments to the substantive posts in the service.
Rule 7 provides two different sources of recruitment and without fixing any actual quota.
but a ceiling that not more than one third of the substantive posts be held by direct recruitments.
Rule 7 and 8 does not exist in isolation and must be read with the other particularly rule 16.
Rule 16 is a rule of relaxation or an additional rule of recruitment providing for temporary posts being filled up in addition to the substantive posts.
The effect of the creation of temporary posts is to expand the area of membership of the service.
As the filling of the temporary posts under rule 16 is confined to recruitment from the members of Delhi Judicial Service Rule 7 cannot be made applicable for the recruitment to temporary posts.
Therefore, there is no quota rule applicable with regard to temporary posts.
[393F H] 4:1.
Assuming that proviso to rule 7 (b) provides for a quota of one third for direct recruits, rule 16 (1) which empowers the administrator to create temporary posts in the service read with rule 16 (2) which provides that temporary posts shall be filled in, in consultation with the High Court from amongst the members of the Delhi Judicial Service either constitutes an exception to the quota rule or in the alternative proceeds on the basis of realization or abrogation of quota rule.
By Rule 16 (2) a direct recruit cannot be appointed to a temporary post.
In other words, only promotees can be appointed to temporary post.
If the source of recruitment to temporary posts is one and one only namely, the members of the Delhi Judicial Service, no question of applying the quota rule can possibly arise.
The quota rule can have application only if there is more than one source of recruitment as envisaged by rule 16 (1) and if such posts have been filled in as it appears to have been done here in consultation with the High Court from amongst members of Delhi Judicial Service as required under rule 16 (2) of the rules, quota rule assuming that there is any, cannot apply to such appointments.
The validity of such appointments is not open to the exception that these violate the quota rule, if any.
[394F H; 395A B] 4:2.
As between direct recruits on the one hand and the members of the Delhi Judicial Service who were appointed in substantive capacity to temporary posts of Additional District and Sessions Judge on the other hand, the seniority must be governed by the rules of continuous officiation in the cadre post i.e. a direct recruit who is appointed in a substantive capacity to a temporary post of Additional District and Sessions Judge cannot and should not rank higher than the latter in the list of seniority, if a direct recruit is appointed after a member of the Delhi Judicial Service thus promoted he would rank lower in seniority than the latter.
[395D E] 4:3.
An appointment on probation is not a jurisprudential sine qua non for absorption into the services, though normally and generally various rules of different services make such provisions as rule 12 (2) here.
During the pendency of the Writ Petitions some of the promotees were placed on probation retrospectively by different orders.
Such probations are meaningless formalities.
In the 359 instant case, the placement of promotees on probation has not been very strictly followed for which the promotees cannot suffer.
[396G H] 4:4.
It cannot be said that the petitioners were not appointed regularly in accordance with the qualifications laid down under rule 7 (a).
In fact the selections were made by the full court of the High Court and appointments were made on merit cum seniority basis.
[397B C] M. Verraian Chowdhary & 42 Ors.
vs The Government of A.P. & 87 Ors.
C. A. No. 2030 of 1981; S.P. Gupta etc.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, [1981] Supp.
SCC 87, held inapplicable.
OBSERVATION [One should insist that Government must abolish this system of making appointments from two different sources in ad hoc manner.
If appointments have to be made from two different sources then the authorities should so plan that recruits come from two different sources in time and officers from one source are not required to function substantively and effectively in the jobs which are intended to be performed by recruits of other source and face the prospect of being either pushed back or thrown out.] [398G H]
