A combined notification under ss.4 and 17 and a declaration under section 6 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 which were published in the official Gazette in regard to the acquisition of certain lands were challenged in a writ petition before the High Court on two grounds: (1) that there was delay of 29 days in giving public notice of the substance of notification in the locality after the publication of the notification under section 4 in the Gazette and that delay was fatal to the notification itself, and (2) that since the matter was under correspondence between various departments of the Government for nearly eight years before the notification and the declaration were published in the Gazette, that showed that there was no urgency necessitating invocation of section 17(4) of the Act to dispense with the enquiry under section 5 A.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition in limine.
The present special leave petitions were directed against dismissal of the writ petition.
Dismissing the special leave petitions, ^ HELD: Section 4(1) of the Land Acquisition Act does not pres 589 cribe that public notice of the substance of the notification should be given in the locality simultaneously with the publication of the notification in the official Gazetter or immediately thereafter.
Publication in the official Gazette and public notice in the locality are two vital steps required to be taken under s.4(1) before proceeding to take the next step of entering upon the land under section 4(2).
The time factor is not the vital element of section 4(1) and there is no warrant for reading the words `simultaneously ' or `immediately thereafter ' into section 4(1), But since the steps contemplated by section 4(2) cannot be undertaken unless publication is made and public notice given as contemplated by section 4(1), it is implicit that the publication and the public notice must be contemporaneous though not simultaneous or immediately after one another.
Naturally contemporeneity may involve a gap of time and by the very nature of the things, the publication in the official Gazette and the public notice in the locality must necessarily be separated by a gap of time.
This does not mean that the publication and the public notice may be separated by a long interval of time.
What is necessary, is that the continuity of action should not appear to be broken by a deep gap.
If there is publication in the Gazette and if there is public notice in the locality, the requirements of section 4(1) must be held to be satisfied unless the two are unlinked from each other by a gap of time so large as may lead one to the prima facie conclusion of lack of bona fides in the proceedings for acquisition.
If the notification and the public notice are separated by such a large gap of time it may become necessary to probe further to discover if there is any cause for the delay and that if the delay has caused prejudice to any one.
[592 H and 593 A.B] The submission that if the publication of the notification in the Gazette is not immediately followed by public notice in the locality, it may lead to a denial to the person interested of an opportunity to object to the acquisition under section 5 A, has no force.
Section 5.A provides that any person interested in any land which has been notified under section 4(1) may object to the acquisition of the land or of any land in the locality within 30 days after the issue of the notification.
The section does not refer either to the date of publication in the official Gazette or the date of public notice of the substance of the notification in the locality.
It speaks of `the issue of the notification which, in the context, can only signify the completion of the prescribed process rather the twin process of notifying the interested public of the proposed acquisition in the manner provided for by section 4(1), that is by publication in the official Gazette and giving public notice in the locality.
Therefore, the period of 30 days may be reckoned from either the date of publication in the Gazette or the date of public notice of the substance of the notification in the locality, whichever is later.
[593C.G] Khub Chand vs State of Rajasthan, ; , Narinderjit Singh v State of.
Uttar Pradesh, AIR 1973 S.C. 552, State of Mysore vs Abdul Rajak, ; and Anjuman Ahmediyya, Muslim Mission vs State AIR 1980 A.P. 246, referred to.
Sanjivaiah Nagar Depressed and Backward Classes Sangh vs District 590 Collector, Hyderabad, AIR 1983 A.P. 142 and Smt.
Shahnaz Salima vs Govt.
of A.P., W.P. No. 3353/76 decided by a Full Bench of Andhra Pradesh High Court on Sept. 26, 1978, approved.
Satish Kapur vs State of Haryana, AIR 1982 P. and H 276, Rattan Singh v State, AIR 1976 Pand H 279 (F.B.), C. Suryanarayana vs Govt.
of Andhra Pradesh, AIR 1983 A P. 17 and Mohammad Khawaza vs Govt.
of Andhra Pradesh, AIR 1982 N.O.C. 270 (A.P), overruled.
It is not possible to agree with the submission that mere pre notification delay would render the invocation of the urgency provisions void.
Very often persons interested in the land proposed to be acquired make various representations to the concerned authorities against the proposed acquisition.
This is bound to result in a multiplicity of enquiries, communications and discussions leading invariably to delay in the execution of even urgent projects.
Very often the delay makes the problem more and mere acute and increases the urgency of the necessity for acquisition.
[596H; 597A and 596G H] Jaga Ram vs State of Haryana, ; and Kashi Reddy Papaiah vs Govt of Andhra Pradesh.
AIR 1975 A.P. 269, referred to.
