The appellant carries on business as manufacturers of diverse kinds of fertilizers at its factory at Vishakhapatnam.
The appellant appointed M/s E.I.D. Parry Limited and M/s Rallis India Ltd. as their selling agents and entered into agreements with them for sale of fertilizers manufactured by the appellant on terms and conditions mentioned in the agreements entered into by the appellant with the selling agents.
Under the terms of the agreements the selling agents were appointed by the appellant and were entrusted with the task of arranging the sale of the fertilizers for and on behalf of the appellant in consideration of receiving a commission of three and a half percent calculated on the net realisable value, that is, upon the gross sales realisation less excise duty and sales tax, freight expenses and discount and rebate This commission is the remuneration paid by the appellant to the selling agents for discharging the obligation of the selling agents under the agreement of selling the fertilizers.
In the absence of any such agreement the appellant would have been obliged to carry on the activity of organising the sales of its product on its own.
Based on a Notification issued by the Government of India bearing No. 23/70 dated 1.3.1970, the appellant, in respect of the fertilizers known as "Gromor N.P.K. 14 35 14" claimed exemption from the imposition of excise duty, as it is a mixed fertilizers qualifying for exemption.
The appellant also claimed deduction of the selling agency commission paid to its selling agents for sale of fertilizers manufactured by it as trade discount in the matter of computation of excise duty payable on the fertilizers manufactured by the appellant.
The claims on both these accounts were disallowed by the Assistant Collector whose decisions were upheld by the Appellate Collector.
Aggrieved by the decisions of the authorities concerned, the appellant filed Writ Petitions in the High Court.
The High Court by its common judgment refused to entertain the claims of the appellant under these two heads and dismissed all the Writ Petitions filed by the appellant in the High Court.
Hence the appeals with Special Leave granted by this Court.
524 Dismissing the appeals, the Court ^ HELD: 1: 1.
The fertilizers manufactured by the appellant in respect of which a claim for exemption under the Notification No. 23 of 1970 dated 1.3.1970 is made, is not mixed fertilizers within the meaning and scope of the Notification, since the process of manufacture of N.P.K. 14 35 14 brings into existence several other substances and once again utilises them in the process treating one substance with the other.
[532B C] 1:2.
The Explanation added to the Notification also forms a part of the Notification Itself.
The notification has to be construed as a whole and in properly interpreting the Notification, the Explanation which has been added to the Notification cannot be ignored.
The question as to whether the Explanation seeks to control the operation or the effect of the Notification is indeed immaterial, as the Explanation purports neither to control nor to alter but only seeks to explain.
What the Explanation provides is not in any way in conflict with or contrary to what the Notification provides.
[531G H] 1: 3.
A wrong decision by the Excise Authorities in favour of any particular party allowing the benefit of the Notification under similar circumstances to a rival company does not entitle any other party to claim benefits on the basis of that wrong decision.[532B] 2: 1.
The amount of commission paid to the selling agents is not a trade discount within the meaning of the Explanation to Section 4 of the Central Excise and Salt Act, 1944 and does not qualify for deduction in determination of the assessable value of the goods for the purpose of imposition of excise duty, though it is possible that in a given case, payment of what is termed as commission may, depending on the facts and circumstances of the case be in the nature of trade allowance.
But every kind of trade allowance does not necessarily qualify for deduction in assessment of excise duty.
Here the agreements make it clear that the commission paid to the selling agents is not a trade discount given either to the wholesale buyer or to the retail buyer.
It is not given to the consumer or the trader.
The commission paid on the basis of the agreement to the selling agents by way of remuneration for services rendered by the agent cannot by any process of reasoning be said to be trade discount payable or paid at the time of removal of the goods from the factory or any other premises of manufacture or production for delivery at the place of manufacture or production.
[534F H; 535A] M.C.V.S.
Arunachala Nadar Etc.
vs The State of Madras and Ors.
[1959] Suppl.
1 SCR 92; In Re: Licensed Victualler 's Mutual Trading Association Exparte Audain [1889] (42) Law Reports Chencery Division 1; discussed and held inapplicable.
