The petitioner, an assessee under the Income Tax Act, 1961, filed income tax returns which were accepted.
Later a search of the petitioner 's residence revealed that the petitioner had suppressed certain business transactions and had kept false accounts.
On the basis of the allegation that the petitioner had deliberately filed false returns and had kept false accounts with the intention of using them as genuine evidence under the assessment proceedings, complaints were filed against him in the trial court for taking action against him for offences punishable under sections 276C and 277 of the Income Tax Act and under sections 193 and 196 of the Indian Penal Code.
The petitioner moved the High Court under section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure for quashing the proceedings contending that the launching of the prosecution was a premature one on the ground that the reassessment proceedings started against him under the Income Tax Act had not been completed.
The High Court dismissed the petitions.
The petitioner filed this petition for special leave to appeal.
The petitioner did not urge any legal bar for the institution of the proceedings except stating that in the event of the petitioner being exonerated in the reassessment proceedings, the prosecutions may have to be dropped.
Dismissing the petition for special leave, 537 ^ HELD: The pendency of the reassessment proceedings cannot act as a bar to the institution of the criminal prosecution for offences punishable under section 276C or section 277 of the Act.
The institution of the criminal proceedings cannot in the circumstances also amount to an abuse of the process of the court.
[543 E] There is no provision in law which provides that a prosecution for the offences in question cannot be launched until reassessment proceedings initiated against the assessee are completed.
[540 H] A mere expectation of success in some proceeding in appeal or reference under the Act cannot come in the way of the institution of the criminal proceedings under section 276C and section 277 of the Act.
In the criminal case all the ingredients of the offence in question have to be established in order to secure the conviction of the accused.
The criminal court no doubt has to give due regard to the result of any proceeding under the Act having a bearing on the question in issue and in an appropriate case it may drop the proceedings in the light of an order passed under the Act.
It does not, however, mean that the result of a proceeding under the Act would be binding on the criminal court.
The criminal court has to judge the case independently on the evidence placed before it.
Otherwise there is a danger of a contention being advanced that whenever the assessee or any other person liable under the Act has failed to convince the authorities in the proceedings under the Act that he has not deliberately made any false statement or that he has not fabricated any material evidence, the conviction of such person should invariably follow in the criminal court.[541 E H] Uttam Chand & Ors.
vs Income tax Officer Central Circle, Amritsar, (1982)133 I.T.R. 909, referred to.
M/s. Telu Ram Raungi Ram & Anr.
vs Income tax Officer, 'A ' Ward.
Hoshiar Pur & Anr., (1984)145 I.T.R. 111, upheld.
The view of the Calcutta High Court in Jyoti Prakash Mitter vs Haramohan Chowdhury that the provisions of section 279(1A) of the Income Tax Act established the necessity for the completion of the penalty proceedings before the institution of the prosecution and therefore as long as the penalty proceedings were pending the criminal proceedings could not be instituted was erroneous.
Section 279(1A) does not provide that merely because there is a possibility of the Commissioner passing an order under section 273A, the prosecution shall not be instituted.
[542 D; H; 543 A] Jyoti Prakash Mitter vs Haramohan Chowdhury, overruled.
It may be that in an appropriate case the criminal Court may adjourn or postpone the hearing of a criminal case in exercise of its discretionary power under section 309 of the Code of Criminal Procedure if the disposal of any proceeding under the Act which has a bearing on the proceedings before it is imminent so that it may take also into consideration the order to be passed therein.
Even here the discretion should be exercised judicially and in such a way as not to frustrate the object of the criminal proceedings.
There is no rigid rule which makes it necessary for a criminal court to adjourn or postpone the 538 hearing of a case before it indefinitely or for an unduly long period only because some proceeding which may have some bearing on it is pending elsewhere.
But this, however, has no relevance to the question of maintainability of the prosecution.
The prosecution in those circumstances cannot be quashed on the ground that it is a premature one.
[543 B D]
