The respondent was travelling by train as a bona fide passenger.
While the bogie in which he was travelling was being shunted at a Railway Station, the respondent fell down from the train near the water column at the end of the platform and his right hand was crushed by that part of the train which was being shunted.
The District Judge did not accept the version of the respondent that the bogie in which he was travelling received a sudden jerk and that he fell down on that account, and dismissed the application for compensation, In appeal, the High Court, held that the word 'accident ' in section 82A must mean to include within its ambit all incidents resulting in the death of or bodily injury to any passenger during his rail journey, occuring in the course of working of a railway, if it involves a passenger train or apart thereof, and awarded compensation on the premise that it was not essential to establish that there was an 'accident to the train ' by which the passenger was travelling.
In the Appeal to this Court, on the question of liability of the Railway Administration under Section 82A of the Indian Railways Act, 1890.
^ HELD: 1.
The liability under Section 82A will not be attracted in the case of a mishap or injury sustained by a passenger on account of falling down whilst getting on or off a running or stationary train or sustained when he slips in a compartment or when something falls on him whilst travelling.
All such mishaps, when not connected with the accident 556 to the train, or a part of it, would be accidents to the passenger only.
And until both the mishaps take place, one to the train, and another, a sympathetic one to the passenger, the liability under section 82A of the Act will not be attracted.
So also, unless the loss or damage to the property of a passenger is attributable to the accident to the train, liability under Section 82A will not be attracted.
[562G 563A] In the instant case, liability under Section 82A will not be attracted, as it cannot be said that there has been an accident to the train and the mishap has nexus with it.
[562G] 2.
The philosophy of Section 82A appears to be to turn an existing 'fault liability into a 'fault ' or no fault ' liability.
And presumably in order to be 'fair ' to the passengers who pay the 'fare ' for a safe (safe from accident to the train) journey, the legislature, with an eye on social welfare, has provided for compensation by a summary proceeding and has made the liability fault free.
[561B D] 3.
That the 'accident ' envisioned by the first part of Section 82A(1) is an accident 'to ' the 'train ' or 'a part of the train ' is self evident.
The Section speaks of an accident by reason of either (1) collision or (2) derailment or (3) other accident to a train.
[560G H] 4.
What is provided is compensation for death or injury caused or loss sustained on account of accident 'to ' the train.
What is 'not ' provided is compensation for death of the passenger 'whilst ' travelling or injury sustained by a passenger 'whilst travelling on the train, say by reason of his own act default or misfortune, which has no nexus with the 'accident ' to the train. ' What the section does is to turn a liability which was contingent on fault into an 'absolute ' liability.
What however, it does not do, is to provide a free insurance cover to the person and property of a passenger so that compensation can be claimed for the accidental death of or injury to the passenger and or loss or damage to his property even when there has been no 'accident ' to the train carrying such a passenger.
[561E G] 5.
An accident is an occurrence or an event which is unforeseen and startles one when it takes place but does not startle one when it does not take place.
It is the happening of the unexpected, not the happening of the expected, which is called an accident.
An event or occurrence the happening of which is ordinarily expected in the normal course by almost every one undertaking a rail journey cannot be called an 'accident '.
But the happening of something which is not inherent in the normal course of events and which is not ordinarily expected to happen or occur is called a mishap or an accident.
A collision of two trains or derailment of a train or blowing up of a train is something which no one ordinarily expects in the course of a journey.
That is why it falls within the parameters of the definition of accident.
But a jolt to the bogie which is detached from one train and attached to another cannot be termed as an accident.
No shunting can take place without such a jerk or an impact at least when it is attached or annexed to a train by a shunting engine.
if a passenger 557 tumbles inside the compartment or tumbles out of the compartment when he is getting inside the compartment or stepping out of the compartment it cannot be said that an accident has occurred to the train or part of the train.
It is doubtless an accident 'to the passenger '.
But not to the train.
[562B F]
