Rule 18 of the Delhi Judicial Service Rules, 1970 (for short, the Rules) says that the Selection Committee shall prepare a list of candidates in order of merit and forward it to the Administrator for filling the vacancies then existing or any vacancy that may occur within a period of one year of the preparation of the list.
Rule 28 of the Rules lays down that appointments made to the Service by competitive examination shall be subject to order regarding special representation in the Service for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes issued by the Central Government from time to time.
Paragraph 2.1 of the Brochure on "Reservation for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in Services" issued by the Central Government requires that 15 per cent of the total vacancies are to be reserved for Scheduled Caste candidates and 71/2 for Scheduled Tribe candidates.
Paragraph 4.2 of the Brochure prescribes that the actual number of vacancies to be reserved for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in any recruitment should be determined on the basis of points in the roster and also taking into account the reservations brought forward from the previous year.
On 8th February, 1982, the Government of India issued a Notification declaring that there would be no limit on the period of validity of the list of selected candidates prepared to the extent of declared vacancies either by the method of direct recruitment or through a departmental competitive examination and that once a person is declared successful according to the merit list of selected candidates which is based on the declared number of vacancies, the appointing authority has the responsibility to appoint him even if the number of vacancies undergoes a change after his name has been included in the list of selected candidates.
565 In 1980, Respondent No. 3, High Court of Delhi notified 16 vacancies of Sub Judges for being filled through competitive examination in the Delhi Judicial Service 11 vacancies were for open candidates, 2 for Scheduled Castes and 3 for Scheduled Tribes which included two carried forward vacancies also.
The carried forward vacancies were interchangeable in the sense that if candidates from Scheduled Tribes were not available, the vacancies could be added to the quota reserved for Scheduled Castes.
The petitioners, Dal Chand Anand and Prem Prakash, who were members of Scheduled Caste secured 10th and 11th position respectively in the merit list of 11 candidates who qualified the examination and viva voce test held in pursuance of the above notification.
They were Serial No. 3 Scheduled Caste candidates.
Since the petitioners did not figure in the final list of candidates selected by the Administrator, Respondent No. 2, they filed present writ petitions under article 32 of the Constitution to challenge their exclusion and non appointment.
Respondent No. 3 contended (1) that the petitioners were excluded from the selections of 1980, on account of the fact that only 11 candidates qualified in the examination of which 7 were general candidates and therefore as against 7 general candidates only 1 Schedule Caste candidate could be appointed; and (ii) That though the petitioners were in the merit list of 11 persons for the year 1980, they could not be appointed as Sub Judges because two Scheduled Caste candidates who were wrongly excluded from the reserved appointments of 1979 had to be accommodated in the merit list of 1980 and after adjusting them against the reserved vacancies of 1980, no reserved vacancies were left for the petitioners.
Allowing the Writ Petitions, ^ HELD: (1) The error from which the calculation of the High Court suffers is that the number of vacancies available for the Scheduled Caste candidates was fixed by it according to the number of candidates who qualified for the general seats.
This is neither justified by the Rules and administrative instructions nor indeed does such a method of fixation of reserved vacancies disclose any acceptable basis.
The quota of seats available for reserved candidates cannot be made to depend on the fortuitous circumstance as to how many candidates have qualified for the general seats, since that would be contrary to the instructions contained in paragraph 4.2 and 9.2 of the Brochure of 1978 and such a method will also lead to the absurd and undesirable consequence that no candidate of the reserved category will be appointed at all if only one or two candidates from the general category qualify in the examination.
The correct approach is to fix the number of vacancies available for the reserved candidates on the basis of the total number of vacancies which are intended to be filled at any particular point of time.
Therefore, the High Court could not have fixed the number of vacancies available to the reserved candidates on the basis that only seven persons had qualified for general seats.
If a decision was taken to fill 10 or 11 posts only, the number of reserved vacancies should have been fixed upon that basis and not on the basis that only 7 candidates had qualified for the general seats.
[574D E, G H, 575A B] 566 (2) In the process of remedying injustice which was done to the 2 Scheduled Caste candidates of 1979, no injustice can be caused to the petitioners who had qualified for the reserved seats in the examination held in 1980.
Such a strange result is to be avoided if not at all costs, at least within the framework of the Rules and the administrative instructions governing the matter.
Justice to one group at the expense of injustice to another is perpetuation of injustice in some form or the other.
[577H, 57 D] (3) The statutory rules and administrative instructions have to be read together unless they are contrary to each other.
In the instant case, since there is no in consistency between the statutory rules and the administrative instructions, it is clear that the two have to be read together by reason of Rule 28.
Though the Rules of the Delhi Judicial Service have not been amended so as to bring them inconformity with the administrative instructions and notifications which have been issued by the Ministry of Home Affairs, Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms, from time to time, that does not mean that administrative instructions can be ignored by the High Court until that is done.
Therefore, the Notification of 1982 is good authority for adjusting the petitioners against the reserved vacancies for the year 1980, since it is clear from the Notification (i) that if selected candidates are available from the previous list, there should either be no further recruitment until those candidates are absorbed or, in the alternative, vacancies which are declared for the subsequent years should take into account the number of persons who are already in the list of selected candidates who are still awaiting appointment and (ii) that there should be no limit on the period of validity of the list of selected candidates prepared to the extent of declared vacancies and once a person is declared successful according to the merit list of selected candidates, the appointing authority has the responsibility to appoint him, even if the number of vacancies undergoes a change after his name is included in the list of selected candidates.
[577G, B D, 576G H; 577A]
