The petitioner is the lessee of the premises No. 7/1A D, Lindsay Street, Calcutta which is situated in an important commercial locality of Calcutta.
The ground floor and mezzanine floor of the said premises were requisitioned by Government for establishing main Sales Show room of respondent No. 4, namely west Bengal Handicrafts and Development Corporation Ltd., by an order of requisition No. 21/58 Regn.
dated 25.2.1958 under the West Bengal Premises Requisition and Control (Temporary Provision) Act 1947.
Though this Act itself is a temporary Act, this has been renewed from time to time, the last one renewing it upto 31st March, 1985.
Aggrieved by the piece meal extension of the 1947 Act and the requisitioning of his premises since 1985, the petitioner challenged the same by a petition under Article 32 of the Constitution and contended that (a) the West Bengal premises Requisition Control (Temporary Provision) Act 1947 cannot be converted into permanent Act and therefore requisition of his premises cannot be a permanent requisition ; (b) Requisitioning the property in this manner for more than 25 years amounts to indirect acquisition of the property and is a fraud upon the power; and (c) It violates both Articles 14 and 19 (1) (g) of the Constitution, since the petitioner who himself requires the premises for his own business is prevented from using.
Disposing of the petition, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
There are significant differences between 'requisition ' and 'acquisition '.
Normally the expression requisition is taking possession of the property for a limited period in contradistinction to acquisition.
This popular meaning has to be kept in mind in judging whether in a particular case there has been in fact any abuse of the power.
The distinction between 'requisition ' and 'acquisition ' is also evident from Entry 42 in List III of the Seventh Schedule, Original Article 31 clause (2) of the Constitution recognised the distinction between compulsory acquisition and requisition of the property.
The two 687 concepts are different; in one title passes to the acquiring authority, in the other title remains with the owner, the possession goes to the requiring authority.
One is the taking over of the title and the other is the taking over of the possession.
Thus the orders of requisition and acquisition have different consequences and affect the owners concerned in different manners.
But the State has the power both of requisition as well as acquisition, subject to one condition that is the property acquired or requisitioned must be for public purpose; Mangilal Karwa vs State of Madhya Pradesh, AIR 1955 Nagpur p. 153 at p. 157 approved, Chiranjit Lal Chowdhury vs The Union of India and others [1950] I SCR p. 869 referred to.
[695H; G; 696A B] 2.
Under Section 49 (1) of the Land Acquisition Act, 1942 as amended by the West Bengal Act 32 of 1955, even a part of the building or a house can be acquired provided the conditions mentioned and the procedure specified therein are followed and there is no absolute bar to the acquisition of a part of a house or a building.
[697F] 3:1 It will not be correct to say that in no case can an order of requisition for permanent purpose be made but in a situation where the purpose of requisitioning the property is of a permanent character and where the Government has also the power and the opportunity to acquire the property or a part thereof especially upon the fulfilment of the conditions of section 49 (1) of the Land Acquisition Act (as amended by the West Bengal Act) to the extent applicable, if the Government chooses not to exercise that power nor attempts to exercise that power to achieve its purpose, than that will be bad not because the Government would be acting without power of requisition but the Government might be acting in a bad faith.
In other words, if there is power to acquire as also the power of requisition and the purpose is of permanent nature by having the property or a part thereof for the Government then in such case to keep the property under requisition permanently might be an abuse of the power and a colourable exercise of the power not because the Government lacks the power of requisition but because the Government does not use the other power of acquisition which will protect the rights and interests of the parties better.
[697H; 698A C] 3:2 Where one is repository of two powers that is power of requisition as well as power of acquisition qua the same property and if the purpose can equally be served by one which causes lesser inconvenience and damage to the citizen concerned unless the repository of both the powers suffers from any insurmountable disability, user of one which is disadvantageous to the citizen without exploring the use of the other would be bad not on the ground that the Government has no power but on the ground that it will be a misuse of the power in law.
[698D E] 3:3 In the instant case, it is indisputably true that (a) The purpose of requisition is a public purpose; and (b) That the only part of the building namely one room has been requisitioned for the show room but the premises in question has remained under requisition for over 25 years and the purpose of having the premises in question is of a permanent and perennial nature.
But that by itself without anything more would not enable the court to draw 688 the inference that the exercise of the power was bad initially nor, would be continuance of the requisition became malafide or colourable by mere lapse of time.
In order to draw such an inference some more material ought to have been placed before the Court.
In the circumstances the continuance of the requisitioning of the premises in question must be permitted subject to fulfilment of the conditions mentioned.
[698H F]
