The respondent, an adolescent, was convicted for an offence punishable under section 302 of the Indian Penal Code and sentenced to imprisonment for life.
After the respondent had undergone the sentence for a few months in a prison, he was ordered to be detained in a Borstal School under an order made by the appellant State Government under section 10 A of the Andhra Borstal Schools Act, 1925 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Act ') to serve unexpired portion of the sentence till he attained the age of 23 years.
Since the respondent was not released on his attaining the age of 23 years, the respondent filed a habeas corpus petition in the High Court.
The High Court allowed the petition and directed the appellant to release the respondent.
Hence this appeal by the State Government by special leave.
The appellant contended that in view of the mandate of section 433A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 any person who was sentenced to imprisonment for life for an offence for which death was one of the punishments provided by law could not be released from prison unless he had served at least 14 years of imprisonment even though by an order made under section 10 A of the Act he had been detained in a Borstal school.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: The appellant 's contention overlooks the words 'prison ' and 'imprisonment ' in section 433A of the Code and the effect of an order made by the State Government under section 10 A of the Act read with section 8 thereof.
Entry 4 of List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution which reads as "4.
Prisons, reformatories, Borstal institutions and other institutions of a like nature, and persons detained therein.
" also makes a distinction between a prison and a Borstal institution.
Section 433A of the Code refers to a person who is actually undergoing imprisonment.
As soon as order is made under section 10 A of the Act 730 in respect of a person who is sentenced to imprisonment for life, and he is sent to a Borstal school pursuant thereto, he ceases to be a prisoner undergoing imprisonment.
He would be a detenu in a Borstal school and the provisions of section 8 of the Act will have to be given their full effect in his case also.
It is true that there is some apparent contradiction between the two sentences of section 10 A. But having regard to the object of the legislation and the meaning of the words 'as if ' in the second sentence, we should extend all the privileges available to an offender detained under section 8 of the Act to a prisoner who is directed to be transferred to a Borstal school under section 10 A. Under section 8 of the Act the person detained in a Borstal school can be kept there for a maximum period of five years and in no case after he has attained 23 years of age.
There is no provision for sending him back to prison except section 14 of the Act which will not be applicable to a person against whom no report is made by the Superintendent of a Borstal school as stated therein.
If section 14 of the Act is inapplicable there is no legal way in which he can be sent back to prison to satisfy the requirements of section 433A of the Code, Moreover, an anomalous situation which arises in the case of a person sent to a Borstal school under section 10 A of the Act is that if the period of detention in a Borstal school is not to be counted as the period of imprisonment because detention is ordered in lieu of imprisonment and because Borstal school is not a prison then such person cannot claim by way of credit the period of detention in a Borstal school while computing the fourteen years of imprisonment mentioned in section 433A of the Code.
If that is so, should he undergo an extra period of imprisonment equivalent to the period of his detention to make good the deficiency to satisfy the requirements of that section ? That would hardly be a proper thing to be demanded of him.
[743F H; 744A E] Emperor vs Lakshman Shivram, A.I.R. 1933 Bom.
(FB), referred to.
In re T. Muniratnam Reddi & Anr., A.I.R 1955 Andhra 118.
In re.
Krishnaswami alias Kittan, A.I.R. 1949 Mad. 109.
In re.
Periyaswami Asari, A.I.R. 1949 Mad. 223 and Kesavan vs State of Kerala, 1957 K.L.G. 1049, overruled.
If every person who is transferred under section 10 A of the Act to a Borstal school is to remain there until he serves out the entire period of imprisonment for life, the Borstal school would soon become a prison consisting of 'lifers ' and its other inmates who are detained under section 8 of the Act would be keeping company with adult offenders, thus defeating the very object of establishing a Borstal school.
The Court should as far as possible avoid a construction which will make the legislation futile.
The second reason is that the words 'as if ' appearing in the second sentence in section 10 A make it a deeming provision and such deeming provision should in law be carried to its logical end.
[740E G] East End Dwellings Co. Ltd. vs Finsbury Borough Council, at p. 132.
referred to.
731 If a person detained in a Borstal school under section 10 A of the Act is to be re transferred to the prison after he serves out the full term of detention in the school it will defeat the very object and purpose of the Act of providing for detention of young offenders in a Borstal school for the purpose of reformation and rehabilitation of such offenders and that person who is detained in a Borstal school has to be released if he has completed 23 years of age.
[741G H] Bondili Jagannath Singh vs The Government of Andhra Pradesh.
1983 (2) Andhra Pradesh Law Journal 262, upheld.
In the instant case, the Andhra Borstal Schools Act, 1925, which specifically deals with the case of a small section of persons namely adolescent offenders traceable to the legislative power derived from the expressions 'Prisons ' and 'Borstal institutions ' in Entry 4 of the State List and which is a local law, prevails on all the provisions of the Code including section 433A of the Code as there is no provision which excludes the operation of the Act which deals with Borstal institutions.
Section 433A of the Code was introduced not to set at naught provisions like section 10 A of the Act which dealt with a special class of offenders like adolescent offenders but only to regulate capricious and arbitrary decisions under section 432 of the Code and the remission rules sometimes reducing the sentence of imprisonment for life imposed on persons who had been convicted for capital offences but had been sentenced to imprisonment for life to short periods like five to six years.
[747E H] Maru Ram etc.
vs Union of India & Anr.
, ; , explained and distinguished.
Section 433A of the Code would not operate in respect of persons dealt with under section 10 A of the Act and that Parliament never intended while enacting section 433A to deny the benefit available to adolescent offenders under section 10 A of the Act.
Therefore, section 10 A of the Act remains unimpaired and it has to be given full effect even after the enactment of section 433A of the Code.
[749C D] In re Ganapati, ; overruled.
Kunwar Bahadur & Ors vs State of Uttar Pradesh, AIR 1979 S.C. 1509, referred to.
(Per Sabyasachi Mukharji, J.) There is some anomaly in section 10 A of the Andhra Pradesh Borstal Schools Act, 1925.
It empowers the State Government to 'transfer adolescent offenders sentenced to transportation to Borstal School '.
It further provides that if the State Government is satisfied that any adolescent offender might with advantage be detained in Borstal School, direct that such offender shall be transferred to a Borstal School, 'there to serve the whole or any part of the unexpired residue of the sentence '.
(emphasis supplied).
The section further stipulates that the provisions of the said Act should apply to such offender 'as if 732 he had been originally sentenced to detention in a Borstal School '.
My learned brother has, with the aid of the principle enunciated by Lord Asquith in East End Dwellings Court.
Ltd. v Finsbury Borough Council, deemed that the original sentence of transferring the petitioner to a Borstal School has been passed by the Court at the time of imposing sentence originally.
But in fact in passing the order under section 10 A expression used by the State Government is that the person concerned should be detained in 'Borstal School ' to serve the unexpired portion of the sentence till he attains the age of 23 years.
So the sentence actually passed by the enabling section by the State Government directs the detenu 'to serve the unexpired portion of the sentence '.
Therefore we have to deem as if the sentence was passed by the court at the time of the passing of the original sentence by the court.
In a matter of this nature, the statute should be more specific and in that view of the matter, the Government should consider the question of either altering the language of section 10 A of the Act or be more specific while passing any orders under section 10.A of the.
[750E H] East End Dwellings Co. vs Ltd. vs Finsbury Borough Council, [1952] Appeal Cases 109 at p. 132, referred to.
