The appellants were convicted and sentenced to suffer imprisonment for life for the murder of a person by the name of Kunwar Bahadur in the village of Bamori Kalan, District Jalaun on July 18, 1971.
Based on a news item carried by a Hindi daily called 'Nav Bharat ' on June 3, 1983, that the dead body of one Kunwar Bahadur Singh was found in Vidisha in suspicious circumstances and that a letter purported to have been written by one Kunwar Bahadur Singh was recovered from the person of the deceased, the appellants filed a petition before the High Court of Madhya Pradesh, praying for their acquittals contending that Kunwar Bahadur Singh for whose murder they were convicted in 1971 was alive for twelve years thereafter and, therefore, their conviction was illegal.
The High Court dismissed the petition.
Hence the appeal by Special Leave of the Court.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD; 1:1.
When a person convicted of murder raised the question that he has material to show that he was convicted for a murder that had never taken place, as, for example, by showing that the person who was alleged to have been murdered is in fact alive the Supreme Court has the jurisdiction, in appropriate cases, to call for further data from the concerned authorities in order to examine the contention of the convict.
This jurisdiction on which the Supreme Court can exercise, though with circumspection, is in order to do complete justice in any matter which is pending before it or which has been disposed of by it.
[863G H, 864A] 1: 2.
The instant case, however, is an example of what an incredible amount of ingenuity is exercised by the people to secure false acquittals.
The two reports called for from the District Magistrate, Vidisha, and the two photographs of 863 the two dead bodies found in 1971 and 1983, respectively make it clear that, (1) Kunwar Bahadur Singh for whose murder the appellants were convicted thirteen years ago is not the same person whose dead body was found on June 2, 1983 in Vidisha and (2) The letter which was found on the person of the dead body on June 2, 1983 is a forged and fictitious document manufactured for the purpose of obtaining false acquittals.
[863D, 864E, 865E F]
