The appellants were Excise Contractors who had secured the excise privilege of retail sale of Toddy, Arrack or Special Liquor.
The State Government had the monopoly of the first sale of Arrack which is country liquor other than Toddy.
The manufacture of Arrack by distillation is done in the State under State control and the entire quantity manufactured in the State is sold to the State Government which in its turn supplies it to the bonded depots in Taluks.
Under the Mysore Excise Act, Arrack is liable to excise duty at rates prescribed by the Government.
The State does not collect excise duty from the distillers.
From the distillery arrack is transferred to Bonded Depots and excise duty together with cesses thereon is collected from the contractors who are given the privilege or right to effect retail sales of Arrack.
The exclusive privilege of retail vending of Arrack for each excise year which commences on the first day of July and ends on 30th June of the following year is sold by the State by auction.
Under the terms and conditions governing the licenses, granted to the contractor whose bid is accepted and to whom the licenses for vending arrack is granted, the licensees were required to deposit in the State Treasury under separate heads of account the sales tax payable to the State Government and the excise duty with cesses.
826 However, with effect from 1.4.1966 the State Government started collecting sales tax computed on the sale price of Arrack together with excise duty and cesses payable thereon.
So computed sales tax came to about 24 Paise a litre which was collected alongwith the price of Arrack sold to the licensees.
The validity of the collection of the sales tax on the aforesaid basis was challenged by the appellants.
A Division Bench of the High Court allowed the writ petition, D. Cawasji and Co. Mysore vs State of Mysore 1969 (1) Mys.
L.J. 461, holding that the State Government could not under S.19 of the Sales Tax Act, collect sales tax on excise duty which is not a part of the selling price of Arrack.
The appeal preferred by the State Government to this Court was withdrawn.
During the pendency of the appeal the privileges of vending liquor in the excise year 1968 69 were sold without any variation in the price of Arrack fixed by the Government during the previous year at 55 paise a litre.
During the year 1968 69 the State Government collected sales tax computing the same @ 6.1/2% of the actual sale price without including therein excise duty and cess.
As the liability of the States to refund the amount collected as sales tax in excess amounted to lacs of Rupees, and with the object of avoiding the liability of refund by the State Government of the excess amount so collected, the State passed Ordinance No. 3 of 1969 on 17th July, 1969 which was replaced by the Mysore Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1969 on 19th July, 1969.
The validity of this Amending Act was challenged by the appellants on the ground that the Amending Act was unreasonable and arbitrary but the High Court dismissed the writ petition.
In the appeal to this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellant that the Amending Act does not seek to rectify or remove the defect or lacuna on the basis of which the collection of the excess sales tax had been set aside by the High Court, and that the increase in the rate of sales tax from 61/2% to 45% with retrospective effect is clearly arbitrary and unreasonable for if, any particular provision of the statute is for some lacuna or defect in the statute declared unconstitutional or invalid, it is open to the Legislature to pass a Validating Act with retrospective effect so that the State may not be saddled with liability of refund or other consequences which may arise as a result of the particular provision being declared invalid.
On behalf of the respondent State it was contended that by the enactment of S.2 of the impugned Act the very basis of the complaint made by the appellants in the earlier writ petitions that the State was collecting amounts by way of tax in excess of what was authorised under the Act had been removed.
Allowing the Appeals, 827 ^ HELD: 1.
The only object of enacting the amended provision it appears is to nullify the effect of the judgment which became conclusive and binding on the parties to enable the State Government to retain the amount wrongfully and illegally collected as sales tax and this object has been sought to be achieved by the impugned amendment which does not even purport or seek to remedy or remove the defect and lacuna but merely raises the rate of duty from 6.1/2% to 45% and further proceeds to nullify the judgment and order of the High Court.
[841E F] 2.
The enhancement of the rate of duty from 6.1/2% to 45% with retrospective effect is in the facts and circumstances of the case clearly arbitrary and unreasonable.
The defect or lacuna is not even sought to be remedied and the only justification for the steep rise in the rate of duty by the amended provision is to nullify the effect of the binding judgment.
[841 F] 3.
The vice of illegal collection in the absence of the removal of the illegality which led to the invalidation of the earlier assessments on the basis of illegal levy.
continues to taint the earlier levy.
This is not a proper ground for imposing the levy at the higher rate with retrospective effect.
[841G] 4.
It may be open to the Legislature to impose the levy at the higher rate with prospective operation but levy of taxation at higher rate which really amounts to imposition of tax with retrospective effect has to be justified on proper and cogent grounds.
[841H] 5.
The amendment does not proceed to cure the defect or the lacuna by bringing in an amendment providing for exigibility of sales tax on excise duty, health cess and education cess.
The impugned Amending Act cannot therefore be considered to be a Validating Act.
A Validating Act seeks to validate the earlier Acts declared illegal and unconstitutional by Courts by removing the defect or lacuna which led to invalidation of the law.
With the removal of the defect or lacuna resulting in the validation of any Act held invalid by a competent Court, the Act may become valid if the Validating Act is lawfully enacted.
To provide that no liability may be imposed on the State in respect of acts done before the passing of the Validating Act making such act valid, a Validating Act is usually passed with retrospective effect.
The retrospective operation relieves the State of the consequences of acts done prior to the passing of the Validating Act.
The retrospective operation of a Validating Act properly passed curing the defects and lacuna which might have led to the invalidity of any act done may be upheld, if considered reasonable and legitimate.
[840E A] In the instant case, the State instead of remedying the defect or removing the lacuna has by the impugned amendment sought to raise the rate of tax from 6.1/2% to 45% with retrospective effect from the 1st April 1966 to avoid the liability of refunding the excess amount collected and has further purported to nullify the judgment and order passed by the High Court directing the refund of the excess amount illegally collected by providing that the levy at the higher 828 rate of 45% will have retrospective effect from 1st of April 1966.
The judgment of the High Court declaring the levy of sales tax on excise duty, education cess and health cess to be bad became conclusive and was binding on the parties.
It may or may not have been competent for the State Legislature to validly remove the lacuna and remedy the defect in the earlier levy by seeking to impose sales tax through any amendment on excise duty, education cess and health cess but in any event, the State Government has not purported to do so through the Amending Act.
[841A D] D. Cawasji & Co. Mysore vs State of Mysore, , D. Cawasji & Co. and Others vs The State of Mysore 1968 (16) L.R. 641, Janapada Sabha, Chindwara etc.
vs The Central Provinces Syndicate Ltd.; , , Municipal Corporation of the City of Ahmedabad vs New Shorock Spq.
and Wvg. & Co. Ltd. etc ; and Shri Prithi Cotton Mills Ltd. and Anr.
vs The Broach Borough Municipality and Ors., , referred to.
