Pursuant to a requisition of the Inspector General of Police Punjab to select and recommend suitable persons for the post of Assistant Sub Inspectors of Police against 57 available vacancies And 170 anticipated vacancies likely to occur as a result of expected re organisation of the Police Force by disbandment of the Punjab Armed Police Battalion, the appellant along with many others were interviewed and physically tested on various dates and the Board recommended panel of 144 candidates on 22nd December, 1979.
The proposal for disbandment of the Punjab Armed Police Battalion and creation instead of additional posts in the Districts was turned down by the Government with the result that there were only 57 posts out of which 9 were offered to The wards or the deceased police officers in accordance with the Punjab Government Instructions regarding priority appointments issued vide the letter No. 80(GOI) SII(3)/73/ 12092 dated 18th April, 1973 and the remaining 48 posts were offered to the candidates recommended by the Board in order of merit determined by the Board.
Since remaining candidates recommended by the Board pursuant to the requisition against anticipated vacancies were not appointed as there were no vacancies the disgruntled candidates filed two petitions under Article 226 of the Constitution before the High Court.
The petitions having been dismissed, two appeals were preferred under the Letters Patent which were also dismissed Hence the appeals by Special Leave.
Dismissing the appeals, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
The fact that there is no provision in the Constitution which makes the acceptance of the advice tendered by the Public Service Commission when consulted, obligatory renders the provisions of Article 320(3) only directory and not mandatory.
[905 E] 2.
The establishment of an independent body like Public Service Commission is to ensure selection of best available persons for appointment to the post to avoid arbitrariness and nepotism in the matter of appointment.
The selection by tho Commission, however, is only a recommendation of the Com 900 mission and the final authority for appointment is the Government.
The Government may accept the recommendation or may decline to accept the same.
But if it chooses not to accept the recommendations of the Commission the Constitution enjoins the Government to place on the table of the Legislative Assembly its reason and report for doing so.
Thus the Government is made answerable to the l louse for any departure vide Article 323 of the Constitution.
This, however, does not clothe the appellants with any such right in the instant case.
l hey cannot claim as of right that the Government must except the recommendation of the Commission.
If, however, the vacancy is to be filled up, the Government has to make appointment strictly adhering to the order merit as recommended by the Public Service Commission, it cannot disturb the order of merit according to its own sweet will except for other good reasons namely bad conduct or character.
The Government cannot appoint person whose name does not appear in the list.
But it is open to the (Government to decide how many appointments will be made.
The process for selection and selection for the purpose of recruitment against anticipated vacancies does not create a right to be appointed to the post which can be enforced by a Mandamus.
[905 F H; 906 A D] A.N.D. ' Silva vs Union of India, [1962] Supp I S.C.R. 968; State of Haryana vs Subash Chander Marwaha & Ors., [1974]] I SCR 165: applied.
G.S. Kalkat vs State of Punjab & Ors.
(Punjab and Haryana decided on 15th July, 1980; held inapplicable.
The allegation about the mala fides are more easily made than made out.
In the instant case, there are no materials to warrant the conclusion that the action of The State Government in not appointing the appellants was mala fide especially when the post in anticipation whereof the Board was asked to select more candidates came to an end.
There was no question of their appointment against these vacancies [906 G; 907 A] 3:2.
The action of the Government is not hit by Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution and the case of the appellants is not identical with those of the persons who were appointed as against 57 vacancies for which original requisition was made to the Board for selecting them [907 B] 3:3.
The notification issued by the Selection Board in this case was only an invitation to candidates possessing specified qualifications to apply for selection for recruitment for certain posts.
It did not hold out any promise that the selection would be made or if it was made the selected candidates would be appointed.
The candidates did not acquire any right merely by applying for selection or for appointment after selection When the proposal for disbandment or the Punjab Armed Police Battalion and instead creation of additional posts for the district police was turned down by the State Government, the appellants were only informed of the situation and there was no question of any promissory estoppel against the State.
[907 C D]
