The Income Tax Officer forwarded a certificate under section 46(2) of the Indian Income Tax Act to the Collector for recovering the arrears of Income Tax from the assesses as if they were arrears of land revenue.
The Collector proceeded under section 48, Madras Revenue 971 Recovery Act, and had the assessee arrested and confined in jail.
Upon a petition for a writ of habeas corpus the High Court ordered the release of the assessee holding that section 48 of the Madras Revenue Recovery Act and section 46(2) Of the Indian Income Tax Act were ultra vires.
The Collector appealed.
Held, that section 48 Of the Madras Revenue Recovery Act, and section 46(2) of the Indian Income Tax Act were not ultra vires and neither of them violated articles 14,19, 21 and 22 of the Constitution.
Where the personal liberty of a person is lawfully taken away under article 21, i.e., in accordance with a procedure established by a valid law, no question of the exercise of fundamental rights under article 19(1)(a) to (e) and (g) can be raised.
A.K. Gopalan vs The State of Madras, ; , followed.
An arrest for a civil debt in the process of or in the mode prescribed by law for recovery of arrears of land revenue does not come within the protection of article 22.
State of Punjab vs Ajaib Singh ; , followed.
Section 46(2) of the Indian Income Tax Act does not offend article 14 and there is no violation of article 21 where a person is arrested under section 48, Madras Revenue Recovery Act, in pursuance of a warrant of arrest issued for the recovery of the demand certified under section 46(2) of the Indian Income Tax Act.
Purshottam Govindji Halai vs Shri B. M. Desai, Additional Collector of Bombay, ; , followed.
Section 46(2) of the Indian Income Tax Act gives authority to the Collector to recover arrears of tax as if it were an arrear of land revenue.
Section 48 of the Madras Revenue Recovery Act read with section 5 make it clear that the arrest of the defaulter is one of the modes by which the arrears of land revenue can be recovered, to be resorted to if the said arrears cannot be liquidated by the sale of the defaulter 's property.
Such an arrest is not for any offence committed or a punishment for defaulting in any payment.
Section 48 of the Madras Revenue Recovery Act does not require the Collector to give the defaulter an opportunity to be heard before arresting him.
But the Collector must have reason to believe that the defaulter is wilfully withholding payment or has been guilty of fraudulent conduct in order to evade payment.
Such belief must be based upon some material, which a Court may look into in appropriate cases, to find out if the conditions laid down in the section have been fulfilled.
The Collector has also the power to release the defaulter if the amount due is paid.
