The Government of Karnataka State made a reference under section 10 of the (hereinafter referred to as 'the Act ') referring Certain dispute between the Regional Provident Fund Organisation established by the Central Government for that State under the Employees ' Provident Fund & Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 and its employees to the Industrial Tribunal.
The Regional Provident Fund Organisation raised two preliminary objections viz. that the activity carried on by the management was not an industry and that the State Government was not the appropriate Government under the Act in relation to the dispute between it and its employees.
The Tribunal negatived both the contentions.
The management filed a writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution before the High Court.
The only contention urged by the management was that the State Government being not the appropriate Government under the Act is for as the dispute was concerned, it could not refer the dispute under section 10 of the Act.
A single Judge accepted the contention.
In appeal filed by the workmen.
a Division Bench of the High Court held that the State Government was the appropriate Government for purposes of the dispute in question.
Hence this appeal by the management by special leave against the judgment of the Division Bench.
The management contended that the industry in question fell under section 2 (a) (i) of the Act as it was an industry carried on under the authority of the Central Government and hence the Central Government alone could act as the appropriate Government in relation to the dispute concerned.
817 Allowing the Appeal, ^ HELD: In order to decide whether the Central Government is the appropriate Government under the Act or not in this case it has got to be determined whether the activity carried on under the Provident Funds Act is being carried on by or under the authority of the Central Government as provided in section 2 (a) of the Act.
The word authority in section 2(a) of the Act must be construed according to its ordinary meaning and therefore must mean a legal power given by one person to another to do an act.
The words 'under the authority of ' means pursuant to the authority, such as whether the agent or the servant act under or pursuant to the authority of his principal or master.[821F H] Heavy Engineering Mazdoor Union vs The State of Bihar & Ors., , Graham vs Public Works Commissioner, and Sukhdev Singh & Ors.
vs Bhagatram Sardar Singh Raghuvanshi & Anr., [1975] 3 S.C.R. 619, referred to.
In the instant case, the activity carried on by the Central Board or the State Boards under the Provident Funds Act is one traceable to Article 43 of the constitution which requires the State to endeavour to secure by suitable legislation or economic organisation or in any other way to all workers, agricultural or industrial or otherwise, work, a living wage, conditions of work ensuring a decent standard of life and full enjoyment of leisure and cultural opportunities.
It is a part of the programme of every welfare State which our country is.
Institutions engaged in matters of such high public interest or performing such high public functions by virtue of their very nature performed governmental functions.
They are truly the agents of the Government and they function under the authority of the Government as provided in the statute because the Central Government could have for the purpose of introducing the scheme of compulsory contribution to the Provident fund set up an organisation or a department in the absence of the corporate bodies envisaged in the Provident Funds Act.
[823C F] The provisions of section 5B (2) of the Provident Funds Act which reads: "A State Board shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as the Central Government may assign to it from time to time" clearly envisage that the State Board is an agent of the Central Government.
In the absence of the State Board, the Regional Committee constitute under Paragraph 4 of the Scheme is required to function under the control of the Central Board.
The Regional Provident Fund Commissioner who is appointed by the Central Government is also under the control of the Central Board and the Central Government.
[824B C] Having regard to the various of the Provident Funds Act and the nature of the business carried on by the Central Board, the State Board, the Regional Committee and the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner, this Court is of the view that the Division Bench of the High Court was not right in holding that the State Government was the appropriate Government under 818 section 2 (a) of the Act in the matter of industrial disputes arising between the management and the workmen of the Regional Provident Fund organisation.
[854D E]
