The Haryana State Industrial Development Corporation Limited (for short, the Corporation) underwrote some preference shares of M/s. Depro Foods Limited.
The appellant Managing Director of M/s .
Depro Foods Ltd. guaranteed by an agreement in his personal capacity the payment of the dividend income due in respect of the aforesaid shares to the Corporation.
One of the provisions in the guarantee agreement declared "that the dues on account of this guarantee will be recoverable in the manner in which land revenue is collected by the Government." The Corporation applied to the Assist and Collector for instituting recover proceedings, against the appellant because M/s. Depro Foods Ltd. failed to pay Rs, 1,96,961 representing the dividend payable by it.
The Assistant Collector issued a warrant for the arrest of the appellant since he made no effort to pay up the amount due from him.
The appellant filed a writ petition in the High Court against the recovery proceedings which was dismissed in limine.
Hence this appeal by special leave.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: (1) This Court always has power to refuse relief where the petitioner seeks to invoke its writ jurisdiction in order to secure a dishonest advantages or perpetuate an unjust gain.
Under article 226 of the Constitution, it is open to the High Court to consider whether, in the exercise of its undoubted discretionary jurisdiction, it should decline relief to such petitioner if the grant of relief would defeat the interests of justice, The High Court was fully justified in refusing relief to the petitioner.
[943C; B] 941 (2) In the instant case the appellant knowingly and deliberately entered into the Guarantee Agreement, and is liable as Guarantor to make payment of the dividend due from Messrs Depro Foods Limited.
It was not contended that the appellant in fact does not possess sufficient funds or cannot avail of sufficient personal property for the purpose of discharging the liability.
The record also shows that the appellant made no attempt to discharge the liability.
When that is so he is not entitled to relief in these proceedings.
[942H; 943A B] (3) It is desirable that the High Court, when dismissing a writ petition in limine should set forth a brief statement of the reasons for its order instead of disposing of the proceedings by the single word 'dismissed ' especially in those cases where the matter in controversy in the subject of judicial examination for the first time and has not been processed earlier by an inferior judicial or quasi judicial authority.
[943E F]
