The appellants in the appeals were printers and publishers of newspapers.
The Assistant Regional Director of the Employee 's State Insurance Corporation issued a notice to the appellants on October 1, 1975 calling upon them to make contributions in respect of the administrative and editorial staff of the newspapers, with effect from January 28, 1968 on the ground that the aforesaid staff came within the definition of the expression 'employee ' in section 2(9) of the Employee ' a State Insurance Act 1948 as amended by the Amending Act No. 44 of 1966.
After the aforesaid demands were made, the appellants filed applications before the Employees ' State Insurance Court under section 75 of the Act questioning the liability to make contribution, in respect of the said employees during the period between January 28, 1968 and November 19, 1976.
They however did not dispute their liability in respect of the period subsequent to November 19.
1976 on which date the notification was issued under section 1 (5) by the State Government.
These applications were contested by the Employees ' State Insurance Corporation.
The Employees ' Insurance Court allowed the applications holding that until the notification under section 1(5) of the Act was issued by the State Government making the Act applicable to the establishments of the appellants viz the administrative and editorial sections of the presses, the said employees could not be considered as 'employees ' as defined by section 2(9) of the Act.
The Corporation thereupon filed appeals before the High Courts under section 32 of the Act, which were allowed, holding that the employees concerned came within the definition given in section 2(9) aud, therefore, the 963 appellants were liable to make contributions during the relevant period in respect of them also under the Act.
Dismissing the Appeals to this Court, ^ HELD: 1 An examination of the provisions of the indicates that the persons employed for wages in the administrative section and the editorial section of each of the printing presses are employees as defined in section 2(9) of the Act and the demand made by the Employees ' State Insurance Corporation is a justified one.
[970E] 2.
The object of the is to provide for certain benefits to employees in case of sickness, maternity and employment injury and to make provisions for certain other matters in relation thereto.
Section 1(4) of the Act provides that it shall apply in the first instance, to all factories (including factories belonging to the Government) other than seasonal factories.
Section 1(5) of the Act, however, provides that the appropriate Government, in consultation with the Employees ' State Insurance Corporation and where the appropriate Government is a State Government with the approval of the Central Government after giving six months ' notice of its intention of so doing by a notification in the official Gazette, extend the provisions of the Act or any of them to any other establishment or class of establishments, industrial, commercial, agricultural or otherwise.
The expression 'establishment ' however was not defined in the Act.
[967A E] 3.
Section 2(9) of the Act defines the expression 'employee ' to mean any person employed for wages in a factory or any person employed for wages in connection with the work of a factory.
It also means any person employed for wages in or in connection with the work of an establishment to which the Act applies.
[967H] In the instant cases, the members of the administrative staff and of the editorial staff in each of the printing presses have to be treated as employees under section 2(9).
They are directly employed by the management concerned on work incidental or preliminary or connected with the work of the factory.
The work of the factory in each case being printing and publication of a newspaper, its work cannot be carried on without the assistance of the members of the editorial staff who are engaged in preparing the material for printing the newspaper and of the administrative staff which is needed for managing the affairs of the factory.
[969C D] Hyderabad Asbestos Cement Products Ltd. vs The Employees Insurance Court and Anr., ; , Royal Tulkies, Hyderabad and Ors.
vs Employees State Insurance Corp., ; and Nagpur Electric Light and Power Co. Ltd. vs Regional Director Employees, State Insurance Corporation etc.
, , referred to.
The members of the editorial staff clearly fall under clause (i) of section 2(9) of the Act.
The administrative staff fall under the clause contain 964 ing the words 'includes any person employed for wages on any work connected with the administration of the factory '.
[969H; 970A] 5.
The effect of an Act cannot be controlled by the provisions of another Act unless the provisions in one have bearing on the provisions of the other.
[970D]
