On the basis of the report of the Public Analyst that the sample of soya.
bean oil purchased by the Food Inspector, Sorar on 17.11.79 from the shop of the accused petitioner was found adulterated, a complaint was filed on 29.11.79 in the Court of the Judicial Magistrate, Balod.
On 17.11.79 a copy of the report of the Public Analyst was forwarded to the petitioner as required by Rule 9A of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Rules.
The accused petitioner made no application to the trial Court to have one of the samples sent to the Central Food Laboratory for further analysis, but was content merely to deny offence.
After due trial, he was convicted by the Magistrate on 8.9.82 under section 16 (1) (a) (i) of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act and sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment for six months and to pay a fine of Rs. 1000.
The appeal preferred by the petitioner to the Session Judge, Durg and the Revision Petition preferred thereafter to the High Court of Madhya Pradesh were dismissed, Hence the Special leave petition.
Dismissing the petition, the Court, ^ HELD: 1:1.
The expression "immediately" in Rule 9A is intended to convey a sense of continuity rather than urgency.
What must be done is to forward the report at the earliest opportunity, so as to facilitate the exercise of the statutory right under section 13(2) of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act in Food and sufficient time before the prosecution commences leading evidence.
[961C D] 1:2.
Non compliance with Rule 9A is not fatal.
It is a question of prejudice.
Applying this principle.
in the instant case, the trial cannot be said to 950 be vitiated by the delay of eighteen days in forwarding the report of the Public Analyst to the Petitioner.
Rule 9A has to be interpreted so as to keep it in tune with, and within the bounds of section 13(2).
The amended section 13(2) does not prescribe any point of time before which the report of the Public Analyst is to be forwarded to the accused vendor.
But, the very basis of a prosecution for adulteration of food is the report of the Public Analyst that the article of food is adulterated The accused is given the right to dispute the Public Analyst 's report by applying to the court for an analysis by the Central Food Laboratory If the report of the Central Food Laboratory is to the effect that the article of food is not adulterated the very basis of the prosecution will disappear.
In such an event the further pursuit of the prosecution will be needless and the accused will have to be discharged or acquitted as the case may be.
It is therefore to be assumed that the report of the Public Analyst is to be made available to the accused vendor at the commencement of the prosecution, that is to say, before the prosecution starts leading evidence in the case, and in good and sufficient time to enable the accused to exercise his right of having the sample analysed by the Central Food Laboratory if he so desires it.
There fore Rule 9A carefully refrains from mentioning any definite limit of time and the expression "immediately" is not to be understood to mean the very next instant, the very next hour, that very day or the very next day.
Construed in its setting, the expression "immediately" is only meant to convey 'reasonable despatch and promptitude ' and no more.
The idea is to avoid dilatoriness on the part of official dom and prevention of unnecessary harassment to the accused.
But the idea is not to penalise the prosecution and to provide a technical defence.
If after receiving the Public Analyst 's report the accused never sought to apply to the court to have the sample sent to the Central Food Laboratory, as in the present case, he may not be heard to complain of the delay in the receipt of the report by him, unless, of course, he is able to establish some other prejudice.
[960E H; 961A B] Dal Chand vs Municipal Corporation, Bhopal AIR 1983 SC 303; Kashmiri Lal vs State of Haryana 1981 (2) AIPFC 167, Kanda Swami vs Food Inspector 1982 (1) AIPFAC 322, Perumal vs Kumbakonam Municipality 1982 (2) AIPFAC 106 and Food Inspector vs Prabhkaran 1983 (1) AIPFAC 84; considered.
The mixing of cotton seed oil with soyabean oil is adulteration of soyabean oil incurring liability to be convicted under section 16(1) (a) (i) of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act.
The sale of an article of food the sale of which is prohibited by any rule made under the Act also renders the person selling the article of food liable to punishment under section 16 (l) (i).
Rule 44(e) prohibits the sale of a mixture of two or more edible oils as an edible oil.
A mixture of soyabean oil and cotton seed oil cannot therefore be sold as soyabean oil irrespective of whether the mixture has affected the soya bean oil injuriously or not.
[961E G]
