The respondent landlord sought eviction of the appellants tenants under section 12 (1) of the Madhya Pradesh Accommodation Control Act, 1961 on the main ground that the landlord bonafide required the premises for locating his gold and silver ornaments factory after demolishing and reconstructing the building.
The courts below found that the requirement of the landlord was bonafide and ordered eviction of the tenants under section 12 (l) (f) and (h) of the Act.
In these appeals the tenants contended that since the eviction ordered was under section 12 (l) (h), section 18 of the Act was attracted and it was obligatory on the part of the landlord to provide accommodation of equal extent to the tenants in the new building to be constructed by him.
Dismissing the appeals, ^ HELD: In Ramnilal P. Mehta vs Indradaman Amritlal this Court observed that once the landlord establishes that he bonafide requires the premises for his occupation, he is entitled to recover possession of it from the tenant under the provisions of sub clause (g) of section 13 (1) of the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House.
Rates Control Act, 1947 irrespective of the fact whether he would occupy the premises without making any alterations or after making tho necessary alterations.
[948B C] Ramnilal P. Mehta vs Indradaman Amritlal Sheth, ; , referred to.
Section 13 (1) (g) of the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House, Rates Control Act, 1947 corresponds to section 12 (1) (f) of tho Madhya Pradesh Accommodation Control Act.
[948A] Applying the above principle to the facts of the instant case, though the Courts below have passed the order of eviction under section 12 (1) (f) and (h) the Court is of the opinion that the order of eviction is based really and substan 946 tially only under section 12 (1) (f) of the Act.
The fact that section 12 (1) (h) is also mentioned in the order of the Court below does not make the order of eviction purely one under that section, for the main ground of requirement of the landlord is bonafide personal requirement for locating his proposed factory for the manufacture of gold or silver ornaments.
Therefore there is no case for the application of section 18 to the facts of the present case.
[947F G]
