The assessee company went into liquidation on August 8, 1960.
The Income tax officer, while determining the taxable income of the assessee company at Rs. 5,79,978 for the assessment year 1963 64, was of the opinion that this amount would attract liability for super profits tax also and therefore asked the assessee company to file its return.
The assessee company submitted its return showing the chargeable profits as 'nil ', contending that there could be no liability to super profits tax in respect of a company in liquidation since the formula laid down in the Second Schedule to the for calculation of the 'standard deduction ' was inapplicable on account of the fact that a company in liquidation could not be said to have paid up share capital as on the first day of the previous year relevant to the assessment year which was long subsequent to the winding up.
The Income Tax officer however overruled the aforesaid contention and worked out the chargeable profits at Rs. 2,04,740 after adopting a minimum amount of Rs. 50,000 mentioned in s.2 (9) of tho Act as a "standard deduction".
The said order was confirmed in appeal by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner.
But, on further appeal by the assessee company the Income tax Appellate Tribunal while allowing the appeal held: (1) that in the hands of the liquidator there is only one integral fund which could not be split up into share capital, reserve profits and therefore s.27 of the Act was clearly attracted to the case; and (ii) that no assessment to super profits could be made on a company in liquidation since section 4 of the Act would not apply to the assessee company in liquidation as the standard deduction was incapable of ascertainment.
The High Court, rejected the reference made at the instance of the Revenue.
972 Dismissing the appeal by the Revenue, ^ HELD: (1) After a company has gone into liquidation it cannot be said that as on the first day in any subsequent year forming the previous year relevant to the assessment year, there exists in the hands of the liquidator any amount distinctly forming the paid up share capital of the company or any sum that can be characterized as "reserve.
" The distinction between capital, reserve and tho accumulated profits disappears in respect of a company in liquidation after the date of its winding up and there is only one integrated or consolidated fund in the hands of the liquidator.
The concept of a fluctuating share capital or reserve which is the basic premise necessary to attract the applicability of rule 1 of the Second Schedule is wholly foreign in respect of a company in liquidation.
[977H; 978E F] (2) It is clear from the definition of "standard deduction" that for the purpose of calculation of "standard deduction" one has to ascertain the capital of the company as computed in the manner specified in Second Schedule.
But, it is important to notice from the terms of Rule I of Second Schedule that unless the company can be said to have a paid up share capital as on the first day of the previous year relevant to the assessment year the formula laid down in the rule for computation of capital of the company cannot have any application and the calculation of "standard deduction" being based wholly on the capital of the company, it becomes wholly incapable of ascertainment.
[976B; 977F G] Commissioner of Inland Revenue vs George Burrell, 1924 2 [K.B.] 52, 63 and Birch vs Cropper [1889] L.R. 14 App.
525, 546 referred to.
Commissioner of Income tax vs Girdhars and Co. Private Ltd, ; followed.
(3) Under the scheme of the Income tax Act 1961, charge of tax will not get attracted unless the case or transaction falls under the governance of the relevant computation provisions.
The character of the computation provisions in each case bears a relationship to the nature of the charge.
Thus, the charging section and the computation provisions together constitute an integrated code.
When there is a case to which the computation provisions cannot apply at all.
it is evident that such a case was not intended to fall Within the charging section.
The scheme of the being similar to that of the Income tax Act 1961, it has to be held that inasmuch as the provisions contained in the Act for computing the capital of the company and its reserves and cannot have any application in respect of a company in liquidation and consequently the 'standard deduction ' is incapable of ascertainment, the charge of super profits tax under section 4 of the Act is not attracted to such a cases.
[978G H ; 979A C] Commissioners of Income tax, Bangalore vs B.C. Srinivasa Setty; , ; referred to.
