Rule 34 of the Civil Rules of Practice framed by the Andhra Pradesh High Court sets out officers authorised to administer oath for the purpose of affidavits and an Advocate or Pleader other than the Advocate or Pleader who has been engaged in such a proceeding have been included in the list of officers authorised to administer oath.
Rule 40 of the said Rules provides that 'the officer before whom an affidavit is taken shall state the date on which, and the place where, the same is taken, and sign his name and description at the end, as in Form No. 14, otherwise the same shall not be filed or read in any matter without tho leave of the Court.
Form No. 14 which prescribes the form of affidavit or solemn affirmation requires a solemn affirmation or oath before the person authorised to administer the same and then at the foot of which the signature of the deponent must appear and below that the officer entitled to administer oath must put his signature in token of both that he administered the oath and that deponent signed in his presence and by his attestation he had subscribed to both the aspects.
Provisions contained in Chapter II in part VI of the Bar Council of India Rules of 1915 prescribe 'Standards of Professional Conduct and Etiquette '.
In the preamble to this part, it is stated that 'an advocate shall, at all times, comport himself in a manner befitting his status as an officer of the Court, a privileged member of the community.
and a gentle 1004 man, bearing in mind that what may be lawful and moral for a person who is not a member of the Bar.
Or for a member of the Bar in his nonprofessional capacity may still be improper for an advocate.
It inter alia includes that an advocate shall not act on the instructions of any persons other than his client or authorised agent.
Sub sec.
(3) of Sec.
35 of the prescribes the various punishments that may be imposed upon a delinquent advocate: They are: (a) reprimand the advocate (b) suspend the advocate from practice for such period as it may deem fit, and (c) remove the name of the advocate from the State roll of advocates.
Respondent Tek Chand filed a complaint against the appellant, an advocate; under Sec 35 of the before the Bar Council of the State of Andhra Pradesh.
The respondent alleged that one Mr. M. Ram Mohan Rao, advocate, with whom the appellant was working as a junior advocate, was a tenant of a house situated at Rashtrapathi Road, Secunderabad of which he was the owner.
This house was agreed to be sold for Rs. 65,000 to Premlata daughter of Shri Hastimal Jain and Rs. 10,000 were paid as earnest money.
The sale deed was to be completed within a period of three months on the vendee paying the balance of consideration of Rs. 55,000.
The vendee did not pay the amount and the respondent alleged that he had cancelled the agreement for sale.
It was further alleged that as the consideration for sale was exceeding Rs. 50,000, tho sale deed could not be registered unless an income tax clearance certificate was produced, but as the balance of consideration was not paid, the agreement to sell the House was cancelled.
However as the vendee Premlata wanted to grab the house without paying the balance of consideration, in order to get the sale deed registered, it was decided to get the income tax clearance certificate and with this end in view an application purporting to be in the name of the respondent with his signature forged there on bearing the date October 31,1972 and with an incorrect address was prepared.
As an affidavit was necessary in support of the application, the same was prepared on a stamp paper of Rs. 2 with the signature of respondent forged thereon.
This affidavit exhibit A 1 was attested by the appellant as he was an advocate authorised to attest affidavits.
On the strength of the forged documents, an income tax clearance certificate was obtained in the name of the respondent and the sale deed was got registered.
It was specifically averred that the respondent neither signed the application for income tax clearance certificate nor swore the affidavit.
It was alleged that someone impersonated the respondent and this must be known to the appellant because he knew respondent for many years prior to the attestation of affidavit.
It was alleged that a suit had been filed by the respondent against Mr. M. Ram Mohan Rao, senior of the appellant, for recovering the arrears of rent in the amount of Rs. 17,000 and obviously to cause damage to the respondent, appellant the junior of Mr. M. Ram Mohan Rao attested a forged signature on the affidavit.
It was alleged that this constituted a very serious professional misconduct and necessary enquiry be made and appropriate action be taken.
The appellant admitted that the affidavit exhibit A 1 was attested by him; that the respondent did not affix his signature in his presence on the affi 1005 davit exhibit A 1 but admitted the same in his presence whereupon he attested the same.
The Disciplinary Committee of the State Bar Council found that the appellant advocate attested the affidavit exhibit A 1 knowing that the respondent complainant had not sworn the affidavit in his presence nor was it signed in his presence by the respondent and therefore this act of attestation of the affidavit giving a misleading information was improper and came with the mischief of professional misconduct and contrary to the norms of some professional etiquette.
Having found the appellant guilty of serious misconduct, the Committee imposed a ludicrously paltry punishment of reprimand.
The appellant filed an appeal before the Disciplinary Committee of the Bar Council of India.
( Appellate Committee ' for short.) The Appellate Committee affirmed the order made by the State Committee imposing he punishment of reprimand and conveying a warning to the appellant that he should be careful in future in such matters.
The Appellate Committee expunged the observation of the State Committee that the appellant had not attested exhibit A 1 in the presence of the complainant and that this act of the appellant was improper and comes within the mischief of professional misconduct and contrary to the norms of professional etiquette on the ground that these observations were uncalled for.
Encouraged by the ludicrous punishment, the appellant filed this appeal under section 38 of the .
Dismissing the appeal and enhancing the punishment, this Court, ^ HELD: Both the fact finding authorities concurrently recorded the finding that the respondent did not put his signature on the affidavit, exhibit A 1 in the presence of the appellant and yet the appellant by contributing his attestation to the affidavit made a declaration that the signature was of the appellant made in his presence.
We consider this unambiguous finding wholly incontrovertible in the facts of this case that the appellant never appeared before the respondent either on October 31, 1972 or November 1, 1972.
[1014 D E] The tell tale circumstances on record and the cumulative effect of the various pieces of evidence accepted as wholly reliable and practically uncontroverted would clearly render this finding unassailable.
The stark alocit unpalatable conclusion that flows is that the appellant is a party to a document which is not genuine.
It can be safely said that it was a false document purporting to be in the name of the respondent.
It would in law became a forged document.
The appellant by attesting the signature to it gave a solemnity which is being relied upon by the Income Tax Officer on which a very valuable document namely, income tax clearance certificate was issued which facilitated registration of a sale deed in respect of which the contention is that the consideration has not been paid to the respondent.
The appellant thus facilitated commission of a fraud by becoming a party to the forged document.
The appellant has thus violated his statutory duty conferred by the , He has also 1006 acted in a manner unbecoming of a member of a noble profession.
He has knowingly become a party to the forgery of a very valuable document and he has by his conduct facilitated the commission of a fraud which would to some extent benefit his senior Mr. M. Ram Mohan Rao.
Does this conduct constitute professional misconduct ? [1018 G H; 1019 A B; 1019 D E] One can legitimately expect an advocate of 10 years standing to know that under Rule 34, the appellant was not entitled to attest an affidavit which includes administration of oath which was likely to be used in a proceeding and yet he pretended to act in his assumed capacity, arrogated to himself the jurisdiction which he did not possess and attested the affidavit in the name of someone whom he knew personally and who was not present before him personally and successfully mislead the Income Tax Officer to issue the income tax clearance certificate.
Add to this that he made a blatantly false statement in the proceedings of disciplinary enquiry that the respondent had appeared before him and admitted his signature.
This is not only a false statement but it is false to his knowledge.
If this is not professional misconduct, it would be time to wind up this jurisdiction.
The appellant is guilty of gross professional misconduct.
[120 E G] The Appellate Committee clearly committed an error in deleting some of the observations of the State Committee and that shows not only not application of mind but a conclusion contrary to record which is wholly unsustainable.
[1021 A] By Act 60 of 1973, specific power has been conferred on this Court that in an appeal by the person aggrieved by the decision of the Disciplinary Committee of the Bar Council of India to this Court, this Court may pass such order including the order varying the punishment awarded by the Disciplinary Committee of the Bar Council of India thereon as it deems fit This jurisdiction will comprehend the jurisdiction to vary the finding of the Appellate Committee.
[1021 C D] In the instant case, having given the matter our anxious consideration, looking to the gravity of the misconduct and keeping in view the motto that the punishment must be commensurate with the gravity of the misconduct, we direct that the appellant shall be suspended from practice for a period of five years that is upto and inclusive of October 31, 1989.
[1024 D E] Krishan Chander Nayar vs The Chairman, Central Tractor Organisation and Ors, , Bar Council of Maharashtra vs M.V. Dabholkar etc.
etc; , at 322, P.J. Ratnam v D. Kanikram and Ors., ; and V.C. Rangadurai v D. Gopalan and Ors.
, ; , referred to.
