The appellant imported some stainless steel plates at concessional rate of import duty under a notification which provided : (i) that the importer should import the goods for the manufacture of all or any of the articles specified in that notification; (ii) that the articles so manufactured had to be sold to industrial units for their use; (iii) that in case of violation of any one of the conditions above mentioned, the importer was liable to pay, in respect of such quantity of goods as is not proved to have been utilised as per the notification, an amount equal to the difference between the duty leviable on such quantity but for the exemption contained in the notification and that already paid at the time of importation.
The appellant submitted a certificate that the goods imported by him under the notification had been consumed and/or utilised as per the notification.
But the Assistant Collector of Customs rejected the said certificate and held that the appellant was liable to pay the deficient duty in respect of the goods which had been sold to hospitals/nursing homes since they were not "industrial units" within the meaning of the .
The Collector of Customs (Appeals) confirmed the order in appeal.
The revision petition of the appellant before the Customs, Excise and Gold (Control) Tribunal, also failed.
The appellant contended before this Court that the word 'industrial units ' contained in the notification should be given the same meaning as is assigned to the word 'industry ' in the Industrial Dispute Act, 1947.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: (1) The expression 'industry ' has many meanings.
It means 'skill ', 'ingenuity ', 'dexterity ', 'diligence ', 'systematic work or labour ', 'habitual employment in the productive arts ', 'manufacturing establishment etc.
While construing a word which occurs in a statute or a statutory instrument in the 1147 absence of any definition in that very document it must be given the same meaning which it receives in ordinary parlance or understood in the sense in which people conversant with the subject matter of the statute or statutory instrument understand it.
It is hazardous to interpret a word in a accordance with its definition in another statute or statutory instrument and more so when such statute or statutory instrument is not dealing with any cognate subject.
[1149 H; 1150 A B] Craies on statute Law [6th Edn.] p. 164 referred to.
(2) 'Industry ' in the wide sense of the term would be capable of comprising three different aspects: (1) raw materials which are an integral part of the industrial process, (2) the process of manufacture or production, and (3) the distribution of the products of the industry.
An analysis of Entry 24 and 27 of List II, Entry 52 of List I and Entry 33 of List III of the Constitution shows that 'industry ' ordinarily means the process of manufacture or production.
[1151 E F] Sh.
Tika Ramji & Ors.
vs The State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors. ; at p. 420 followed.
(3) It is true that in the Bangalore Water Supply & Sewerage Board, etc.
vs R. Rajappa & Ors.
[1978]3 SCR 207 this Court has held that hospitals would also come within the definition of the expression 'industry ' given in the Industrial Dispute Act, 1947.
But that definition cannot be used for interpreting the word 'industry ' in a notification granting exemption from customs duty under the .
When the word to be construed is used in a taxing statute or a notification issued thereunder it should be understood in its commercial sense.
[1151 B C] (4) The new definition given to the word 'industry ' by Parliament in the Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 1982 (46 of 1982) also specifically excludes 'hospitals or dispensaries ' from the category of 'industry '.
It shows that the meaning given to the expression 'industry ' in the cannot be depended upon while construing other statutes or statutory instruments and it should be confined to the .
Therefore, the word 'industry ' means only the place where the process of manufacture or production of goods is carried on and it cannot in any event include 'hospitals ', dispensaries or nursing homes.
[1151 G H; 1152 A B]
