i Section 123 Allegation of Corrupt Practice made in an election petition How should be established Whether on basis of preponderance of probabilities as in civil litigation or "proof beyond reasonable doubt" as in Criminal trials.
ii Section 116A(1) Election appeal Nature of findings of facts If could be interfered with by Supreme Court.
iii See.
123 (2) Corrupt Practice of "Undue influence" Nature and proof of Whether disturbing election meeting a corrupt practice section 123 (2) Whether appointment by the returned candidate of a person charged for murder as his polling agent amounts to exercise of "undue influence".
iv Sec.
123 (1) (A) Corrupt Practice of "Bribe" Whether ameliorating grievances of the public while canvassing for votes amounts to corrupt practice.
The appellant was declared elected on May 31, 1980 to the Punjab Legislative Assembly from a constituency known as Non shehra Pamuan Assembly Constituency.
Respondent Nos. 1 and 2, two voters of the Constituency challenged his election before the High Court on two grounds, namely, (1) that the appellant 's supporters disturbed a meeting of the Akali Party by using fire arms and fatally injuring one and otherwise inflicting injuries on many others and thus he committed a corrupt practice of "undue influence" section 123 (2) of the Representation of the Peoples Act 1951; and (2) that the appellant in order to get the votes of one Bagicha Singh Chakiwala and his family members as also of his brotherhood, promised to Bagicha Singh to get the uncovered electric wires, which were dangerously passing over his house, removed after paying its expenses etc.
and so he approached the Punjab State 1060 Electricity Board employees, put pressure on them and got the amount of expenses deposited and the wires removed on 30th May 1980 i.e. One day before the poll.
Thus, the appellant had committed a corrupt practice of 'Bribery ' section 123 (1) (A) of the Act.
The High Court declared the election of the appellant void holding that both the corrupt practices had been committed by the appellant himself or through others with his consent and were covered by ss 123 (1) (A), (B) and (2) of the Act.
Hence this appeal, The respondent petitioners in addition to the above mentioned two grounds of challenge contended (i) that the charges of corrupt practice should be allowed to be established on the basis of preponderance of probabilities as in civil litigation and not by asking for proof of the allegation beyond reason able doubt as in a criminal case; (ii) that it was the practice of the Supreme Court in election appeals not to enter into re appreciation of evidence and disturb findings of fact reached by the High Court and therefore the Supreme Court should not attempt a re appreciation of the evidence while dealing with this appeal; and (iii) that the appointment of Gurdial Singh who had disturbed the Akali Meeting and had also been charged for murder, by the appellant as his polling agent in the Gandiwind Polling Booth amounted to exercise of "undue influence" within the meaning of the Act.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: (1) Section 116 C makes it clear that an appeal to the Supreme Court under the Act is to be treated as a Civil appeal and the jurisdiction to be exercised is as extensive as in the case of an appeal from a matter disposed of in exercise of original civil jurisdiction of the High Court Section 116 A (I) of the Act clearly indicates that the appeal to this Court has to be disposed of by exercising the same jurisdiction as is exercised in an appeal against the original judgment of the High Court In this view of the matter there can really be no rule, whether statutory or evolved by this Court by long usage as alleged, that the Court would not interfere with the findings of fact reached at the trial stage.
Ordinarily a finding reached on assessment of the evidence particularly when it is oral would not be interfered with but where the Court is satisfied that on account of a wrong approach to a matter, injustice has been done to one of the parties before it, it would not only be within the powers of the Court but it would be its obligation to rectify the mistake and do justice to the party.[1066E G,1070G H ] Ramabhai Ashabhai Patel vs Dabhi Ajitkumar Fulsinji & Ors.
[1965] I S.C.R. 712, Bhanu Kumar Shastri vs Mohan Lal Sukhadia & Ors. ; Mohd. Yasin Shah vs Ali Akbar Khan [1977] 2 S.C.C. 23.
Laxminarayan vs Returning Officer [1974] I S.C.R. 822 & Sh.
Raghbir Singh Gill V. section Gurcharan Singh Tohra & Ors. , relied upon.
Sarju Prasad vs Raja Jwaleshwari Pratap Narain Singh & Ors.
; Wart vs Thomas 1947 A. 484.
Narmada Prasad vs Chagan Lal [1966] 1 S R. 499.
Prabodh Chand vs Mohinder Singh AIR 1971 SC 257.
Sumitra Devi v; Sheo Shankar Prasad Yadav ; , Chand Singh vs Shiv Ram 1061 AIR 1975 SC 403, Vital Nagaraj vs R. Dayanand Sagar, ; and Laxmi Narain vs Chander Singh [1977] 2 S.C.R. 412 referred to.
By a catena of decisions of this Court it has by now been very well settled that allegations of corrupt practice are quasi criminal charges and the proof that would be required in support of such allegations would be as in a criminal charge.
Therefore, charges of corrupt practice are to be equated with criminal charges and proof thereof would be not preponderance of probabilities as in civil action but proof beyond reasonable doubt as in criminal trials.
[1071A B; 1075D C] Dr. M. Chenna Reddy vs V. Ramchandra Rao & Onr.
Magraj Patodia vs R.K. Birla & Ors.
; , Mohan Singh vs Bhanwar Lal & Ors. ; Guruji Shrihar Baliram Jivatode vs Vithalrao & Ors. ; Mehant Shreo Nath vs Choudhry Ranbir Singh , Abdul Hussain Mir vs Shamsul Huda & Onr.
; , Ch.
Razik Ram vs Ch.
Jaswant Singh Chouhan & Ors. , Surya Kant Roy vs Imamul Hak Khan , Nizamuddin Ahmed vs Narbada Prasad & Ors. , D. Venkata Reddy vs R. Sultan & Ors. ; Bir Chandra Barman vs Anil Sarkar & Ors. , Ramji Prasad Singh vs Ram Bilas Jha & Ors.
; , Lakshmi Raman Acharya vs Chandan Singh & Ors.
[1977] 2 S.C.R. 412, Amolak Chand Chhazed vs Bhagwandas Arya & Ors. , Ramanbhai Nagjibhai Patel vs Jasvant Singh Udesingh & Ors. , Haji C.H Mohammad Koya vs I. K .S. M. A. Muthukoya ; , A. Younus Kunju vs R.S. Unni & Ors.
[1984] 3 SCC 346 & Manmohan Kalia vs Yash & Ors. ; ; followed.
Election disputes are not cases at common law or equity but are strict statutory proceedings and result of an election is not available to be interfered with lightly, [1076B] Jagannath vs Jaswant Singh & Ors.
D. Venkata Reddy vs R. Sultan & Ors. ; ; followed.
Section 123 (2) of the Act defines 'undue influence '.
Any direct or Indirect interference or attempt to interfere with free exercise of the electoral right by a candidate, his agent or any person with his consent or the candidate 's election agent has been made a corrupt practice u/s 123 (2) of the Act.
Chapter II of the Act deals with agents and refers to appointments of election agent, polling agent and counting agent.
Section 79 (d) defines "Electoral Right" to mean ' the right of a person to stand or not to stand or to withdraw or not to withdraw from being a candidate or to vote or refrain from voting at any election.
[1080G H; 1079D] (5) The fact that firearms were freely used first by Gurdial Singh and his party and then by way of retaliation by Akali workers and gun shots resulted in the death of Daya Singh and thus a grave situation arose is really not very material unless that would amount to a corrupt practice within the meaning of 1062 section 123 (2) of the Act.
Undoubtedly, disturbing the meeting as alleged is ont covered under sub section
(2) of section 123 of the Act and is clearly an electoral offence dealt with by section 127 of the Act.
[1079H; 1080A] (6) The High Court clearly overlooked the fact that disturbing the election meeting by itself did not constitute undue influence.
For establishing the link between the disturbance of the meeting and the returned candidate the evidence is wholly oral in character and has to be scrutinised with greater rigour.
Merely on the statements of some of the witnesses who were essentially Akali Party workers or supporters a charge of corrupt practice could not have been taken as proved.
The approach of the learned trial judge to the matter is contrary to law as settled by decisions of this Court relating to corrupt practice and proof thereof.
[1084B C] (7) It is the admitted position that neither the Akali candidate section Ranjit Singh nor the appellant who was another contesting candidate came to the place of the meeting so held on 20.5.80.
There is evidence that the meeting so convened was disturbed.
The disturbance to the meeting is said to have been caused by a group of people consisting of Gurdial Singh, Hardial Singh, Rachhpal Singh, Kulwant Singh and Gurnam Singh.
There is no specific plea that these five persons were agents of the appellant.
Admittedly, by May 20, 1980, none of these persons was an agent of any of these classes of the returned candidate.
The only other aspects by which the appellant would be liable for the action of these five people would be if their act of disturbing the meeting was with his consent.
Consent is the life line to link up the candidate with the action of the other person which may amount to corrupt practice and unless it is specifically pleaded and clearly proved in view of the fact that all ingredients have to be proved beyond reasonable doubt the appellant cannot be charged for the action of Gurdial Singh and his group.
[1078B D; 1083B] (8) In the instant case, though there is some oral evidence to implicate the appellant, even for what followed the disturbance to the meeting, this Court does not think in the absence of the plea such evidence can be entertained for any effective purpose.
The fact that protection had been extended by the appellant to his supporter Gurdial Singh and members of his family even by raising quarrel with the local police inspector would not lead to a backward presumption of consent for the acts of Gurdial Singh.
[1081F; 1083A B] (9) It is difficult to accept the submission of the respondent that by appointing a person charged for murder as polling agent the appellant had exercised undue influence.
There is clear evidence also that voting was free and quite a large percentage of the voters had exercised their electoral right.
These are circumstances which clearly militate against the allegation of the election petitioners that voters had been threatened and their free exercise of electoral right had been affected.
Moreover, in the absence of requisite pleading, want of any contemporaneous complaint in writing or otherwise to the public officers within the polling booth and the nebulous nature of the oral evidence placed from the side of the election petitioners, it cannot be said that any objection could really be taken to the election on account of Gurdial Singh having acted 1063 as polling agent in the particular electoral booth.
[1083E G; (10) A candidate is entitled to canvass for votes.
One who is in the field to be an electoral representative is also entitled to nourish his constituency.
Amelioration of grievances of the public is innocuous and cannot be construed against a candidate.
We agree that while nourishing is a legitimate activity, it is of paramount importance that nourishing should not transgress the limit so as to corrupt the electoral process.
The appellant was already in the field as a candidate for the legislature and was entitled to help the people in his constituency in a legitimate way.
[1087E G] (11) There was no clear plea in the election petition that the money had been deposited by the appellant though in paragraph 8 it was stated that on 28.5.1980 appellant had told Bagicha Singh that he (Bagicha Singh) should not bother about the expenses involved.
There is no oral evidence even to suggest that the appellant caused the amount to be deposited.
There is a presumption that the person in whose name the receipt has been drawn up was the payer of the amount and burden lay on him who wanted to contend that the facts were otherwise.
In these circumstances, it cannot be accepted that the appellant had got the estimated demand deposited with the authorities of the Board.
Once the allegation that the appellant had deposited the amount of Rs. 944 is discarded, his taking up of the cause of Bagicha Singh for early shifting of the electric wires over hanging the first floor of his house would not amount to 'bribe '.
At any rate, the evidence on record is only of PW.12.
That evidence even if accepted as a whole would not be sufficient to establish the charge of corrupt practice on this score.
Oral evidence, particularly, coming from a tainted source cannot form the sole basis of proof of corrupt practice.
Therefore, the High Court was wrong in accepting the case of the election petitioners that the appellant had committed corrupt practice for procuring the votes of Bagicha Singh, members of his family and his friends by getting the over hanging electric wires removed.
After all, if there be any scope for doubt, it must resolve in favour of the appellant who was facing a quasi criminal charge.
[1087B D; G H; 1088E F]
