On an allegation that the appellant, a temporary Sub inspector of Police, while posted at Pithoragarh had contracted in November 1964 a second marriage, while his first wife was alive, without obtaining the prior permission of the Government and in violation of Rule 29 of the U. P. Government Servants ' Conduct Rules, 1956 the Superintendent of Police, Shahjahanpur initiated in 1968 disciplinary proceedings under section 7 of the Police Act against him.
1 However, after the evidence was closed in January 1970, the Superintendent noticed that his action was without jurisdiction and pointed out the same lo the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Bareilly Range, who ordered the quashing of the disciplinary proceedings on March 12, 1970.
About this time the Inspector General of Police, Uttar Pradesh issued a circular letter to the Superintendent of Police throughout the State requiring them to submit a list of Sub Inspectors who fell in any of the following three categories: 1.
Whose reputation and integrity is very low and/or 2.
Who are generally involved in scandals, like drinking, immorality, etc.
which blackens the face of the U. P. Police and/or 3.
Everywhere they are a big problem because they encourage gambling, excise offences, brothels, criminals, etc.
The Superintendent of Police, Shahjahanpur drew up a list of such Sub Inspectors on February S, 1970 and directed them to appear before the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Bareilly Range on February 10, 1970 during his 2 inspection of the district.
The list included the name of the appellant with the note: "A corrupt officer, who is not straight forward.
Married two wives against Government Servants Conduct Rules.
Does not do his duty sincerely.
Wherever he goes creates problem".
Thereupon, on April 27, 1970, the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Bareilly Range, made an order purporting to be under the rules published by Notification No. 230/ 1953 dated January 30, 1953 that the appellant 's services were not required any more and were terminated with one month 's pay in lieu of notice.
The appellant thereupon filed a Writ Petition in the High Court against the order terminating his services and on November 17, 1972 a learned Single Judge of the Allahabad High Court dismissed the Writ Petition holding that the order of termination was passed bonafide, that it was an order of termination simpliciter and that it did not constitute the removal of the appellant from service.
On appeal filed by the appellant that vice was endorsed by a Division Bench of the High Court by its judgment and order dated March 13, 1973 and the appeal was dismissed holding that the impugned order was ex facie innocuous and could not be said to cast any stigma or be regarded as imposing the punishment of dismissal or removal.
Hence the appeal by Special Leave of the Court.
Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD; 1.
It is well settled that in dealing with a government servant the State must conform to the constitutional requirements of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
An arbitrary exercise of power by the State violates these constitutional guarantees, for a fundamental implication in the guarantee of equality and of protection against discrimination is that fair and just treatment will be accorded to all, whether individually or jointly as a class.
When a government servant satisfies the Court prima facie that an order terminating his services violates Articles 14 and 16 the competent authority must discharge the burden of showing that the power to terminate the services was exercised honestly and in good faith, on valid considerations fairly and without discrimination.
[S E G] 2.
Where the services of a government servant on temporary appointment arc terminated on the ground that his reputation for corruption makes him unsuitable for retention in the service, the reputation for corrupt behavior must be based on something more than a mere allegation.
The State, and for that matter any statutory employer must take great care when proceeding to terminate a career on the ground of unsuitability, to ensure that its order is found in definable material, objectively assessed and relevant to the ground on which the termination is effected.
[6 C E] In the instant case, the Superintendent of Police did not apply his mind to the requirements of the case.
The Superintendent of Police has noted that the 3 appellant created problems wherever he went, but it is not disclosed in the affidavits what those problems were and that the problems were of the nature specifically indicated by the circular issued by the Inspector General of Police.
The other grounds mentioned in the report of the Superintendent of Police are equally vague and unspecific.
[ 6A B] 3.
Where allegations of misconduct are leveled against a Government Servant, and it is : case where the provisions of Article 311 (2) of the Constitution should be applied(l, it is not open to the competent authority to take the view that holding the enquiry contemplated by the clause would be a bother or a nuisance and that therefore it is entitled to avoid the mandate of that provision and resort to the guise of an ex facie innocuous termination order.
The Court will view with great disfavour any attempt to circumvent the constitutional provision of Article 311 (2) in a case where that provision comes into play.
[6 G H, 7A B]
