In accordance with the provisions of the and in terms of Para 2 of the contract of apprenticeship the appellants completed a one year apprenticeship under respondent No. 2, Punjab State Electricity Board.
Contrary to the Instructions, noticed on March 23rd, 1983 and issued by of the Ministry of Labour and Rehabilitation, Department of Labour (D.G.E.T ) Government of India to all officers asking them to take necessary action to ensure that the trained apprentices are absorbed in industries upto a minimum of 50 per cent of direct recruitment vacancies, the Board advertised on July 27, 1983 50 posts of Junior Engineers II (Electrical) in its establishment for which the appellants had successfully completed a one year apprenticeship under it.
The appellants, therefore, filed a writ petition in the High Court of Punjab and Haryana, challenging the issuance of the advertisement on the ground that under their respective letters of appointment, they were entitled to be appointed to 50 per cent of posts which were advertised by respondent No 2.
The writ petition was dismissed by the High Court on the ground that the letters of appointment issued to the appellant did not contain any assurance or undertaking that they will be absorbed in the service of the Punjab State Electricity Board; that 47 per cent of the vacancies were already reserved for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, backward classes, ex servicemen, etc, and that, if another 50 per cent of the posts were to be reserved for apprenticeship trainees, almost 100 per cent posts shall have been put in the reserved category which would be contrary to law.
Hence the appeal by special leave Allowing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD. 1.
The object of Section 22(2) of the Apprentice Act 1961 is to guarantee to the extent of the existence of vacancies that the apprentices will not be rendered jobless after they complete their training.
153 2.1.
Sub section (2) of section 22 leaves no doubt that, despite the A provision contained in sub section (1), the employer is under an obligation to offer suitable employment to the apprentice if the contract of apprentice.
ship contains a condition that the apprentice shall serve the employer after the successful completion of the training.
Indeed, when such an offer is made the apprentice on his part is bound to serve the employer in the capacity in which he was working as an apprentice.
In a contract of apprenticeship, if a condition is not happily expressed the Court must take a broad and commonsense view of the terms of the employment.
It in not proper in such cases to indulge in a hair splitting approach and find an escape for defeating the rights of employees.
[155 F G] 2.2.
Paragraph 2 of the letters of appointment is intended to convey the meaning that there is an obligation on the apprentices to serve the employer after the successful completion of the training.
When paragraph 2 says that the apprentice "shall be absorbed in the department" the only reasonable interpretation to put upon that expression is that it creates reciprocal rights and obligations on the parties to the contract of apprenticeship, namely, the employee and the employer.
"You shall be absorbed" is a double edged term of the contract.
It binds the employer to offer employment to the apprentice (if there is a vacancy) and, equally, it binds the apprentice to accept the offer.
In the context in which the expression "without any commitment" occurs, it only means that the obligation of the employer to offer employment to the apprentice and the corresponding obligation of the apprentice to serve the employer arises only if and when there is a vacancy in which the apprentice can be appointed.
Paragraph 2 of the letters of appointment creates a binding obligation upon the employer to absorb the apprentices in the department on the successful completion of the training period, provided there is a vacancy in which the apprentices can be appointed.
It would be contrary both to the letter and spirit of paragraph 2 of the letters of appointment to hold that even if there is a vacancy in which an apprentice can be appointed after the successful completion of his training, the employer is free not to appoint the apprentice and fill that vacancy by appointing an outsider Such a reading of the assurance contained in paragraph 2 will also frustrate the very object of the provision made by the legislature in section 22(2) of the apprentice Act.
[157 B; E F] 3.
The contention that the Executive Engineer, who sent the letters of appointment, had no authority to incorporate the particular condition in those letters cannot be accepted in as much as a senior officer in the position of an Executive Engineer would not incorporate a specific term in the contract of apprenticeship without being authorised to do so.
[156 G H] 4.
In the instant case, offering employment to the appellants to the extent of 50 per cent of the posts will not violate the law, as laid down by this Court, in regard to reservation of posts.
The appellants are entitled to be appointed in the available vacancies not because of any reservation of posts in their favour but because of the provisions of section 22(2) of the 154 Apprertices Act and the contractual obligations arising under paragraph 2 of the letters of appointment.
[157 H; 158 A]
