The Government of India by a notification dated April 6,1984, exempted tyres from a certain percentage of Excise Duty to the extent that the manufacturers had not availed themselves of the exemption granted under certain other earlier notifications.
The Customs and Excise Department was of the view that the Respondent company who was a manufacturer of Tyres, Tubes and various other rubber products was not entitled to the aforesaid exemption as it had cleared the goods earlier without paying Central Excise Duty but on furnishing Bank Guarantees under various interim orders of courts.
The Company claimed the benefit of exemption to the tune of about Rs. 6 crores and filed a Writ Petition in the High Court and sought an interim order restraining the Central Excise authorities from the levy and collection of excise duty.
The High Court held that a prima facie case had been made out in favour of the company and by an interim order allowed the benefit of the exemption to the tune of about Rs. 2 crores and directed that the goods be released on furnishing a Bank Guarantee.
In the Department 's appeal, the Division Bench confirmed the above order with a slight modification to the effect that the Collector of Central Excise could encash 30 per cent of the Bank Guarantee.
Allowing the appeals by the Department, this Court, ^ HELD: 1.
The orders of the Single Judge as well as the Division Bench are wholly unsustainable and should never have been made, Even assuming the 191 company had established a prima facie case, it was not a sufficient justification A for granting the said interim orders.
There was no question of any balance of convenience being in favour of the respondent Company, it was certainly in favour of the Government of India.
[201B C] 2.
Governments are not run on mere Bank Guarantees.
Very often some courts act as if furnishing a Bank Guarantee would meet the ends of justice.
No Governmental business, for that matter no business of any kind can be run on mere Bank Guarantees.
Liquid cash is necessary for the running of a Government as indeed any enterprise.
[201C] 3.
Where matters of public revenue are concerned, it is of utmost importance that interim orders are not to be granted merely because prima facie case has been shown.
More is required.
The balance of convenience must be clearly in favour of the making of an interim order and there should not be the slightest indication of a likelihood of prejudice to the public interest.
[201D1 4.
Article 226 is not meant to short circuit or circumvent statutory procedures.
It is only where statutory remedies are entirely ill suited to meet the demands of extraordinary situations, as for instance where the very vires of the statute is in question or where private or public wrongs are so inextricably mixed up and the prevention of public injury and the vindication of public justice require it, that recourse may be had to article 226.
The Court must also have good and sufficient reason to by pass the alternative remedy provided by statute.
Matters involving the revenue where statutory remedies are available are not such matters.
The vast majority of the petitions under article 226 are filed solely for the purpose of obtaining interim orders and thereafter to prolong the proceedings by one device or the other.
This practice needs to be strongly discouraged.
[194F H; 195A] E 5.
There are, cases which demand that interim orders should be made in the interests of justice.
Where gross violations of the law and injustices are about to be, or are perpetrated, it is the bounden duty of the court to intervene and give appropriate interim relief.
In cases where denial of interim relief may lead to public mischief, grave irreparable private injury, or shake a citizen 's faith in the impartiality of public administration, a court may well be justified in granting interim relief against public authority.
Samarias Trading Company Pvt. Ltd. vs section Samuel and Ors.
, ; , Siliguri Municipality vs Amalendu Das, , Titaghur Paper Mills Co. Ltd. vs State of Orissa, , Union of India vs Oswal Woollen Mills Ltd., ; and Union of India vs Jain Shudh Vanaspati Ltd., C.A. No. 11450 of 1983; referred to.
In India, under article 141, the law declared by the Supreme Court shall be binding on all courts and under article 144 all authorities civil and judicial shall act in aid of the Supreme Court.
[200B] 7.
In the hierarchical system of Courts which exists in our country it is 192 necessary for each lower tier, including the High Courts to accept loyally the decisions of the higher tiers.
The better wisdom of the Court below must yield to the higher wisdom of the Court above.
[199E F] 8.
The label per incuriam is relevant only to the right of an appellate court to decline to follow one of its own previous decisions, not to its right to disregard a decision of a higher appellate court or to the right of a judge of the High Court to disregard a decision of the Supreme Court.
[199H; 200A] Cassel and Co. Ltd. vs Broome, ; and Rookes vs Barnard, ; , referred to.
