After the decision of the Supreme Court in Kewal Krishan Puri vs State of Punjab ; holding that the increase of the market fee from Rs. 2 to Rs. 3 perhundred leviable on the agricultural produce brought or sold by a licensee in the notified market area under section 23 of the Punjab Agricultural Produce Markets Act was not justified, some dealers wanted refund of the market fee in excess of Rs. 2/ per hundred already collected by various market committees.
But, the Supreme Court held in Shiv Shankar Dal Mills vs State of Haryana ; that dealers who had not passed on the liabilities to others and others who had contributed to or paid the excess one percent were entitled to make claim for such sums as were due to them from the Concerned market committees and directed the market committees to pay the same The Court further directed that the unclaimed amounts, if any, shall be permitted to be used by the respective market committee for the purposes falling within the statute as interpreted by this Court in C.A. 1083 of 1977.
Thereafter more or less in tune with these directions given by the Court, the Punjab Agricultural Produce Markets Act was amended by the introduction of section 23 A It provided, inter alia, that not with standing anything contained in any judgment decree or order of any court, it shall be lawful for a committee to retain the fee levied and collected by it from a licensee in excess of that leviable under section 23 if the burden of such fee passed on by the licensee to the next purchaser of the agricultural produce in respect whereof such fee was levied and collected The appellants challenged before the High Court the constitutional validity of section 23 A and the same was upheld.
The appellant contended (1) that Section 23 A was a blatant attempt to validate a levy which had been declared invalid by the Supreme Court and this was not permissible (2) that while the legislature was competent to enact a law for the levy of fee and matters incidental and ancillary thereto, it was incompetent to legislate providing for the retention by any authority of fee illegally levied.
73 Dismissing the appeals by the appellants ,.
^ HELD: (1) The general scheme of the Punjab Agriculture Produce Markets Act and the Act, as amended and in force in Haryana, are broadly on the same lines as the Madras and the Andhra Pradesh Acts and similar enactments in other States.
Sections 13, 26 and 28 of the Act covers a vast range of topics and are so wide as take in a multitude of direct and indirect ways of achieving the principal object of the Act, namely, the better regulation of the purchase, sale, storage and processing of agricultural produce and the establishment of markets for agricultural produce.
Some of the purposes for which the funds may be expended may on a first impression appear to be municipal or governmental functions, but a closer scrutiny will reveal that they are clearly associated with providing better facilities for marketing of agricultural produce.
[81H; 86C D] (2) The primary purpose of section 23 A is to prevent the refund of licence fee by the market committee to dealers, who have already passed on the burden of such fee to the next purchaser of the agricultural produce and who want to unjustly enrich themselves by obtaining the refund from the market committee.
section 23 A, in truth recognises the consumer.public who have borne the ultimate burden as the persons who have really paid the amount and so entitled to refund of any excess fee collected and there fore direct the market committee representing their interests to retain the amount.
It has to be in this form because it would, in practice, be a difficult and futile exercise to attempt to trace the individual purchasers and consumers who ultimately bore the burden.
It is really a law returning to the public what it has taken from the public, by enabling the Committee to utilise the amount for the performance of services required of it under the Act.
Instead of allowing middlemen to profiteer by illgotton gains, the legislature has devised a procedure to undo the wrong that has been done by the excessive levy by allowing the Committees to retain the amount to be utilised hereafter for the benefit of the very persons for whose benefit the marketing legislation was enacted.
[97D G] (3) There is no substance in the argument that sec.
23 A is an attempt at validating an illegal levy.
Section 23 A does not permit any recovery of fee at the rate of Rs 3 per hundred in respect of any sales of agricultural produce before or after the coming into force of that provision.
There is no attempt at retrospective validation of excess collection nor any attempt at providing for future collection at the rate of Rs. 3 per hundred.
All that section 23 A does is to prevent unjust enrichment by those dealers who have already passed on the burden of the fee to the next purchaser and so reimbursed themselves by also claiming a refund from the market committees.
It gives to the public through the market committee what it has taken from the Public and is due to it.
There is no justification for characterising a provision like section.
23.A as one aimed at validating an illegal levy.
It is consistent with the spirit of Kewal Krishan case and the Letter of Shiv Shankar Dal Mills case.
[98B D] Walati Ram Mahabir Prasad vs State of Punjab, AIR 1983 P & 120 & R. section Joshi vs Ajit Mills ; approved.
74 Shiv Shankar Dal Mills vs State of Haryana ; followed.
orient Paper Mills Limited vs State of Orissa ; , R.S. Joshi vs Ajit Mills ; relied upon.
Kewal Krishan Puri vs State of Punjab ; , Srinivasa General Traders State of Andhra Pradesh AIR 1983 section C. 1246 Kutti Keya vs State of Madras AIR l954 Mad 621 Arunachala Nadar, State of Madras, AIR 1959 SC 30O, Immedisetti Ramkrishnaiah Sons vs State of Andhra Pradesh, AIR 1976 AP 193 Sreenivasa General Taaders vs State A. P. AIR 1983 SC 1246, Shirur Matt ; ; Hingir Rampur Coal Co. Ltd. vs State of Orissa, , Corporation of Calcutta vs Liberties Cinema ; , H. H. Sudhundra Thirtha Swamiar vs Commissioner, [1963] Supp. 2 SCR 302, H. H. Shri Swamiji vs Commisssioner, Hindu Religious and Charitable Fndowments Department [1980] I SCR 368, Municipal Corporation Delhi vs Mohd. Yasin ; , Craving Dock Co. Ltd. vs Horton, at 761, Home office vs Dorset Yacht Co., [1970] 2 All E. R. 294, Herington v British Railways Board [1972] 2 W. L R. 537, & State OF Bombay vs United Motor.
(India) Ltd., ; referred to.
A. V Nachane and Ors.
vs Union of India, and Abdul Quadar & Co. vs Sales tax officer; , ; held inapplicable.
