The respondent assessee filed voluntary income tax returns for some assessment years after the date prescribed by Sub s.(l)of.139 of the Income Tax Act, 1961.
The Income Tax officer treated the assessee as being in default and imposed penalties under cl.
(a) of Sub s.(1) of s.271 of the Act.
In appeal before the Appellate Assistant Commissioner of Income Tax the assessee contended that since interest had been levied under cl.(iii) of the Proviso to Sub section
(1) of s.l39, no question arose of imposing a penalty.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner rejected the contention.
In second appeal the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal held that as the Income Tax officer had levied interest upto the date of the filing of the returns, it must be presumed that the Income Tax officer had extended the time for filing the returns after satisfying himself that it was a case for extension of time.
The Appellate Tribunal allowed the appeals and canceled the penalties.
On a reference being made.
the High Court held that the Appellate Tribunal was justified in relying upon the presumption.
Hence these appeals by the Revenue.
The Revenue contended that there was 216 no material to warrant the finding that an application had made by the assessee A for extension of time and that upon such application the Income Tax officer extended the time.
The Revenue urged that the imposition of interest does not warrant the assumption that an application for extension of time was made by the assessee and allowed by the Income Tax officer.
Dismissing the appeals, ^ HELD: It cannot be disputed that the Income Tax officer could extend the date for furnishing the return in respect of each assessment year.
It was open to him to do so under the statute, and he was entitled to charge interest only on the basis that the extended period fell beyond September 30 or December 31, as the case may be.
In the ordinary course of things, the Income Tax officer could have extended the date only upon being satisfied that there a was good reason for doing so, and that would have been on grounds pleaded by the assessee.
We consider that in the circumstances of this case a presumption could validly be raised that all that was done.
No attempt was made by the Revenue to show that the Income Tax officer acted arbitrarily and contrary to the procedure envisaged by the statute.
The Appellate Tribunal considered the matter carefully and found circumstances on the record in favour of raising the presumption.
The High Court approved of the approach adopted by the Appellate Tribunal and did not find it contrary to law.
We do not see any reason to differ from the opinion expressed by the High Court.
[221E G] Additional Commissioner of Income Tax, Gujarat vs Santosh Industries, , M. Nagappa and others vs Income Tax officer, Central Circle l, Bangalore and others, , Poorna Biscuit Factory vs Commissioner of Income Tax, A.P., , Commissioner of Income Tax, Orissa v Gangaram Chopolia, [1976]103 I.T.R. 613, Metal India Products vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Lucknow, [1978] 113 1.T.R. 830 and Commissioner of Income Tax, Punjab vs Kula Valley Transport Co. P. Ltd., not applicable.
Penalty under cl (a) of Sub s (1) of s.271 of the Income Tax Act is attracted if the Income Tax officer is satisfied that the assessee as, without reasonable cause, failed to furnish the returns "within the time allowed '.
, The time allowed for furnishing a voluntary return is the time specified in Sub s.(l) of s.139.
The proviso so that sub section empowers the Income Tax officer to extend the date for furnishing the return.
When the Income Tax officer extends the date, he does so in the exercise of authority conferred by the statute, and the additional time available to the assessee consequent upon such extension is, for all relevant purposes, of the same character and as effective as the statutory period specially enacted by Parliament.
For the purpose of furnishing a return it constitutes an integral part of the time allowed for furnishing a return.
Therefore, where the Income Tax officer extends the date, then all the time upto that date is the time allowed for furnishing the return.
The additional period consequent upon such extension falls within the expression "the time allowed" in cl.(a) of Sub s.(l) of s.271.
That being so, the conclusion must follow that the penalty provision does not come into play at all.
[223C G] 217
