The respondents, Landlord. filed three ejectment applications on March 9, 1967, May 13, 1968 and March 9, 1971 respectively against the appellants, a tenant for possession of one room situate at Kamla Nagar, New Delhi.
The first application was on the ground of non payment arrears of lent and bona fide requirement, the second on the ground of bona fide requirement of the landlord and the third one again on the ground of non.
payment of arrears of rent.
The first application, where the appellant complied with an order passed by the Rent Controller u/s 14(21 r/w section 15(1 ) of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 calling upon the appellant to deposit arrears of rent, was withdrawn by the respondents subsequently on the ground that they had not given to the appellant a notice to quit.
The second application was dismissed on merits.
In the third application out of which the present appeal arises, the Additional Rent Controller passed an order of eviction against the appellant holding that no order section 15(1), of the Act could be passed on the ground that such a benefit was given to the appellant in the first eviction petition and that by reason of the proviso to sub section 2 of section 14 of the Act, the appellant could not claim that benefit once again.
The appeal of the appellant against the order of eviction was allowed by the Rent Control Tribunal, which took the view that the appellant was entitled to the benefit of the provision contained in section 14 (2) of the Act and that, the proviso to that sub section had no application because, the benefit of the provision contained in section 14 (2) was being availed of by the appellant for the first time in the present proceedings.
But the High Court in second appeal set aside the judgment of the Rent Control Tribunal and restored that of the Rent Controller.
The appellant contended that the proviso to sub section
(2) of section 14 can have no application to the instant case because, in the first ejectment proceedings the appellant had not obtained any benefit under that sub section.
The respondent contended that if a tenant avails of the benefit of an order passed section 15 (1), he must be regarded as having obtained the benefit of the provision contained in section 14 (2) and that the final result of the eviction petition in which an order was passed under section 15 (1) for the first time, or the form of the final order passed in that proceeding, has no relevance on the question whether the tenant had obtained benefit of the provision contained in section 14 (2).
389 Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: (I) Section 14 (2) of the Act provides that no order for the recovery of possession of any premises can be made on the ground that the tenant has committed default in the payment of rent, if he pays or deposits the rent in accordance with the provisions of section 15.
The benefit which the tenant obtains under section 14 (2) is the avoidance of the decree for possession.
Though he had committed default in the payment of rent, no decree for possession can be passed against him.
This benefit accrues to the tenant by reason of the fact that he has complied with the order passed by the Controller under section 15 of the Act.
The passing of an order under section 15 is not a benefit which accrues to the tenant under section 14(2).
It is obligatory upon the Controller to pass an order under section 15(1) in every proceeding for the recovery of possession or: the ground specified in section 14 (1) (a), that is, on the ground that the tenant has committed default in the payment of rent.
That is a facility which the law obliges the Controller to give to the tenant under section 15.
It is through the medium of that facility that the tenant obtains the benefit under section 14(2).
And that benefit consists in the acquisition of an immunity against the passing of an order of possession on the ground of default in the payment of rent.
It must follow that, it is only if an order for possession is Dot passed against the tenant by reason of the provision contained in section 14(2), that it can be said that he has obtained a benefit under that section.
[394C G] (2) If the earlier proceeding was withdrawn by the landlord, it cannot be said that the tenant obtained the benefit of not having had an order of possession passed against him.
It is self evident that if a proceeding ends in an order granting permission for its withdrawal, it cannot possibly be said that "no order for the recovery of possession was passed therein for the E reason that the tenant had made payment or deposit as required by section 15".
That is the gist of Section 14(2).
The stage or occasion for passing an order to the effect that 'no order for possession can be passed because of the fact that the tenant has complied with the order passed under section 15 does not arise in the very nature of things, in a case wherein the landlord is permitted to withdraw the application for ejectment of the tenant.
[394H; 395A B] (3) In the instant case, the reason leading to the termination of the earlier ejectment application was that the respondents wanted to cure the formal defect from which the application suffered and not that no order for possession could be passed against the appellant for he reason that the had complied with the order passed under section 15.
In other words, there was no nexus between the final order which was passed in the earlier ejectment application and the fact that the appellant had complied with the order passed under section 15.
The earlier ejectment application was founded on two grounds, namely, that the appellant had committed default in the payment of rent and that respondents wanted the premises for their personal need.
The fact that the first of these grounds was no longer available t ) the respondents since the appellant had complied with the order passed under section 15 could not have resulted in the dismissal of the ejectment application because, the other ground on which eviction of the appellant was sought by the respondents had yet to be considered by the Rent Controller.
This is an additional reason why it cannot be said on the facts, of this case 390 that the appellant obtained a benefit under section 14(2).
But, the two circumstances, just mentioned will not make any difference to the fundamental legal position explained above that the proviso to section 14(2) can be attracted only if it is shown that the tenant had obtained the benefit of the provision contained in that section and not otherwise.
[395D H] (4) The Court allowed the appeal, set aside the judgment of the High Court and restored that of the Rent Control Tribunal with the modification that the period of one month for depositing the arrears Or rent shall be computed from the date of this judgment.
[397C] Rama Gupta vs Rai Singh Kain , Ashok Kumar vs Ram Gopal 1982 (2) Rent Control Journal 29 approved.
Kahan Chand Makan vs B.S. Bhambri, AIR 1977 Delhi 27 referred to.
