In exercise of the powers conferred by section 29 of the Tamil Nadu Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1960 the Government of Tamil Nadu issued a Notification G.O. Ms. 2000 (Homo Department) dated 16th August, 1976 exempting all the buildings owned by the Hindu, Christian and Muslim religious public trusts and public charitable trusts from all the provisions of the Act.
The tenants challenged the Notification granting total exemption through the said Notification on three grounds namely; (a) that section 29 of the Act suffers from the vice of excessive delegation of legislative powers in as much as it vests in the State Government unguided and uncontrolled discretion in the matter of granting exemptions and is, therefore, violative of Article 14 of the Constitution; (b) that the Notification dated 16th August, 1976 deprives the tenants of all such buildings (belonging to Hindu.
Christian and Muslim religious public trusts and public charitable trusts) of the equal protection of the beneficial provisions of the Act which is available to the tenants of other buildings and as such the same is discriminatory offending against the equal protection clause of Article 14; and (c) that in any event the total exemption from all the provisions of the Act granted to such buildings, where partial exemption would have sufficed is excessive, unwarranted and unsupportable.
The State Government and the respondent landlords have refuted all the grounds on which the exemption has been challenged and further sought to justify the grant of total exemption mainly on the basis that the freedom (right) to recover the reasonable market rent would be ineffective without the freedom to evict the tenant.
Dismissing the writ petitions and the civil appeals the Court, 399 ^ HELD: 1.1 In view of the decision of the Supreme Court in P.J. Irani vs The State of Madras, ; dealing with an identical provision contained in the earlier Madras enactment the challenge to the Constitutional validity of section 29 cannot be sustained.
[405A B] P. J. Irani vs State of Madras, ; ; State of Madhya Pradesh vs Kanhaiyalal, 1970 (15) M.P.L.U SC 973 relied on.
The rationale behind the conferal of such power to grant exemptions or to make exceptions is that an inflexible application of the provisions of the Act may under some circumstances result in unnecessary hardship entirely disproportionate to the good which will result from a literal enforcement of the Act and also the practical impossibility of anticipating in advance such hardship to such exceptional cases.
In the matter of beneficial legislations also there are bound to be cases in which an inflexible application of the provisions of the enactment may result in unnecessary and undue hardship not contemplated by the legislature.
The power to grant exemption under section 29 of the Act, therefore, has been conferred not for making any discrimination between tenants and tenants but to avoid undue hardship or abuse of the beneficial provisions that may result from uniform application of such provisions to cases which deserve different treatment.
Of course, the power to grant exemption has to be exercised in accordance with the policy and object of the enactment gatherable from the preamble as well as its operative provisions without subverting the general purpose of the enactment.
[406G H, 407A B] P. J. Irani vs State of Madras, ; relied on.
Gorieb vs Fox, [1926] 71 Lawyers Edition at page 1230 quoted with approval .
That Tamil Nadu Act is a piece of beneficial legislation intended to remedy the two evils of rackrenting (exaction of exhorbitant rents) and unreasonable eviction generated by a large scale of influx of population to big cities and urban areas in the post Second World War period creating acute shortage of accommodation in such areas and the enactment avowedly protects the rights of tenants in occupation of buildings in such areas from being charged unreasonable rents and from being unreasonably evicted therefrom.
The Legislature itself has made a rational classification of buildings belonging to government and buildings belonging to religious, charitable, educational and other public institutions and the different treatment accorded to such buildings under section 10(3) (b) of the Act, which obviously proceeds on the well founded assumption that the government as well as the landlords of such buildings are not expected to and would not indulge in rack renting or unreasonable eviction.
This and similar other provisions crystalize the policy and the purposes of the Act and furnish the requisite guidance which can legitimately govern the exercise of power conferred on the State Government under section 29 of the Act The power to grant exemptions or make exceptions could be legitimately exercised by the State Government in areas or cases where the mischief sought to be remedied by 400 the Act is neither prevalent nor apprehended as also in cases (individual or class of cases) where a uniform or inflexible application of the law is likely to result in unnecessary or undue hardship (here the landlords) or in cases where the beneficial provision is likely to be or is being abused by persons for whom it is intended there the tenants) [407D E, 408F H, 409A] 3.1.
Public religious and charitable endowments or trusts constitute a well recognised distinct group in as much as they not only serve public purposes but the disbursement of their income is governed by the objects with which they are created and buildings belonging to such public religious and charitable endowments or trusts clearly fall into a distinct class different from buildings owned by private landlords.
Therefore, their classification into one group done by the State Government while issuing the impugned notification must be regarded as having been based on an intelligible differentia.
[409F G] 3.2.
In view of the counter affidavit filed by the State Government dated 10 2 1981 and the supplementary counter affidavit dated 24th September, 1983 to the effect that the government was satisfied that "in all these cases, the rent paid by the tenants was very low, meagre and that the provisions of fixation of fair rent under the Act would not meet the ends of justice and the situation will still continue in which the tenant will be exploiting the situation and the helplessness of the public religious trusts and charitable institutions and hence they decided to withdraw the protection given under the Act to the tenants of such buildings", not having been challenged by way of rejoinder affidavits by the petitioners/appellants, it is clear that buildings belonging to such public religious and charitable endowments or trusts clearly fell into a class where undue hardship and injustice relating to them from the uniform application of the beneficial provisions of the Act needed to be relieved and the exemption granted will have to be regarded as being germane to the policy and purposes of the Act.
In other words, the classification made has a clear nexus with the object with which the power to grant exemption has been conferred upon the State Government under section 29 of the Act.
[411C, 412B G] State of Rajasthan vs Mukanchand and Others, ; ; held inapplicable.
Granting total exemption cannot be regarded as excessive or unwarranted.
The two objectives of the enactment, namely, to control rents and to prevent unreasonable eviction are interrelated and the provisions which subserve these objectives supplement each other It is obvious that if the trustees of the public religious trusts and public charities are to be given freedom to charge the normal market rent then to make that freedom effective it will be necessary to arm the trustees with the right to evict the tenants for non payment of such market rent.
The State Government on materials before it came to the conclusion that the 'fair rent ' filled under the Act was unjust in case of such buildings and it was necessary to permit the trustees of such buildings to recover from their tenants reasonable market rent and if that be so non eviction when reasonable market rent is not paid would be unreasonable and if the market rent is paid by the 401 tenants no trustee is going to evict them.
Further, it is conceivable that trustees of buildings belonging to such public religious institutions or public charities may desire eviction of their tenants for the purpose of carrying out major or substantial repairs or for the purpose of demolition and reconstruction and the State Government may have felt that the trustees of such buildings should be able to effect evictions without being required to fulfil other onerous conditions which must be complied with by private landlord when they seek evictions for such purpose.
[413D E, 414C G] 3.4.
The manner in which exemption from rent control provisions should be granted, whether it could be partial or total and if so on what terms and conditions would be matters for each State Government to decide in the light of the scheme and provisions of the concerned enactment and the facts and circumstances touching the classification made.
And if the State of Madras has thought fit to grant the exemption in a particular manner by the impugned notification is cannot be faulted.
if to exemption so granted is not illegal or unconstitutional.
[415A B]
