At the sale held by the Official Liquidator under the orders of the Bombay High Court, the appellant a public limited company, purchased the "Hirji Textile Mills" minus its goodwill and its workmen who were discharged earlier.
The appellant invested some fresh capital in the business, renovated the machinery and employed workmen on fresh contracts which included 70% of the workmen formerly working in that factory and commenced to produce certain never types of things at the factory w.e.f. November 12, 1955, after obtaining a new licence to run it.
When by the end of February, 1956 the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner made certain enquiries about the working of the factory in order to enforce the provisions Provident Fund Act against the appellant, the appellant wrote to him stating that The factory was an infant factory having been established on November 12,1955 and the period of three years had not elapsed from that date within the meaning of Section 16(1) (b) of the Act.
When the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner was not convinced about its explanation, the appellant first filed a writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution before High Court of Bombay in Miscellaneous Application No. 76 of 1957 challenging the applicability of the Act to the factory and after withdrawing it, filed Short Cause Suit No. 2088 of 1958 before the City Civil Court at Bombay for a declaration that the Act and the scheme framed thereunder could not be enforced against the factory until the expiry of three years from November 12, 1955 and that the appellant was not liable to make any contributions under the Act.
The trial Court dismissed the suit holding, that in view of the several facts established in the case it could not be presumed that a new factory was established by the 517 appellant on November 12, 1955, that the continuity of the old factory had A not been broken and as such the appellant was liable to make contributions under the Act.
The judgment of the trial Court was affirmed by the Bombay High Court in Appeal No.406/64.
Hence the appeal by special leave.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: 1.1.
Every statute should be construed so as to advance the object with which it is passed and as far as possible, avoiding any construction which would facilitate evasion of the Act.
[521 C] 1.2.
In consonance with the directions enshrined in Article 43 of the Constitution, Employees ' Provident Fund Scheme is intended to encourage the habit of thrift amongst the employees and to make available to them either at the time of their retirement or earlier, if necessary, substantial amounts for their use from out of the provident fund amount standing to their credit which is made up of the contributions made by the employers as well as the employees concerned.
The Act being a beneficent statue and section 16 of the Act being a clause granting exemption to the employer from the liability to make contributions, section 16 should receive a strict construction [521A B, 522A] 2.1.
The criterion for earning exemption under section 16(1)(b) of the Act is that a period of three years has not yet elapsed from the date of establishment of the factory in question.
It has no reference to the date on which the employer who is liable to make contributions acquired title to the factory which once established may be interrupted on account of factory holidays, strikes, lock outs, temporary breakdown of machinery, periodic repairs to be effected to the machinery in the factory, non availability of raw materials, paucity of finance etc., and also on account of an order of court as in the present case.
Interruptions in the running of factory which is governed by the Act brought about by any of these reasons without more cannot be construed as resulting in the factory ceasing to the factory governed by the Act and on its restarting it cannot be said that a new factory is or has been established.
On the resumption of the manufacturing work in the factory it would continue to be governed by the Act which does not state that any kind of stoppage in the working of the factory would give rise to a fresh period of exemption.
In other words the period of three years should be counted from the date on which the factory was first established and the fact that there had been a change in the owners p makes no difference to the counting of period.
[522A D, 524D E] Lakshmi Rattan Engineering Work vs Regional Provident Fund Commissioner, Punjab & Ors.
SC, reiterated.
Chaganlal Textile Mills Pvt.
Ltd. Y.P.A. Bhaskar Misc.
Appln.
No. 289 of 1956 disposed of on November 5, 1956: M/s. Bharat Board Mills Ltd. vs The Regional Provident Fund Commissioner & Ors.
Vegetable Products Ltd. vs Regional Provident Fund Commissioner W. Bengal & Ors. ; Jamnadas Agarwala & Anr.
vs The Regional Provident Fund Commissioner West Bengal & Ors. ; 518 Robindra Textile Mills vs Secretary Ministry of Labour Govt.
of India New Delhi & Anr A.I.R. 1936 Punjab 55.
Hindustan Electric Co. Ltd. vs Regional Provident Fund Commissioner Punjub & Anr.
A I.R 1959 Punjab 27 Regional Provident Fund Commissioner Punjab & Anr.
v Lakshmi Rattan Engineering Works Ltd M/s.
R.L. Sahni & Co vs Union of India represented by the Regional Provident Commissioner Madras & Anr.
A.l.R. ; Kunnath Textile vs Regional Provident Fund Commisioner ; The New Ahmedabad v Bansidar Mills Pvt Ltd. Ahmedabad vs Union of India & Ors.
A I R. 1968 Gujarat 71; approved.
Provident Fund Inspector Trivendrum vs Secretary N.S. section Co operative Society Changanacherry ; Vithaldas Jagnnathdas & Anr.
vs The Regional Provident Fund Commissioner Madras & Anr.
; distinguished.
