Section 3 of the Punjab Aided Schools (Security of Service) Act, 1969 ( '1969 Act ' for short) provides that no employee shall be dismissed or removed or reduced in rank except after an inquiry to be held in the manner prescribed therein.
Sub sec.
(2) provides that no order of dismissal or removal or reduction in rank of an employee shall take effect unless it has been confirmed by the Deputy Commissioner who may refuse to do so.
if in his opinion, the provisions of sub sec.
(I) have not been complied with.
Sub sec.
(S) permits an aggrieved person to prefer an appeal against any decision or order of the Deputy Commissioner under the section to the Commissioner.
The appellant in the civil appeal was appointed as Headmaster of an aided school which received 95 percent of its expenses as grant from the Government.
As required by the conditions of his appointment, the appellant entered into an agreement with the management of the school.
The appellant 's appointment was confirmed by the concerned authority.
The appellant was confirmed in his post as the Headmaster.
The appellant was 480 awarded a certificate of honour by the Chandigarh administration in token of appreciation of the outstanding performance of the appellant.
After the term of the Managing Committee which appointed the appellant expired and the new Managing Committee took over, the services of the appellant were terminated invoking the conditions of the agreement entered into by the appellant.
The appellant 's appeal to the Deputy Commissioner and the Commissioner were turned down.
The appellant 's writ petition was dismissed by the High Court in limine.
The High Court observed that as the school cannot be said to be 'other authority ' under article 12 of the Constitution, it was not amenable to the writ jurisdiction of the High Court.
Hence this appeal by Special Leave.
The petitioner in the writ petition was appointed as a Drawing Teacher in 1976.
As required by the conditions of his appointment the petitioner entered into an agreement with the management.
In 1983 the petitioner 's services were terminated invoking the conditions of the agreement.
The petitioner approached the Deputy Commissioner and the Commissioner without success.
Thereupon he field the present writ petition under article 32 of the Constitution.
Allowing both the appeal and the writ petition, ^ HELD: Any agreement not in consonance with the statutory provisions beneficial to a class in need of protection cannot be given effect to if it stands in derogation of the mandatory provisions of the statute.
Section 3 of the 1969 Act makes it obligatory to hold a disciplinary inquiry before an employee of an aided school can be either dismissed removed or reduced in rank.
In order to circumvent this mandatory provision, a resort to the provisions of the agreement in the context of the fact that an inquiry was commenced and given up clearly indicates the true nature of the order as well as colourable exercise of power.
And this was done by the new Managing Committee which appeared to be keen to dispense with the service of persons appointed by the outgoing Managing Committee.
This smacks of malafide.
For these reasons the order of termination of service of the appellant is bad and ab initio void.
[485E G] The High Court declined to grant any relief on the ground that an aided school is not 'other authority ' under Act.
12 of the Constitution and is therefore not amenable to the writ jurisdiction of the High Court.
The High Court clearly overlooked the point that Deputy Commissioner and Commissioner are statutory authorities operating under the 969, Act.
They are quasi judicial authorities and that was not disputed.
Therefore, they will be comprehended in the expression 'Tribunal ' as used in article 227 of the Constitution which confers power of superintendence over all courts and tribunals by the High Court throughout the territory in relation to which it exercises jurisdiction.
Obviously, therefore, the decision of the statutory quasi judicial authorities which can be appropriately described as tribunal will be subject to judicial review namely a writ of certiorari by the High Court under article 227 of the Constitution.
The decision questioned before the High Court was of the Deputy Commissioner and the Commissioner exercising power under Sec.
3 of the 1969 Act.
And these statutory 481 authorities are certainly amenable to the writ jurisdiction of the High Court.
[485G H; 486A C] After the decision of the Constitution Bench of this Court in Ajay Hasia etc.
vs Khalid Mujib Sehravardi and Ors. etc.
the aided school receiving 95% of expenses by way of grant from the public exchequer and whose employees have received the statutory protection under the 1969 Act and who are subject to the relations made by the Education Department of the Union Territory of Chandigarh as also the appointment of Headmaster to be valid must be approved by the Director of Public Instructions , would certainly be amenable to the writ jurisdiction of the High Court.
[486C D] Ajay Hasia etc.
vs Khalid Mujib Sehravardi and Ors. etc.
; , , referred to.
The Deputy Commissioner and the Commissioner in terms held in both the cases that because of the terms of the agreement entered into by each of the teachers with the management of the school, it would not be open to them to go behind the order and to find out the true nature of the order.
Now if the management of the school intends to circumvent the mandatory provisions of Sec. 3 of the 1969 Act, it has merely to terminate the service by giving one month 's notice as provided in the agreement and the provisions controlling the arbitrary powers of the management to hire and fire can be rendered nugatory.
The Deputy Commissioner cannot take an easy recourse becoming oblivious to his duties merely to pay lip sympathy to the order made by the management and decline even to examine the allegation of malafide as also the true nature and character of the impugned order.
[484B D]
