Appeal against acquittal by state Government to High Court Powers of appellate court What are High court final court of facts Correctness and acceptability of evidence Duty To be satisfied Open to re appraise evidence and decide appeal or order re trial Not proper to remand case to trial court for writing a fresh judgment Proper direction by Government to file appeal Existence of High Court whether competent to go through the sanction file.
The four appellants in the appeal were tried by the Sessions Judge for offenses under Sections 302/34 I.P.C. and also under Section 27 of the .
The court convicted the first appellant under Section 304 Part I I.P.C. and sentenced him to 7 years rigorous imprisonment and acquitted the others.
The first appellant filed and appeal before the High Court and the State Government filed appeals against the acquittal of the other appellants and also of the first appellant 's under Section 302 I. P. C.
The High Court came to a general conclusion that the judgment of the Sessions Judge was not in accordance with law and had not dealt with some of the Points raised in the appeals, and remanded the case back to the trial court for writing a fresh and proper judgment.
As far as the acquitted accused were concerned although the appeals were filed by the Public Prosecutor as directed by the State Government, the High Court hold that there was no proper direction by the Government for filing the appeals except in the case of the first appellant .
Allowing the Appeals to this Court, ^ HELD: Assuming that the High Court was right in thinking the judgment suffered from some infirmity and there were certain facts which were not taken into consideration they would not be grounds for remanding the case to the Sessions Court to writ a proper judgment.
The High Court itself was a final court of facts and it was its duty to satisfy itself regarding the correctness and acceptability of the evidence.
It was entirely open to the High Court to re appraise the evidence once again to consider the facts overlooked by the Sessions Judge and to have decided the appeal 489 itself instead of remanding the case to the Sessions Court.
The proper order in such a case should be either to decide the case itself or to send it for re trial.
The question of re trial does not arise in the instant case.
The order of the High Court is set aside and the High Court is directed to re hear two appeals on merits according to law.
[491D F] 2.
Whenever the Government seeks opinion it consults various agencies namely the Advocate General, Public Prosecutor, Legal Remembrancer and others and thereafter the order is passed by the Government through the Secretary incharge.
[490E] In the instance cases it is not in dispute that the Public Prosecutor was directed by the Under Secretary to the Government in charge to file appeals against all the appellants.
A clear direction had been given to the Public Prosecutor to file appeals against all the four accused and as regards the first appellant against his acquittal under Section 302 IPC.
The High Court at the instance of the acquitted accused tried to re open the matter in order to find out the manner and various stages through which the sanction to file an appeal was chanalised.
This was not at all proper for the High Court to do.
[490E; G; F]
