The respondent filed a suit in 1962 against the subtenant for possession of the premises on the ground of unlawful subletting and carrying out unauthorised structural alterations.
The sub tenant resisted the suit and filed a written statement.
During the pendency of the suit the appellant applied to the Court for being added as a defendant but the application was opposed by the respondent and was rejected.
The respondent 's suit was ultimately decreed for possession in accordance with a compromise between the parties.
The appellant thereafter filed a suit in 1966 for a declaration that he was a lawful tenant in possession of the premises and for an injunction the restraining respondent from executing the decree he had obtained against the sub tenant.
It was pleaded that he was in occupation and exclusive possession as a lawful subtenant for more than fifteen years to the knowledge of the respondent and that the decree in the respondent 's suit was a collusive one and that he had become a direct tenant of the respondent under section 14 of the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947.
The respondent filed a written statement and pleaded that they were tenants of the entire building and that they had sublet a portion of the premises to a sub tenant who could not sub let the premises further to the appellant and therefore the appellant 's subtenancy was invalid.
564 The Court of Small Causes decreed the suit.
The respondent filed an appeal before the Appellate Bench of the Court of Small Causes which dismissed the appeal and affirmed the trial judge 's finding that the premises had been sublet by Manekchand to the appellant, and that on May 21, 1959 when the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control (Amendment) Ordinance 1959 was promulgated and sub s.(2) of section 15 was introduced into the Bombay Rent Act the subtenant was not in possession.
the Appellate Bench rejected the submission of the appellant that he had paid rent directly to the respondent and therefore had been accepted as a tenant.
It found that no rent had been paid by the appellant to the respondent after Manek Chand statutory tenancy which followed the termination of his contractual tenancy by service of notice had itself been terminated by the decree for possession in the respondent 's suit.
It further held that as the appellant was undisputably in possession on May 21, 1959, the sub tenancy in his favor by Maneck Chand must be deemed to be a valid sub tenancy and followed the view in Josephy Santa Vincent vs Ambico Industries.
70 Bombay LR 224 while dismissing the respondent 's appeal.
The respondent filed a Special Civil Application in the High Court and the High Court set aside the order of the Appellate Bench and dismissed the appellant 's suit, taking the view that having regard to certain observations made in Jai Singh Moraji & Ors vs M/s. Sovani Pvt Ltd. & Ors ; , an extended construction of sub section
(2) of section 15 of the Bombay Rent Act so as to include a sub tenancy created by a sub tenant was not justified.
In the appeal to this Court, on the question whether the appellant could rightly claim tenancy rights in the premises and therefore nullify the enforcement as against him of the decree in the respondent 's suit.
Allowing the Appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
There can be no doubt that upon the amendment of sub section
(I) of s.l5 by the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Amendment Ordinance 1959, which was brought into force on May 21, 1959 and by its related Act, the prohibition against sub letting did not operate in those cases, where the sub letting was permitted by contract between the landlord and tenant.
In all such cases, if the landlord had permitted the tenant under a contract between them to sub let the premises, no question would arise of a need to validate those subtenancies.
The relevant amendment in sub section
(1) of s.15 was deemed to have always been part of the sub section.
[569C D] 2.
Sub section
(2) of s.l5 raises the ban from all sub letting effected before May 21, 1959, the date of commencement of the Ordinance, provided the provisions of that sub section are fulfilled.
Any such sublease shall be deemed to be valid provided the sublessee has entered into possession before the date of commencement of the Ordinance and has continued in possession on such date.
This is an special provision and marks a departure from the general law.
It does not refer to sub tenancies which are permitted by contract between the landlord and the tenant, but relates to sub tenancies which are not so protected.
[569F F] 565 3.
Sub section
(2) of s.15 relates to sub tenancies not permitted by contract A between the landlord and tenant and which would, but for the said sub section
(2), fall within the prohibition enacted in the amended sub section (I) of section 15.
[570C] 4.
In the instant case, the respondent Goldfiled was a Tenant, Manik Chand was a lawful sub tenant and the latter had created a further sub tenancy in favor of the appellant.
If regard be had to clause (a) of sub section (ii) of section 5 it is apparent that in respect of the subsequent sub tenancy Manek Chand could be described as a tenant and the appellant as his sub tenant.
And if that is so, there is no reason why the appellant 's sub tenancy should not be regarded as a valid sub tenancy inasmuch as it was created before May 21, 1959 and he entered into possession of the premises before that date and was continuing in possession on that date.
[571A B] Jai Singh Morarji & Ors.
vs M/s Sovani Pvt. Ltd. & Ors, [197312 S.C.R. 603, referred to.
P.D. Awani vs Kavashah Dinshah Mulla, (1953) 56 Bombay Law Reporter 467 and Woman Shrinivas Kini vs Ratilal Bhagwandas & Co., [1959] Supp.
2 S.C.R. 217, held inapplicable.
[572F] In the instant case, having regard to the concession made on behalf of the respondent in the Court below that Manekchand was a lawful tenant, which necessarily implies a valid contract of tenancy between the respondent and Manek Chand, the latter was to be regarded as a contractual tenant when he sub let the premises to the appellant.
No question, therefore arises of a statutory tenant purporting to sub let his interest to a sub tenant.
[572F] Anand Nivas (P) Ltd. vs Anandji, ; , referred to.
