Stage carriages of State Transport Undertaking Exclusive operation of Draft scheme published No decision taken thereon by State Government for nine years Increased transport facilities Need and necessity arising Regional Transport Undertaking granting temporary permits Action whether valid and legal Statutory duty imposed by section 68C Speedy exercise with due regard to public interest Necessity of.
Administrative Law: Statutory duty Delay in performance of Abuse of process of law To be remedied by Court.
Practice and Procedure: Motor Vehicle Permits Grant of Delay in Performance of statutory duty duty of Court to enforce by issuance of writ.
A notification dated November 17, 1971 was published under section 68C of the , inviting objections to a draft scheme providing for exclusive operation of stage carriages of the State Transport Undertaking over thirteen routes in a district.
At the Regional Transport Authority felt that it was necessary to increase the strength of the stage carriage services of nine routes out of the thirteen routes covered by the said scheme, it decided by its order dated December 17, 1979 to invite applications for temporary carriage permits.
This decision was taken after it had allowed amalgamation and extension of certain existing permits held by 102 operators.
Pursuant to this invitation by the Regional Transport Authority, a large number of persons including the appellants applied for the temporary permits.
On January 10, 1980, the State transport undertaking having not made any applications under section 68F(IA) 791 the application of the appellants and a large number of other persons about 800 were considered by the Regional Transport Authority and the appellants were granted nineteen temporary permits.
Some Operators who felt aggrieved by the resolutions of the Regional Transport Authority passed on December 17, 1979 and January 10, 1980 filed Revision Petitions before the State Transport Appellate Tribunal.
The Tribunal by its order dated June 3, 1981 set aside both the resolutions dated December 17, 1979 and January 13, 1980 of the Regional Transport Authority, on the ground that the amalgamation and extension of permits granted in favour of the existing operators, after the publication of the scheme under section 68C was contrary to the provisions of Chapter IVA of the Act.
The appellants filed writ petitions which were dismissed by the High Court, which held that since the grant of temporary permits in favour of the appellants was dependent upon the order dated December 17, 1979 to which the appellants were not parties, the temporary permits granted in their favour on January 10, 1980 were also liable to be set aside.
Allowing the Appeals to this Court, ^ HELD: 1.
The order of the Tribunal and the order of the High Court to the extent they cancel the temporary permits in favour of the appellants are set aside.
The appellants are permitted to operate their services under the temporary permits issued to them under section 68F (IC) on January 10, 1980 and the operation of the said temporary permits shall come to an end in accordance with law.
[799E] 2.
A direction is issued to the State Government to pass orders under section 68D (2) approving the scheme with or without any modification or rejecting it or to pass any other order thereon which it may under that provision on or before July 31, 1985.
Such approved scheme shall be published under section 68D (3) on or before August 31, 1985.
Failure to do so, the scheme published under section 68C shall stand quashed with effect from August 31, 1985.
[799C D] 3.
(i) Both the Tribunal and the High Court overlooked the relevant issues affecting the public interest which should always be the guiding principle in deciding cases relating to grant of motor vehicles permits under the Act.
[798B] (ii) The Tribunal and the High Court both failed to notice that the scheme had been published in the year 1971 and the order issuing temporary permits had been passed nearly nine years after its publication, after the Regional Transport Authority was satisfied that there was necessity for granting them.
[i] (iii) The Tribunal and the High Court did not seek to elicit information about the reasons for the inordinate delay in the State Government passing its order under section 68D of the Act and failed to consider the adverse effect on the travelling public.
[798D] 792 4.
The Regional Transport Authority had found that there was need for issuing the said temporary permits for some of the routes in question, after it had granted extension to the permits held by 102 existing operators.
On the cancellation of the said extensions, the need for providing additional travelling facilities became further intensified and therefore there was certainly no case for setting aside the temporary permits granted in favour of the appellants.
The cancellation of the temporary permits issued in favour of the appellants has resulted ill grave public prejudice.
[798G H] 5.
Delay in performance of statutory duties amounts to an abuse of process of law and has to be remedied by the court particularly when the public interest suffers thereby.
[796F] 6.
(i) The provisions of section 68C and section 68D of the clearly indicate that any scheme which is intended for providing efficient, adequate, economical or properly by coordinated transport service should be approved either as it is or in a modified form or rejected as the case may be within a reasonably short time as any extraordinary delay is bound to upset all or any of the factors, namely efficiency, adequacy, economy of coordination which ought to govern an approved scheme under Chapter IVA of the Act.
[194G H] (ii) On account of various reasons such as the growth of population and the development of the geographical area adjacent to the area or route in question, any unreasonable delay may render the very proposal contained in the scheme antiquated, outmoded and purposeless.
Hence there is need for speedy disposal of the case under section 68D of the Act.
[795A B] (iii) The power under section 68D has to be exercised having due regard to the public interest.
[796H] (iv) If there is an unreasonably long and unexplained delay in the State Government passing orders under section 68D of the Act, the Court may issue a mandamus to the State Government to dispose of the case under section 68D of the Act within a specified time or may in an appropriate case even issue a writ in the nature of certiorari quashing the scheme and a writ in the nature of prohibition directing the State Government not to proceed with the consideration of the scheme published under section 68C of the Act because section 68D does not confer an unfettered discretion on the State Government to deal with the case as it likes.
[796F G] 7.
Sub sections (IA) and 1C of section 68F of the Act read together indicate that what can be granted under either of the said sub sections is only a temporary permit which can last during the period between the date of publication of the scheme under section 68C of the Act and the date on which the order under section 68D of the Act is made subject to the provisions contained in sub section (IB) of section 68F of the Act.
The life of such temporary permit cannot extend to an unreasonably long period, as even a renewable permit issued under Chapter IV of the Act is subject to the restrictions contained in section 58 of the Act as regards its duration and renewal and that a temporary permit issued under section 62 of the Act cannot be in force in any case for more than four months.
The State Government is necessarily therefore required by law to pass its orders under section 68D of the Act as early as possible.
[796C E] 793
