Md. Safiur Rehman was a dock worker and gratuity was payable to him under one of the three prevailing schemes of the Calcutta Dock Labour Board.
Respondent No. I filed a suit before, the Court of Small Causes at Calcutta asking for recovery of a sum of money against the widow and son of the said Md. Safiur Rehman after his death and prayed for attachment of the gratuity payable to the said workman.
The Court made an order and called upon the Board to withhold payment of the amount, whereupon the Board pointed out to Court that gratuity was not liable to attachment.
The Chief Judge of the Court of Small Causes examined the objection against attachment and overruled the same.
In appeal by the appellants a Division Bench of the High Court examined the provisions under the Payment of Gratuity Act and the Code of Civil Procedure, and holding (a) clause (g) of section 6 of the Civil Procedure Code does not cover the gratuity payable by the Board to a registered dock worker since subsequent amendment of this clause have not been adopted and made applicable by the High Court to Presidency Small Causes Court; and (b) Rule 9 of the Gratuity Rules which purports to exempt gratuity from attachment, not having been made by the Central Government on powers delegated by the Parliament under the Dock workers (Regulation of Employment) Act, but by the Board on sub delegation of Dowers under the scheme cannot override the legal right of the plaintiff, and dismissed the appeal.
Hence the appeal by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, the Court, 827 ^ HELD: 1.
The preamble of the clearly indicates the legislative intention that the Act sought to provide a scheme for payment of gratuity to all employees engaged in, inter alia port and under this Act gratuity was payable to workers like Md. Safiur Rehman.
In view of The provisions in section I (3) of the Act gratuity must be taken to be covered by section 4 of the Act, in the absence of any notification contemplated under section 5.
Section 14 has also overriding effect and section 13 gives total immunity to gratuity from attachment.
The gratuity which was payable to him squaredy came within the purview of the Act and, therefore, became entitled to immunity under section 18 thereof.
[830D E] 2.
The immunity under section 13 of the , itself being adequate the Court applied non liquet on the two issues, namely, (a) consideration of the subsequent event of the amendment of section 13 of the Gratuity Act by Central Act 25 of 1984 with effect from July 1st, 1914; and (b) the necessity for remaking of the Calcutta High Court 's earlier order under section 8 of the Civil Procedure Code extending the provisions of section 60 of the Code to the Small Causes Court consequent to section 97 of the Amending Act of 1976.
[830H; 831A B]
